Click here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.Click here to access the print version. Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Just as most of us are feeling the effects of soaring inflation, which the Office for National Statistics said last week had reached a 10-year high of 5.1%, wealthy bankers and traders are looking forward to receiving extraordinarily large new year bonuses. Banks on both sides of the Atlantic are finalising bonus pool deals that could be inflated by as much as 50% compared with last year, reaching their highest levels since 2009 and the mergers and acquisitions boom that followed the financial crisis. The very top investment bankers in the US – the “masters of the universe” – can expect to collect $5m-$10m (£3.7m-£7.5m) this year, according to pay experts. The huge payday is due partly to the damage wreaked by the pandemic, as the crisis has forced a wave of takeovers and mergers. The banks that advise on such deals – which have included US private equity group Clayton, Dubilier &amp; Rice’s £7bn takeover of Morrisons and the London Stock Exchange’s £20bn purchase of Reuters’s owner, Refinitiv – collect a percentage of the total transaction for their trouble. They also collect fees for advising on flotations, private equity buyouts, and debt offerings. As well as the flurry of mergers and acquisitions (M&amp;A), there was also a 64% increase worldwide in the number of initial public offerings (IPOs) to 2,388 in 2021 over 2020, according to a study by Ernst &amp; Young. The biggest paydays are expected in the US, where the deals completed so far this year have totalled $2.3 trillion – a record high, according to Refinitiv data. Goldman Sachs, which had already raked in $11bn in fees by the end of September, is expected to increase its bonus pool by 50%, while rival Wall Street bank JP Morgan may inflate its bonuses by 40%, according to sources last week. David Solomon, Goldman’s chief executive, told staff at the bank’s October results announcement that they could expect bumper bonuses. “We are a pay-for-performance culture, and there’s no question that people are performing,” Solomon, who moonlights as a club DJ with the stage name D-Sol, said. Solomon, who swallowed a $10m pay cut in January over the 1MDB scandal in Malaysia, received a share-based bonus worth up to $30m to be paid in 2026. The bank said the awards “ensure leadership continuity” and “enhance retention in response to the rapidly increasing war for talent”. JP Morgan gave its chief executive, Jamie Dimon, a “special award” of 1.5m share options this summer, which could be worth as much as $49m over 10 years. Last week the largesse was extended to Daniel Pinto, the bank’s chief operating officer and president, who is seen as the mostly likely successor to Dimon. He was granted a “retention planning” share award worth up to $25m on top of his $24.5m pay in 2020. While they may not collect bonuses as large as those of their New York cousins, hundreds of London bankers will also take home millions when bonus season arrives in early January. Some of the city’s luxury car dealers say they are preparing for possible fat-wallet splurges by increasing stock availability. Boutique bankers are expected to be the biggest beneficiaries in London as regulations introduced after the 2008 financial crisis prevent large banks from offering bonuses of more than 100% of fixed pay (or double that with shareholder approval). The smaller, mostly Mayfair-based, boutique advisers are not covered by the rules, and have regularly paid out huge amounts. Robey Warshaw, the bank that former chancellor George Osborne joined as a partner this year, has paid out £207m in profits to its three partners (before Osborne joined to make it four) over the past six years, according to accounts filed at Companies House. Sir Simon Robey, the majority shareholder who has been described as the City’s “trillion-dollar man” for the cumulative size of the megadeals he has worked on, has only collected £137m over the past seven years. The firm has yet to file this year’s accounts, but Robey is among those named as advisers on the LSE deal to buy Refinitiv, in which bankers, lawyers and other advisers are set to collectively earn a cool £830m.Germany is tightening restrictions on travel from the UK in an attempt to curb the spread of the Omicron variant. From midnight on Sunday – or 11pm UK time – there will be a ban on carriage from the UK to Germany, except for German nationals, residents and transit passengers. The Netherlands will go into a new lockdown from Sunday morning to try to limit Covid-19 infections because of the Omicron variant, prime minister Mark Rutte said. All non-essential shops, restaurants, bars, cinemas, museums and theatres must shut from Sunday until January 14, while schools must close until at least January 9. More than 90,000 new cases of coronavirus have been reported across the UK and 125 more people have died from Covid-19, according to the latest official figures. The number of deaths in England of people with the Omicron variant has risen to seven, the UK Health Security Agency said, from the previous figure of one. Brazil on Saturday recorded 153 new Covid-19 deaths and 3,323 new coronavirus cases, the country’s health ministry said. However, the data is still not up to date, as the ministry is still struggling to reconcile its figures after a cyber attack on its systems over a week ago, Reuters reports. The UK’s Brexit minister Lord Frost has resigned from the cabinet. In his resignation letter to prime minister Boris Johnson, he wrote he was sad the unlocking from Covid restrictions had not proved “irreversible” as promised, and added: “I hope we can get back on track soon and not be tempted by the kind of coercive measures we have seen elsewhere.” The mayor of London has declared a “major incident” over rapidly rising numbers of coronavirus infection in the capital that threaten to place strain on public services. Sadiq Khan took the decision, which allows for closer coordination between different public agencies, after consulting with leaders from NHS London, local authorities and emergency and other essential services. A leading UK government adviser has said that a “circuit breaker” lockdown after Christmas would be “probably too late” and “we need to act now” to head off a huge surge of infections. Stephen Reicher, professor of social psychology at the University of St Andrews and member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), said it was clear that plan B measures alone would not be enough to stop the spiralling numbers of cases. The Omicron variant of the coronavirus is spreading significantly faster than the Delta strain in countries with documented community transmission, with a doubling time of 1.5 to three days, the World Health Organization said. Brazil on Saturday recorded 153 new Covid-19 deaths and 3,323 new coronavirus cases, the country’s health ministry said. However, the data is still not up to date, as the ministry is still struggling to reconcile its figures after a cyber attack on its systems over a week ago, Reuters reports. Nearly 618,000 Brazilians have died from Covid-19, the second highest total in the world after the US. Police officers have suffered minor injuries during “scuffles” at an anti-vaccine protest in Parliament Square in London, the Metropolitan police said in a statement. The officers were injured while attempting to escort a police motorcyclist through the area. Video footage from the protest posted on social media shows shoving between police and protesters. Later at around 3pm a group of protesters began “directing abuse” at people inside and egging the shop until police intervened, the Met added. No injuries were reported. A further incident occurred when beer cans and flares were thrown at officers on Whitehall. The force said that their officers were also subjected to abuse and physical violence elsewhere on Whitehall, leading to several more officers sustaining minor injuries. No arrests have been made. As coronavirus has wreaked havoc with the Premier League fixture list in England, the Liverpool manager Jurgen Klopp outlined a future whereby a vaccine refusenik could be more trouble than he is worth: as a threat to his teammates, creating a two-tier system when he has to be separated from the rest of the squad and a logistical nightmare as the need to quarantine could rule him out of many a game. Germany is tightening restrictions on travel from the UK in an attempt to curb the spread of the Omicron variant. From midnight on Sunday – or 11pm UK time – there will be a ban on carriage from the UK to Germany, except for German nationals, residents and transit passengers. Everyone entering Germany from Britain, whether vaccinated or not, will need a negative PCR test and is required to quarantine for 14 days. The country’s public health authority, the Robert-Koch-Institut, announced the new rules on Saturday evening as it classified the UK as an area of variants of concern due to Omicron. It said the restrictions could last until at least 3 January, PA reports. You can follow the latest Covid developments in Australia here: The UK’s Brexit minister, Lord Frost, has resigned from the cabinet, the Mail on Sunday reports. Lord Frost, who has led negotiations with the EU, is said to have handed in his resignation letter to Boris Johnson last week. But the Mail on Sunday reports he had been persuaded to stay on until January. The newspaper says it was the introduction of plan B coronavirus measures, including the implementation of Covid passes, that prompted Lord Frost’s decision. Iran is evacuating its envoy to Yemen’s rebel Houthi movement after he contracted Covid-19, Iran’s foreign ministry said. “In order to transfer him (Irlu) to our country for treatment, the Foreign Ministry conducted consultations with some regional countries to prepare for his transfer, which is currently under way,” ministry spokesman Saeed Khatibzadeh told state media. Houthi spokesman Mohammed Abdulsalam said on Twitter: “Under an Iranian-Saudi agreement reached through contacts with Iraq, the Iranian ambassador in Sanaa was transferred on an Iraqi plane due to his health condition,” Reuters reports. France will compensate ski resorts hit by the ban on British tourists and will try to steer more French tourists to the mountains to make up for lost earnings, the tourism minister said. Under new rules taking effect on Saturday, meant to protect from importing the Omicron variant, holiday travel from Britain is not allowed and only French nationals and their partners, as well as foreigners with a permanent residence in France, can enter the country from the UK. Tourism minister Jean-Baptiste Lemoyne said on BFM TV that British tourists accounted for about 15% of French ski resort customers overall, but the percentage was much higher in some resorts such as Val d’Isere, Courchevel and Meribel. “Last year the government has provided 7 billion euros ($7.9 billion) of support for the sector and we will continue to stand by the industry,” Lemoyne said, without specifying what measures could be implemented. He added that because of a new lockdown in the Netherlands, Dutch tourists, who account for about 5% of the customers in French ski resorts, may also be more scarce this season, Reuters reports. Here is more on UK government scientists’ stark warning there are now hundreds of thousands of infections every day. The daily number could reach between 600,000 and 2m by the end of the month if new restrictions are not brought in immediately, they said. The government’s SPI-M-O group of scientists, which reports to the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), also warned that, based on their modelling, hospitalisations could peak between 3,000 and 10,000 a day and deaths at between 600 and 6,000 a day. US president Joe Biden will deliver a speech on Tuesday addressing the Omicron variant of coronavirus, NBC News reported. Biden is expected to go beyond his “winter plan” with additional steps to help communities in need, Reuters reports. France hopes that a planned new vaccine pass that will be required to enter public places will persuade more people to get inoculated against Covid-19 as the country faces a rapid spread of the Omicron variant, the health minister said. The government does not want to impose new curfews or lockdowns on people who have been vaccinated, but the threat of Omicron means authorities have to increase pressure on those refusing vaccination, Olivier Veran said on France Inter radio. “We cannot continue to say that the choice of not getting vaccinated is a choice that has no consequences,” Veran said. Prime minister Jean Castex said on Friday the government will propose a bill in parliament in January to change France’s “health pass” into a “vaccine pass”, meaning only vaccinated people will be allowed to enter indoor public places such as bars, restaurants and cinemas. Veran said the government would ask MPs to also consider making the vaccine pass a requirement on trains and planes, and to make it mandatory to show proof of identity along with the pass. “There is too much fraud,” he said. Veran said Omicron was currently suspected to account for up to 10% of new coronavirus cases and that could rise to more than 50% early next year, Reuters reports. Australia could take until well into next year to hit an 80% booster vaccination rate, with the rollout currently ranking almost last out of 70 countries, Guardian analysis shows. Boosters are now available to anyone who has had a second dose of a Covid vaccine more than five months ago. However, Australia’s slow initial vaccine rollout meant that more than half of all second doses were administered in the final four months of 2021. So with a five-month dosing interval, the people who received their second doses late in 2021 won’t be eligible for a booster until February. France has reported 58,536 new coronavirus cases and a total of 94,404 Covid-related deaths in hospital, up by 85, Reuters reports. British musician Brian May said it has been “a truly horrible few days” after testing positive for coronavirus. The Queen guitarist, 74, warned others to take care so the illness does not jeopardise their festive celebrations, PA reports. He shared a photo of a lateral flow test with two red lines and wrote: “Yep. The shocking day finally came for me. The dreaded double red line. “And yes – definitely NO sympathy please – it has been a truly horrible few days, but I’m OK. And I will tell the tale. “Please take extra care out there, good folks.” Guests invited to a holiday party at the home of the leading anti-vaxxer Robert F Kennedy Jr in the US were urged to be vaccinated or tested for Covid-19 because, Kennedy said, he is “not always the boss at my own house”. Speaking to Politico, which reported the request before the party in California last week, Kennedy said his wife, the actor Cheryl Hines, was behind it. He also said no effort was made to check if guests had been vaccinated or recently tested. The Netherlands will go into a new lockdown from Sunday morning to try to limit Covid-19 infections because of the Omicron variant, prime minister Mark Rutte said on Saturday. All non-essential shops, restaurants, bars, cinemas, museums and theatres must shut from Sunday until January 14, while schools must close until at least January 9. The number of guests that people are allowed in their house is also being cut from four to two, except for Christmas Day on December 25. Rutte said: “The Netherlands is again shutting down. “That is unavoidable because of the fifth wave that is coming at us with the Omicron variant,” Reuters reports. Restrictions “similar in scale to the national lockdown” are needed to keep hospital admissions from coronavirus below previous peaks, experts in the UK have warned. Amid high numbers of cases of the Omicron variant of coronavirus, documents released by the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) revealed the bleak picture painted by advisers throughout December as the threat from the strain rose. Advice included that indoor mixing is the “biggest risk factor” for the spread of the variant of coronavirus, and that large gatherings risked creating “multiple spreading events”. Two US Air Force crew members supporting US secretary of state Antony Blinken’s travel last week to the UK and south-east Asia have tested positive for the coronavirus, a spokesperson for the airforce said. It brings the total number of people who have tested positive for Covid-19 traveling on Blinken’s plane last week to three, Reuters reports. “Both aircrew members were fully vaccinated. Neither had come into close contact with the secretary of state or senior staff,” an Air Force spokesperson told Reuters. “One aircrew member is asymptomatic, while the other is experiencing mild symptoms.” Large swathes of the UK have no vaccination walk-in centres, it has emerged, sparking fears the government will miss its target of offering all adults a booster jab by the end of this month. As the tide of Omicron cases surges, thousands seeking a third vaccination without having to wait days or weeks for an appointment are driving miles to neighbouring counties. People without transport and those for whom a walk-in centre is the only option – because they do not have a GP or an NHS number – have no access to Covid booster jabs. Several cities, including Norwich, Peterborough and York, have no walk-in centres. And there are no walk-in boosters available in entire counties, including Oxfordshire, Hampshire and Buckinghamshire, although some offer third doses for people with weakened immune systems. More data from Italy. Patients in hospital with coronavirus – not including those in intensive care – stood at 7,576 on Saturday, up from 7,520 a day earlier. There were 95 new admissions to intensive care units, up from 70 on Friday. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 953 from a previous 923, Reuters reports. 697,740 tests for Covid-19 were carried out in the past day, compared with a previous 669,160, the health ministry said. Official figures show that 817,625 people in the UK have received their booster Covid jab in the latest 24-hour period, which brings the total number of jabs delivered to more than 27 million. Italy reported 123 coronavirus-related deaths on Saturday, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of new infections was 28,064. Italy has registered 135,544 deaths linked to Covid-19, the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain and the ninth-highest in the world. The country has reported 5.365 million cases to date, Reuters reports. Indoor mixing is the “biggest risk factor” for the spread of the Omicron variant, UK experts have warned, as documents revealed advisers cautioned that large gatherings risked creating “multiple spreading events”. Documents released by the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) on Saturday revealed the advice it had given to ministers. And at a meeting on Thursday the experts said that stricter measures may be needed for Omicron, because of its transmissibility. Minutes from the meeting said this could include “reducing group sizes, increasing physical distancing, reducing duration of contacts and closing high-risk premises”. They said that lateral flow tests should also be used on a group basis – so if one person in a group tests positive before going to an event, their whole group should also not attend, even if they did not test positive. The experts warned that “hospitalisations in the UK will reach high levels in about two weeks even if transmission is reduced soon” and predicted between 1,000 and 2,000 hospital admissions per day in England by the end of the year, PA reports. Headlines from today’s coronavirus coverage in the UK and around the world include: More than 90,000 new cases of coronavirus were reported across the UK and 125 more people died from Covid-19, according to the latest figures. The increase in cases comes amid the suspected rapid spread of the new Omicron variant, which is believed to be more transmissible than previous iterations of the virus. They included 10,059 new confirmed cases of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 across the UK, bringing the total confirmed cases of the variant in the country to 24,968. The number of deaths in England of people with the Omicron variant rose to seven, while there were 85 people in hospital with it. The mayor of London declared a “major incident” over rapidly rising numbers of coronavirus infection in the capital that threatened to place strain on public services. Sadiq Khan took the decision after consulting with leaders from NHS London, local authorities and emergency and other essential services. UK cabinet ministers have received a briefing on the latest situation regarding the Omicron variant. There was no meeting of the cabinet or further discussion, according to a report by the PA Media news agency, but ministers were given an update on the data surrounding the variant. A government adviser said a “circuit breaker” lockdown after Christmas would be “probably too late” and “we need to act now” to head off a huge surge of infections. Stephen Reicher, a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), said plan B measures alone would not be enough. The Omicron variant of the coronavirus is spreading significantly faster than Delta, the World Health Organization has said. The new variant had a doubling time of 1.5 to three days, said the UN health agency, which reported it had been detected in 89 countries across all six WHO regions as of 16 December. Almost 3,000 locations in England were being taken over by vaccination centres on Saturday. The football grounds Anfield, Stamford Bridge and Wembley were among them, as were the Christmas market at Chester Cathedral, the Liverpool Christmas Ice festival and Bluewater shopping centre in Kent. That’s it from me, Damien Gayle, for today. I’ll leave you in the capable hands of my colleague Nadeem Badshah. More than 90,000 new cases of coronavirus have been reported across the UK and 125 more people have died from Covid-19, according to the latest official figures. The increase in cases comes amid the suspected rapid spread of the new Omicron variant, which is believed to be more transmissible than previous iterations of the virus. The figure for the number of deaths includes all individuals who have died within 28 days of a positive coronavirus test. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have now been 172,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. Kamala Harris, the US vice-president, has conceded that the Biden administration was blind to the emergence of the Delta and Omicron variants of Covid-19, and said she fears “misinformation” over vaccines will prolong the pandemic well into a third year, writes Richard Luscombe for the Guardian US. The vice-president’s candid admission came in a wide-ranging interview with the Los Angeles Times, which followed reports that Harris was “struggling” to make a mark as Joe Biden’s No 2 and was keen for a more prominent role. Harris, who has suffered the same sinking approval ratings as the 79-year-old president, was seen as shoo-in for the 2024 Democratic nomination until Biden said last month he would seek a second term. The White House said on Thursday that Harris would be his running mate again. Harris’s comments about Covid, in which she also appeared to place blame on the medical community for a lack of foresight, would seem to confirm the administration’s view that the pandemic is its biggest obstacle to progress. “We didn’t see Delta coming. I think most scientists did not – upon whose advice and direction we have relied – didn’t see Delta coming,” Harris said. “We didn’t see Omicron coming. And that’s the nature of what this awful virus has been, which as it turns out, has mutations and variants.” The number of deaths in England of people with the Omicron variant has risen to seven, the UK Health Security Agency said, from the previous figure of one. Hospital admissions in England for people with confirmed or suspected Omicron rose to 85, from 65. The mayor of London has declared a “major incident” over rapidly rising numbers of coronavirus infection in the capital that threaten to place strain on public services. Sadiq Khan took the decision, which allows for closer coordination between different public agencies, after consulting with leaders from NHS London, local authorities and emergency and other essential services, according to a statement. It comes after the UK on Friday reported the largest 24-hour increase in the number of new cases since the pandemic began. A major incident is defined as an event or situation with a range of serious consequences which requires special arrangements to be implemented by one or more emergency responder agency, the mayor’s office said. Khan said: “The surge in cases of the Omicron variant across our capital is hugely concerning, so we are once again declaring a major incident because of the threat of Covid-19 to our city. “The Omicron variant has quickly become dominant with cases increasing rapidly and the number of patients in our hospitals with Covid-19 on the rise again. We are already feeling the impact across the capital and while we are still learning about this variant, it’s right that London’s key agencies work closely together to minimise the impact on our city, including helping to protect the vital vaccination programme. “We know that the vaccine offer our best defence against the virus. There are now more clinics in London delivering vaccines than at any point during the pandemic. I urge all Londoners to book their appointment or to go to one of the many walk-in centres across the capital as soon as you can.” Khan, from the opposition Labour party, also declared a major incident in January when rising Covid-19 cases threatened to overwhelm hospitals. The Omicron variant is estimated to account for more than 80% of new Covid-19 cases in London. Thousands of people are marching through London in a protest against vaccine passports, with the hashtag #londonprotest trending on Twitter. Online posters advertising the event asked people taking part to gather from 12pm at Parliament Square in Westminster, from where they have since began a march through the capital. Among those marching with protesters were Gillian McKeith, former host of Channel 4’s You Are What You Eat, and Maajid Nawaz, the LBC radio host. In a video posted to Twitter, Nawaz pointed to a stream of people marching through the city, and said: “This is endless, it goes on as far as the eye can see. When I say we are coming, this is what I mean; you see how many people are coming.” According to a report in the Express, the demonstration was organised by a coalition of groups including Take a Stand London, Save Our Rights UK, and The Great Reopening. Many of those marching held placards that had been printed by a group called Together, which hosts an online petition against vaccine passports, mandatory vaccinations and the government’s summary introduction of Covid powers that has been signed by more than 167,000 people. The protest had its critics online, however, with some observers suggesting that by gathering together those taking part would make lockdowns more likely by increasing transmission of the virus. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) has reported 10,059 new confirmed cases of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 across the UK. This brings the total confirmed cases of the variant in the country to 24,968. According to the latest figures released on Saturday, the number of confirmed Omicron cases in England stood at 23,168 - up 9,427 on the previous day’s total. Cases in Northern Ireland rose to 827, a rise of 514. Scotland’s cases have reached 792, an increase of 96. In Wales there are 181, up 22 on the previous day. Scotland has recorded nine new coronavirus deaths and 5,917 positive cases in the past 24 hours, according to the PA Media news agency. The daily figures from the Scottish government show 494 people are in hospital with recently confirmed Covid-19, of which 34 are in intensive care. The Covid-19 death toll in Scotland under the daily measure - of people who first tested positive for the virus within the previous 28 days - now stands at 9,780. The test positivity rate stands at 12.2%. A total of 4,369,398 people have received their first dose of a coronavirus vaccine while 3,988,961 have received their second dose and 2,436,952 have received a third dose or booster. Omicron is spreading rapidly in Italy, with new cases identified in both the north and south of the country, according to the national health institute (ISS). The health agency reported that regional laboratories had so far identified 84 cases of the new coronavirus variant on Saturday, “a strong acceleration” from 55 early on Friday, according to Reuters. Thirty-three cases were found in Lombardy, around Milan, in the north of Italy; 20 more were identified in Campania, the southern region centred on Naples. Silvio Brusaferro, the president of the ISS, said the spread of Omicron was “widely expected, in line with what we have seen in other countries, and we will probably see an increase in cases in coming days”. Italy reported 120 coronavirus-related deaths on Friday against 123 the day before, while the daily tally of new infections rose to 28,632 from 26,109. This is Damien Gayle back at the controls of the blog now. UK cabinet ministers have received a briefing on the latest situation regarding the Omicron variant, according to the PA Media news agency. The agency said it understood there was no meeting of the cabinet or further discussion but ministers were given an update on the data surrounding the variant. A rush of passengers travelling to France to beat the country’s ban on UK tourists that came into force at 11pm on Friday has led to a knock-on effect on freight traffic, resulting in long queues of lorries. There were lengthy tailbacks on the M20 motorway in Kent heading to Dover and at the entrance to the Channel tunnel on Saturday, PA reports. A day earlier there were queues at the Port of Dover after many people brought their Christmas travel plans forward to avoid new restrictions imposed by France. It was hoped freight traffic queues would clear by Saturday afternoon. A spokeswoman for Eurotunnel said: Congestion in Dover overnight and on the A20 into Dover this morning has led to a transfer of freight traffic to Eurotunnel. There is currently slow-moving traffic on the approach to J11A (Eurotunnel exit) on M20, but freight is flowing through the tunnel at normal rates and so this will disappear in the coming hours. She said all passengers who wanted to get to France through the Channel tunnel before the deadline had been able to do so. Under the new rules brought in due to the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant, UK citizens now need a “compelling reason” to enter France, with trips for tourism or business banned. Hauliers, transport workers and French nationals and their UK spouses and children are exempt from the new rules. A Dutch government spokesperson has confirmed reports that new stricter measures will be announced at a press conference this evening. Health ministry spokesperson Axel Dees told Reuters there would be a government press conference to announce new measures at 7pm (1800 GMT). He did not comment on the types of measures that would be announced. The Dutch government is expected to announce a “strict” Christmas lockdown under which everything but essential stores will close amid fears over the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant, Dutch media reported. The government is meeting on Saturday with its health experts who have recommended the closure of all non-essential shops, schools, bars, restaurants and other public venues. In the city centre of Leiden, around 20 km outside The Hague, people flocked to the main shopping street to get last-minute gift shopping done. Some stores, like toy stores and luxury skincare and cosmetics shops, had lines outside, with the manager of a cosmetics shop telling Reuters it was “much busier than usual”. The prime minister, Mark Rutte, said earlier this week that Omicron could be the dominant coronavirus variant in the Netherlands by January. On Friday the National Institute for Public Health (RIVM) reported 15,433 new Covid-19 cases, down around 25% from a week earlier, but higher than the peak of any previous wave. Hello, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be taking over for a bit. Feel free to get in touch if you have anything to flag you think is relevant to our coverage, I’m on Twitter @JedySays or you can email me. UK cabinet ministers are meeting for a briefing on the latest Covid data this afternoon, which is expected to reflect concerning predictions of hospital admissions as Omicron cases continue to rise, writes Michael Savage, policy editor on the Observer. A Cobra meeting is also due with the devolved administrations of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The New Year’s celebration fireworks display on the ChampsÉlysées in Paris has been cancelled, after scientific advisers warned of risks associated the festive season. “The fireworks will not take place, nor unfortunately will there be any DJ sets,” the mayor’s office told AFP. In an announcement, the Paris municipal authorities said that “with regret that we will have to cancel all the festivities planned on the Champs-Élysées on 31 December.” The announcement was in line with new recommendations laid out by government scientific advisors to slow the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant. “With regard to the acceleration of the pandemic, and the risks related to the end-of-year festivities, authorities should impose significant restrictions,” France’s scientific panel said. A leading government adviser has said that a “circuit breaker” lockdown after Christmas would be “probably too late” and “we need to act now” to head of a huge surge of infections. Stephen Reicher, professor of social psychology at the University of St Andrews and member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), said it was clear that plan B measures alone would not be enough to stop the spiralling numbers of cases. Prof Reicher, who was speaking to Times Radio in a personal capacity, said the time to act was now, adding “all the science suggests that (plan B is) not going to be enough”. He said: “The only way really, or at least the most effective way, we can have an immediate effect is to decrease the number of contacts we have. “In many ways, the most effective way of diminishing contact is to have a circuit-breaker. “Now, you could have it after Christmas, the problem is after Christmas it’s probably too late, it’s probably by then we will have had a huge surge of infections with all the impact upon society. “When people say ‘look, we don’t want to close down’, of course, we don’t want to close down. But the problem is at the moment, things are closing down anyway, because of the spread of infection. “So I think we need to act now.” It comes amid reports officials have been drawing up draft plans for a two-week circuit-breaker lockdown after Christmas. Trials of the Pfizer vaccine in children aged two to five have found it did not provide expected levels of immunity in children of that age, CNN reports. The research found that two child-sized doses of the Pfizer/BioNtech were working for babies aged up to the age of two, but not in older children. Pfizer said it would “amend” the trial to add a third dose for the older group. CNN quoted the pharmaceutical company as saying: “The study will now include evaluating a third dose of 3 micrograms at least two months after the second dose of the two-dose series to provide high levels of protection in this young age group.” The child dose of Pfizer vaccine is a fraction of the size given to older age groups. Injections given to 12-year-olds and over contain 30 micrograms of vaccine while children aged from five to 11 are injected with 10 micrograms. Anthony Fauci, director of the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said the changes probably mean a delay in authorization for vaccines for younger children. Omicron is spreading rapidly in countries with high levels of population immunity, but it is unclear if this is due to the virus’ ability to evade immunity, its inherent increased transmissibility or a combination of both, the World Health Organization has said. In its latest technical update on the coronavirus pandemic, the UN health agency said data on the clinical severity of Omicron remains limited. “More data are needed to understand the severity profile and how severity is impacted by vaccination and pre-existing immunity,” the WHO said. It added: “There are still limited available data, and no peer-reviewed evidence, on vaccine efficacy or effectiveness to date for Omicron.” With cases rising so rapidly, hospitals could be overwhelmed in some places. “Hospitalisations in the UK and South Africa continue to rise, and given rapidly increasing case counts, it is possible that many healthcare systems may become quickly overwhelmed.” The Omicron variant of the coronavirus is spreading significantly faster than the Delta strain in countries with documented community transmission, with a doubling time of 1.5- to 3 days, the World Health Organization has said. The Omicron variant, which was designated as a variant of concern on 26 November, has been identified in 89 countries across all six WHO regions as of 16 December, Reuters quoted the WHO as saying. An announcement on a strict Christmas lockdown is expected in the Netherlands, with the government expected to close everything but essential shops. The government is meeting on Saturday with its health experts who have recommended the closure of all non-essential shops, schools, bars, restaurants and other public venues. The Dutch national broadcaster, NOS, and the news agency ANP cited government sources saying a press conference announcing the new measures would be held at 7pm. However, a spokesman for the health ministry, Axel Dees, declined to comment on any proposed measures or the timing of any press conference. It is only days since the government ordered that the 5pm to 5am closure of bars, restaurants and most stores, introduced in late November, would continue until 14 January. More than 1.18bn people in China have been fully vaccinated against Covid-19, a spokesperson for the country’s national health commission has said. Mi Feng told a press conference on Saturday that more than 2.66bn Covid-19 vaccine doses had been administered. “China is meeting the growing pressures of guarding against inbound cases, with a total of 77 countries and regions having reported cases of the Omicron variant of Covid-19,” Mi was quoted as saying by China’s state-run Xinhua news agency. Portugal became the latest country to widen distribution of Covid vaccines to children over five on Saturday. More than 60,000 children aged between five and 11 were set to receive their first jab of the Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine this weekend in the country, which already has 88.9% vaccine coverage in older groups. France is set to follow suit next week. The EU’s medicines watchdog last month approved a lower-dosage Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine for five to 11-year-olds, an age group experiencing high coronavirus infection rates across the continent. Denmark, where there has been a surge in cases attributed to the new Omicron variant, and some Austrian regions began offering vaccines to younger children in November. The US was the first large country to widen access to young children and has so far vaccinated more than 5m in the five-to-11 age bracket. Plans are being formulated for a two-week “circuit breaker” lockdown in England after Christmas, although a final decision on new restrictions is yet to be taken, the Times reports. The draft regulations would return England to similar restrictions as those seen in spring, with indoor mixing banned except for work purposes and pubs and restaurants limited to table service outdoors. Schools and shops would remain open, but the “rule of six” would be reimposed for meetings with friends and family, weddings and funerals would be limited to 15 to 30 people, and the most-vulnerable would once again be advised to “shield”. According to the Times, some sources said planning was under way to recall parliament next week to debate the restrictions. They could prove politically difficult for the prime minister, after a rebellion by 100 of his MPs against the plan B restrictions, including Covid passes for public events, earlier this week. The football grounds Anfield, Stamford Bridge and Wembley and the racecourses, Sandown Park, Bath and Chelmsford are among the almost 3,000 sites taken over by vaccination centres in England this weekend. Other venues open this weekend include the Christmas Market at Chester Cathedral, the Liverpool Christmas Ice Festival, Bluewater shopping centre in Kent and London’s Oxford Street, where there will be a vaccine bus. More than 21 million booster jabs have been delivered by the NHS in England so far, NHS England said. On Monday Boris Johnson announced that the government would aim to offer a booster to every single adult in the UK by the end of December. Many vaccination sites across the country are working 12 hours a day, seven days a week, the NHS told the PA Media news agency, adding that in every community there should be slots available at least 16 hours a day. NHS national medical director, Prof Stephen Powis, said: “From stadiums to racecourses and mobile buses to Christmas markets, NHS Covid vaccination programme, the biggest and most successful in our history, is pulling out all the stops to make it easier than ever. “Thanks to the hard work of our health service staff and brilliant volunteers we have already delivered record boosters so far this week but we want to keep up the momentum so if you haven’t taken up the offer yet get boosted now.” Olivier Veran, France’s health minister, has said the spread of the Omicron variant is the main reason behind plans for stricter vaccine pass measures. Under the current regulations, a recent negative Covid test is sufficient for entering many indoor public places, but a new health pass set to be introduced early next year will require people to show proof of vaccination to enter restaurants and long-distance public transport. Veran, speaking on France Inter radio, also said that he expected that early next week the French health authority will give the green light to start offering coronavirus vaccinations to children aged 5 to 11. Seven to 10% of new confirmed coronavirus cases in France are suspected to be of the Omicron variant, the country’s health minister, Olivier Veran, said on Saturday, as a ban on travellers from the UK comes into force. From Saturday morning, travellers will only be allowed to enter France from the UK if they are travelling for “compelling reasons”, unless they are French nationals, residents or hauliers. Even then, those wanting to travel will have to show a negative Covid test and self-isolate for two days after arriving in the country. On Saturday, Veran said the rapid spread of the new variant was the main reason for the planned introduction of a new vaccination pass early next year, which will require that people show proof of vaccination to enter restaurants and long-distance public transport. Under the current health pass regulation, a recent negative Covid test is sufficient for entering public places. Stricter Covid restrictions must be introduced “very soon” in England to prevent hospital admissions rising to 3,000 a day, according to leaked minutes from the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, seen by BBC News. The leaked minutes, from a meeting of government scientific experts held on Thursday, warn that any delay in imposing new restrictions “would greatly reduce the effectiveness”. So far the government has taken a relatively light touch despite fears of the rapid spread of the Omicron variant, with the UK setting new records for lab-confirmed cases of Covid-19 for two days in a row this week. The Sage minutes say: “If the aim is to reduce the levels of infection in the population and prevent hospitalisations reaching these levels, more stringent measures would need to be implemented very soon.” “The timing of such measures is crucial,” say the Sage minutes. “Delaying until 2022 would greatly reduce the effectiveness of such interventions and make it less likely that these would prevent considerable pressure on health and care settings.” This is Damien Gayle kicking off the Guardian’s coronavirus live blog coverage this morning. All day I will be bringing you the latest Covid-related updates and headlines. Seen a story you think we should be covering? Drop me a line on my Twitter profile @damiengayle, or via email to damien.gayle@theguardian.comGreg Hunt says it is unlikely Australia will follow the Netherlands and impose significant lockdowns to suppress surging Omicron infections. Asked on Sunday about the prospects of fresh statewide lockdowns given the new restrictions in the Netherlands, the federal health minister told reporters in Canberra the circumstances in Europe were quite different to Australia. “They’re going into the depths of winter with a vastly higher case rate, and sadly, having had a vastly higher loss of life,” Hunt said. “We’re going into summer, we have one of the highest vaccination rates in the world, and a very different set of circumstances. “We don’t see that’s a likely situation in Australia.” But the deputy chief medical officer, Sonya Bennett, noted that the new variant was highly transmissible: “We are seeing rapid escalation of case numbers around the globe, particularly in the UK, with the UK recording over 90,000 cases yesterday.” Bennett said Omicron had a doubling time of around two days, “which is obviously concerning”. The Netherlands will enter a significant lockdown from Sunday morning. The government has announced that all non-essential shops, restaurants, bars, cinemas, museums and theatres will close until 14 January. Schools will close until 9 January and there will be limits on gatherings during the Christmas period. Having played down the prospect of new lockdowns, Hunt was asked whether he thought the states and territories could impose restrictions on movement and gatherings either during the Christmas holiday period, or in 2022, given increasing case rates. The federal health minister left that open. The minister said none of the state and territories had telegraphed doing that at this point, but “obviously, everyone looks and responds to the circumstances”. But he noted: “The direction of Australia is overwhelmingly towards opening up.” New South Wales recorded 2,566 new Covid cases on Sunday – another national record – while Victoria had 1,240 new cases and four deaths. The deputy chief medical officer urged people to consider wearing masks in crowded indoor settings. Bennett said people should not wait for a mask mandate before taking that precaution. “My plea to the community is we don’t need to wait for mandates to tell us what is sensible to do,” Bennett said on Sunday. “That particularly applies to masks.” Infections are also surging in the UK, though the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, has so far resisted imposing further measures. But a major incident has been declared in London after a series of concerns were raised about the number of NHS staff off sick or self-isolating with Covid. The London mayor, Sadiq Khan, made the announcement after seeing the number of cases in the city increase rapidly. All Australian governments are underscoring the importance of people getting booster shots when they are eligible. But a new analysis by Guardian Australia shows Australia could take until well into next year to hit an 80% booster vaccination rate, with the rollout now ranking almost last out of 70 countries. Boosters are now available to anyone who has had a second dose of a Covid vaccine more than five months ago. But Australia’s slow initial vaccine rollout meant that more than half of all second doses were administered in the final four months of 2021. Hunt said on Sunday Australia had now passed 1.33m booster shots, with more than 640,000 administered in the past seven days.NSW premier Dominic Perrottet has ruled out reintroducing mask mandates or other restrictions, saying it is a matter of “personal responsibility”, despite the state setting another record for daily Covid infections. NSW recorded 2,566 cases on Sunday, taking the tally for the past five days to more than 10,000. Leading epidemiologists have called for masks to be reintroduced to indoor settings such as retail in NSW, and have expressed concern in recent days about mask mandates lifting as the Omicron variant appears to be partly driving a spike in cases. Victoria was due to lift mask mandates for retail settings earlier in December, but has delayed doing so due to Omicron and rising case numbers. On Sunday, Perrottet emphasised vaccination and booster shots as key to keeping hospital admissions down. “I said the increasing cases will be come,” he said. “What’s key to us is personal responsibility. Vaccination has been key, booster shots are crucial to keep people safe, and as we move through the next phase, case numbers will increase. That is the new normal. “We’ll continue to monitor the situation. It’s a time for calm. But it’s also an important time to go out and get your booster shot. Because vaccination here has been key to New South Wales’s success. That’s not on the government, it’s on the people and our fantastic health teams.” World Health Organization director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus last week warned governments against becoming complacent about Omicron, even if it turns out to be milder than Delta, saying its infectiousness alone is enough to overwhelm health systems. Other public health measures such as mask wearing, proper ventilation, hand hygiene and social distancing should not be dismissed yet, he said. “Omicron is spreading at a rate we have not seen with any previous variant,” Ghebreyesus said. “Surely we have learned by now that we underestimate this virus at our peril.” Perrottet was asked whether it was likely more restrictions would be imposed before Christmas. He responded that there are settings, such as hospitals, in which masks are still mandated, and said the government would continue to monitor case numbers and intensive care admissions. Some people were continuing to wear masks in other settings despite not being mandated to, he added, and said this was something the government “strongly” recommended. “We’ll continue to take a balanced, proportionate and measured response,” he said. “But this is all about taking personal responsibility. And the people of NSW are doing just that. The government can’t do everything. It’s over to the people of our state. It’s the people of our state that have got us through the last two years, and it’s the people of our state who will get us through the next two.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Perrottet added that intensive care admissions were only in the 20s, and “that’s incredibly positive”. On Saturday, the president of the Australian Medical Association (AMA), Dr Omar Khorshid, said it was “bizarre timing” for the NSW government to reduce mask restrictions while Covid cases rise and masks “are not a huge impact on personal freedoms”. “Hospitalisations lag behind infections quite significantly by a week or even two weeks, it’s too late once we actually see a sharp rise in hospitalisations,” Khorshid said. “And the right thing to do right now is try and flatten that curve a little bit, because we don’t know what proportion of people who get Omicron are going to end up in hospital. We simply don’t have that information as yet. It seems more mild, but if you end up with tens of thousands of people every day getting infected, which is quite a realistic prospect for NSW, then even if a small proportion end up in hospital, that could still overwhelm the system.” Asked about Khorshid’s comments, the NSW health minister Brad Hazzard said that while he had “heard” the AMA’s views, it was important to listen to a broader range of experts in the health system, including mental health experts and the experts helping “people staying in jobs”. He emphasised the importance of booster shots. “I think there’s only one club that people should belong to here in NSW, and that’s the booster club,” Hazzard said. “So, what we’ve seen is a quadrupling of the number of boosters given out. That tells me people are voting with their feet to join the booster club and everyone in NSW who is eligible should get into that club. It certainly is one of the major protections that we can have against this worldwide pandemic.”Cole Bassett scored in the 89th minute of his US national team debut and the Americans set a record for victories in a calendar year with a 1-0 friendly win over 10-man Bosnia and Herzegovina on Saturday night. Bassett, a 20-year-old midfielder for the Colorado Rapids, slammed home a rebound of a shot by 18-year-old Jonathan Gomez, the former Louisville City defender headed to Real Sociedad. Gomez had also just made his US debut as a second-half substitute. The newcomers teamed up for a goal that salvaged the Americans’ 17th win of 2021, surpassing the team mark set in 2013. Four Americans made their national team debuts as a US player group consisting almost exclusively of domestic-based talent finished off its December camp. US manager Gregg Berhalter staged the camp to keep his players fit for bigger competitions early next year while attempting to expand the breadth of his player pool. The US begin a string of three World Cup qualifiers on 27 January against El Salvador. Bassett’s late goal enlivened a quiet night in the US men’s first appearance since February 2020 at the LA Galaxy’s home stadium in the Los Angeles suburbs. The team is 13-2-3 with 11 shutouts at the venue, currently named Dignity Health Sports Park. Berhalter has now given debuts to 53 players in his 44 games in charge. That’s the third-most newcomers to get a chance under any coach in US history, and Berhalter did it in many fewer games than Bob Bradley or Bruce Arena. Atlanta United defender Brooks Lennon started in the US debut for the 24-year-old Arizona native. In the 78th minute, Bassett and 18-year-old defender Cade Cowell came on for their own US debuts. Gomez came on in the 84th minute. New England’s Henry Kessler also made his second appearance, while Internacional’s Johnny Cardoso made his third appearance. Roma defender Bryan Reynolds came on in the second half for his second career US appearance. This American lineup struggled to generate a consistent attack against a Bosnian team with eight starters making their first-ever international appearances. Bosnia already have been eliminated from World Cup qualification, and this exhibition was not in a Fifa window, leaving their federation to field a team of inexperienced players from their top domestic league while international stars like Edin Džeko, Miralem Pjanić, Asmir Begović and Sead Kolašinac stayed in Europe. US midfielder Kellyn Acosta went down hard in the 40th minute after a hard challenge from behind by Bosnia’s Amar Begić, who received a red card. Acosta returned to action after a short pause, while the 21-year-old Begić was furious to be tossed from the field in his international debut. Jordan Morris looked sharp on several attacks early in the Seattle forward’s first US appearance in more than two years, bolstering his chances of getting a roster spot for the next round of World Cup qualifiers. He tore a ligament in his left knee in February while on loan with Swansea, but returned to play in three matches for the Sounders. Ricardo Pepi played the first 62 minutes in his seventh appearance for the US since choosing his birth country over his parents’ native Mexico earlier this year. Before the game, US Soccer named Chelsea forward Christian Pulisic as its male player of the year and Pepi as its top young player. Pulisic became the youngest three-time winner of the award, joining Landon Donovan (four), Clint Dempsey and Kasey Keller in the three-timers club.Two men and two children have died after a light plane crashed into mangroves off the Queensland coast on Sunday morning. An investigation is under way into why the four-seater aircraft crashed shortly after taking off from Redcliffe airfield, north east of Brisbane, about 9am. Four bodies, including that of the 69-year-old male pilot, were recovered from the aircraft at about 12pm. Another man and two children not yet in their teens also died in the crash. Police were yet to confirm their identity, but do not believe they were related to the pilot. Queensland Police Inspector Craig White said members of the pilot’s family were at the Redcliffe aerodrome at the time of the crash. “I understand it was a bit of a family day,” he told media on Sunday. “The family are deeply traumatised as you’d expect.” White said the families became aware of what had happened once the aircraft did not return and they saw posts on social media. “This is a tragic accident,” he said. “It’s the lead up to Christmas and this is the last thing that any family need to go through at this time of the year, at any time.” The flight was a “joy flight” and appeared to have been prearranged, he said. The plane could be seen floating upside down in the wake of the crash as water police and forensic divers worked at the scene. Australian Transport Safety Bureau chief commissioner Angus Mitchell said a “very experienced team” was working to understand what caused the crash. Early reports suggested the plane went down shortly after takeoff but air traffic control was yet to confirm its movements, he told reporters. “We will of course get any evidence we can from the actual plane itself but equally from other sources such as air traffic control and witnesses,” he said. He called for any witnesses or people with relevant information to contact Queensland Police or the ATSB. Mitchell said the ATSB was working to recover the wreckage but the tide had gone out, making it difficult to get a barge in. “My understanding at the moment is it’s really ankle deep water … because the tide is going out,” he said. “It was slightly deeper at the time of the accident.” Earlier on Sunday, Queensland police commissioner Katarina Carroll said police and divers were confronted with a difficult situation. “The plane is in a very, very difficult situation, difficult position in the wetland area, and we have currently got police and divers travelling to that area, and that’s all I can say at this stage.”Christmas Day will bring warm weather and calm conditions for most Australians, but those in the north should brace for a potential storm, while temperatures are set to soar in the west. The La Niña downpours of recent weeks are not expected to make an appearance on Christmas Day, with warm and potentially cloudy weather opening the door to outside festivities across most state capitals. The south-eastern cities will enjoy temperatures just shy of 30C, while Queenslanders should prepare for showers. Perth is set for a 40C scorcher and Darwin may be in for a storm. Senior meteorologist with the Bureau of Meteorology Jackson Browne said it was “fairly typical” Christmas Day weather for Darwin and Perth, but a “little bit more muted” than usual for those in the south east. “Probably a bit more cloud than there otherwise would be, but you can explain that away with La Niña,” he said. He warned people should keep their festivities flexible and take the forecast, which is six days out, with a “massive grain of salt”. “Meteorology isn’t an exact science and uncertainty increases with the amount of time,” he said. Sydney Christmas Day will bring a predicted top of 28C in Sydney and 31C in Penrith, with cloudy skies expected across the city. Along the coast, Newcastle is likely to see a top of 29 and a cooler 26 in Wollongong. To the west, temperatures are expected in the low to mid-30s, with a hot 38C day predicted for Broken Hill. Those planning to spend Christmas at the beach will be pleased to hear calm seas and swells predicted not only for Sydney, but across the country. Melbourne Melburnians can expect partly cloudy skies and a high of 29C, one degree hotter than their NSW counterparts. “That’s a bit unusual, because it’s usually warmer in Sydney,” Browne said. Some light wind may be around, picking up through the morning, and there’s a slight chance of a shower. Those in northern Victoria can expect a hotter Christmas Day, with temperatures in the mid-30s predicted for towns including Bendigo and Shepparton. Adelaide Those in Adelaide should look forward to a mostly sunny day of 30C. A high pressure ridge stretching east from the South Australian capital will see “relatively mild and settled weather” across the south east of the country. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Canberra The nation’s capital is predicted to see similar weather to Melbourne and Sydney, with some likely clouds and a top of 28C. Light winds are expected, and there’s a slight chance of an afternoon shower. Brisbane Brisbane is expecting a top of 29C with a “reasonable” chance of showers, Browne said. People all the way up the Queensland coast should be prepared for the same, with rainfall possible in Mackay, Rockhampton, Townsville and Cairns. Tropical moisture moving in from Indonesia and the Coral Sea will introduce wetter conditions across the north of the country, stretching from the Top End across the Gulf of Carpentaria. Darwin The weather is expected to be less settled in Darwin, where showers and a possible storm are expected amid a predicted top of 34C. The tropical moisture moving in will see “quite a bit” of rainfall offshore, Browne said. In Alice Springs, the mercury is predicted to hit 38C but cooler minimum temperatures are expected to spare the red centre from heatwave conditions. Perth West Australians should brace themselves for heat during the festivities, with the Perth mercury expected to hit 40C. Browne said it was “quite a warm temperature” but “not entirely unheard of” for the state capital’s Christmas Day. Hobart Tasmanians will have a cooler Christmas Day than the rest of the country with an expected high of 23C in Hobart. There’s a 20% chance of rain.The hope was always that Christmas 2021 would have a lighter, more joyous feel than a year ago. Not clear of the pandemic, but coping with it much better, with the vast majority of the population benefiting from the immunity conferred by vaccination. But the extraordinarily rapid spread of the Omicron variant has imbued this year’s festive season with a gloomy sense of deja vu. The situation facing us now is materially different. A year ago, just a sliver of the population had received their first vaccination and social restrictions were the only way to hold off an impending second wave of Covid. Today, we have a much stronger wall of immunity as a result of vaccination and prior infection. But the arrival of Omicron is a cause for grave concern. The first case in the UK was documented on 27 November; just three weeks later, and it is estimated to be the dominant variant in the UK, accounting for four out of five positive test results in London. Daily case numbers are the highest they have been during the pandemic, and rising. This is being driven by Omicron’s extra transmissibility: the number of Omicron cases is doubling in less than two days. The impact of Omicron on the NHS will depend on the degree to which catching it is associated with serious illness and hospitalisation. But as yet there is a lack of real-world data as to the strength of this link in the UK. We know that Omicron is more vaccine-resistant than Delta, with double vaccination providing much less protection against symptomatic infection, but a booster jab restoring this to very good levels. Estimates based on early data suggest that a booster jab is 80-86% effective against hospitalisation, compared with more than 95% effective against Delta. But better data on the link between catching Omicron and hospitalisation is not expected for at least another week. The other route through which Omicron will affect not just the NHS, but all emergency services and essential infrastructure, is through staff shortages, as record case numbers lead to more people having to self-isolate than at other points during the pandemic. Guy’s and St Thomas’ Trust in London was forced to cancel non-essential services and redeploy staff to emergency medicine last week as hundreds of staff were self-isolating, and almost a third of fire engines in London were out of action last week, also due to staff shortages. The lack of data means ministers are having to take decisions amid a high degree of uncertainty. Should the government swallow the cost of imposing further social restrictions in England before Christmas – as Wales and Scotland have already done – to try to slow the spread as a precaution, in case of the entirely plausible scenario that the link between getting Omicron and hospitalisation is strong enough to pose a very serious threat to the NHS’s ability to respond to this wave? Or should it wait until there is more data and hope for the best, but impose restrictions if needed later on? Compounding the high stakes is the reality that with a virus that is growing exponentially – particularly with as rapid a spread as Omicron – taking action later means imposing tougher measures for longer to flatten the curve of infections and hospitalisations, and that to wait might be to leave it too late. In the face of these critical choices, it is vital that the public can trust Boris Johnson to make decisions in the national interest, based on the best data and scientific advice. Yet he inspires little confidence; partly as a result of his track record in consistently being too slow to act in the pandemic, which led to thousands of avoidable deaths in earlier waves. But also because weeks of self-made scandals have stripped him of all authority within his own party. These include the allegations of Downing Street Christmas parties that broke last year’s Covid restrictions, which it seems implausible Johnson himself was not aware of. This has left him an irrevocably weakened and damaged prime minister. Last week, 99 Conservative MPs rebelled against the introduction of vaccine passports for large venues even as Omicron was sweeping through the capital. The wing of his party that opposes necessary Covid restrictions is out of step with the nation, but will be even more emboldened by the Conservatives’ shocking byelection loss in North Shropshire. Johnson’s political crises will therefore not only pull him away from the crisis at hand, but will discourage him from taking the timely action needed to protect the NHS for fear of further upsetting his rancorous party. And the whole cabinet is likely to be distracted by the potential for a Conservative leadership election, with contenders positioning themselves rather than focusing on the national crisis under way. It is already interfering with government public health communications: Johnson has struck a far more ambiguous note than the chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, in terms of advising people on reducing socialising before Christmas. Whitty’s suggestion that people prioritise the social engagements that really matter to them led some Conservative MPs to launch disgraceful political attacks on him. There is still a chance that the link between catching Omicron and hospitalisation may be sufficiently weak to minimise the impact of the next wave on the NHS. Thanks to a stellar effort by the NHS, the booster vaccine rollout is proceeding apace, after a sluggish start that left the UK more exposed than it needed to be. But there is a very real risk that January 2022 is no less challenging than January 2021. We go into it with a prime minister no more competent than he was a year ago, but whose power and authority has all but leached away. It is a grim way to end the year.Shortly after Owen Paterson resigned as the Tory MP for North Shropshire in early November, Helen Morgan, who had been trounced when she stood as Liberal Democrat candidate at the last general election, rang her party’s HQ in London with a message that took senior officials by surprise. “She told us that we really had a chance in the byelection, that we had to throw everything at it. Initially there was a lot of scepticism,” said a party official. “Nobody really believed it.” They had good reason to doubt her. In 2019, Morgan, a local accountant, had come a poor third behind the Tories and Labour in this rural seat that had been held by the Conservatives in all but two of the past 189 years. Paterson had mopped up 35,444 votes (62.7%), Labour 12,495 (22.1%) and the Lib Dems just 5,643 (10%). It was top of the safe Tory list, strongly pro-Brexit, and nowhere near being a Lib Dem target. But such was Morgan’s insistence that within days Dave McCobb, the party’s head of campaigns, headed north with a small team to take a look for himself. “We discovered that the Tory vote was even softer than it had been in Chesham and Amersham [where the Lib Dems had pulled off a stunning byelection win over the Conservatives in June in a seat that was overwhelmingly pro-Remain]. “We found a lot of disillusion and anger with Boris Johnson and the government. They were the kind of voters who we knew would never vote Labour but could come over to us. And this was before Peppa Pig and before ‘partygate’,” said the official. The rest is history. Morgan was chosen as the candidate, and Lib Dem activists poured in from all corners of the UK in a way that only Lib Dems can do. Soon the campaign was taking off, and the Lib Dems knew they had a chance. “Farmers who had always put up blue signs in their fields were putting up gold Lib Dem ones instead,” said a party aide. “It was happening.” By last Thursday, polling day, the Lib Dems were confident of at least running the Tories very close. “The expected range was from close defeat to close victory,” said an adviser. In the event of it being the latter, Morgan’s team had racked their brains, thinking how they could get mass coverage on the scale they received after Chesham and Amersham, when party leader Ed Davey celebrated by smashing plastic blue bricks out of a wall with a mallet, a stunt which put him on every major TV news bulletin. “One idea was that Ed would get on a tractor and drive it through it a field, mowing down blue bails as he went,” said a member of his team. “But in the end we didn’t think that was practical.” (Not least because Davey had contracted Covid so could not be there.) Eventually, they plumbed for a big blue balloon, daubed with the phrase “Boris’ bubble”, which Morgan popped on camera. Three days on, MPs of all parties are still trying to come to terms with the Lib Dems’ stunning victory, the scale of which shocked even them. Morgan stormed home by almost 6,000 votes in the early hours of Friday morning before declaring that the “party is over” for Boris Johnson. The 34% swing was the third biggest they or their predecessor party, the Liberals, had ever achieved, and the largest this century. Byelection defeats for governing parties are often dismissed as short-term protests that will be reversed at general elections. But this was on a massive scale, in very unlikely territory for a Lib Dem success, and its potential, wider significance escaped few at Westminster. MPs began to think that if the Tories could lose in places like North Shropshire, they could lose anywhere. All bets were off. In an interview with the Observer, Davey, ebullient but still recovering from Covid, drew immediate comparisons with the early 1990s. “I joined the party in 1989. Initially, it was a really bad period for us and then we have a series of byelections. We had Eastbourne, then in 1993 we had Newbury and Christchurch – that was the last year that we won two byelections off the Tories. Last night was the seventh largest swing in any byelection since 1945. There is something serious going on. I think the Tories are on the slide.” Former supporters of the Conservatives had cast aside tribal loyalties in huge numbers for the first time in their lives, while some Labour voters had done the same and backed Morgan. In a seat that had voted heavily to leave the EU, Johnson had not been able to use Brexit as his protective shield any more. The Lib Dems, so closely associated with being pro-EU in the eyes of hitherto Tory-supporting Brexit supporters, and previously so disliked by many Labour voters because of their time in David Cameron’s coalition, were no longer off limits to either. “We’re grateful for Labour supporters who decided to vote tactically to help us defeat the Conservatives. But it wasn’t through some sort of agreement or some sort of formal or informal pact,” said the Lib Dem leader. “Voters are pretty savvy and they work it out. The Labour vote got really, really squeezed.” It is not only Lib Dems who feel that North Shropshire could be part of something much bigger. This weekend, such is the sudden slump in the credibility of the prime minister that many Tory MPs, including some with large majorities, are beginning to fear for their own seats, unless there is change at the top. After weeks of allegations of Tory sleaze, triggered by Johnson’s disastrous effort to save Paterson, have come revelations of lockdown rule-busting parties at Downing Street, at first denied and then revealed to be true on leaked film footage. On top of all this have been heaped revelations about Johnson asking a party donor to pay for refurbishment of his flat but failing to tell his own standards adviser the full truth in an inquiry into the affair. Then there were the endless promises to his MPs made privately and publicly that we were on an “irreversible road to freedom” from Covid, and that the pandemic was all but done. On Tuesday – two days before the byelection humiliation for Johnson – he suffered a huge rebellion in parliament. Ahead of the vote, the mood was little short of anarchic among Tory MPs. During it, Tory after Tory denounced the way they and the country had been misled over Covid. A senior Conservative source summed up the anti-Johnson feeling this way: “It is the lies and being misled that they don’t like. They can put up with things going badly because they do in government, but not being lied to.” Well over 100 Tory MPs either voted against or abstained in a Commons vote on the introduction of vaccine passes – by far the biggest revolt of Johnson’s premiership. Red wallers and southern Tories, Leavers and Remainers, libertarians, old hands and those recently arrived ignored a three-line whip. Johnson was left relying on the votes of Labour, which backed the plans, to get them through. One former Tory minister, who supported the proposals but describes Johnson’s leadership of late as “embarrassing and shaming”, said: “You could feel the moral authority draining from our side to Labour. The real leadership in recent times has been shown by Labour.” The same MP added that had it not been for the pandemic he would now be writing to the chair of the 1922 committee Sir Graham Brady calling for a vote of no confidence in the prime minister. Many Conservative MPs believe Johnson has until the May local elections to rescue his leadership or he will be out by next autumn. Even loyalists like Martin Vickers, a member of the executive of the 1922 committee, are prepared to say publicly that something must change. Vickers wants Johnson to show leadership like he did before the Brexit referendum and the 2019 election. “I am confident he can do so,” he told the Observer. “But he has got to do so straight away.” Almost every backbencher insists he must sort out his Downing Street operation, be more respectful of parliament, and listen more to his MPs. But few are confident he will. And as they look ahead, they see even more testing times for the PM. In the spring, council-tax bills will shoot up and National Insurance will rise just as higher energy bills hit householders, compounding a cost-of-living crisis. Closer to home and the affairs of Downing Street, Johnson awaits the result of inquiries into all the alleged parties at No 10, a probe now being conducted by the senior civil servant Sue Gray (after the cabinet secretary Simon Case, who had been in charge but was revealed to have held a bash in his own office, requiring him to step aside). Other official investigations into the way the PM handled his Downing Street flat redecoration may be launched. The general view among Johnson’s MPs is that now – with Omicron raging – is not the time to get rid of him. But most think that soon it may well be. “I think his flight path is set,” said a former Tory minister in a senior position in parliament. “The course is pretty clear unless he changes. We will arrive at a leadership contest in the second half of next year.”Five ice-age mammoths in an extraordinary state of preservation have been discovered in the Cotswolds, to the astonishment of archaeologists and palaeontologists. The extensive remains of two adults, two juveniles and an infant that roamed 200,000 years ago have been unearthed near Swindon, along with tools used by Neanderthals, who are likely to have hunted these 10-tonne beasts. More are expected to be found because only a fraction of the vast site, a gravel quarry, has been excavated. Judging by the quality of the finds, the site is a goldmine. They range from other ice-age giants, such as elks – twice the size of their descendants today, with antlers 10ft across – to tiny creatures, notably dung beetles, which co-evolved with megafauna, using their droppings for food and shelter, and freshwater snails, just like those found today. Even seeds, pollen and plant fossils, including extinct varieties, have been preserved at this site. All these will now offer new clues into how our Neanderthal ancestors lived in the harsh conditions of ice-age Britain, a period of prehistory about which little is known. The exceptional discoveries will be explored in a BBC One documentary, Attenborough and the Mammoth Graveyard, to be aired on 30 December, in which Sir David Attenborough and evolutionary biologist Professor Ben Garrod join archaeologists from DigVentures to film the excavation. Garrod told the Observer: “This is one of the most important discoveries in British palaeontology.” While the odd mammoth bone often turns up, he said, finding such complete skeletons is “incredibly rare”. “Where these mammoths lie in the ground is exactly where they died a quarter of a million years ago – next to incredible things like stone tools and the snails they trampled underfoot. “We have evidence of what the landscape was like. We know what plants were growing there. The little things are really revealing the context of these big, iconic giants. It’s a glimpse back in time. That’s incredibly important in terms of us understanding how climate change especially impacts environments, ecosystems and species.” Lisa Westcott Wilkins of DigVentures, an archaeology social enterprise, said: “Exciting doesn’t cover it. Other mammoths have been found in the UK but not in this state of preservation. They’re in near-pristine condition. You can’t take it in.” She added: “Archaeological sites from this period are rare, and critical for understanding Neanderthal behaviour across Britain and Europe. Why did so many mammoths die here? Could Neanderthals have killed them? What can they tell us about life in ice-age Britain? The range of evidence at this site gives us a unique chance to address these questions.” The researchers believe that the mammoth remains and the artefacts date to around 220,000 years ago, when Britain was still occupied by Neanderthals during a warmer interglacial period known as MIS7. Falling temperatures had forced Neanderthals south, and this site was then a lush, fertile plain to which both animals and humans were drawn. The earliest mammoths came from Africa about five million years ago. This particular species, the Steppe mammoth, was the largest of them, and lasted from about 1.8m years ago to about 200,000 years ago. Garrod, professor of evolutionary biology at the University of East Anglia, said the species weighed up to 15 tonnes, twice or three times the weight of an African elephant: “This was the largest species of mammoth ever. By the time they were about to be gone, they had dropped down to 10 tonnes, which still sounds a lot. We think that was an adaptation to the change in environment, climate and resource availability. It was becoming colder at that time, resources were getting sparser, and it drove that shrinking of the species. On top of that, there would have been undoubtedly local pressure from hunting and competition from other species.” Speculating on why so many animals died at this site, he added: “Was there a massive glacial flood that washed these poor animals down? By looking at the mud, it doesn’t look like there was. It’s very uniform all the way down. Were they hunted by people? Were Neanderthals crouching down in the rushes and chasing them into the water? Possibly. There is definitely an association between a wonderful hand-axe and other stone tools and these bones. Did they chance upon this bunch of dead mammoths and have a mammoth buffet? “Or was it just really muddy? With elephants today, if a juvenile gets stuck, often the adults won’t leave the site. They’ll try and help them. This is very thick mud. I’ve grown up near the seaside, near estuaries; you don’t need to be very heavy to get stuck in mud very quickly.” The excavations also revealed further evidence of Neanderthal activity on the site, including flint tools that would have been used for cleaning fresh hides. Some of the bones have possible butchery marks. DigVentures is a team of archaeologists that specialises in public outreach. They were called in after a Neanderthal’s hand-axe was found with the initial discovery of mammoth remains by amateur fossil-hunters Sally and Neville Hollingworth. DigVentures raised the funding from Historic England, dug the site and is coordinating the analysis and research. They hope to continue excavations once further funds have been raised. The site is now protected from fossil hunters by natural flooding. Westcott Wilkins praised the Hills Group, the quarry owners, for allowing them as long as they need: “There are also early discussions about wanting to build a public outreach centre where we can display some of the finds.” Other finds are expected to go to the Bristol Museum. She noted that the mammoths were barely five metres below ground level and close to a busy road: “People are whizzing by, not realising that feet underneath their car is this scene. It’s very surreal. We’re all still trying to get our heads around what we found.”Masalchi by Atul Kochhar, 2 Wembley Park Blvd, Wembley HA9 0HP (020 8634 8181). Half plates £4-£7.50; large plates £6-£14; desserts £4.50; wines from £24; cobra beer £6.50 a pint In the middle of October, the Indian chef Atul Kochhar opened a massively spendy and also quite simply massive restaurant called Mathura, inside what was formerly the Westminster fire station. It offers a tasting menu at £110 or an à la carte with starters at around £20 each. Many of the main courses are more than £40, including a wagyu fillet with 24ct gold leaf at £85 because, as we know, sigh, eating gold leaf is a thing. These days the only fires to be dealt with by this building are credit cards spontaneously combusting. The launch could be taken as an act of great bravery. I’m not so sure. There are lots of restaurants in central London charging big-ticket prices right now and they all seem to be full; mostly with the sort of people you could never tire of poking with the sharp end of an unsanitary stick. Prices have also increased recently, by as much as 20% against pre-pandemic levels in some places. And yet what all the chefs and restaurateurs I’ve spoken to tell me is that, while there may be staff shortages, there is no shortage of customers. Kochhar will doubtless find plenty of takers for that £85 gold-flecked wagyu, even if I’m not among them. Just five days after he opened Mathura, Kochhar opened a second restaurant, nine miles or so to the northwest, in Wembley. Masalchi, which roughly translates as “spice master”, is so close to the stadium that on match days diners will be able to hear the crowd sigh with disappointment when a goal is missed. It is, I think, the really brave venture. Partly it’s the scale. This is a big old beast of a glass-walled room, which can seat 120. There are huge square pillars tiled in iridescent shades of blue and gold, and a ceiling clad in blond wood strips. It has something of the canteen about it. It’s also keenly priced. The menu starts with a long list of what they call half plates, many of which cost less than a fiver. Why they can’t be called “small” plates, I don’t know. Small is a word I understand. Half just makes me want to ask “of what?” Alongside those are bigger dishes at between £6 and £12. It will therefore have to make its money on volume. That means it can not simply depend on crowds looking for something to eat before watching their team lose in the stadium next door, or before being waltzed into dribbling unconsciousness by the weird dinner-jacketed and bow-tied personality cult that is André Rieu and his Orchestra at the SSE Wembley Arena, who play on 18 May 2022. As you didn’t ask. The fact is it needs locals to come and keep coming. Which is where it gets interesting. Wembley is a focus for the capital’s Indian community. Masalchi is surrounded by brilliant, cheap and often long-established restaurants, representing various parts of the subcontinent’s culinary traditions: places like Sakonis, Goan Spice Café and Restaurant, and Pradip’s. If his kitchen gets it wrong, the Indian community, who are here in force tonight, will quickly let him know. It may be to Masalchi’s benefit then that, instead of a tight geographical frame, it takes its inspiration from street food across the entirety of the Indian subcontinent, with origins often explicitly described. Come here for a bit of everything, because that’s what you get. Expect uncompromising fire and depth, and to recall what you ate for a few hours afterwards. Regard mask wearing after the meal as a joyous way by which to extend the experience as you breathe and rebreathe your dinner. Two-thirds of the half plates happen to be vegan; these dishes always were meat- and dairy-free. From Uttar Pradesh there’s aloo kachori, the carb-on-carb fest of crisp bread pockets filled with potato curry, then gloriously swamped in more of the same, and there’s the textural joy of sundal, a warm south Indian salad of coconut, peanuts and chickpeas. A pile of disc-shaped poori with a turnip and carrot pickle fails to grab our attention. From Chennai comes a plate of the deeply spiced and fried chicken 65, with dry-fried chillies. Depending on the source you use, it’s named because of its origins in 1965 at the Buhari Hotel or, rather less persuasively, because of the 65 chilli peppers involved, or the 65 pieces of chicken it demands. Origin stories like this are only really interesting if the dish is any good and this is. It’s fried chicken in mighty steel toe-capped boots. The list of grills includes Lahori lamb chops. If what you crave, if what you really hunger after, is the hand-on-bone action of dark and crusted lamb chops, this is not the place for you. Go to Gifto’s Lahore Karahi in Southall or one of the Mirch Masalas or, of course, Tayyabs in Whitechapel. (Other Pakistani grill houses are always available.) But as part of a menu drawing on a whole bunch of different traditions of which these fat-cut lamb chops can be a part, they are more than agreeable. Here, for example, they get to sit alongside a light and soft fish curry from Southern India and, from Lucknow, an enormously engaging bowl of mutton keema (or mince) with potatoes. It’s pure comfort food for grownups. We have foregone bread and rice, for fear it will dent the space that could otherwise be used for more pressing dishes. With this bowlful I do miss a naan. Oh well. I’ll just have to spoon it away neat. I’m good at jobs like that. A smoky side of roasted and mashed aubergine, bold with acidity and chilli, helps with this noble task. The dessert menu includes gulab jamun, those rose syrup-drenched golden dumplings, guaranteed to ease away the more intense flavours. I assume there’s a handbook somewhere that insists they must be included on a menu like this. They’re absolutely fine. More refreshingly, there are sweet, juicy chunks of pineapple deeply charred from a trip through the tandoor, across which the pristine white of a coconut sorbet gently melts. Cobra and Malabar are available by the pint and there’s an entirely serviceable list of wines and cocktails. There’s also a menu for those who, for dietary or cultural reasons, do not eat alliums. Until now Atul Kochhar has been a chef who has swum only in the deep waters of high-end Indian food. This is his first casual spot. I suspect it won’t be his last. News bites The restaurant sector is reporting rampant cancellations following the introduction of new Plan B Covid restrictions and concerns over the Omicron variant. Now Sacha Lord, Greater Manchester’s night-time economy adviser, has launched a campaign calling on Chancellor Rishi Sunak not to return hospitality to the full 20% vat rate. It’s currently at 12.5%, a rise from the emergency 5% level introduced in July 2020. According to Lord if the rise goes ahead it could result in 120,000 job losses due to business failures. The latest restaurant operator to celebrate their environmental credentials is Boparan Restaurant Group which has Carluccio’s, Gourmet Burger Kitchen and Giraffe, among others. They’ve announced they are now carbon neutral. Like a number of operators who have made similar announcements, they are offsetting all their direct emissions. Critics have pointed out this is merely mitigating impact, rather than actual de-carbonising. However, they say they have been using renewable sources of energy across the estate since 2019. Adam Breeden, co-founder of restaurant groups themed around sports like bowling (All Star Lanes), darts (Flight Club) and ping pong (Bounce), has announced a new venture, combining a food and drink offering with digital race simulations. The first will be in the One New Change retail development in the City of London. Meanwhile, Norwich is to get Putt Putt Noodle, an Asian-inspired restaurant built around crazy golf. Frankly, I find just typing these words exhausting. Newsbites will now take a rest until 9 January. Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1There are parallels between three Comment articles last week: “Grenfell delivers yet more horrors. But the guilty still fail to take responsibility”; “So which of these politicians is a neoliberal? Not one of them”; and “Michael Sheen – knowing when you have enough is a rare trait”. We may not live in a neoliberal society, but we certainly live in one in which corporate and personal greed has been prioritised above individual and community wellbeing. There are many corporations whose conduct is not dissimilar to that of the companies that supplied the dangerous materials used on Grenfell Tower. Their chief executives are paid huge sums and are often rewarded with “honours” from the establishment. Yet they treat their customers with disdain and ignore their pleas of poor service and overcharging. As a school friend with whom I was reunited after 40 years put it: “I spent my career lying for my company.” At the same time, there are companies that are not like this. They respond promptly and sympathetically to inquiries, and admit to fault when necessary. It is tragic that they are the exception, and that the “predator capitalists” continue to dominate our lives. Bob Wolfson Rudford, Gloucestershire Lifeboat heroism In “If there’s peril, I’ll be there, says UK’s youngest ever female lifeboat helm” (News), it was heartening to read that the RNLI continues to make progress in recruiting women into its crews, although the youngest ever female helm was 18-year-old Elizabeth Hostvedt at Atlantic College in 1969. More importantly, the article pays tribute to the Penlee lifeboat crew, lost 40 years ago, but says that lifeboat safety has vastly improved with better boats and volunteer training. Better boats, yes; better training, no. The RNLI has always had excellent volunteer training and the coxswain of the Penlee lifeboat, Trevelyan Richards, was a Cornish fisherman with over four decades at sea. He had already rescued four people and went in to save the remaining four. The lifeboat was overwhelmed by the savage storm and smashed to pieces. No training could have saved her. The unofficial lifeboat motto is “Never turn back”. Ray Kipling, former deputy director, RNLI Holt, Dorset He that is without sin… We should applaud the timely, brave and honest call from Emma John to reconfigure, if not explicitly restate, the doctrine of original sin in respect of our universal susceptibility to prejudice and discrimination (“Do we really want to live in a culture of endless blame games when we’re all fallible?” Comment). Perhaps we could do with an imaginative programme of instituting personal and collective penance in the form of a truth and reconciliation process. Without that, we become prisoners of our inevitable failings, paralysing our will to repent and build a more inclusive world. The Anglican tradition of corporate confession and absolution in which we repeatedly and regularly acknowledge our sins and wickedness is necessary because it recognises that we can and, sadly, will relapse. The price of redemption is eternal vigilance of our potential for, in this case, prejudice and discrimination. It also applies to other egregious failings such as taking for granted the exploitation of the dispossessed in securing the advantages of affluence. Paul Thomson Mobberley, Cheshire Having read and agreed with Emma John’s article, I feel that the blame culture has the powerful attraction of making us feel better about ourselves and, in some cases, links with the compensation culture. A much more positive way of addressing a situation is to value “Black Box Thinking”, as illustrated by Matthew Syed in the book of the same name. The black box is there so that what led to an aviation accident, which was invariably a combination of events, can be learned from and addressed without apportioning blame, because surely the important aim is to prevent it happening again rather than to blame and carry on as before. The cost of blame is that if we do not feel free to recognise and accept our own failures, we can never learn and progress. Rosalind Wain Clifton upon Teme, Worcestershire Inappropriate irony In his New York Notebook (World), John Sweeney writes that the “slut-shaming” of witnesses in the Ghislaine Maxwell trial “is, almost, a thing of beauty, a dark wonder to behold. You’ve got to admire the way Maxwell’s multimillion-dollar attorneys break her accusers on the rack of their own human frailty. No one dare call it torture.” I would. I would add that torture, which is designed not to elicit truth but to terrorise, does not belong in a civilised society, as Sweeney knows. His would-be ironic comments are inappropriate and tasteless. Michele Roberts London SE5 Clued-up Sondheim Imelda Staunton’s touching note on Stephen Sondheim (“Those we lost in 2021”, the New Review) mentions his love of puzzles but not a connection with the Observer that may now be generally forgotten. In March 1968, a dinner was held at the Café Royal in London to mark the paper’s publication of the 1,000th Ximenes crossword puzzle. Sondheim arrived late (he was not on the guest list) but told me that the event was the main reason for his transatlantic trip. He did the puzzle for many years, entering the associated clue-writing competitions with some success, perhaps his neatest effort being a clue to “hypodermic”: my rich dope is dispersed in solution. Note the clever use of “solution” to mean both fluid and answer. John D Walsh Swindon, Wiltshire Cheers, drive Séamas O’Reilly mentions his exasperation that British people don’t thank their drivers as they leave a bus (“Reward stickers rescue my furious son…”, Magazine, last week). You should come to Cardiff, Séamas; almost everyone says “Cheers, drive” as they depart. Anne Pritchard Rhiwbina, Cardiff The joy of cathedrals I was surprised to read Jonathan Hauxwell’s letter on the topic of refitting Notre Dame of Paris (“A rood awakening”, Letters). The notion that our forebears designed cathedrals to promote nothing but fear and physical discomfort mischievously misrepresents. They certainly were and still are complex places. As for their builders and their intentions, the joy of The Canterbury Tales does not paint a picture of ordinary people in a state of terrorised submission as they purposefully made their way to Becket’s cathedral. Rather, it expresses a sense of the dignity, humour and tragedy of lives often unavoidably painful and short. People have always known fear. They have also always sought out relief. Lazy secularism is poorly equipped to enter into the subjective medieval world of which it frequently knows next to nothing. All buildings are liable to be reinterpreted but we should not retrospectively distort layers of meaning which can and still do speak to many. I suggest Eamon Duffy’s The Stripping of the Altars as a scholarly and faithful eye-opener to interested readers. Dr Andrew Blewett ExeterThe co-leader of a coronavirus study team at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine is Nicholas Davies, not Nicholas Wright (Science tells us if next few weeks will be miserable – or just muted, 12 December, p4). A reader who had had Covid posed a dilemma, saying the DHSC website states that PCR tests can’t be taken within 90 days of testing positive (Will a work trip to Poland mean 90 days of isolation?, 5 December, p59). We responded: “Given that the new rules oblige travellers to quarantine until they receive a negative test, this could mean three months of isolation.” In fact, all returning travellers must isolate until they receive the results of their day two PCR test, and for 10 days thereafter if the test is positive, but it is not the case that a negative test following a positive is required before they can leave self-isolation. Susanna Sait, founder of The Goods Shed, Canterbury, was misnamed “Salt” (The 50 most fabulous independent shops, 28 November, Magazine, p28). An article about dream analysis misplaced Furman University in North Carolina; it is in South Carolina (In your wildest dreams, 5 December, Magazine, p16). Other recently amended articles include: Dispatches from the grassroots: Farmerama and the new wave of food media Jonny Gray hat-trick inspires Exeter to easy win over Montpellier Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736The question I need help with my career. My heart sinks every morning – I feel overwhelmed, under-capable. Everything is a firefight and I just get through and think OK, and then I must face it all again the next day, repeat ad nauseam. I feel I’m over-promoted. Probably because of a family connection. I’m very senior at a large charitable foundation. I feel a fraud and I have no idea how to make people do things, I just am not a natural leader in this area. I want to “like” people into doing things. I never “command”, I always almost plead – a sort of, “Please, please, if you could would you…” puppy-dog style. And it is exhausting. I am not strategically bad, on that level I think I am OK, it is all the rest. I spend half my time worrying whether I have upset someone, said something wrong or been misunderstood; and whether I can get this or that person to like me. It is all so exhausting. I suppose this has been my philosophy throughout life. I don’t think it is a good strategy for life either, but I don’t seem to have an alternative. I feel as if I have never quite grown up. I tried executive coaching, but it didn’t work. Philippa’s answer That’s the trouble with being a woman, we are often trained by our background and culture to be more likable than assertive. I also think it is a shame when people try a psychological therapy once and then dismiss it. Finding the right counsellor is not unlike shopping for shoes. You rarely take the first pair you see, but you try on a few and go with the best fit. Just because that coach wasn’t for you doesn’t mean every coach or therapist would let you get away with trying to make them like you. (I’m just guessing that’s what happened with your executive coaching.) The first thing a coach that was a better fit might tackle would be how you talk about yourself, to yourself and to others. They’d get you to change: “I am not strategically bad, on that level I think I am OK, it is all the rest” to “My strength is being able to strategise.” If we overdo the people-pleasing it probably has the opposite effect of what we would wish because it can be annoying to be over-flattered. When we bend over backwards to get it right for the other, we often lose our ground and wisdom in the process. However, someone who doesn’t or who can’t consider an employee’s feelings or thoughts is not great either. So, like so many things, this is about avoiding the polarities and finding the middle ground. This may make it easier to get people to do things: make everything into an “I statement” rather than a “You statement.” Avoid words like “should” and “must”. So it’s not, “You must take this report to all members of the team and get everyone’s feedback by Thursday.” Nor is it, “Please, please, please do this by Thursday thanks ever so much, please thank you.” But use the middle way which is: “I would like you to take this report to all members of the team and get everyone’s feedback by Thursday. Would that be possible?” They may say, “It’s a bit tight” and then you say, “The deadline would have to be Thursday as the grant application must be filed by Friday. What would help you meet this deadline?” And I bet they’d have an idea that could make it work. Aim for the space between commanding and pleading that is assertiveness. Think about how you would like to be asked. You wouldn’t want to be asked in such a wishy-washy way that meant you didn’t know whether it was important or not. Nor would you like to be commanded as though you were some sort of robot or slave with no choice or brain of your own. If you need something done by someone, give them a bit of choice but not too much. This works outside work, too. When we are getting ready to go out in the winter we need to say to a child: “D’you want to put your coat on now or when we get outside?” Then we get better results than if we just say, “Coat on now,” or plead with them to put it on. When you’ve practised the middle way between commanding and pleading you will feel more like an adult and this will help diminish the impostor syndrome, too. Aiming for mutual respect with colleagues rather than just being liked will also make you, and them, feel better. The best leaders are not those who dominate, but those who listen, respect and consider feedback from employees when making a decision. I expect you already do this because even if nepotism played a part in your promotion, I doubt that is the whole story. Shop around for a book on assertiveness and maybe shop around for your next counsellor, too. I think some help to control your inner critic and impostor syndrome would be beneficial – and you’ll need that whether you decide to stay in your present role or live another life. If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.ukDavid Newton Johnson Southend Chardonnay, Upper Hemel-en-Aaarde Valley, South Africa 2020 (£15.99, laithwaites.co.uk) Christmas Dinner is effectively a buffet, so many and so varied are the competing elements on the plate. That makes the kind of precise wine matching that fusspots like me go in for somewhat redundant: a wine you might pick for the way it dovetails with turkey and a rich gravy is unlikely to be the same one you’d pick for bread sauce or sprouts (although, come to think of it, and much as I love them, I can’t think of a wine that would go really well with the maximum brassic bitterness of sprouts). In effect, then, you’re looking for all-rounders, and when it comes to whites that means something with a bit of weight and fullness, but also enough cleansing acidity to cut through the general richness. White burgundy is the classic choice, although that region’s recipe of subtly oaked chardonnay is as international as a croissant these days, with the likes of Newton Johnson’s Southend Chardonnay from the far southern, ocean-cooled Hemel-en-Aarde, a shimmering, gently savoury, and, for the quality, superb value alternative. Château Beauregard Fleurie Poncié, Beaujolais, France 2019 (£14.95, thewinesociety.com) Other rich but brightly balanced whites that I’ve enjoyed recently and that would have their versatile way with all the trimmings plus whatever bird or pulse-based centrepiece you may be having include: Winemaster’s Lot Vacqueyras Blanc 2020 (£9.99, Aldi) a fluently peachy blend from the southern Rhône Valley; and the vivid, finely drawn intensity of Benanti Etna Bianco 2020 (£21.50, tanners-wines.co.uk) from 750m up on the slopes of Mount Etna. Switching to reds, two approaches seem to work. The first is to pick something relatively brisk and red-fruited to deliver the same kind of palate-sharpening cut-through you get from the tartness of cranberry sauce. Specifically that could mean the perfumed, fresh-berry compote of a classic gamay from the Beaujolais village of Fleurie, such as Château Beauregard’s silkily charming example. Or it could be the seamless, silk-sheet luxury of northwestern Spanish wiemaking wizard Raúl Pérez’s infusion of deep, dark cherry, Las Gundiñas, La Vizcaina de Vinos 2017 from Bierzo (£20.67, justerinis.com). La Rioja Alta 904 Gran Reserva, Rioja, Spain 2011 (from £45.70, armitwines.co.uk; thewinesociety.com; laywheeler.com; leaandsandeman.co.uk) Another approach to the festive banquet with red wine is to go for something robustly structured, with plenty of spice from fruit and oak. The southern French blend, based on grenache, syrah and others, from the Rhône or the Languedoc, offers one garrigue-scented avenue to go down, in wines such as Taste the liquorice, pepper and blackberry of Difference Saint Chinian 2018 (£9, Sainsbury’s); the brambly sweetly spicy Marks &amp; Spencer Lirac 2020 (£10); and the meaty, deep Famille Perrin Les Sinards Châteauneuf-du-Pape (£29, thewinesociety.com). In Italy, Nebbiolo’s mix of ethereal perfume and monumental tannin and acidity is a feast wine par excellence, with Lay &amp; Wheeler’s Langhe Nebbiolo 2018 (£22.48, laywheeler.com) a particularly pristine and luxurious example. Finally, two European classics that would grace any occasion: the slickly sumptuous claret of Château de Cérons, Graves, Bordeaux 2018 (£21.95, leaandsandeman.co.uk), and the mellow oak-borne intricacy of La Rioja Alta 904. Follow David Williams on Twitter @DaveydaibachThe entire issue of the Observer Magazine of 6 February 1977 was devoted to the Queen’s Jubilee ‘to mark the fascinating new era that began 25 years ago today’. Asked whether she would celebrate, the reliably off-message Margaret, Duchess of Argyll, replied: ‘Of course I’m very happy for the Queen and her family, but with the country in its present state I don’t think it’s the time for a great celebration. I will probably just give a dinner party for a few friends from abroad who happen to be in London.’ The historian Lady Longford compared the royal styles of Elizabeth Windsor and Elizabeth Tudor. The first time Longford had seen the Queen up close was at an evening party at Buckingham Palace where ‘she was laughing and sparkling like a small, exotic humming-bird… I could see with my own eyes that here was essentially an equable and outgoing character.’ Both, she noted, had come to the throne at the age of 25. Furthermore: ‘The Tudor princess suffered imprisonment in the Tower of London and banishment to Woodstock for political reasons; the Windsor princess was virtually a prisoner in the castle of that name for reasons of wartime security.’ ‘Elizabeth Tudor’s enormous glittering ruff, in which her face was borne above the crowd, was designed to show the Queen’s mystique,’ wrote Longford. ‘A silver wedding photograph of Elizabeth II and Prince Philip showed them wearing a sweater and open-necked shirt respectively. Each Queen has known how to achieve her own ideal.’ To finish, a section to fill in and return, entitled: ‘Tell us what you think of the Queen’ – ‘Do you think the income the royal household receives now should be increased/cut/remain as it is/don’t know.’ Increased? Not even Barbara Cartland would have gone that far. ‘Which member of the Royal Family would you most like to meet: Princess Alexandra, Prince Andrew…’ Love that there was a ‘don’t know’ box for this question, too.The old year’s gardening has nearly ended. The new one’s waiting in the pots. Tulip and narcissi bulbs planted in lasagne style, semi-sleeping under the soil. The yellow roses are pruned, the last few flowers in a vase. I will leave the ‘Bengal Crimson’ rose to bush. The stellata has lost its leaf. Autumn is now all swept away. Furry magnolia buds in numbers like never before carry our wishes. There are new hellebores: four of these Christmas roses, from deep purple to tinted red, and a white. An early-morning impulse buy to soften the austere late year. The garden centre is a mass of Christmas trees waiting for their families and fairy lights. Spruce and fir in every size and style, potted and unpotted. I am seduced. The children are grown and we will be away on the day. But the old Danish family decorations are calling from their cupboard and I love the scent and to see the tree lit. Dad bought a couple of hundred 6in tiny pines when we were kids and it was the boys’ job to cut the choking grass around the pencil-thin stems. Another of Dad’s money-making schemes, like the chickens and the caravan to be rented out to holidaymakers. My brother Christopher cleverly failed with his share immediately, chopping one too many trees in the trimming. So it was left to me. We have red pine and fir on the summerhouse plot, but I’ve never had the heart to cut them down. We dress one with outdoor lights for the holidays and buy a Nordmann Fir from the local farmer where we get our goose. Sometimes he has a few cut and ready, but as often we wander round the plantations looking for the perfect balance of height and shape. Sometimes it is snowing. The drive home with the bird in the car and tree in the trailer is the true start to our holiday. Merry Christmas everyone. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.comSummerhill school has been in the news this month while celebrating its 100 years as an idiosyncratic, self-governing school. It started life in 1921 with the idea that children thrive when they are given maximum freedom to do what they want and be who they will. Nobody thought it would survive once its head and founder AS Neill died in 1973, but they reckoned without his daughter, the charismatic Zoe Redhead, who took over as head and continues to keep her father’s dreams alive with ferocious dedication. Nobody could be more pleased than I am that Summerhill lives on, but there is one big gap in the history of the school, and that is my grandmother. Neill did not found the school alone. Lillian Ada Neustatter met Scotsman Neill in the early 1900s when her son, my father, Walter, was a pupil at King Alfred School in London. One day my father brought Neill, his teacher at KAS, home to tea. Neill stayed for four hours, then followed this up with more visits, telling my grandmother his dream of running a school where children could be free and happy, where emotions were not neglected in order to develop the intellect – a contrast to the pupils at the Scottish school where he had been a primary teacher and had been ordered to be the boss and use the tawse. Lillian had recently been released from Holloway, where she was sent as a suffragette, punished for breaking a post office window after becoming a passionate believer in women’s emancipation. It was a time that had changed her dramatically from the frustrated wife of a doctor (Otto Neustatter) with no way to use her education and musical skills, living in Dresden among women who, she said scathingly, would rather discuss the perfect recipe for apfelstrudel than opera and theatre. She also had an interest in human rights and education. The lanky pedagogue, with his huge square-toed shoes and vibrating excitement, enchanted her. He, in turn, was very drawn to this woman, described by the writer Ethel Mannin as “one of those rare women who can suggest breeding even when wearing an old jumper, a tweed skirt, brogue shoes. She always contrives to look ‘a lady’.” My grandmother left Otto to join Neill, determined to bring her fire-in-the-belly belief in women’s rights to those of children. She and Neill rented a space in a hilltop building in Hellerau, Germany – they could not afford premises in England – where they created a schoolroom and living quarters, and took in their first children from different countries. Some had the kind of behavioural difficulties Neill believed – with justification in many cases – that approval and education without punitive authority would help. My grandmother became known to the children as Mrs Lins, a derivative of our middle family name, Lindesay. It was in Germany, in 1921, that the poet Edwin Muir and his wife, Willa, lived at the experimental school, and she taught in return for board and lodging. Willa and my grandmother became firm friends, while Edwin observed the enduring problem Neill had in getting a balanced range of good teachers: “What the school ended up with was the usual complement of communists, vegetarians and simple lifers.” It is said my grandmother was not as keen as Neill on letting children be unfettered. One day when Mrs Lins was vigorously cleaning windows – the school being short of funds to pay for help – a pupil, Wolfgang, stood watching and lectured her on the necessity of work as a source of joy. She gave him an old-fashioned retort. Her old-fashioned education also came in handy. Alongside managing the school, she taught a range of subjects including German and music, which she had studied at the Conservatory in Leipzig. Over and over in the course of researching a memoir of my grandmother, I heard from the ex-pupils who had been there in her time what a vital balance Mrs Lins’s practical, efficient, mover-and-shaker persona had been to Neill’s ability to construct the dream of Summerhill and inspire others. Gustav Mattson, who spent a couple of weeks studying Summerhill, in Hellerau, its first home, said of my grandmother: “She was a remarkable woman. Neill’s great support and indefatigable co-operator – I don’t think he could have carried through his enormous task without her.” Michael Boulton was a pupil during my grandmother’s time, and went on to join the Royal Ballet. He told me: “She was a marvellous person. She had a magic all her own.” In 1924 Summerhill moved to a building in Lyme Regis in the south of England, then to Leiston in Suffolk, where it is now. It did not deviate from the fundamental principles of holding a weekly school meeting where matters of concern, children proving troublesome or breaking rules, and ditto staff, could be brought up by anyone, and all had equal votes in decision making. To Neill, this was the heart of a democratic community. Children can choose to go to lessons or simply play if they prefer, the idea being that children are naturally curious and most will want to learn once they are ready. (It’s worth saying that many Summerhillians go on to university.) I was a pupil at Summerhill from 1954–9 and remember how the place has always attracted a remarkable amount of animosity from disapprovers, who seem to fear that somehow this educational outlier is going to pervert and corrupt education more generally. There seems to be a personal loathing for the school in the words of Maurice Punch, one of the academics who see the school’s ethos as damaging. In 1976, he called Neill’s appeal that of a messiah figure leading a cult, saying: “It’s remarkable how little critical word has appeared on the Summerhill sect. I’d like to raise the question of the extent of Neill’s influence on the children and the degree to which they respond to being a deviant minority.” Similar figures visited Summerhill in the 1960s, when child-centred ideas were coming into state education, and observing that it was all very utopian but no pupils educated this way would be able to adjust to life in the outside world. Clearly they had not met – as I have – the academics, scientists, artists, social and humanitarian workers, charity founders, skilled tradespeople and not high-achieving but contented former pupils. Nor did they see the value of Summerhill for pupils such as book illustrator John Burningham, who was sent to 11 schools before Summerhill, where he was, finally, happy. But the greatest threat has always been the education inspectorate. There were highly critical reports, and a few changes had to be made. Tabloid reporters writing about staff having sex on the front lawn – there wasn’t one – didn’t help. Then, in 1999, Tony Blair’s government decided he could not tolerate this tiny private school. It was given six months to enforce learning or be closed down. A notice of complaint was issued which, if upheld, would have meant closure. Not if Summerhill pupils could help it. They went to an independent schools tribunal and took over court 40, where they argued the case for their school and won. This was long after my grandmother’s time, but I have no doubt she would have been there with the pupils, encouraging them to argue they were happy products of a well-functioning school with students who even managed to pass GCSEs. My grandmother died in 1944, in Wales where the school was evacuated during the second world war. She had a slight stroke and withdrew from the school. Neill wrote to his friend Wilhelm Reich: “My wife is done out now. It is very sad to see one who has been so active become like a child again.” His tribute of remembrance recognised how valuable the woman he had taken tea with decades earlier had been: “Her memorial will be lived in the lives of many … who were helped by her … encouraged by her … loved by her.”When I first saw The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring with my dad at a Johannesburg mall multiplex one afternoon in that idle dead zone between Christmas and New Year, not everyone in the audience was left as rapt as they might now claim to have been. “That’s it?” asked a bewildered punter in front of us, to nobody and everybody in general, as the credits rolled to the droning vocal windchimes of Enya. “That’s really the end?” He and his partner skulked out of the cinema before anyone could reassure them more was on the way. I assume they got the memo eventually. Even for those of us forewarned of Peter Jackson’s bold three-film adaptation strategy, however, the limbo in which the first instalment left us was disorienting and exhilarating, like being woken abruptly from a still-escalating dream. Twenty years on, to a Generation Marvel audience, that shock might be hard to understand. A vast amount of blockbusters these days are but chapters in a larger narrative; their fans are less preoccupied with endings than with closing-credit teases and hints for whatever’s coming next. By 2001, we were fully accustomed to ubiquitous sequels, of course, though they largely feigned completeness in themselves each time; the promise of future extensions and rehashes was left tacit, a sort of silent gentleman’s agreement between studios and paying viewers. It might be unfair to draw a straight causal line between Jackson’s project and the glumly corporatised franchise culture that overwhelms Hollywood cinema culture today. For one thing, it shares either the credit or the blame with Christmas 2001’s other colossal fantasy-film event: Chris Columbus’ pedestrian but immediately obsession-inspiring Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone, the first move in a more conservative strategy – only one film made at a time, at least to begin with – that nonetheless worked like gangbusters. Columbus’ film might not have had its follow-ups ready to go the way Jackson’s did, but its scene-setting narrative and ellipsis of an ending as good as promised them, pending the audience’s thumbs-up. You don’t need me to tell you how that turned out, but cinematically, the Potter franchise-starter was marked by its commercial caution: its imagination was safely limited, its storytelling by-the-book in all senses, its budget spent to yield more value than magic. The Fellowship of the Ring, by comparison, was a reckless, wondrous extravagance to complement New Line Cinema’s considerable risk-taking in funding the production of all three films upfront for over £200m, based on the conviction of a New Zealander best known in Hollywood for some cheerfully icky indie horrors and one brilliant, Oscar-nominated arthouse downer about teen female patricide. One can only presume Jackson talked a good game. But he filmed one, too. From the film’s luxuriant, immediately immersive prologue, the viewer feels in the grip of a storyteller with complete conviction in his own vision — granted the money and wherewithal to realise what had long existed in his mind’s eye. That prologue alone is a pretty jaw-dropping feat of showing off: guided by the seductively knowing voiceover of Cate Blanchett’s Galadriel, we swoop through centuries and mountain ranges in mere minutes, merely passing through scraps of battle scenes that only preview the digital dazzle of grand-scale warfare to come, and are given our first intriguingly repulsive glimpse of Andy Serkis’s Gollum, the uncanny motion-capture creation that would swiftly change the possibilities of human performance in mainstream film-making. I had forgotten that The Fellowship of the Ring offers us this much straight out of the gate: Jackson is not a film-maker to hold onto his cards, even if spreading JRR Tolkien’s admittedly vast narrative across three years and nine hours was nothing if not an exercise in delayed gratification. Somehow, however, The Fellowship of the Rings keeps renewing its spell, giving us more things to literally ooh-and-aah over: the first, perfectly art-directed reveal of Bilbo Baggins’ higgledy-piggledy home, its exquisitely shabby detailing extending outdoors into the impossibly green, rolling, topsy-turvy shire; the camera’s first, awed sweep across Lothlorien, its soaring elf-gothic architecture impossibly hanging off vertiginous cliffs; the astonishing movie star entrance granted Liv Tyler’s Arwen on horseback, shrouded in ethereal mist and the backlighting of a Meat Loaf music video. Never the most instinctively tasteful of film-makers, Jackson doesn’t shy from New Age kitsch in his aesthetic; he just presents it with enough assurance and spectacular extravagance that we come to believe in it too. I had always been less a Tolkien fanatic than an admirer, yet the first film’s immense achievement was to hook even agnostics with the sheer bravura excess of its world-building: few who saw it didn’t return the next year, and the one after, if only to see how much grander things could get. That it all felt so fully and comfortingly imagined from the off was the beauty of Jackson and New Line’s mad all-in-one gambit. There was little room here for adjustment or focus-grouping or interference: its imagination was brought to us whole. The Fellowship of the Ring taught studios that audiences could be strung along for serials, that film-makers too could enjoy the expansive, sprawling privileges of what had hitherto been largely defined as televisual storytelling – albeit on a visual scale that, a decade prior to Game of Thrones, was still thought of as cinema’s advantage. Yet if the film changed cinema in this respect, few successors have used its expansions to similarly thrilling advantage – including Jackson himself, whose gaudy, bloated Hobbit trilogy had none of his first Tolkien outing’s breathless, liberated romanticism. The Marvel Cinematic Universe, meanwhile, proved that franchises could be built around multiple disparate visions rather than a single impassioned one, its corporatised cluster of superhero adventures covering a safe number of audience bases without ever approaching the near-deranged singularity of vision driving Jackson’s franchise-starter. You can even see the legacy of Jackson’s game-changing battle scenes – all vast expanses of mud and blood and metal – in the murky, charcoal-hued digital showdowns that most contemporary superhero movies climax with these days, minus the crisp, crunchy tactility and human touch. Somehow, The Fellowship of the Ring revitalised and ruined Hollywood cinema all at once – a kind of riddled curse that Gollum himself would be proud of.That’s where we are going to leave our live Covid and other news coverage for today. To recap the main Covid news; NSW premier Dominic Perrottet has ruled out reintroducing mask mandates or other restrictions, saying it is a matter of “personal responsibility”, despite the state setting another record for daily Covid infections. NSW reported 2,566 cases on Sunday, taking the tally for the past five days to more than 10,000. The federal health minister Greg Hunt says it is unlikely Australia will follow the Netherlands and impose significant lockdowns to suppress surging Omicron infections. In the Northern Territory, health authorities will announce tomorrow whether the lockdown affecting Tennant Creek will be extended, saying an extension is “likely” as seven new cases were identified in the Tennant Creek and Barkly regions. Later on Sunday, an additional case was identified in Ali Curung, 170km south of Tennant Creek. Ali Curung is an Indigenous community of about 500 people, and it is now in lockdown until 5pm Wednesday 22 December. Meanwhile, Victoria recorded 1,240 new Covid-19 cases, out of 76,033 tests. The state reported that 392 patients have been hospitalised with the virus; of these 81 active cases are in the ICU, of whom 41 require ventilation. A positive Covid case has been identified in a member of the media covering the second Ashes Test at Adelaide Oval. Tasmania is mandating masks indoors as the state recorded three new Covid-19 infections after reopening its border. South Australia recorded 80 new Covid-19 cases. In total across Australia there were 3,959 new cases: 2566 in NSW, 1240 in Victoria, 80 in South Australia, 42 in Queensland, 18 in the ACT, 10 in the Northern Territory and three in Tasmania. In other news; Police commissioner Darren Hine announced with “a heavy heart” that a sixth child has died after the tragic jumping castle accident that occurred at a Devonport primary school end-of-year event on Thursday. The 11-year-old boy named Chace Harrison died on Sunday afternoon. Police are investigating the accident. Four people have died following a plane crash near Redcliffe this morning. Police and emergency services responded to reports a small plane crashed in waters off the coast of Redcliffe shortly after 9am. The deaths include two children. Police have retrieved the body of a man from waters off Lennox Head, in the northern rivers region of New South Wales. The crew of PolAir 5 had been searching the area after a 19-year-old swimmer was reported missing. One person has died, and two others have been critically injured by a fallen tree during a storm on Sydney’s northern beaches today. The Bureau of Meteorology has released its Christmas Day weather forecast. The liveblog will be back tomorrow morning to take you through the news of the day. Until then, stay safe. Eighty new Covid cases have been reported in South Australia, with 309 active cases in the state and four people in hospital. SA Health urged “anyone who has been out in the community to monitor closely for symptoms and get tested as soon as they appear”. A person has died, and two others have been critically injured by a fallen tree during a storm on Sydney’s northern beaches today. From 3.30pm, emergency services received multiple reports of storm damage across the northern beaches area with trees and powerlines down across suburbs from Mona Vale to Forestville. Officers from Northern Beaches Police Area Command along with NSW Ambulance paramedics, Fire &amp; Rescue NSW, and the Westpac helicopter responded to a carpark on Ocean Street, Narrabeen, after reports a tree and powerlines had come down. One person was declared dead, while two others were critically injured and transported to Royal North Shore Hospital. The area is still considered hazardous, and members of the public are advised to avoid the area. In order to stay safe, treat all powerlines as if they are ‘live,’ NSW police said in a statement. There have also been reports of severe damage to homes and other buildings. Looks like the northern beaches in NSW are copping some rough weather. Elsewhere in NSW, severe thunderstorms are likely to produce damaging winds over the next several hours in parts of the Central Tablelands, Southern Tablelands, Central West Slopes and Plains and South West Slopes districts. Meanwhile in Victoria, a severe thunderstorm warning for damaging winds and heavy rainfall has been issued for those in East Gippsland, West and South Gippsland and parts of North Central and North East forecast districts. And if you want to know what to expect weather-wise for Christmas Day, you can read this piece by Lane Sainty: Some breaking news from the Northern Territory, where nine new Covid-19 cases were announced today. An additional case has been identified in Ali Curung, taking new cases in the NT to 10, eight of those in the community. Ali Curung is an Indigenous community of about 500 people, and they are now in lockdown. Darren Hine says it is too early to say how long the investigation into the jumping castle tragedy will take: A lot of pieces of the investigation need to be pulled together. We don’t want to rush it but we also understand that the community wants answers. We have lost another life and we’ll need to respect the family and give them space as well. Asked whether a state memorial will be held, Peter Gutwein says: I think we need to ensure that our thoughts at the moment with those two children that are still critically hurt and we will work with, obviously, the families, and understand their wishes as well. None of us can understand just how difficult it is for those six families who have lost children. Tasmanian premier Peter Gutwein: I am certain all Tasmanians share with me a deep sadness and heartache that young Chace Harrison, another child involved in this terrible tragedy, has now passed away. I know that our community, which is so connected, will be deeply saddened for the family involved and indeed all the families of the now six children who have lost their lives in this tragedy. We all feel this terrible loss. To all of the families impacted by this terrible tragedy, we will continue to support you. Welfare officers were with Chace’s family, the premier said. Commissioner Darren Hine said the investigation would take some time: We are working tirelessly with all parties concerned to ensure the extensive investigation is completed as a matter of priority for the coroner. The investigation is being led by Devonport criminal investigation branch, with assistance from officers from Launceston CIB, under the direction of the coroner. Their priority will be to interview all witnesses, gather and analyse forensic evidence and all environmental aspects, including weather patterns and conditions at the time of the incident. Given the magnitude of this critical incident and the need to speak to a large number of traumatised children within a short period of time, we have accepted an offer from NSW police to assist in conducting interviews in relation to the investigation. Four forensic child interviewers will travel to Tasmania today to help conduct interviews with young witnesses over the coming days. It is paramount we don’t pre-empt any outcome until all evidence is gathered and the investigation is complete. This will allow the coroner to determine the findings based on all the available evidence and facts. Community recovery arrangements are in place, and our thoughts continue to be with the families, loved ones and all those affected by this tragedy. The loss of six young lives will be felt by our community for a long time – so please take care of yourselves and those around you. For anyone in need of assistance, there is a range of 24-hour support services available: • Kids Helpline – 1800 551 800 • Mental Health Services Helpline – 1800 332 388 • Beyond Blue – 1300 224 636 • Lifeline – 13 11 14 Police commissioner Darren Hine says it is with “a heavy heart” he has to announce a sixth child has died after the tragic accident: An 11-year-old boy died this afternoon, his name is Chace Harrison. Our thoughts continue to be with his family and all other families and loved ones of the children involved. Nine children were seriously injured in Thursday’s incident. Devastatingly, six children have now passed away. Two children remain in critical condition in the Royal Hobart hospital. Another is now recovering at home. Tasmanian premier Peter Gutwein will shortly hold a press conference on the jumping castle tragedy on Thursday, in which five children were killed. Addison Stewart, 11, Zane Mellor, 12, Jye Sheehan, 12, Jalailah Jayne-Maree Jones, 12, and Peter Dodt, 12, died in the incident. They were taking part in end-of-term activities at their primary school when the jumping castle and Zorb balls were hurled into the air by a gust of wind. From AAP: The Bureau of Meteorology has released its first official Christmas Day forecast and it’s promising warm and dry weather for much of the country. A high pressure system moving east to west across southern Australia will lead to mild and settled conditions, said meteorologist Jackson Browne. There’s a chance of rain and storms for the northern half of the country, including places including Weipa in the Gulf of Carpentaria and extending into the Northern Territory. That’s thanks to tropical moisture coming in from Indonesia and the Coral Sea. The mercury in Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne, Canberra and Adelaide should peak between 27 and 30 degrees. Perth residents will be sweating a little more, with an expected top of 34 degrees. That’s the same top as Darwin, where there’ll be a shower or two. Browne said it would be hot across the interior of the country, including a top of 39 degrees in Alice Springs, and the heat will extend north into WA. But cooler minimum temperatures mean people shouldn’t expect heatwave conditions. In Hobart, the maximum expected temperature is 23 degrees. The bureau emphasised that the forecast could change. Browne said: We know Australians eagerly await our Christmas Day forecast. Should Christmas lunch be inside or outside, will the surf be safe for a swim, will it be wet on the roads; these are just some of the questions we help you answer each year. Victoria has published the daily chief health officer update: 94.3% of Victorians aged 12 and over have now had at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine and 92.5% have had two doses. There are 392 Covid-19 cases in hospital in Victoria. This includes 81 active cases in ICU, with 41 of those on a ventilator. As mentioned earlier in the blog, Victoria was notified of 1,240 new cases of Covid-19 yesterday. All cases were locally acquired except for one case which was acquired overseas. The 10 local government areas with the highest number of new cases are Casey, Whittlesea, Hume, Wyndham, Brimbank, Greater Dandenong, Melton, Moreland, Melbourne and Moonee Valley. There are 13,093 active Covid-19 cases in Victoria. 76,033 Covid-19 tests were processed yesterday. There are now more than 31,000 active primary close contacts in isolation in Victoria. There were five new confirmed cases of the Omicron variant identified in Victoria yesterday. The total number of confirmed Omicron variant cases in Victoria is 24. Of the Omicron cases in Victoria, 16 acquired their infection overseas and eight acquired their infection in Australia. The Department of Health has been taking a cautious approach to the designation of contacts of known Omicron cases. The department directly advised a number of non-household contacts to get tested and quarantine for seven days if fully vaccinated (or 14 days if not). These settings were applied on a case-by-case basis. Going forward, contacts in Victoria are now following the standard protocols regardless of variant: household contacts quarantine for 7 or 14 days, but non-household contacts (such as social, workplace or education contacts) are advised to get a PCR test and isolate until they get a negative result. Cases and contacts can find more information about these protocols at www.coronavirus.vic.gov.au/checklist. A pre-Christmas booster blitz for state vaccination clinics has also been launched. Capacity is being ramped up at state-run vaccination clinics to assist the commonwealth’s booster vaccine rollout before Christmas. More on the positive Covid case linked to the second Test at Adelaide Oval: Queensland has recorded 42 new Covid-19 cases, more than doubling its daily number in 48 hours, AAP reports. Chief health officer Dr John Gerrard said of those cases 24 are still under investigation, one was overseas-acquired, seven were linked to interstate travel and eight are contacts of known cases. Two of them, though, had no known link or travel history. After 20 total cases on Friday, and 31 just 24 hours ago, Gerrard expected the number to continue to surge after Queensland opened its borders to fully vaccinated interstate travellers on Monday. He said the new cases were “spread right across the state” with remote north-west town of Mount Isa the latest to be affected: It is likely most Queenslanders will be potentially exposed to this virus in the coming weeks. Forty-two may seem like a relatively small number but this is double the number we saw just 48 hours ago. If this rate continues, we will see significant numbers in January as predicted. Gerrard said no one was in intensive care, with only one of the 42 new cases showing symptoms after 18,312 tests in the last 24 hours. But he said the “moderately unwell and breathless” woman had been unvaccinated. Gerrard said Omicron was emerging as the dominant strain in Queensland at a much faster rate than expected. Four people have died following a plane crash near Redcliffe this morning. Police and emergency services responded to reports a small plane crashed in waters off the coast of Redcliffe shortly after 9am. A multi-agency operation is under way with Queensland water police officers and divers along with the forensic crash unit assisting other agencies, including the Australian Transport Safety Bureau, as investigations continue. There is no further information about those on board at this stage, Queensland police said in a statement. The families are asking media to respect their privacy during this difficult time. A positive Covid case among a member of the English media is causing some chaos on the first morning of the Adelaide Test, the Australian reports. Nine new cases of Covid-19 have been reported in the Northern Territory. Territory health minister Natasha Fyles said the lockdown in Tennant Creek may be extended, with no final decision made. The lockdown was announced on Friday and was due to end at 5pm on Monday. But this was “likely” to be extended, with health authorities continuing to discuss the situation, Fyles said. As of Sunday afternoon, 236 close contacts in the Northern Territory have been identified. Of the nine new cases, two are in international travellers in quarantine at Howard Springs. Seven are local cases in the Tennant Creek and Barkly regions. Fyles: So, considering these case numbers in Tennant Creek, we are actively considering extending that lockdown, but we haven’t made a final decision on that. We will get more information from our health teams ... and that decision will be made tomorrow. But it does look likely that we will extend that lockdown. Of the new Tennant Creek infections, four are in residents from the Wuppa town camp. These include a woman in her 60s with vulnerabilities, and she has been transferred to Tennant Creek hospital. A woman in her 50s from the camp is also very unwell and has been transferred to the same hospital. A man and a woman in their 40s from the same town camp have been transferred to the Alice Springs hospital. Fyles: We also have additional cases, a male and female in their 20s, and they’re at the Tennant Creek hospital. Then we have a child who is from Tennant Creek and is a known household contact. We believe that all of these cases are linked to the Katherine cluster, so we’re working through that in terms of the genomic sequencing and trying to establish that link. In the meantime Wuppa town camp residents have all been tested and are isolating. Northern Territory police apprehended two young women yesterday evening after they absconded from quarantine in Howard Springs a few hours earlier. The teenagers from Katherine were nearing the end of their quarantine period and had returned negative test results on their last test. They absconded from the centre at 3.30pm. Police resources used to locate the pair included a drone, police dogs and CCTV operators. Police apprehended the 16-year-old girls in Bakewell about 7pm and they were taken back to Howard Springs. As I mentioned earlier Tasmanian premier Peter Gutwein has announced masks will be mandated indoors. At a press conference, Gutwein said masks would be mandatory for all indoor settings including offices, restaurants, pubs, clubs, public transport including taxis and ridesharing, retail settings and supermarkets: In terms of the mandate, it is a strong recommendation that from today that you start wearing your mask indoors. But it won’t be mandated until Monday night and, importantly, I’d encourage everybody to fall into line with this, do the right thing, and let’s keep our community safe as we move forward. A light aircraft has crashed off the end of a runway and into the water off the coast of Redcliffe in Queensland. Tasmania is mandating masks indoors as the state records three new Covid-19 infections after reopening its border, AAP reports. It takes the number of active cases in Tasmania to seven. One of Sunday’s new cases was a woman who arrived in Launceston from Sydney on Wednesday and visited a number of retail venues. Another was a man who arrived in Hobart from Melbourne on Friday and the third was a family member of a previously confirmed case. Premier Peter Gutwein told reporters: What we’re seeing occur at the moment is not unexpected. We said that we would see Covid in the state. Masks will be mandatory across all indoor settings, public transport and ride shares from 12.01am on Tuesday. Gutwein said: We’ve done this before. It’s important. In fact, a lot of Tasmanians are already doing it. Slightly more than 91% of Tasmanians aged 16 and older are fully vaccinated. There are lengthy delays at the Covid testing sites in Launceston, according to police. In particular, the site in Henry Street, Launceston is experiencing a back-up of traffic. Motorists are requested to avoid the area if possible. Police request that people lined up for the site pull over to the far left hand side of the road. I thought I’d take a quick look overseas as Omicron continues to spread worldwide. The Omicron variant has now been detected in 89 countries. In London, mayor Sadiq Khan has declared a “major incident” to help ease the pressure on the capital’s hospitals amid a surge in cases being driven by Omicron. On Friday, Britain reported the largest 24-hour increase in the number of new cases since the pandemic began. A major incident enables different public agencies to share information more closely but also acts as a warning that emergency services and hospitals are unable to guarantee their normal level of response due to unusual circumstances. Although there has been some early data to suggest Omicron may cause milder disease than Delta (though there is not enough data to say for sure), what we know is Omicron is definitely highly infectious. Milder but highly infectious viruses can still cause a lot of stress to health systems if they spread to the most vulnerable too quickly. Even a milder virus can cause severe disease and death, especially in immunocompromised people, or unvaccinated people with co-morbidities. That’s why governments around the world are moving to slow the spread even in highly vaccinated populations, and even amid suggestions the virus may be more mild. The World Health Organization said this weekend: There are still limited data on the clinical severity of Omicron. More data are needed to understand the severity profile and how severity is impacted by vaccination and pre-existing immunity.” But the WHO warned that with cases rising so rapidly, hospitals could be overwhelmed: Hospitalisations in the UK and South Africa continue to rise, and given rapidly increasing case counts, it is possible that many healthcare systems may become quickly overwhelmed. UK scientists have called on governments to bring in restrictions now or face up to 2m daily Covid infections as Omicron spreads. Due to the rising cases, Germany and France have implemented travel restrictions banning tourists from the UK. Meanwhile, the Netherlands will spend Christmas in lockdown. Non-essential shops, bars, gyms hairdressers and other public venues will be closed until at least mid-January, the BBC reports, while two guests a household will be allowed – four over the holidays. I’ve wrapped up all of the information from the NSW press conference which took place this morning, where NSW premier Dominic Perrottet rejected enforcing mask mandates despite the state setting another record for daily Covid infections – 2,566 new cases were reported today. Leading epidemiologists have called for masks to be reintroduced to indoor settings such as retail in NSW, and have expressed concernabout mask mandates lifting as the Omicron variant appears to be partly driving a spike in cases. Victoria was due to lift mask mandates for retail settings earlier in December but has delayed doing so due to Omicron and rising case numbers. Today Perrottet emphasised vaccination and booster shots as key to keeping hospital admissions down: What’s key to us is personal responsibility. Vaccination has been key, booster shots are crucial to keep people safe, and as we move through the next phase, case numbers will increase. That is the new normal. We’ll continue to monitor the situation. It’s a time for calm. But it’s also an important time to go out and get your booster shot. Because vaccination here has been key to New South Wales’s success. That’s not on the government, it’s on the people and our fantastic health teams. World Health Organization director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus last week warned governments against becoming complacent about Omicron, even if it turns out to be milder than Delta, saying its infectiousness alone is enough to overwhelm health systems: Omicron is spreading at a rate we have not seen with any previous variant. Surely we have learned by now that we underestimate this virus at our peril. You can read the full report on the NSW press conference here: There is some sad news to report as I take the live blog into the afternoon. Police have retrieved the body of a man from waters off Lennox Head, in the northern rivers region of New South Wales. The crew of PolAir 5 had been searching the area this morning after a 19-year-old swimmer was reported missing. The body of a man has been recovered by divers. While the body has yet to be formally identified, it is believed to be the man reported missing. He had been swimming at Lennox Head about 6pm on Friday. The man’s family were at the beach this morning and have been provided with support by local police. Police have thanked members of the Lennox Head-Alstonville surf life saving club, Marine Rescue NSW, the Westpac Helicopter crew and the local community. A report will be prepared for the coroner. That wraps up my time on the blog this morning. And that’s my last live blog for the year! Thank you so much for joining me on Sundays over the last few months. I’m handing over to the brilliant Melissa Davey, who will keep bringing you the news this afternoon. Let’s take a look back at what we learnt at this morning’s press conference with health minister Greg Hunt. Hunt says it is unlikely Australia will follow the Netherlands and impose significant lockdowns to suppress surging Omicron infections. Asked about the prospects of fresh statewide lockdowns given the new restrictions in the Netherlands, the federal health minister told reporters in Canberra the circumstances in Europe were quite different to Australia. Read the full story from Guardian Australia political editor Katharine Murphy. Further to my last post, NSW police believe the missing swimmer is a 19-year-old man. A PolAir helicopter crew and police divers have joined the search for a man who went missing while swimming at Lennox Head, New South Wales, on Friday. Officers attached to Richmond police district were called to Seven Mile beach by a woman, who reported she’d seen a swimmer in difficulties in the surf about 6pm. NSW police said officers were on site within minutes and immediately coordinated a search. Personal belongings were found unattended on the beach near the surf club and, about 7pm, a man approached police at the scene with concerns that his 19-year-old son had not returned from a swim. The search resumed at 6.30am. One Twitter user wrote to me asking if we have any data on the number of Covid-19 cases in Victoria over time. Thankfully Guardian Australia’s data team have pulled together this super helpful article with all the figures in one place for Australia as a whole, as well as the states with current outbreaks. A whopping 98.3% of those aged 12 and over in the ACT are fully vaccinated. Health experts are urging Australians to wear face masks and opt for outdoor gatherings as Covid-19 infections continue to climb in the lead-up to Christmas. Our friends at AAP have the story: Infectious diseases pediatrician Robert Booy doesn’t expect infections to fall until February after an anticipated January peak fuelled by holiday travel. “There are so many simple things we have been doing already that work that we can continue doing without too much fuss,” he told the Nine Network on Sunday. “We don’t have to be locked down, but we can observe simple measures like masking indoors, like spending more time outdoors where it is ventilated, social distancing by a metre to two metres.” Booy thinks QR codes should be continued or brought back to help control the spread and avoid a return to lockdowns. “Even then, we can do things like a partial lockdown where people can get on with their lives, but they limit the amount of time in pubs, clubs, hotels and the like,” he said. Brad Hazzard is asked about calls from the Australian Medical Association for NSW to reintroduce some restrictions, due to the state’s rapid rise in cases. AMA president Omar Khorshid told ABC News yesterday: “It’s very bizarre timing from the New South Wales government to pull out a mask mandate just when you are seeing an incredible spike in cases that matches what’s happening around the world.” Hazzard: Look, again, the AMA, I ... respect their views, I have heard their views, particularly the federal AMA. But I have also heard a range of other epidemiologists and I get to see more when I want you TV programs at night. I will take the advice of New South Wales Health and weigh up all the other issues that we have to add ... At the moment I don’t seem to be, I don’t see any reason to jump down that path. Health minister Brad Hazzard says the figures that come out of other countries are “not naturally analogous to our state”. But he says the state is on “high alert”: At the moment the figures here are very low and so we are also looking at modelling that is coming from overseas. NSW is in a different position at the moment. We are in summer, so we are not seeing the huge uptake of what you would expect anyway of people, for a variety of other reasons other than just the ... variants we are dealing with at the moment. It is hard to distinguish or understand the full impact until we see more weeks of experience in what is going on here in New South Wales as to whether or not it is going to really lift our hospital intake or not. We are on high alert, as you would expect us to be. Dominic Perrottet is asked what the downsides to mandating masks are, given that doctors and nurses are calling for this. The premier says authorities “strongly encourage it” but won’t go so far as to issue a mandate, saying: “There’s always different views, there’s always different debates.” He does suggest that mask mandates may be reintroduced in the future, especially as Australia heads into winter or as new variants emerge: When we believe there’s evidence in front of us we need to potentially tighten restrictions we will. And it’s almost certainly as we move through, as we see overseas, as they head into the winter months, certain challenges will come our way. There will be curve balls, certain things we don’t expect. There’s almost certainly to be other variants that may come our way, and we’ll need to respond. Reporter: What will your threshold to reintroducing restrictions? What would it you take for you to do that? Dominic Perrottet: We’ll look at that. What is key to us as well is personal responsibility. And you know, we have mandated masks in high-risk settings. We strongly encourage the use of that. Everybody today is responding incredibly well. We monitor the situation. ICU presentations are the key metric for us. We want to make sure that our health system has the capacity as we move through this next challenge of the pandemic. And I’m incredibly confident as premier that our health system is the strongest in the country. That we can deal with the challenges that come our way. One journalist points out that the NSW government’s response to Omicron is very different to how authorities, like the UK and the Netherlands, are responding. They ask Dominic Perrottet whether he is doing enough. The premier says he thinks NSW is, and has always, struck the right balance. He says that state is focused on getting people vaccinated: What has been our leading aspect here in New South Wales has been the effort that everyone has undertaken to get vaccinated. We have not only the highest vaccination rates in the country but in the world. That enables us to learn to live alongside the virus. If you look over the last two years, to be in a position where we’re having incredibly low death rates and, in addition to that, our economy is strong, and we have been able to open up in a way that keeps people in work and allows them to provide for their families. And we’ll continue that approach. We’ll continue to monitor the situation ... It’s a time for calm. But it’s also an important time to go out and get your booster shot. Health minister Brad Hazzard clarifies that NSW saw 57,000 booster shots given by state health facilities alone this last week. This is up from 15,000 doses the previous week: By the end of January, we expect that 40% of all people who have been vaccinated … I think we were all hoping for a really good year next year. I think we can still hope for a good year next year. We need to get our booster shots and take the basic precautions. This virus is now this new variant, Omicron. We can’t be sure we won’t have other variants along the way, but the basic rules apply. If you have symptoms, stay home. Don’t put your family and workmates at risk. If you have any symptoms, go and get tested. Maintain that social distancing and, of course, if you’re in close proximity to people inside and it’s a big group of people, consider wearing a mask. We also have to live our lives in amore normal way coming into 2022. We’ll continue to strike the balance. Dominic Perrottet adds that the NSW first-dose vaccination rate is now at 94.9% (it is unclear whether this is for those 16 and older, or those 12 and older). NSW premier Dominic Perrottet is speaking, and is urging residents to get their booster shot, if eligible. More than 50,000 people in the last week came forward for it, he says: We said vaccination is key to ensuring we’re able to open up as quickly as possible, as safely as possible. And to see so many people go out and receive that booster shot, particularly as we go into Christmas, has been incredibly pleasing. We are standing by to hear from NSW premier Dominic Perrottet. I’ll bring you the updates as we have them. Finally, Greg Hunt is asked about data emerging from the UK health security agency that shows AstraZeneca is weak at preventing a symptomatic infection from Omicron (based on a very small sample size). He is asked whether booster timeframes could, or should, be shortened for those who had the AstraZeneca vaccine: There’s lots of information coming in. Much of it preliminary ... Our advice remains that all the vaccines provide clear and strong protection against serious illness and loss of life. In terms of Omicron, there’s emerging data. I haven’t had any indication at this point in time of a vaccine-specific set of booster timeframes. So what we do is just as we’ve done with the TGA ... with Atagi, we encourage and really defend and protect their independence. And sometimes we’ll see others with a medical expert background or others with just a passing medical background give differing views. But by having the two outstanding bodies, one the regulatory agency, the other the vaccine advisory body, as strong and independent bodies that make their assessments, we get the best advice. Greg Hunt said none of the states or territories have indicated that there will be changes to Covid-19 restrictions in the lead-up to Christmas or in 2022: The direction of Australia is overwhelmingly towards opening up. Obviously, seven states and territories are now reunited and Western Australia has set their timeframe. So, it’s that direction towards opening up which has been set. But Hunt acknowledged that “individual measures might be adjusted from time to time depending on circumstances”. Federal minister Greg Hunt said that it is up to states to “make their own decisions” about whether to shorten the wait time between a second dose and a booster shot beyond the five months that Atagi has advised. Guardian Australia reported yesterday that New South Wales health officials are considering breaking with commonwealth advice by shortening the Covid vaccine booster interval to four months, amid concern about spread of the Omicron variant. Deputy chief medial officer Dr Sonya Bennett responds to a question about the UK view that there are two pandemics – Delta and Omicron: We have always considered Omicron would be more transmissible ... It’s hard for both ourselves and even countries around the world to completely understand what proportion of their cases are Omicron versus Delta. There is a belief that the majority are Omicron in the UK. But it’s very difficult through testing to completely confirm that. That just underscores the fact there’s still a lot of uncertainty about this particular variant ... we continue to watch all the emerging evidence and it will adjust as necessary ... For us it’s about focusing on what we as a community can do now, whilst we enjoy that time with family and friends at Christmas. And it’s a combination of vaccination and those other measures that I mentioned, such as mask wearing and being Covid-safe. Greg Hunt is asked whether there is going to be a problem with the booster rollout, given that a lot of GP clinics close over the Christmas period. The journalist asks whether the states should ramp up their vaccination clinics to compensate. The health minister says the system has shown it can “ramp up from 500,000 [doses] a week ... to now over1m in the last seven days”: The second thing, though, is we [prepared] extremely large volumes of vaccines to cover the Christmas period, over 5m vaccines are in place, with another 2m-plus being expected to be delivered in the lead-up to Christmas and then in the days beyond. And then a third thing is that the states do have a very important role. We’ve been in contact with the states and territories, encouraging them to continue their state clinics. Hunt adds that the role of pharmacies is also increasing, and that they’ve gone from administering 15,000 doses a day to more than 50,000 on weekdays. Sonya Bennett seems to suggest that we should have mask mandates but doesn’t go so far as to call on the NSW government to reintroduce them. Instead, she says that people should act before mandates come in: I think we know mask mandates work. We know mandates work generally. But I think my plea to the community is we don’t need to wait for mandates to tell us what is sensible to do. That particularly applies to masks. They’re simple, we’re used to it. Most people around the country have worn masks at some stage. It’s a simple, easy, effective tool to continue to use when necessary. I ask the community to consider that they use that. That they make their own choice to use a mask when necessary. Greg Hunt is asked whether, given the fact that the Netherlands is going into lockdown, there is a chance we’ll see more state-wide lockdowns in Australia. The journalist also asks whether New South Wales will be prepared to bring back its mask mandate and QR codes? Hunt says what is going on in the Netherlands is “quite different to Australia, as well as the fact they’re going into a cold European winter”: In fact, they’re already there. But they’re going into the depths of winter with a vastly higher case rate and, sadly, having had a vastly higher loss of life. So a different country, different circumstances. Sonya Bennett says that, despite Australia’s high vaccination rate, the rate of transmission for Omicron is still concerning. She urges people to wear masks while doing their Christmas shopping: It was really pleasing to see, you know, a large proportion of people still wearing masks. But probably not large enough. It’s a simple thing we can all do. In saying that, she admits that she forgot to wear her mask at the shops: I didn’t have it, but it reminded me that in the future I will certainly be taking a mask to anywhere that’s crowded, particularly around Christmas time, because it’s an effective, another effective layer of protection. Deputy chief medical officer Dr Sonya Bennett says there is “there’s still a lot of uncertainty” surrounding Omicron, “particularly with respect to how severe we think Omicron might cause disease and various opinions”: We are seeing rapid escalation of case numbers around the globe, particularly in the UK, with the UK recording over 90,000 cases yesterday. We are seeing case numbers rise here ourselves in New South Wales, particularly, with 2,500 cases, or thereabouts, yesterday as well. So, it is highly transmissible and appears to rapidly escalate with what’s called the doubling time of around two days. Which is obviously concerning. Greg Hunt adds that Australia’s first dose rate is at 93.8%; while 90.4% Australians are fully vaccinated. Federal health minister Greg Hunt is speaking from Canberra. Meanwhile, Victoria recorded 1,240 new Covid-19 cases, out of 76,033 tests. The state reported that 392 patients have been hospitalised with the virus; of these 81 active cases are in the ICU, of whom 41 require ventilation. Let’s take a closer look at those numbers coming out of NSW this morning. The state recorded 2,566 new Covid-19 cases today, the highest daily total since the pandemic began. Yesterday NSW recorded 2,482 cases, and 2,213 cases the day before. An impressive 148,937 tests were administered across the state yesterday, as residents get tested before travelling interstate for Christmas. The state also reported that 227 people are in NSW hospitals being treated for Covid-19, with 28 in intensive care. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet will announce his new cabinet today. Minister for water, property and housing Melinda Pavey said yesterday that the premier had told her she would not be continuing as a minister. The cabinet also won’t include special minister of state Don Harwin, or local government minister Shelley Hancock who, as reported yesterday, both told the premier that they will step down, and won’t contest the next election. Researchers working to improve the lives of people with chronic neurological conditions and brain cancer are among the scientists who may benefit from a $276.4m injection into medical research, AAP reports. The government says the funding, drawn from the $20bn medical research future fund, will improve health outcomes for all Australians and tackle global health challenges. The new funding rounds also include grants in maternal health and chronic respiratory conditions, as well as digital innovations in primary healthcare. The government says the funding will support projects that benefit healthcare consumers by answering research questions that are more relevant and responsive to community needs. Good morning, everyone! It’s Justine Landis-Hanley here to bring you the live blog this morning, Sunday 19 December 2021. Experts have called for state governments to reinstate some Covid-19 restrictions after Australia recorded more than 4,000 coronavirus cases yesterday, the highest national daily total yet. NSW recorded 2,482 cases, more than quadrupling its daily case tally in just five days, just days after the NSW government decided to remove almost all remaining Covid restrictions, including wearing masks in crowded retail settings. Guardian analysis also shows that Australia could take well into the next year to hit an 80% booster vaccination rate, with the rollout now ranking almost last out of 70 countries. This is because Australia’s slow initial vaccine rollouts means that more than half of all second Covid-19 vaccine doses were administered in the final four months of 2021. Guardian Australia reported yesterday that the NSW government is considering breaking with commonwealth advice by shortening the Covid vaccine booster interval to four months, amid concern about spread of the Omicron variant.Guess who’s back? Back again? Six months after their surprise victory in Chesham and Amersham, the Liberal Democrats have delivered another seismic byelection win, taking the deep-blue rural seat of North Shropshire on a whopping 34-point swing. This was an epic turnaround for the party, which started in third place in a seat which has returned Conservative MPs in every election but one since the repeal of the Corn Laws. The swing against the Conservatives was the largest since Douglas Carswell’s post-defection win as a Ukip candidate in Clacton seven years ago, and the largest blue-to-yellow shift since Christchurch in 1993. The seventh largest byelection swing in history was not the Christmas present a beleaguered prime minister wanted. The North Shropshire earthquake caps a remarkable turnaround for the Liberal Democrats after nearly a decade in electoral purgatory. Coalition from 2010 was toxic for the party, and Brexit hampered their recovery, with their enhanced appeal to remainers offset by intensified hostility from Leave voters. The massive swings in both Leave-voting North Shropshire and Remain-voting Chesham and Amersham suggest the party may at last have shrugged off the baggage of coalition and Brexit, and become once again a catch-all vehicle for voter discontent, able to ride local resentments to victory in widely varying political contexts. The restoration of the Liberal Democrats as electoral gadflies is a major headache for the Tories. Incumbent governments build up grievances: whatever they do, it will have displeased someone. This is particularly true for the demographically diverse and ideologically incoherent current Conservative administration. Ed Davey’s party are already the main local competition for many government MPs, who until now could at least console themselves with the notion that Brexit had put sharp limits on their opponents’ support – Leave voters would not back the party of ultra-Remain. Now they face the prospect of opponents who, as in the 1990s, can successfully play whatever tune local voters want to hear. Suburban Tories in seats like Chesham and Amersham will have their opposition to planning reform and tax rises reflected back to them on the doorstep by activists in yellow rosettes, while restive rural voters will get leaflets on the Conservatives’ failure to support farmers. Tory voters looking for “levelling up” in poorer seats will hear how the government has spent too little, while small-state Conservatives in wealthy seats will hear it has spent too much. One nightmare scenario for Tory strategists is having to fight the Liberal Democrats on two large fronts simultaneously. The third party has been moribund since its post-Coalition collapse in many traditional strongholds, places which often have Liberal roots stretching back a century or more. Though North Shropshire is not part of this lost liberal heartland, places such as Cornwall, which went from entirely gold to entirely blue between 2005 and 2015, or Somerset, where the Lib Dems are still the local opposition in all four of the seats they lost at the end of the Coalition, could be ripe for a revival. A Liberal restoration in these far-flung, rural and often Leave-voting areas could come at the same time as a Conservative-to-Lib Dem realignment in a very different swathe of England – the wealthy, strongly Remain-leaning home counties seats where the third party surged into contention in 2019. These two battlegrounds are geographically and politically distinct, which creates major strategic problems for CCHQ in deciding how to distribute local campaigning resources and calibrate national messaging. A government already facing the difficult task of defending former Labour heartland seats north of the Watford Gap may also face a taxing game of Lib Dem whack-a-mole in a wide range of blue seats further south. Success poses new strategic problems for the Liberal Democrats too. A smaller party with limited resources can throw everything at a byelection campaign in a single seat, but has to pick its fights carefully in a general election. The Liberal Democrats simply don’t have the money or the activists for intensive campaigns everywhere. Yet activists will now be clamouring for the opportunity to restore the party in its lost heartlands, a call which will only get louder if the party makes big gains in this terrain at next year’s local elections. Yet twice in the past decade, in both 2010 and 2019, the Lib Dems have been badly burned when an overexcited response to a polling surge led them to stretch resources too thinly. The risk of squandering a newfound electoral advantage on dozens of second place finishes is real. If local and byelection advances continue, the party will face some very tough choices in deciding which seats to target at the next general election. While a government defeat is always a happy result for the opposition, Labour strategists will also be wondering about the broader implications of the Lib Dems’ revival. Keir Starmer’s team will be delighted if the return of vigorous competition diverts Conservative resources to seats Labour have no chance of winning, but not all seats can be so neatly divided. North Shropshire itself is an example – Labour started in second place but have now been shoved to the margins. Should Labour candidates who often start in second place in pre-coalition Lib Dem seats accept a Lib Dem restoration or contest it? Even if Labour decide to aid the Lib Dem fightback, it is not obvious how best to do this. Signals of alignment may help encourage tactical Labour-to-Lib Dem switching but may impede Lib Dem recruitment of disgruntled Conservatives. Association with Labour in a national “progressive alliance” could kill off nascent Liberal Democrat revival in deeper-blue areas. Both parties might be better served fighting the next election as frenemies, formally opposed but informally co-ordinating. This could help preserve the fragile recovery of the Liberal Democrats’ greatest electoral resource: being “none of the above”. Robert Ford is professor of political science at the University of Manchester and co-author of The British General Election of 2019How do tyrants survive? History is littered with examples of cruel dictators and despots who dominated their countries for years, oppressing millions of “subjects”, and were never forcibly deposed. Joseph Stalin famously died in his bed at the age of 74. Mao Zedong lasted longer, dying of natural causes in 1976, age 82. Spain’s thuggish dictator, Francisco Franco, seized power in 1939 and was still in office when he died in 1975 at 82. The obvious answer is fear. Other factors – cunning, chutzpah, charisma – play a role, too. But terror is the tool of choice for your typical tyrant. This is a lesson Kim Jong-un, North Korea’s “supreme leader”, learned at his father’s knee. And when Kim Jong-il died, 10 years ago last week, his then 26-year-old son was propelled willy-nilly to the top of the totalitarian dynasty founded in 1948 by his grandfather, Kim Il-sung. It was by no means certain in 2011 that young Kim Jong-un was up to the job of oppressing 26 million people. Analysts predicted he would soon be overthrown. Some in South Korea hoped for a democratic revolution. Aping his forefathers, Kim fell back on fear to survive. In 2013, Jang Song-thaek, his uncle and long-time mentor, was arrested and executed. Purges of other senior officials swiftly followed. Then, in 2017, in a darkly Jacobean plot, Kim’s elder half-brother, Kim Jong-nam, once viewed as heir to the dynasty, was assassinated by two young women wielding a nerve agent at an airport in Malaysia. Since then, no one has dared challenge Kim Jong-un’s rule. Further evidence of Kim’s habitual, merciless brutality was provided last week by the Transitional Justice Working Group, a human rights organisation in Seoul, which published gruesome details of 23 public executions. Most of the shootings and hangings were not for crimes of murder or rape but for watching or distributing videos from South Korea, it said. Kim’s own visceral fear – that North Koreans may become “infected” by the superior living standards, democratic politics and public freedoms and media of the South – spurs paranoid behaviour. Restrictions on every aspect of working and personal life have tightened in recent years. To mark the anniversary of his father’s death, North Koreans were reportedly instructed “not to drink alcohol, laugh, or engage in leisure activities”. The predictable result of Kim’s 10 years of tyranny is a chronically impoverished, socially and economically backward country. It’s a country where food shortages bordering on famine conditions are common, where most people struggle to make a meagre living, and where state violence, corruption and the ever-present fear of a Stalinist prison gulag have reduced its citizens to terrified silence. North Koreans are Kim’s hostages. So the question must be asked again, but this time of the great powers: how does this tyranny survive? Dating back to the Korean war, China has the most to answer for. While Pyongyang’s erratic behaviour causes problems for Beijing, its base calculation has not changed in 70 years: better a weak, dependent despot in the North than a strong, reunified Korea that, if South Korea’s president, Moon Jae-in, had his way, would join the western camp. The US and allies such as Japan have likewise failed to do enough to end this gross affront to international decency and law. For too long, they were content to isolate, sanction and ignore the North. Now that Kim has built nuclear-armed ballistic missiles capable of hitting an American city – the biggest “success” of his leadership – it may be too late to take him down, politically or otherwise. Donald Trump, as is his wont, made matters worse with ego-driven summits that boosted Kim and achieved nothing. Now China and Russia tacitly conspire to maintain the status quo, while the US enacts additional, ineffective sanctions and fulminates impotently. For North Koreans, more decades of tyranny beckon.Youtuber-turned-boxer Jake Paul extended his perfect record after sending Tyron Woodley face-first into the canvas with a vicious knockout blow in the sixth round at the Amalie Arena in Tampa, Florida on Saturday. In a largely uneventful bout, the first five rounds saw little significant action or quality with fans booing the lacklustre display, until Paul delivered a right hand blow that knocked Woodley out cold. Paul, 24, beat former UFC champion Woodley for the second time in four months, after his split-decision victory in August, and improved his professional boxing record to 5-0. The 39-year-old Woodley replaced Paul’s scheduled opponent Tommy Fury, half-brother of heavyweight champion Tyson, after the Briton dropped out earlier this month with a broken rib and chest infection. “This guy is a legend and respect him for taking the fight on two weeks’ notice,” Paul said in an expletive-laden interview where he called out Fury for withdrawing from the match. “It was a tough fight. I had blood in my eyes. I had the job done. I was setting the punch up the whole fight. He didn’t see it coming. Like a lumberjack, timber. It’s got to be the moment of my life.” Paul has now knocked out all four of his opponents, having previously stopped fellow YouTuber AnEsonGib, former NBA guard Nate Robinson and ex-UFC fighter Ben Askren. In the co-main event, unified featherweight world champion Amanda Serrano dominated Spain’s Miriam Gutierrez to win the lightweight bout by a unanimous decision, potentially setting the stage for a long-awaited showdown with Ireland’s Katie Taylor. Two-time NBA All-Star Deron Williams beat former NFL running back Frank Gore by split decision in a four-round heavyweight exhibition fight earlier in the card.The celebrated television writer Sarah Phelps, the woman behind recent popular Agatha Christie adaptations, has revealed that research for her latest Christmas drama has convinced her that a 60-year-old mystery at the heart of the British establishment has yet to be solved. Phelps, the writer of A Very British Scandal, starring Claire Foy, told the Observer she suspects that successive governments have acted to keep the full salacious details of a sensational 1960s divorce case away from the public. Her new three-part drama, beginning on Boxing Day on BBC One, tells the true story of a 1960s sex scandal that tarnished the gilded image of key members of the aristocracy. Phelps hopes her new screen version of the court battle between the 11th Duke of Argyll and his supposedly unstable, “Dirty Duchess” will do something to restore the reputation of his wife, played by Foy. But the writer also believes that crucial facts about the duchess’s adventurous sex life are still judged too sensitive to reveal. “The sin that Margaret, Duchess of Argyll, really committed was to break the code of silence, the omertà that protected the top tier of the upper classes,” Phelps said. Instead, sordid myths about the duchess, myths that later went on to inspire Thomas Adès’s acclaimed opera Powder Her Face, have masked an episode of government lies and whitewashing, Phelps argues. The Argyll couple’s bitter divorce case dominated the front pages and society columns in March 1963, and at its centre was the riddle posed by a shocking series of erotic photographs stolen from her desk by her husband. Commentators were especially intrigued by the hidden identity of a man who was only visible from the neck down in a nude polaroid photograph taken in the 1950s and put forward by the duke as evidence of his wife’s voracious sexual appetites and alleged 88 infidelities. The so-called “headless man” is pictured in a sexual act with the duchess and speculation raged as to whom he might be. At one time, the film star Douglas Fairbanks Jr was a candidate, as were members of the royal family, the Pakistani prince, Aly Khan, Max Aitken, Lord Beaverbrook’s heir, various wealthy Americans and, maybe most damagingly, the then-secretary of state for the Commonwealth, Winston Churchill’s son-in-law, Duncan Sandys. And the speculation did not stop, long after the duchess’s reputation lay in tatters and she had suffered heavy financial losses. In 2000 a Channel 4 documentary claimed it had an answer. Just released government papers indicated the involvement of two well-known men, rather than just one: Fairbanks and Sandys. Further secret proof was said to lie in documents originally put together in the 1960s by Lord Denning, the judge who was Master of the Rolls from 1962 to 1982, and then marked for destruction, since the law lord had assured his illustrious interviewees that names would never become public. But the dossier was instead sealed for 30 years. It was eventually shown in 1993 to the then-prime minister, John Major, but he in turn ruled the documents should not be released for another 70 years. They remain in the National Archive at Kew. The Conservative government may have assumed this would end the matter. But other contemporary Westminster papers released under the same 30-year rule showed that Sandys had considered resigning from Harold Macmillan’s government over the gossip around the scandal. On 20 June 1963, cabinet minutes record a discussion about setting up what soon became the Denning inquiry: “The Commonwealth secretary [Sandys] said he was himself the subject of some of the rumours to which the prime minister had referred. “In one respect the allegations involved him in some difficulty. For the rest, he completely denied them.” Sandys died in 1987, but Lord Denning, still alive at that time, then decided to speak out. He told the Independent newspaper he had incontrovertible evidence that Sandys was not implicated. He had, Denning said, later learned of physical characteristics that made it impossible for the pictured torso to belong to the late commonwealth secretary. However Fairbanks, the film star, stayed in the frame. Since then, the name of William Lyons, a married Pan American airline executive, has been put forward as the duchess’s lover by Lady Colin Campbell, a relative by marriage. And Argyll was indeed known to have had an affectionate affair with a man she called Bill. A recent biography of the duchess has also offered the name of a Texan millionaire, Joe Thomas. But Phelps is unpersuaded. After her lengthy investigations into the vicious legal fight and the admittedly outrageous life of the duchess, she believes a series of names have been released to hide the truth. “Why would John Major have extended the ban on the release of the trial documents for another 70 years?” she asked. “Was it really just someone like Bill Lyons in that picture? Would that be enough for the lengthy ban, just to protect a prominent businessman?” Margaret, Duchess of Argyll, died aged 80 in a nursing home in Pimlico, London, just a few days before the Major government decided to keep all the testimonies given to Lord Denning under wraps, including her own. So the last official word on her is the scathing verdict of the divorce trial judge, who described her as “a highly sexed woman who had ceased to be satisfied with normal relations and had started to indulge in disgusting sexual activities”. Phelps sees it differently: “Margaret’s image was trashed deliberately in the case. In my view the aristocracy are no worse than the rest of us. But they have a lot more time for debauchery and a lot more at stake.”Describe your Sunday morning I like a bit of a snooze – as much as you can with four dogs jumping on the bed demanding attention. I’ll cook a late breakfast – pancakes, or scrambled tofu – and then just chill. Play music, drink coffee, walk the dogs. Easy. What’s playing? Reggae, always, just like with my family. It puts me in a laid-back mood, makes me feel safe with nostalgia. In LA I’m far from home, so reggae is comforting. Just like Bob Marley said: everything’s gonna be all right. How do you relax? I love to be in nature, so I take long walks through the canyons. The week is manic; I cherish switching off. Grandma was very Christian – it was her day of God. In my own way, I treat Sundays as sacred. A special Sunday? The day my goddaughter was christened; one of my best friend’s first child. It was love-filled and emotional. There’s this picture of me holding her tightly. It was so special. I’m a godmother three times over – with no kids of my own, everyone gives me that responsibility. Sunday lunch? I like to cook. I’m half-Guyanese, so my roasts are a bit eclectic. I’ll do the traditional trimmings, but with a West Indian gravy. It’s spiced with whatever I can find in the kitchen. My British friends here on the West Coast love to join; the American ones sometimes question why I keep making them Thanksgiving dinners in the summer. Sunday night? We might watch a film, but I’m in bed by 10.30. I recently bought a head-massager and have started giving myself some love with it last thing in the evening. Apparently, it’s good for headaches, hair growth and brain stimulation. I’m trying to keep my phone in the living room overnight to keep my mind clear, but I’ll probably watch dog videos on TikTok before sleeping. Christmas, With Love Always is out nowEarly adopters of bathing rituals are amazed when I tell them that, once upon a time, I just didn’t understand baths. My thinking was, what on earth is attractive about soaking and getting wrinkly in a tub of water that is essentially a pool of your own dirt? Now, of course, I realise that the true purpose of a bath isn’t really about getting clean. It’s bigger than that. It’s akin to making a cup of tea. It’s about taking a moment. It’s about comfort. It’s about solving life’s ills. It’s rarely ever about the tea – or bath – in and of itself. The ritual of bathing helps calm the mind, ease tension and clear the debris of the day away, and a good scented bath oil heightens the experience. Whatever oil you choose – lavender, for instance, is wonderfully relaxing and aids sleep, rose is uplifting, eucalyptus soothes aches and pains – you can rely on them doing magical things to your mood and joints. They are also a shortcut to hydrated skin – so much so, you could potentially sidestep another layer of moisturiser post bath. If you are pregnant, particularly in the first trimester, a word of advice: not all essential oils – a key component in bath oils – will be suitable, so check with your doctor first. For everyone else, remember: bath oils are not the same as any old oil, they have been formulated specifically for use in the bath. So don’t expect a splash of olive oil to have the same effect. 1. Diptyque Precious Oils for Body and Bath £46, net-a-porter.com 2. REN Moroccan Rose Otto Bath Oil £32, renskincare.com 3. Ortigia Bath Oil £45, libertylondon.com 4. Jo Malone Pomegranate Noir Bath Oil £48, jomalone.co.uk 5. Aromatherapy Associates Bath and Shower Oil £49, aromatherapyassociates.com 6. Olverum Bath Oil £36.50, spacenk.com 7. Neal’s Yard Geranium and Orange Bath Oil £15, nealsyardremedies.com 8. Verden Bath Oil £85, votary.co.uk 9. Susanne Kaufmann Oil Bath for The Senses £50, libertylondon.com 10. Bamford Bath Oil £48, bamford.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFettoSylvain Cypel’s new book is a violent indictment of the Jewish homeland, its growing embrace of apartheid and its closeness to some of the worst autocratic and similarly ethnocentric regimes around the world, including Hungary, Brazil and the Philippines. The author is a prominent French newspaper editor and foreign correspondent who lived in Israel for 12 years, trained there to be a youth movement leader and even served in a paratroop brigade after being drafted. Cypel writes with the passion of the convert: someone who believes he has been betrayed by the faith in which he was raised. His father was also a journalist, the editor of France’s Yiddish-language daily, Unzer Wort, and the main leader of labor Zionism in France for a quarter of a century. Cypel was very close to his father, but Zionism ultimately became the “unbridgeable hiatus” between them. “It had been his whole life and it was mine no longer,” he writes. Cypel argues that the country originally seen as an embattled David menaced by a constellation of Goliaths has evolved since the six-day war, into something “no idealist could stomach: a racist, bullying little superpower”. His accusations carry particular power because of the nationality of his sources: nearly all are Israeli journalists, intellectuals and activists. But there is a paradox which Cypel mostly glides over: the provenance of all this criticism is also potent evidence of the continuing vitality of Israeli democracy. It would be impossible to write a book like this, relying almost entirely on the testimony of resident citizens and especially journalists, about Saudi Arabia, Egypt or even Jordan. That’s one reason why Israel’s supporters still describe it as the only democracy in the Middle East – a description Cypel rejects. Although the accusation of apartheid has gained much more currency in the last couple of years, it was almost 20 years ago when Cypel first heard the case for it. It came in an interview he conducted with Michael Ben-Yair, who was Israel’s attorney general in Yitzhak Rabin’s second government. Ben-Yair believed the essential tenet of Zionism had been violated. “The object of Zionist thinking was never the domination of another people,” he said. “We are committing crimes that fly in the face of international law and public morality. The moment a power establishes two different legal systems, one democratic and liberal, and the other repressive and cruel, that’s where apartheid starts … Where an army defends the property of the one and destroys that of the other … there is no other term to define the situation except apartheid.” Cypel begins his prosecution by quoting an assortment of headlines from a six-month period in 2018 and 2019: Israeli border policewoman arrested on suspicion of shooting Palestinian for fun Israel said a Palestinian was killed in clashes. A video shows he was shot in the back The disabled Palestinian slowly walked away. Then Israeli troops shot him in the back of the head After shooting a Palestinian teen, Israeli troops dragged him around – and chased an ambulance away The headlines are bolstered by horrific statistics. Yesh Din, a human rights organization, studied 1,163 complaints to police from Palestinians who said they were victims of violence by settlers. During the 12 years that were examined, the share of complaints referred for prosecution was 1.9%; 91% of the investigations were closed without charges being brought. Out of 1,163 complaints, three went to trial. Amira Hass, a West Bank correspondent for Haaretz, wrote that by systematically shooting “young unarmed Gazans … Israel is conducting a mass psychological experiment in Gaza”. But the “guinea pigs are actually the Israelis. How far will their society go in its acquiescence? The experiment is about compliance and cruelty.” Hass compared the process to the notorious Stanley Milgram experiments conducted at Yale in the early 1960s, when subjects were asked to press a button that sent increasingly powerful electric shocks to a person each time he or she gave the wrong answer to a question. All of these anecdotes explain Cypel’s relentless pessimism about Israel, which he calls “a society blindly turning inward as it drifts toward disaster”. “Israel seems to have no sense of what within it could avert that disaster, or who would do it,” he writes. “Does Jewish society have what it takes to resist the current that is carrying it? The answer has to be no.” Cypel’s book is also replete with the voices of virtuous Israelis who remain determined to put their country on a different course. But while the “ultras” who dream of expelling every Arab “aren’t yet dominant in Israeli society”, he writes, “they are its most determined segment”. In a long section about the Jewish diaspora, Cypel points out that Israel’s lurch to the right has produced a growing gap with the liberal traditions of American Jews in the Reform movement. No one has written more powerfully on this subject than Daniel Boyarin, a scholar of the Talmud at Berkeley who has described the piercing pain of watching the Jewish tradition “disintegrating before my eyes”. “It has been said by many Christians that Christianity died at Auschwitz, Treblinka, and Sobidor,” Boyarin wrote. “I fear – God forbid – that my Judaism may be dying at Nablus, Dheisheh, Betein or El Khalil.” Cypel says those words were “considered blasphemous” when they were written, in 2006. “But more and more American Jews agree with them today.” The State of Israel vs the Jews is published in the US by Other PressCouples without children managed to sustain a more even share of housework after the onset of the pandemic than those with children, according to a new study examining the social impacts of the crisis. The immediate impact of the lockdown in March last year did cause a rebalancing of the domestic chores between men and women. It led some to hope that one of the quirks of Covid’s arrival might be a boost to equality in the home. This shift towards men taking up more of the slack soon faded for those couples with children, however, as schools and nurseries closed. In comparison, child-less couples were found to maintain more of an equal share of household duties. Researchers said that the difference between the two might be partly down to a bias that sees women as being more affected by school closures. Mothers are potentially more likely to be interrupted while working to take on childcare and help with homeschooling. The study by researchers in Bristol and Berlin used survey data covering more than 2,000 couples aged between 24 and 54. They examined how behaviour changed between March and September 2020, a period that included the first lockdown. Following that lockdown, the share of housework done by women initially declined for all types of couples, but more noticeably for those with a young child. It slightly increased in May and decreased again by June. However, by September 2020, those with young children, older children and no children diverged in terms of their sharing of the burden. “Couples with school-age children and couples with a 0- to 5-year-old were already clearly retreating to a more traditional gender division of housework, though still below the reference levels before the national lockdown in March 2020,” the study states. “Couples without children living at home sustained a more equal share of housework.” Susan Harkness, professor of public policy at the University of Bristol, said the study further dampened early hopes that there might have been some boosts to equality from the enforced social changes that the pandemic created. “There were attempts at a more positive take [on the impacts of the pandemic on housework], that maybe homeworking will be good for gender equality, and we’ll see some sort of positive takeaways,” she said. “Men could start doing the housework if they’re more likely to be at home. “There was a short-term transition, but if you think about whether those changes persisted and affected gender norms, that’s not what we see. Fathers are more likely to get back into work more quickly than mothers, for example, so mothers can lag behind in terms of returning, post-Covid. When you close schools, you’re increasing the burden for women. And I think that’s a fairly clear story coming out of this pandemic.” Previous official data has suggested that women were bearing the burden of homeschooling far more in the second lockdown compared to the first. The Office for National Statistics data found at the time that 67% of women and 52% of men were taking charge of their children’s education at home. More women reported that homeschooling was having a negative impact on their wellbeing, with 53% struggling compared with 45% of men. Another survey from earlier this year also suggested that girls and young women aged between 14 and 24 had been taking responsibility for the majority of household chores during the pandemic, leaving them less time to focus on their education. Harkness said the research pointed to the stubbornness of gender divides, as reflected in the discrepancies in employment and pay going into the pandemic. Last year, the Institute for Fiscal Studies revealed that in 2019 the average working-age woman in the UK earned 40% less than her male counterpart. It found that the earnings gap was about 13 percentage points lower than in the mid-1990s, but that over three-quarters of the reduction could be explained by the rapid increase in women’s educational attainment. Women of working age have gone from being five percentage points less likely to five percentage points more likely to have a university degree than men.It’s hard to look beyond your own front door when a lethal disease threatens your family. Governments often exhibit similar introspection when facing emergencies beyond national borders. So what if the world is on fire? In the age of Covid the quest for protection and recovery is primarily, myopically, obsessively domestic. Charity, it’s said, begins at home. So look away now, if you wish, because much of the world beyond the inoculated shores of Europe and America presents a very disturbing picture. The pandemic has coincided with, and greatly exacerbated, a crisis in an already struggling international humanitarian system. Existing weaknesses and long-neglected problems are ruthlessly exposed. The resulting, worldwide crescendo of suffering, extreme need and sheer misery is now reaching its highest-ever pitch. And Covid is only part of this story. Unmediated conflicts, endless civil wars, climate-related disasters, state lawlessness, impunity and ineffective diplomacy are leading to hunger, disease and displacement on an unprecedented scale. It’s a universal scream of pain and fear the like of which even Edvard Munch never imagined. The latest emergency watchlist from the NGO International Rescue Committee (IRC), shows that a record 274 million people will need humanitarian assistance in 2022 – a 63% rise over the past two years. A record 80 million people have been forced to flee their homes; 41 million people are on the brink of famine. As ever, everywhere, women and girls suffer disproportionately. The 20 crisis countries identified by the IRC as most at risk of further deterioration – a list which is topped by Afghanistan, Ethiopia and Yemen but also includes Myanmar, Syria and another 11 African countries – account for a startling 89% of all global humanitarian need and 80% of all refugees. The UN’s refugee agency says that despite calls, largely unheeded, for a Covid-related global ceasefire and curbs on cross-border movement, mass displacement continues to grow. It’s estimated at least 1% of the world’s population – one in 95 people – has been forcibly displaced, compared with one in 159 in 2010. This puts cross-Channel migration in much-needed context. The Disasters Emergency Committee, an umbrella group of 15 leading UK aid charities, last week launched a crisis appeal for Afghanistan, where 8 million people are at risk of starvation this winter, including about a million children. It raised a laudable £9.5m in the first 24 hours. But the bigger picture is daunting. Unicef is seeking a record $9.4bn in worldwide emergency funding in 2022 to help 177 million children affected by humanitarian crises, climate change and Covid. In total, the UN says, a whopping $41bn will be needed across 63 countries. Such targets will be hard to reach. David Miliband, the former UK foreign secretary and president of the IRC, says this extraordinary global emergency is not the result of a sudden, unlucky collision of unfavourable factors. It has been brewing for years. He argues that the humanitarian crisis is rooted in a political crisis – what he calls “system failure”. This failure has several aspects. More and more states fail to fulfil their responsibility to protect citizens – and some, such as Syria and Myanmar, attack them or treat them as hostages. Like liberal democracy in general, diplomacy and peace-making are in retreat. Civil wars are more numerous, last longer, are internationalised through proxy forces, and are harder to resolve. The failure is legal, too. Universal rights and treaties are disregarded. International law is less respected than at any time since the UN was created in 1945. The consequences are a growing incidence of war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide – and, for perpetrators, a lack of accountability bordering on impunity. Think of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine or the Saudi bombing of Yemen. The international aid apparatus is also breaking down, and not only through insufficient donor support. It’s shocking that Britain chose this worst possible moment to cut overseas assistance. Problematic, too, is the politicisation of aid. “Aid is being instrumentalised, to serve the needs of those giving not those receiving,” Miliband says. Aid workers face record violence. Aid, or its denial, is used as a weapon, as in Tigray. How to reorder a world in which conflict drives extreme poverty, hunger and people becoming refugees, where great powers compete rather than collaborate even in a pandemic, where unchecked climate change wreaks havoc, and where the UN security council – the ultimate guardian of global law and order – is blocked and circumvented by veto-wielding permanent members? One way to ensure improved accountability is greater use of universal jurisdiction by national courts – witness the recent successful genocide prosecution in Germany of a former Islamic State member. Another is to suspend the veto power of the five UN security council permanent members in the case of mass atrocities in crisis states, as France (which like Britain has a veto) proposes. This would potentially stop Russia, for example, blocking inquiries into chemical weapons attacks in Syria, or China protecting Myanmar’s genocidal generals. Such an agreement, overseen by an independent panel, might also in theory allow a full investigation of civilian deaths at the hands of US forces in Iraq, Afghanistan and northern Syria. “We need to break global gridlock on the UN security council when it comes to mass atrocities, because only the UNSC can mandate peace envoys, enable UN sanctions, implement arms embargoes,” Miliband said in a speech last week. “The sidelining of the UN is a threat to global peace and security.” The world is on fire, of that there is no doubt. Yet if the – hopefully precedent-setting – French plan is to work, China, the US and Russia must join the firefighters. And that in turn requires them – and others – to set aside national self-interest and look beyond their own front door.As the year’s end approaches, cultural predictions for 2022 come thick and fast. In interiors and design, one trend is being flagged across the board, from Pinterest to Architectural Digest magazine – biophilic design. The idea, first coined in the 1970s, is that humans have an innate affinity with the natural world. Next year, biophilia seems set to become a major influence on everything from city planning and architecture to our furniture and the colour we paint our walls. Defined by the psychologist Erich Fromm in 1973, biophilia gained traction when the American biologist EO Wilson wrote extensively about the concept during the 1980s and 1990s. Multiple scientific studies seem to confirm the hypothesis, suggesting that exposure to nature is good for human mental and physical health. There is evidence that it can speed hospital patients’ recovery, lower blood pressure, improve the immune response and increase office productivity. As humans spend more time indoors than outside, often in built-up urban areas, biophilic design has emerged. This is essentially thinking up different ways to bring nature to people through changing the way we build and the materials we use for furniture and products. Biophilic design is also typically sustainable. At the most straightforward lifestyle end of the spectrum, this means choosing natural materials such as wood or stone for flooring and furniture. Floral prints are a big trend for wallpapers. More people are building conservatories. But at the level of urban planning or architecture, biophilic principles change the fabric of the cities we live in. “This is more than ‘putting the right plant in the right place’,” says MK Leung, director of sustainable design with the Hong Kong architects Ronald Lu &amp; Partners (RLP). “Biophilic design involves natural forms, variations in daylight, airflow and temperature – ultimately, it means opening up buildings to nature. My attraction to it began when I realised the science behind it – it is about much more than aesthetically pleasing greenery, it involves biology, physics, psychology, sociology, and a myriad of mental and physical health aspects.” Biophilic architecture is a key part of the construction boom under way in China and, like many Asian architects, RLP focuses on sustainable, biophilic designs such as the Zero Carbon Building, which features Hong Kong’s first urban native woodland. RLP is currently creating an apartment block called The Courtyard in Kowloon, due to open next year, which is designed as an urban forest with greenery in every view on every level and a sky garden of indigenous plants. This isn’t just a trend for new builds. British cities which have their roots in the industrial revolution can still aspire to green shoots. Last week, the designer Thomas Heatherwick announced his plan to take the ruins of Broadmarsh, a part-demolished 1970s Nottingham shopping centre, and turn it into a community garden, climbing wall and housing complex covered in plantlife. Birmingham has been a member of the Biophilic Cities organisation, an international group studying the value of nature in cities, since 2013. It is the first British city to complete an assessment of its “green infrastructure” and create a green living spaces plan, which places a value on all the natural spaces in the West Midlands conurbation and treats them as “natural capital”. This includes plans to give access to its canal network to create a citywide trail and to promote jobs and pastimes connected to the local landscape. “The idea of natural capital allows us to see that nature has massive value. It’s built up of all the services nature gives us: soils, fresh water, fresh air, biodiversity, health benefits, property price uplift, carbon absorption, flood risk reduction, and so on,” says Nick Grayson, Birmingham city council’s climate change and sustainability manager. “We have taken nature for granted and expected its ability to regenerate to be exponential. Cities are responsible for the consumption of 70% to 80% of natural resources, yet that has been invisible to the many people living in them.” Birmingham is about to approve a plan to join Cities With Nature, a worldwide initiative to support cities working to create a sustainable urban environment, says Grayson. “Because the council is starting to understand nature’s true value and build that into its decision-making – it’s not just cutting the grass!” Even if where you live doesn’t have a green plan or buildings with a copse on the third floor, there are ways to bring nature into your life. Sam Peters and Deborah Spencer are the husband and wife team behind Planted, a zero-waste biophilic design event launched in 2020 to reconnect people and spaces with nature. As well as talks and installations, Planted showcases sustainable products and furniture. Besides the beautiful craft furniture by designer companies, there are bright ideas for the future such as water systems that encourage plants to thrive on available walls and surfaces and tiles which mimic natural stone, their textured surfaces providing homes for moss and insects. “Through peer-reviewed, evidence-based research, biophilic design enables us to build a commercial case and demonstrate to business leaders that enabling their workforce to access nature makes total business sense,” says Peters. “As more people realise it is possible to design and construct buildings with nature in mind, we have no doubt that what is currently a trend will become the norm.” On the most accessible level, acquiring plants as housemates will have a positive impact on your life. One person who really loves his “green friends” is Joe Bagley, a plant influencer who shares his Leicestershire home with more than 1,400 house plants. “For me, the appeal is that the plant you have on your shelf is a living, breathing specimen. It interacts with the environment, sussing out local humidity levels, temperature levels. It’s similar to having pets. I love how my plants are at different points of their growth cycles. Most will be dormant now. Others, like my cyclamen, are pushing out some lush hot-pink flowers. It’s a pleasure to have a look around my small jungle to find that an orchid at the back putting on a show all by itself. The little things, right?” Joy in the natural world is a great thing to achieve and finding harmonious ways to exist seems like a good plan. As Leung says: “The lessons from Covid-19 are stark: when we respect the natural world and its rules, there is enormous mutual benefit; when we ignore these rules, nature will not respect us.”A Philadelphia mother has given birth to what is believed to be the world’s first Tesla baby: an infant delivered in the front seat of an electric smart car while it was driving on autopilot. The remarkable delivery, reported by the Philadelphia Inquirer, took place in September while Yiran Sherry, 33, and her husband Keating Sherry, 34, were taking their three-year-old son Rafa to pre-school. Yiran Sherry’s waters broke while the family was stuck in traffic. With contractions increasing rapidly and traffic barely moving, the couple realized they were not going to make it in time. Keating Sherry placed the vehicle on autopilot after setting the navigation system to the hospital, 20 minutes away in the western suburb of Paoli. He said he laid one hand gently on the car’s steering wheel as he attended to his wife. “She was squeezing my hand to the point where I thought she was going to shatter it,” Keating Sherry told the Inquirer. “I was [saying] ‘Yiran, OK, focus on your breathing.’ That was advice to myself, as well. My adrenaline was pumping.” Yiran Sherry said the decision over whether to try to wait to give birth until they reached the hospital was an agonising one. However, she said, she kept glancing at their estimated arrival time and saw it was barely moving. “Should I push or should I hold? Should I push or should I hold? Fuck it, let’s do this,” she recalled telling herself, according to People magazine. She gave birth to her daughter as they arrived at the hospital, whispering: “Oh, my God, Keating. She’s out.” Nurses cut the baby’s umbilical cord over the car’s front seat. Keating Sherry said: “Once the pediatrician said, ‘She’s healthy, congratulations,’ that was quite the sigh of relief.” Once she was in hospital, Yiran said, nurses kept coming into her room to see the “Tesla baby”. “[They would ask] ‘Are you the one who delivered the baby in the car?’” Yiran Sherry said. The couple named their daughter Maeve Lily, after briefly considering Tess, in tribute to the car manufacturer. “Thank you genius Tesla engineers for your brilliant design of autopilot,” Keating Sherry said. The baby’s delivery is a good news story for Tesla, which has been plagued by bad publicity over safety concerns and workplace abuse. This week a taxi company in Paris discontinued use of Tesla Model 3 cars after a fatal crash. Tesla previously faced a lawsuit in Florida over an accident involving the death of a teenager in a Model S in 2019. Co-founded by the world’s richest man, the PayPal and SpaceX entrepreneur Elon Musk, in October the company was ordered to pay $137m damages to a Black employee who was racially abused. Tesla also faces sexual assault allegations from numerous women. Tesla did not immediately respond to Guardian request for comment.This will come as no surprise to anyone but New York City has a rat problem. Two million rats call the city home, thriving on the streets, in sewers, in both abandoned and un-abandoned buildings, in the parks, in the subways, in shoe stores and in restaurants. The problem is getting worse. Rat sightings increased by 40% in the first 11 months of 2021 compared to 2019, apparently spurred by cuts to trash collection and street-cleaning services. At the same time, the pandemic-induced closure of restaurants deprived rodents of a regular source of food, leading to hungry rats being forced to travel further, and more openly, in search of nourishment. But rats are hardly a new issue in New York. For centuries they have presented a seemingly unsolvable problem, despite a variety of efforts. Mayor Bill de Blasio launched a $32m rat-tackling effort in 2017, and workers laid more rat poison and traps. The sanitation department has blasted dry ice into rats nests. Building owners have been fined into cleaning up their trash, while at least one heron has leant a hand, swallowing a rat in one gulp in Central Park. None of it has really worked, which is where Rats comes in. The group has been hunting rats with dogs in New York since 1995, operating a sort of canine-vigilante service, summoned to infested neighborhoods via Facebook or email. The Rats method of rat control – documented in grisly detail online – isn’t for everyone, but it receives scores of requests from New Yorkers each year. In a city this rat strewn, it seems people are willing to try anything. The group conducts most of their hunts on Friday nights, which is when I find myself standing outside an apartment building in the Lower East Side, flanked by some of the hunters. There have been seen signs of a rodent in a fenced-off area, and a Rats operative squeezes through a couple of fence panels with his dog, intending to flush the rat out. On the other side of the fence we wait: eight people with eight dogs straining at their leashes, and me, standing there with my pants tucked into my socks, holding an iPhone. The dogs, all terriers, have quite literally smelt a rat, and are yapping and hopping about. All of a sudden, there’s action. The sound of scurrying approaches the fence, and a small furry thing – a rat – scampers out from under the fence. It pauses, surveying the scene, and sprints straight at me. As the only person not tethered to a spirited dog, the rat has appeared to see me as its best chance of escape. With a leap and barely suppressed squeal I evade the rat, but it’s a close call. “You let it get away!” someone shouts, possibly at one of the dogs. I look around apologetically. This rat, like several others this night, will live to see another day. New York City rats Rats are not native to North America, but have been present in New York since the 1700s. The city’s rat population is dominated by the Norway rat, Rattus norvegicus, a brown rat native to China, but spread around the globe by Norwegian sailing ships. According to Columbia University, Norway rats arrived in the US on boats sometime around 1776, transported in boxes of grain by German soldiers recruited by the British to fight American colonists. Since then, they have spread far and wide, but at least today the city is better equipped to deal with the problem. In 1860, the New York Times documented the rat issue, in an article headlined: “THE CASE OF THE NEW-BORN CHILD GNAWED BY VERMIN”. The unfortunate child died after being “mutilated by rats” at Bellevue hospital, located in midtown Manhattan. “The rats at Bellevue are a bold and reckless race, and do not hesitate to come forth from their hiding places, and scamper about even in the presence of men in high position,” the Times reported. There have been no recent reports of death by rat – although bites are relatively common – but the rats remain bold, and continue to show disdain for men in high position. That’s something that has upset Eric Adams, Brooklyn borough president and New York’s incoming mayor. He was highly critical of the city’s approach to rats during the mayoral election campaign this fall – in one speech Adams listed de Blasio’s $32m efforts before adding: “All of these devices and items are unsuccessful”. Instead, Adams has come up with a plan of his own, which involves the use of a sort of rat bucket. The device lures rodents in with the promise of food, then dumps them, via a trap door, into a liquid. The rats then die. According to the manufacturer, more than 30 rats can be caught in the bucket before it has to be emptied. The next mayor is extremely enamored with the rat bucket, lauding it at length over the past two years, and he even demonstrated the device at a press conference a couple of years ago, where Adams’ team said they had placed five of the buckets around his Brooklyn office building. In a tacit admission of the scale of the task, however, a spokesman later admitted that one of the buckets had already been broken – by a big rat. A rat bolts out of its hole … Back in the Lower East Side, our problem is too few rats, not too many. We’ve spent half an hour walking through high rise public housing buildings, where rats have been a big problem in the past. But there’s little evidence of the alleged rat increase. “Worst night of the year,” says Richard Reynolds, the de facto leader of Rats, as we walk from one fruitless spot to another. “Usually we’d have 20 by now.” By my count, we’ve got two, but the hunt is gearing up. Reynolds, a dog show judge and dog breeder who prior to the pandemic taught a course in dog breeding in Beijing, has been at this a long time, and leads us to one of his most successful hunting spots: a big green dumpster, with a small drainage hole in one of the lower corners. “The record coming out of that hole is 53 in one night,” Reynolds says. Reynolds, a burly guy wearing a flat cap and slacks, and Jimmy Hoffman, a veterinary technician from Queens, stand either side and rock the dumpster, which is more than 6ft tall and about 12ft long, back and forth. Nothing happens, apart from the dumpster coming close to crushing Hoffman’s Nike Air Max-clad foot. Undeterred, the pair rock it again. Bingo. A rat bolts out of the hole, runs straight through the group of waiting dogs, and makes good its escape under a nearby car. “They nest up in the engine,” Jason Riviera, an electrician from Queens said. The rats can chew wires under the hood of the car, damaging various components. According to Reddit, peppermint oil or powdered fox urine can be used as a deterrent. Reynolds’ and Hoffman’s rocking continues. Another rat bolts out and is snaffled by Hoffman’s Patterdale terrier, Mighty. Then another, scooped up in the jaws of Bustelo, a Patterdale named after the popular coffee brand. “When I first saw him he was so hyper it’s like he was on coffee,” Efren Reyes, Bustelo’s owner, says. Bustelo apparently loves these excursions. “In the house he lays down on his little pillow. As soon as he sees me grab the leash, he’s up, he’s excited,” Reyes says. Rats has been good for his owner too. Reyes, 44, lost his job as a restaurant chef during the pandemic, and is still out of work. It was only then that he started bringing Bustelo out to chase rats. “It helps me keep myself composed,” Reyes begins to tell me, but he never finishes the thought because Bustelo has grabbed another dumpster rat, and needs a lot of cajoling to let it go. A total of five rats are caught from the dumpster, which is a disappointment to both dog and owner. Nevertheless, the dead rats are dutifully deposited into a weather-beaten waxed canvas backpack, carried by Greg Conception, a cigar-smoking union electrician who appeared to have drawn the short straw. By 11pm, the bag count was a paltry seven rats. Despite the group’s poor tally, the New York health department admitted that “neighborhood rat activity is high in many areas of NYC currently”. “We have observed higher than usual numbers of properties failing inspections for rat activity and for conditions conducive to rats like garbage and harborage,” Shari Logan, a spokeswoman, said in an email. Logan said that de Blasio’s costly “Rat reduction plan” had been a success, at least through the end of 2019. Calls to 311 were down, and the number of rat burrows in parks and NYCHA developments declined. But then the pandemic hit, and services were scaled back. Logan said that, combined with a “wetter, warmer and longer summer”, was responsible for the rise. The proliferation of outdoor dining options during the pandemic didn’t help, with diners sharing horror stories about rats popping up on tables and scurrying up legs. Top ‘vigilantes’? Hunting rats with dogs is not for everyone. Reynolds said animal rights groups, in particular, were unimpressed. “Rats are simply trying to eke out an existence like other New Yorkers, and setting dogs on them is depraved and illegal,” the animal rights group Peta, said in an email. “Anyone who witnesses this cruelty should alert authorities immediately, as it’s a violation of New York’s anti-cruelty law, which applies as much to smaller mammals who feel pain and fear as to larger ones such as dogs.” “Rats mean no harm – and effective rodent control means making areas less attractive to them by disposing of trash and keeping garbage receptacles secured, not creating a vicious killing cycle that accomplishes nothing.” During the hunt, the Rats groups walked past several police officers, none of whom showed any interest what in they were doing, and Reynolds insists nothing the group does is illegal. The New York Police Department did not respond to a request about the legality of hunting rats, but in an email the health department said it “does not recommend this practice”. “Dogs that hunt rats may capture and kill individual rats but if the underlying conditions that attract and promote rats are not addressed, rats will continue to reproduce and thrive in an area,” said Shari Logan, a spokeswoman for the department. “This activity also puts dogs at risk for becoming ill from leptospirosis or other diseases.” Reynolds denies there is a risk. “We’ve never had a dog hurt, we’ve never lost a dog in 30 years,” he said, although others there that night said small injuries, including rat bites to the dogs mouth, are common. Owners clean cuts after a night of hunting and treat wounds with antibiotic ointment. They insist the dogs don’t mind, and they certainly seemed to enjoy the hunt. The dogs get a good reception, too. Everyone we came across was supportive, and Rats has even been honored from on high. In 2017 New York City councilman Eric Ulrich presented 12 Rats dogs with “Vigilante Awards” after the group successfully hunted rats in his Queens district. Seeing the rat killing up close, however, is brutal. In a phone conversation before we met, Reynolds had described it like a science, or a slow dance. When approaching a suspected rat site, some dogs act as flushers, he said, driving the rats into the arms, or mouths, of dogs that are deemed better at killing. But on that Friday night, at least, there didn’t seem to be much method to the process. We came across piles of trash and dogs were urged to get stuck into it to see if there were any rats. Several trash piles were left in more disarray after dogs and humans had trampled through hoping to disturb rodents. Trash cans were explored almost at random by dogs’ owners, and whenever there was a hint of rat action, people and their dogs mostly just sprinted in different directions. The general idea is that dogs kill the rats by shaking them vigorously, breaking their necks or backs. But that doesn’t always work. One rat ended up being beheaded, while another found itself subjected to a tug-of-war between two lusty terriers. At the end of the Rats hunt, nine rats had been caught in just over two hours. Reynolds seemed disappointed and a bit embarrassed, repeatedly referring to the bounty of nights past. “We’ve gotten a third of what we would usually take following that route,” he said, shaking his head sadly. “It doesn’t get any worse than this.” Reynolds doesn’t think the lackluster catch is evidence of the rat population declining, but he doesn’t buy that there are more rats, either. He thinks people have gotten better at reporting rats to the city, although it seems unlikely that this alone could account for the 40% jump in sightings. It also seems unlikely that dog hunting can make any significant dent in the number of rodents in New York. The night’s tally of nine rats, from a total of two million, was put into perspective as I idly counted the number of rats eating a donut on the subway tracks as I waited for the train home. By the time my train came into the station, sending the gaggle of rodents into the safety of the shadows, I had counted ten.Reports from the frontline of the war on motorists have made distressing reading for some vehicle owners. With low traffic neighbourhoods (LTNs) surviving both physical and media assault, improved protections for pedestrians and cyclists in a revised Highway Code will weaken still further, they discover, a right to road domination long understood to be, if not divinely ordained, something even better: unassailable. Howls of below-the-line outrage in traditionally motor-friendly media confirm that views on road use can still, given the number of cycling and walking motorists, be startlingly tribal. To make vulnerable road users safer, as the government intends with revised hierarchy at junctions, appears for the extreme motorised group to be a more grievous insult to their status, if possible, than the sight of a straggly planter where there was formerly a Land Rover’s right to roam. What, after all, is the point of a massive city-based 4x4 if it must now give way, as in the revised regulations, to a cyclist enjoying the right to ride safely in the middle of the road, or to go first at a junction? The rage is near palpable. “Goes against the natural order of things,” offers one Telegraph reader. “Cyclists and pedestrians will die clinging on to their rights, while ordinary citizen motorists will rot in gaol at the taxpayer’s expense.” What next for an oppressed and often unloved group whose only fault, beyond the environmental damage, is their involvement in the majority of vulnerable road user deaths? Could they soon face prison sentences for simply being a bit pissed and turning a car over? Permanent driving bans for, say, killing someone or quite reasonably driving over an extra-irksome cyclist? It may be some comfort to these persecuted drivers that UK targets for road casualty reduction were abandoned back in 2010. That Grant Shapps, the transport minister, introduces himself as a “petrol-head”. And whatever excruciating junction-based humiliations may lie ahead at the hands of pedestrians and cyclists, terrible drivers can still, as demonstrated last week, hope for leniency in the courts. In the first of two cases that could, equally, have been designed to frighten potential cyclists off the roads, a Mr Alan Moult, aged 73, was jailed for chasing after a cyclist (including along a pavement) then running over him with his Land Rover Freelander. His victim, who had annoyed him, was fortunate to survive injuries including a fractured pelvis, torn genitals, six broken ribs and a punctured liver. By itself, a dashcam recording in which the cursing Moult’s wife screams at him to calm down, makes a powerful case for acknowledging that cars, like kitchen knives, are murder weapons in the wrong hands. Since Moult’s conviction was for causing serious injury by dangerous driving, he was jailed for 18 months and chastised for behaviour that was “grossly disproportionate”. Locals can expect to see him back in his Freelander, a lifetime ban having presumably been judged over-harsh, after a three-year disqualification. In what can’t have been the best promotional week for Land Rover (an angry Range Rover driver was also charged for “nudging” Insulate Britain protesters), another prominent customer, the minor celebrity and driving ban veteran Katie Price, received a suspended sentence for driving when uninsured and disqualified. She was under the influence of alcohol and cocaine. The judge also imposed costs of £213, and a two-year driving ban – an arguably disappointing choice when a longer version could have protected the public from a motorised Price for 80 years. Then again, a speeding driver recently jailed – for 40 months – after killing a 15-year-old boy, was disqualified for three years. A reluctance to impose long bans seems to have coincided with what the Towards Zero Foundation regrets as the “stagnation” of UK road safety. If the UK aligned itself with the UN’s target of a 50% (by 2030) reduction in road fatalities and serious injury, it argues, “we have the opportunity to save around 170,000 people from dying or experiencing life-changing injuries from road collision”. Sussex police are considering appealing against Price’s sentence, which “could have and should have been much worse”. It might even, given her vast following, have doubled as one of those teachable moments recommended by anti-knife crime experts: “An event or experience which presents an opportunity to learn something new or re-evaluate an existing belief.” In this case, to re-evaluate the existing belief that, whatever the Highway Code might say about junctions, car drivers belong at the top of the road-using hierarchy. A serial traffic offender who was lucky to trash nothing more than her own car, has, the public may instead have noted, been more forgivingly treated than the Insulate Britain pedestrians jailed in November. Their sentences of between three and six months (along with combined costs of £45,000) were welcomed as a deterrent by National Highways: “The judge’s decision will hopefully make people think again about carrying out reckless and dangerous protests such as these.” Teachable moment: if you want to behave recklessly and dangerously on a road without incarceration, inconvenience, or even incurring a large fine, it’s advisable to do it inside a car. As for almost killing a stranger in a moment of madness: that too, as demonstrated by Mr Moult, is best done, for the avoidance of more stringent penalties, from a seatbelted position inside, for preference, one of the car industry’s more environmentally objectionable models. Where does this leave the war on motorists (as the imposition of any road safety measures is traditionally known)? Some, no doubt, are likely to feel deeply their humbling by less magnificent road users. “Pedestrians leap from the prow of my Morgan,” Boris Johnson wrote when a motoring columnist, “the bonnet connoting the size of my organ.” By way of compensation for this lost status they may, then, escape a good deal of future disappointment. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnistIn 2006, Australian photographer Trent Parke moved in with his in-laws in suburban Adelaide for Christmas. He and his wife, Narelle, were in between houses and had two young children. Parke kept himself relatively sane by photographing some of the insanity of a 40-degree festive season in which sweaty barbecues and screaming toddlers loomed large. He only started to think of his pictures as a proper festive series, however, when he was overcome with a sickness bug, which caused him to reach for the nearest thing at hand in which to retch. His mother-in-law, disturbed to find him bent double out on the front lawn, called in alarm to her husband: “Oh, Laurie! Trent’s vomiting into the Christmas tree bucket.” That nausea seemed to set the tone for the yuletide that followed, in which the TV guide was all four gospels and the sun beat down on conjured winter wonderlands. Parke’s father-in-law appears at one point dressed as a full-size hot dog. The series demands a Tom Lehrer soundtrack: “Kill the turkeys, ducks, and chickens/Mix the punch, drag out the Dickens/Even though the prospect sickens/Brother, here we go again!” Resistance, as any faint-hearted Christmas fairy knows, is always futile. The dancing Santa emerging from his chimney-like cardboard box is one of Parke’s more whimsical images (elsewhere, a Santa piñata hangs decapitated on the porch). Parke’s habit of shooting at carpet-level captures both the child’s eye surreality of life below the tinsel line and that creeping sense of dread beloved by Grinches across the world, who are counting the days to point out how this particular Old St Nick, pre-programmed with his surprising twerks and a lifetime of “ho, ho, hos”, has no doubt arrived boxed up among thousands of bearded clones on a container ship from China.Caroline Eden has made Edinburgh her home since 2014 Food Bacco is an Italian deli and wine bar on Dundas Street that’s popular with New Town locals but off the tourist trail. It’s run by young Italians, who offer a simple but pleasing menu of good wines, cured meats and cheeses, in a friendly and attentive atmosphere – much appreciated on long, cold Edinburgh nights. On the south side of town is another utterly charming spot, Elliott’s – a small “kitchen” open for breakfast and lunch that serves the best cakes in town (the flourless chocolate cake is a must). A few doors down is the Elliott’s workshop, which will soon be starting supper clubs and other events. For a memorable dinner, the innovative menu at Noto on Thistle Street is a great bet. The must-order here is the North Sea crab served in its shell with warm butter, sourdough bread for dipping. Inspiration The City Art Centre, by Waverley railway station, showcases both historic and contemporary Scottish art, but what it does best is offer heaps of inspiration to get you out in to Scotland’s Highlands and islands to see the places depicted for yourself. Recent exhibitions have included Scottish poet and artist Ian Hamilton Finlay (1925–2006), who, with his wife, Sue, is known for Little Sparta, a wild and mind-blowing literary garden of sculptures and stone artworks in the nearby Pentland Hills. Neighbourhood Photogenic Stockbridge, on the Water of Leith, is often recommended as a place to shop and eat, but it’s always worth revisiting, as new places open regularly. The bookshop scene in particular keeps getting stronger. I have been banging the drum for brilliant independent bookshop Golden Hare since I moved to Edinburgh, but since then Ginger and Pickles, a delightful new children’s bookshop has opened right opposite, and a five-minute walk away is the new and exciting Rare Birds bookshop, opened by the cult online book club Rare Birds Books, which is dedicated to women’s writing. On the same street, there are creative hot sandwiches on offer at newly opened Earls Sandwich Co – the big mackerel (£11) is a meal in itself, coming with hot sauce, pickled onions and dukkah. And given that Edinburgh is such a dog-friendly destination it would be remiss of me not to mention Just Dogs, a super little shop filled with treats, coats, travel kit and wonderful staff who always go the extra mile. Green space The Secret Herb Garden is edged by peaceful farmland close to the Pentland Hills, and it’s an ideal place to spend a relaxing morning. I often stock up on potted herbs here, as there are hundreds to choose from, then have a coffee in the vine-filled glasshouse cafe before a meander around the grounds. It’s an easy 25-minute drive out of town. In the city, I visit Inverleith Park – one of Scotland’s largest and loveliest urban parks – most days, to jog, think or walk the dog, and to daydream that one of the allotments there will one day be mine. Nightlife The Lucky Liquor Co (sister to one of my other favourites, the Last Word in Stockbridge) is a serious cocktail bar with a regularly changing menu and a broad, well-chosen vinyl selection. It’s on traffic-clogged Queen Street but away from the boozier lanes in town, which makes bagging a table a possibility. The Scottish SeaWolf white rum is excellent with a grapefruit soda. Stay I enjoyed a couple of nights at the Raeburn boutique hotel (doubles from £165 B&amp;B) in Stockbridge a few years back and still regularly pop in for a pint of Hollyrood pale ale in its stylish bar. Right by Inverleith Park, the Raeburn has a warm ambience and is just a stone’s throw from great cafes and independent shops on Raeburn Place.A dry run. A dress rehearsal. A practice coup. As the first anniversary of the 6 January insurrection at the US Capitol approaches, there is no shortage of warnings about the danger of a repeat by Republicans. But even as Donald Trump loyalists lay siege to democracy with voting restrictions and attempts to take over the running of elections, there are fears that Democrats in Washington have not fully woken up to the threat. “At the state level we’re raising hell about it but the Democrats on the national level are talking about Build Back Better, the infrastructure bill, lots of other things,” said Tony Evers, the Democratic governor of Wisconsin. “When we think about voting rights and democracy, I would hope we would hear a little bit more about that from the national level.” Hopes that the attack on the Capitol would break the fever of Trumpism in the Republican party were soon dashed. All but a handful of its members in Congress voted against a 9/11-style commission to investigate the riot and many at national level have downplayed it, rallying to the former president’s defense. But it is an attritional battle playing out state by state, county by county and precinct by precinct that could pose the bigger menace to the next election in 2024, a potential rematch between Trump and Joe Biden. An avalanche of voter suppression laws is being pushed through in Republican-led states, from Arizona to Florida to Georgia to New Hampshire. Gerrymandered maps are being drawn up to form districts where demographics favour Republican candidates. Backers of Trump’s big lie of a stolen election are running to be the secretary of state in many places, a position from which they would serve as the chief election official in their state. Trump has endorsed such candidates in Michigan, Arizona, Georgia and Nevada – all crucial swing states. The all-out assault suggests that Trump and his allies learned lessons from their failed attempt to overturn the 2020 election, identifying weak points in the system and laying the groundwork for a different outcome next time. Dean Phillips, a Democratic congressman from Minnesota, said: “It looks like Plan B is populating state elected offices with believers of the big lie and morally corrupt candidates. We should all be concerned about that and, by the way, not just Democrats: everybody.” Yet despite waves of media coverage – recently including the Atlantic magazine and the Guardian and New York Times newspapers – Democrats face the challenge of getting their voters to care. Many are confronting inflation, crime and other priorities and may assume that, having defeated Trump last year, they can stop paying attention. Jay Inslee, the governor of Washington state, said: “It’s still very difficult to imagine the severity and depth of what Donald Trump tried to pull off. It’s hard sometimes to recognise something when it’s new. For the president of the United States to try and stage a coup is unprecedented. It’s hard for people to wrap their heads around it.” Inslee described Trump as “a clear and present danger” who is “trying to remove the impediments that rescued democracy last time”. State governors are not the only ones sounding the alarm about the dangers of complacency or assuming that normal service has resumed. Jena Griswold, a Colorado Democrat seeking re-election, is chair of the Democratic Association of Secretaries of State, which focuses on electing Democrats to those positions. She said while there’s been a surge of attention from activists and donors to those races, “it is not enough.” “I think one of the issues happening is that because this is the United States, the idea that our most fundamental freedom of living in a democracy is under attack, is hard to really grasp,” she said. “It’s important that we keep leaning in because the folks on the other side are definitely leaning in.” In Michigan, one of the leading candidates in the Republican field is Kristina Karamo, who has spread lies about 6 January and the election. She is seeking to oust Jocelyn Benson, a Democrat who became one of the most high profile secretaries of state in 2020 when she took steps to make it easier to vote by mail in her state. Like Griswold, Benson, who describes herself as “avowedly not a partisan”, said she noticed increased interest from voters and independent donors, but not from the national Democratic party. “We’re not seeing the same sense of urgency that perhaps ‘the other side’ has shown in investing in these offices,” she said. “With the exception of the vice-president, who’s been enormously supportive and gets the importance of these offices from a voting rights standpoint, I have seen no significant increase in support from national party leaders than what we experienced in 2018, which wasn’t insignificant.” Acolytes of the so-called “Stop the Steal” movement are drilling down even deeper, targeting local election oversight positions that have traditionally been nonpartisan and little noticed, with only a few hundred votes at stake and candidates often running unopposed. Yet these too could pull at the threads of the democratic fabric. In Pennsylvania, for example, there is concern that election deniers are running for a position called judge of elections, a little-known office that plays a huge role in determining how things are run on election day. Scott Seeborg, Pennsylvania state director of All Voting is Local, a voting advocacy group, said the role is essentially the top position at the precinct polling place on election day. They could cause huge disruptions at the polls based on how the office holder interprets rules around ID and spoiling mail-in ballots, he added. Seeborg agreed that not enough attention has been paid to these local races. “There’s no precedent for this, as far as we know in sort of the modern history of elections,” he said. “I don’t think folks anticipated this, I’m not sure how seriously entities like the Democratic party are taking this, but they ought to.” Similar anxieties emerged earlier this week when the grassroots movement Indivisible ran a focus group with members from Georgia, Indiana, North Carolina and elsewhere. Ezra Levin, the group’s co-founder and co-executive director, said: “They’re worried about their governors, they’re worried about their secretaries of state and they’re worried even at a more local level about previously nonpartisan or uncontroversial election administration officials being taken over by a well-funded and very focused operation led by people who have embraced the big lie. “These are not positions, especially at the local level, that are getting as much attention but it’s real. We see Steve Bannon [former White House chief of staff, now a rightwing podcaster] trying to lead the charge, getting folks to take up the lowest level spots in the election administration ecosystem. It’s happening right in front of our eyes.” Levin, a former congressional staffer, noted that the Democratic party is not a monolith but warned that Biden has devoted his political capital – traveling the country to make speeches, holding meetings on Capitol Hill – to causes such as infrastructure rather than the future of democracy. “The big missing puzzle piece in this entire fight for the last 11 months has been the president.” Pressure on the Senate to act intensified this week when 17 governors wrote a joint letter expressing concern over threats to the nation’s democracy. Evers of Wisconsin was among them. In a phone interview, he said Democrats in his crucial battleground state are highlighting the “full throated attack on voting rights” but acknowledged that voters have numerous other concerns. “Everybody’s talking about it but when they go home from the capital and they’re visiting with people, I’m guessing that the conversation talks about more bread and butter things like ‘I want my roads fixed,’ and ‘Thank you for reducing taxes,” Evers added.Throughout his career, Stanley Kubrick never cared much about ingratiating himself to the audience, so it’s an achievement that A Clockwork Orange, his controversial adaptation of Anthony Burgess’ 1962 novel, is the most repellent film of his career. That’s not to say it isn’t an audacious and frequently brilliant film, but watching it can feel like getting into a 136-minute argument – with Kubrick, with yourself, and with a society that wrestles imperfectly (and often unjustly and tragically) with issues of law-and-order and individual rights. There’s something here to infuriate people on both ends of the political spectrum, and even if you accept it as a satire that has no ideological allegiances, that can be infuriating, too. And this is to say nothing of its extreme unpleasantness. Yet we should neither run from difficult arguments nor hide from art that confronts us as seriously as Kubrick always did, and while A Clockwork Orange has settled into the pop-culture firmament – multiple references in classic episodes of The Simpsons will do that to a film – it still feels dangerous and vital 50 years later. As his previous work, 2001: A Space Odyssey, has settled appropriately as the great monolith of screen science fiction, A Clockwork Orange continues to be a moving target, liable not only to provoke you differently at different points in your life, but also from scene to scene. If it were released today, it would be a Three Mile Island-level event for the take industry. In broad strokes, A Clockwork Orange continued Kubrick’s career-long worries about power and the morally bankrupt people who are corrupted by it, from the decadent Romans of Spartacus to the careerist French military brass in Paths of Glory to deranged stewards of our nuclear arsenal in Dr Strangelove. Set in near-future Britain – or near enough that the soundtrack to 2001: A Space Odyssey is available alongside microcassettes of unlistenable pop hits – the film warns of a society lost to authoritarian rule, where an experimental campaign to curb criminal behavior leads to a deplorable form of social engineering. But Kubrick doesn’t limit himself to that issue alone, and as his agenda expands, so do the possible sticking points for an audience. The backdrop for A Clockwork Orange is loaded with the interior bric-a-brac of its own period, like projecting the hippest, least comfortable living rooms of the early 70s would gain a permanent foothold. But there’s a key tension here between technological advancement and societal decay: for the elite, there are sports cars and modern homes, but for everyone else, apartment buildings and other public spaces crumble from neglect, leaving packs of young marauders to scavenge sick pleasures from “a bit of ultra-violence” and “a little of the old in-out, in-out”. Kubrick does not need to press much to suggest the root of their destructive impulses. One of these marauders is Alex DeLarge, the only charismatic and fully human character in the film, played by Malcolm McDowell, whose role three years earlier in Lindsay Anderson’s If…. had codified him as Britain’s rebel without a cause. In Burgess’ made-up slang – which translates here beautifully in context, no glossary required – “droogs” like Alex, drunk on the intoxicating liquor of a “milk bar,” seek out opportunities for rape, robbery, and assault, or some combination of the three. Alex’s one concession to high culture is his love of “Ludwig Van”, the ninth symphony especially, and his passion leads to a rift between him and his fellow droogs that widens. The gang is shown beating up an intellectual (Patrick Magee) and raping his wife, but one night, when Alex murders a “cat lady”, they smash him in the head and leave him for the police to find. From there, A Clockwork Orange shifts into the punishment phase, where Alex, sentenced to 14 years for murder, has a chance to go free if he participates in an experimental rehabilitation program. This “Ludovico technique”, touted by the interior minister, trains Alex to have a severely negative physical response to his violent impulses – and, by accident, it makes his beloved Ludwig Van repulsive to him as well. It renders him a docile animal, incapable even of defending himself, and when he reemerges as the model of a reformed man, he becomes a target for old victims and adversaries, and a lightning rod for political controversy. Of the prominent criticism against A Clockwork Orange, Pauline Kael had the most compelling, asserting that Kubrick rigs his argument in favor of Alex’s essential humanity by making his victims repulsive, thus blunting the full horror of his crimes. This is a difficult point to deny – though Alex’s debasement of Singin’ in the Rain is an unpardonable act of violence in itself – but the “clockwork” of Kubrick’s grand design requires Alex’s own dehumanization to sync with that of society at large. The solution to the crime problem is a reflection of the times, and Kubrick is asking the audience to consider what happens when authoritarian institutions are themselves machines. But even that’s not close to the limit of what Kubrick is exploring here. One fascinating sliver of A Clockwork Orange is how it comments on the nature of rehabilitation itself, and what people expect of it. Turning Alex into a machine or a symbol is offensive to some because it feels like an injustice for him not to be punished for his crime – those he had wronged, including two droogs who have now become cops (perfect touch, that), don’t care if he’s “cured”. They want him to suffer, and the Ludovico technique spoils the punitive aspect of being in prison. His sadistic warden, for one, is absolutely incensed by the Ludovico program until he sees a demonstration of its results, and leaves secure in the knowledge the Alex will suffer forever. Every layer of A Clockwork Orange is its own nasty provocation, including the dispute Kubrick had with Burgess himself over a redemptive final chapter of the novel that wasn’t included in either the film or the American edition. No other director was as skilled as making films as texts to be examined and re-examined through myriad lenses for as long as the medium exists. His reputation as a perfectionist, on full display in every decision he makes here, belies the fact that his films exist to scramble your orientation and question your responses to them. They’re machines that expose our messy humanity.Ministers have been accused of failing to protect the most vulnerable people from rising Covid cases after it emerged that people with blood cancer now account for a higher proportion of coronavirus deaths than earlier in the pandemic. With daily case numbers at record highs as a result of the Omicron variant, charities warn that people with suppressed immune systems who had been helped to shield at the start of the pandemic felt obliged to put themselves at risk at work, were confused about how to access treatments and less likely to have protection from vaccines. More than 3,000 people with blood cancer – just over 1 in 100 of all those who have the disease in England and Wales – have died of Covid, according to analysis of official data by Blood Cancer UK. This is despite these patients having spent long periods shielding to avoid contact with the virus. People with blood cancer are now accounting for a much higher proportion of Covid deaths than previously, the figures suggest – one in 23 Covid deaths between July and September, compared with one in 45 deaths between January and March. Charities said they believed the increase was linked to the end of shielding and the fact that people with blood cancer have weakened immune systems less likely to respond strongly to vaccines. They called for greater support to be reintroduced for those with conditions that seriously affect the immune system, including short-term financial help for those who cannot work from home. There is anecdotal evidence that some sufferers have struggled to secure a booster dose three months after their third dose of vaccine, as they have been advised to do. There is also confusion over how they can access antiviral drugs purchased by the government that ministers said would be available from last week. “We are very worried about what the rise of Omicron means for our community, as there has been a shocking lack of messaging or advice about how to stay safe, given how vulnerable people with blood cancer are to Covid,” said Gemma Peters, chief executive of Blood Cancer UK. “The government policy for times of the greatest danger seems to have gone from shielding the vulnerable to no protection at all. The government and the NHS owes it to the memory of the 3,101 people who have already died of Covid to do a much better job of protecting people with blood cancer in the difficult weeks ahead as the Omicron variant takes hold. “They need to support people with blood cancer by giving them clear communications, easy access to booster doses and financial support for those who cannot work from home. This is the best way to save the lives of those who are most vulnerable to Covid, and we hope to see a sense of urgency in giving people the protection they need.” She advised anyone with blood cancer who tests positive for Covid after a PCR test to contact their hospital treatment team. A new Covid medicines distribution unit has been set up within Whitehall to oversee the distribution of limited antiviral drugs that could help the most vulnerable people. Fiona Loud, policy director at Kidney Care UK, said that patients had told her that they felt forgotten. “Since shielding ended in the summer, despite the rapid onset of the Omicron variant there has been no additional information for people who are more at risk than there has been for the general public,” she said. “We are concerned that a lack of clarity and a lack of information may leave thousands of people unsure of what to do. It’s not good enough. “We, along with 12 other leading health charities and 11 parliamentarians, have called for ministerial responsibility for people who are immunocompromised so that there can be coordination between the vaccines, treatment and information provided to keep this group of half a million safe. Ultimately, someone in government should have responsibility for these individuals because too many people feel like they are being ignored and let down.” A Department of Health and Social Care source said: “On 10 December, NHS England wrote to specialists and GPs with instructions to invite immunosuppressed patients who are eligible for a booster to get their vaccination. “Communications have already been sent to primary care, secondary care and 119 in relation to the booster programme for the severely immunosuppressed cohort and updates will continue to be shared.”The billionaire oligarch Roman Abramovich has become an EU citizen, three years after withdrawing his application for a UK visa amid diplomatic tensions between London and Moscow. The surprise development was confirmed on Saturday by his spokesperson, who revealed the Russian-born owner of Chelsea Football Club had secured Portuguese citizenship earlier this year. Abramovich’s successful application used a Portuguese law offering naturalisation to descendants of Sephardic Jews who were expelled from the Iberian peninsula during the Inquisition, according to a report in the Portuguese newspaper Público. In 2018 Abramovich elected not to pursue a UK visa application in the wake of international recriminations following the Salisbury poisoning incident and changes making it harder for powerful Russians to obtain visas. The complications had prompted Abramovich to pull plans to build a £500m stadium for Chelsea, a scheme that supposedly would have delivered more than £20m in community benefits to the surrounding area. His new EU passport means the businessman would need to pass the UK’s point-based post-Brexit immigration system and meet “specific requirements” if he now chose to stay and work in the UK. His Portuguese passport, however, follows his acquisition of an Israeli passport in late 2018 which meant it was already possible for him to visit his family in the UK without the need for a visa. Thousands of Israeli Jews have been granted Portuguese citizenship since the law was passed in 2015, with applicants’ genealogies vetted by experts who look for evidence of interest in Sephardic culture. Abramovich is understood to have donated money to projects honouring the legacy of Portuguese Sephardic Jews in Hamburg. Justice ministry documents suggest Abramovich gained his citizenship on 30 April. Some observers may view the awarding of a Portuguese passport as a novel way for a Russian oligarch to secure coveted EU citizenship. A popular route for Russian oligarchs – some of whom have been accused of corruption – to gain EU passports was by exploiting controversial “golden visa” schemes. In 2017 the Guardian revealed how the government of Cyprus had raised more than €4bn in four years by providing citizenship to the super-rich, granting them the right to live and work throughout Europe in exchange for cash investment. Documents indicated that more than 400 passports a year were issued through the scheme. An estimated 300,000 Jews lived in Spain when, in 1492, the “Catholic monarchs”, Queen Isabella of Castile and King Ferdinand of Aragon, ordered them and the country’s Muslims to convert to Catholicism or leave. Tens of thousands fled to Portugal, only to be persecuted there or expelled in 1496. Estimates of the total number of Jews, Muslims, Cathars, people accused of witchcraft, scientists and other non-Catholics killed by the Spanish Inquisition, which Sixtus IV authorised in a papal bull in 1478, have ranged from tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands. Abramovich made his fortune – believed to be more than £10bn – in Russia’s oil industry in the 1990s and bought Chelsea in 2003.When is a libertarian not a libertarian? When, apparently, it is the wrong kind of people whose liberties are being curtailed. The past week has seen so-called “libertarian” Tory MPs rebel against the government’s Covid plan B – the necessity for vaccine certificates or negative tests to attend large venues, mandatory vaccinations for NHS staff, and the compulsory wearing of masks in certain spaces. “We’re not a ‘papers please’ society,” Tory MP Marcus Fysh claimed. “This is not Nazi Germany.” Forget the gratuitous Nazi analogy, for which Fysh apologised; such a stance is now endemic in much discussion of Covid restrictions. The fact is, for many people, Britain is very much a “papers please” society. “Papers please” is what the “hostile environment” for immigrants is built on – the demand that people who might be immigrants must show their papers before they can receive hospital treatment, rent a flat or find a job. It’s what lies at the heart of the Windrush scandal – the insistence that those who did not have the right papers could not be British, even if they had been born here, and had lived and worked here all their lives. The failure to recognise this is not an unfortunate oversight. Rightwing libertarians often have a selective view of who should be able to avail themselves of liberty. In the run-up to the debate over Covid restrictions, two other laws deserving of their attention passed through parliament. The libertarians’ response to both revealed their authoritarian core. The government’s police, crime, sentencing and courts bill is currently in its committee stage in the Lords, having travelled through the Commons. At its heart is an assault on the ability of people to protest. The law would allow police to prevent demonstrations they deem too noisy or causing “serious disruption”. What “serious disruption” means is left to the home secretary to define. An array of amendments the government has quietly added to the bill include measures to proscribe protesters from attaching themselves to another person or to an object, and the use of “serious disruption prevention orders” to ban individuals from protesting. These can be imposed on anyone who has previously been convicted of a “protest-related offence”, or who simply has been to two protests in which they carried out activities that could have caused serious disruption. Breaking such bans could lead to 51 weeks’ imprisonment. Police are also to be given new powers to stop and search people without suspicion. It is one of the most ferociously illiberal laws of recent times. So, how many of our libertarian Tories voted against the bill at its third reading in July? Not one. Fysh objects to a “papers please” society but is happy to assent to a “you cannot protest unless the home secretary allows you to” state. And then there is the nationality and borders bill, which had its third reading in the Commons earlier this month. The bill proposes “differential treatment of refugees” depending on how they arrived here. Those who come through “regular means” – with papers or permission to enter the UK – will be eligible to claim asylum. But any asylum seeker who “knowingly arrives” without “leave to enter” could be jailed for up to four years. This is to criminalise the very act of seeking asylum. It is also to enlarge the “papers please” approach of the hostile environment. Not just asylum seekers, but anyone helping them will also be criminalised – even if providing humanitarian assistance – and could face life imprisonment. One of the many amendments the government has added to the bill gives the home secretary unprecedented powers to deprive an individual of citizenship without even informing them. Tory MP and former Brexit minister David Davis described the bill as “deeply flawed” and suggested that plans to establish offshore asylum detention centres could “create a British Guantánamo Bay”. Presumably, then, Davis voted against the bill? No. He supported it. As did 290 other Tory MPs. A further 66 abstained or did not vote. Again, not a single Tory opposed the bill. Tory libertarians are not libertarian in any meaningful sense. They accept, indeed welcome, the most grotesque denial by the state of individual liberty so long as it is directed against people they deem unworthy of such freedoms, whether protesters or immigrants. Some commentators, such as the Spectator editor and Daily Telegraph columnist Fraser Nelson, have bemoaned “the rise of illiberal conservatism”. Such illiberalism is, however, neither new nor strange. Belief in small government and free markets has long coexisted with an insistence on the strict policing of those deemed “undesirable”. Nelson cites the 19th-century liberal Walter Bagehot as an exemplar of the kind of liberal conservatism he would like to re-establish. In 1852, writing from Paris, Bagehot welcomed Louis Napoleon’s bloody coup d’etat the previous year to suppress the 1848 revolution. “The first duty of society,” Bagehot insisted, “is the preservation of society: to keep up this system we must sacrifice everything. Parliaments, liberty, leading articles, essays, eloquence – all are good, but they are secondary.” He warned against being “misled by any high-flown speculations about liberty or equality” and to recognise the need to protect society from the “dangerous classes”. It’s a sentiment as alive today as it was then. Liberty has always been a contested issue, both in its meaning and in its scope. Those in power have constantly attempted to exclude certain groups from benefiting from the largesse of liberty. “How is it that we hear the loudest yelps for liberty among the drivers of negroes?” asked Samuel Johnson (no friend of liberty himself) of the American revolutionaries of 1776. It was historically the left that waved the banner of liberty, seeking to expand its meaning and to include debarred groups, from the working class to women to colonial subjects. These struggles gave shape to the modern meaning of liberty. More recently, though, many sections of the left have retreated from issues that once helped define it, from free speech to civil liberties. This has given a free pass to the libertarian right both to don the mantle of freedom and to distort its meaning; “libertarians” who are happy to deny basic freedoms to those who need it most. Liberty is too important to leave to those who don’t really believe in it. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnistFor weeks, Andrew Taylor had pinned his hopes on “mad Friday”, the last one before the Christmas holidays when hundreds of people would normally pack into his gastropub in Croydon. But as Covid case numbers soared last week, the number of cancellations grew. Instead of the 300 bookings Taylor had pencilled in at the start of the week, just 41 groups turned up at his venue, Mr Fox, on Friday night. What should have been the busiest night of the year was a washout. “It’s been hard and fast,” said Taylor. “We were fully booked every day of the week up until Christmas Eve, and now that couldn’t be further from the truth.” On Saturday, the 200 bookings expected had shrunk to just 64. “On top of that, we’ve lost all our corporate Christmas bookings,” he said. “It’s been terrible.” Taylor, who also runs a restaurant called Adam and Eve in Northumberland, said that very few staff have been off sick with Covid. “But it wouldn’t really make much difference because I don’t have anything for them to do. We’re seriously cutting hours, unfortunately, which is not ideal going into Christmas week. “Most businesses were relying on having a good festive period to get them through January. I think everyone knew that January was going to be tough, regardless. “We understand why parties are not going ahead. I just think the mixed messaging from the government is the main problem on this.” He said prime minister Boris Johnson’s lack of leadership was making things more difficult, because members of the public did not want to go out, but at the same time businesses were not entitled to government support to help them with lost earnings. “He’s not telling people not to go out – but he’s also telling them to stay at home. I’m not sure where we stand. It’s very much lacking clarity.” He added: “We do need a support package because all of this has a knock-on effect. It’s not just about us, we’ve got suppliers as well, and also the thousands of freelancers that are attached to hospitality, like your entertainers, your door staff, all of those.”Britain must back calls for countries in the United Nations security council to give up their veto on cases of alleged mass atrocities, genocide and war crimes, the former foreign secretary David Miliband has said. Miliband, now the president of the New York-based NGO, International Rescue Committee, said he supported a proposal from France that would suspend the power of the US, China, the UK, France and Russia to block action in these cases. He called on the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, to back the measure. He said there was now a “system failure” in the international humanitarian system that had combined with the Covid pandemic and climate change to fuel unprecedented rises in global hunger, poverty and refugee numbers. “I support the French proposal,” Miliband told the Observer. “The UK veto in the security council is a very powerful tool for the UK and the other permanent members of the security council. But in debates involving mass atrocity, the veto and threat of veto prevents diplomacy and fuels dangerous conflicts. “I think the UK should support the French proposal, now supported by 100 other countries, to abandon the veto in the security council in cases of mass atrocity. In these cases, the veto and threat of veto does much more harm than good.” The measure would avoid a repeat of situations in the past when Russia attempted to block UN investigations into chemical weapons attacks in Syria, and China prevented effective UN action against the Rohingya genocide in Myanmar. The French proposal has been co-signed by Mexico. Russia has also used its veto in other areas. Last week, it used its veto against a UN security council resolution casting the climate crisis as a threat to international peace and security. The vote sank a lengthy effort to make global heating more central to decision-making in the UN’s most powerful body, which had been championed by Ireland and Niger. Miliband said use of the veto must be limited in the most serious cases. “The veto is unjustifiable in cases of mass atrocity, and the threat of the veto strangles effective diplomacy in these cases,” said Miliband. “The sidelining of the UN is a threat to global peace and security, and encourages the rise of impunity. If the UN security council was being created today, then the veto would not be granted to the five permanent members. “But we cannot rewrite the past. We need a more effective security council today, not a thought experiment about yesterday.”An early morning email arrives. It’s from our friend, Tom, and it reads: “Negative massif, in case you’re worried!” I can’t remember when, exactly, Tom began using the French for massive as an all-purpose expression of enthusiasm – more and more, I notice, it is his word for “yes” – but I understand his desire to greet the day (and us) with a glorious affirmation that just one little pink line has appeared on his latest lateral flow test. Only moments before, in our own Covid-19 testing centre (AKA our kitchen), we received similarly joyous news. Let the trumpets sound. It seems that our beloved annual outing to hear Handel’s Messiah at the Barbican will be going ahead, after all. Wide awake in the small hours, I sometimes picture a vast landfill site filled to the brim with only the remnants of used lateral flow tests, those bits of plastic now so integral to daily life that we cutely abbreviate them (“latty flow?” we offer, in the same casual tone that we once might have said: “cappuccino?”). It presses on my mind, this medical detritus; no one ever mentions how – if – it’s all to be recycled. But like everyone else, I cannot do without the wretched things now. Here is freedom, I think, in the moments after it becomes clear that no second pink line is going to appear. Another day of life. Lately, my response to opening the door of the cupboard where I keep my (increasingly hard to top up) stash of LFTs is Pavlovian, kicking in even if I’m only after a bag of coffee. My heart hammers. My mouth goes dry. I’m as a nervous as if I was going on a date. There are two approaches to the current lockdown-that-is-not-a-lockdown. The first, which is by far the more popular, is to try to protect Christmas by doing nothing that might involve any risk of catching Omicron before then. You stay in, and you tick off the days. The second is to test and test and test, and then (so long as the result is negative) to go out and squeeze the pips from life. Naturally, I don’t cast any judgment on people who are doing the former; I know very well what Christmas means to some families. But I am taking the second approach, and if this means that I’m in isolation on Christmas Day, well, so be it. It seems to me that the deferral of pleasure, a key principle of my tussocky northern childhood, no longer really works as an inducement, moral or otherwise, in a world in which (is there a German word for this?) postponements are themselves more than likely to be postponed, sometimes indefinitely. Basically, I am determined not to mothball my embarrassing 2021 Snoopy diary until the day I finally test positive, or the day (31 January) that Schroeder finishes playing his tiny piano, whichever comes first. “Everyone has something that feeds their soul,” said the theatre director Nicholas Hytner on Newsnight last week, as he appealed once again for government help for the creative industries (across the country, shows are closing as actors and dancers, singers and stage managers test positive for Covid; meanwhile, advance bookings have dropped like a stray champagne flute from the dress circle). Hytner is always brilliantly persuasive, combining clarity with feeling in a way that won’t cause the lip of the politician to curl (though Nadine Dorries may yet prove herself the exception in the coming weeks). But I felt the force of his words more than usually this time. My soul did grow somewhat emaciated without concerts and galleries; even now, it could still do with a little cultural Complan. But there’s something else: the hundreds and thousands of people for whom cancellations spell doom. They also press on my mind. On Thursday night, I went to see James Graham’s new play Best of Enemies at the Young Vic in Waterloo. It has had rave reviews, and its cast includes a big star in the form of David Harewood – and yet, there were empty seats. This was a sad sight, though not quite as sad as that of the glamorous new West Indian restaurant we went to afterwards, where only two tables were taken, and waiters outnumbered diners three to one. Every day the emails arrive: a beloved hotel closing “until April, God willing”; a box office getting in touch with “sad news”. On social media, I read that the owners of a favourite (and now hibernating) West End restaurant are offering a Christmas raffle instead of Christmas tables; of a beloved pub in Sheffield whose chef does not know if it will be possible to keep going for more than a couple more days. Ridiculous as this may sound, I feel duty bound to go out; to spend what spare cash I have on a ticket for something and a bowl of pasta afterwards. It’s as if there is a debt – quite a pressing debt – that I must repay. The arts and hospitality kept going through the pandemic against the odds, and they were ready, just as the government had told them to be, when the various lockdowns ended. Everything (or almost everything) reopened, and it was miraculous. I have sometimes cried at the theatre in the past, but never from happiness I think – until, that is, I saw the sold-out musical Anything Goes (another Barbican show) in the autumn. Watching Sutton Foster and the rest of the cast tap dancing as if they were born to it, I lost it completely; my cheeks were inky with mascara. I was just so grateful and relieved. And now, I guess, I feel it’s my turn. I’ll sit in my mask at the theatre, and I’ll order wine in a half-empty restaurant, and I’ll do these things as often as I can, until someone tells me that I can’t, or a little pink line appears in a rectangle of plastic. Again, whichever comes first. • Rachel Cooke is an Observer columnistOn the third floor of one of the country’s biggest hospital trusts, a team of intensive care specialists in masks and visors huddle around a screened bay where a critically ill patient lies unconscious surrounded by cables and tubes. The elderly man’s breathing is supported by a ventilator and he is connected to an arterial line to measure blood pressure. He is fed by a gastric tube, and a nearby stack of six monitors provide updates on his condition, from oxygen levels to heart rate. He is one of 14 Covid patients on a critical care ward which is at capacity this weekend. He is receiving some of the best medical care in the world, but his concerned medical team know the long-term prognosis for this patient at the unit in King’s College hospital in south London, and many like him, is uncertain. Staff who spoke to the Observer during a visit to the Covid wards said most of these dangerously ill patients recently admitted to critical beds were unvaccinated. Medical teams at King’s are now bracing themselves for a new influx of patients infected by the rapidly spreading Omicron variant. They are urging people to get their jabs. About a third of patients who are transferred to critical care beds with Covid will die, according to several studies carried out during the pandemic. Most will gradually improve over a week to 10 days, and a small number will require long-term treatment – for three months and longer – in the unit. Doctors and nurses say they are deeply concerned at the number of seriously ill patients being transferred to critical care beds who are still unvaccinated. Michael Bartley, a critical care matron at King’s, estimated that “80 to 90%” in the hospital’s critical care beds were unvaccinated. He said: “We are not here to judge patients – we are here to look after them – but this can be a scary place. If the patient is too unwell, we will take over their breathing, intubating and ventilating them. “The disease can affect all the organs of the body, and the long-term effects can be devastating. We have a number of patients who have been with us for more than 100 days. The age of those who are unvaccinated is about 35 to 65. The message is ‘please get your vaccines’.” The proportion of unvaccinated patients in intensive care beds at King’s is particularly high compared with the rest of the country. A report by the charitable Intensive Care National Audit &amp; Research Centre shows the percentage of unvaccinated Covid patients admitted to critical care in England fell from 75% in May to 48% last month as more people were jabbed. London, however, has the lowest proportion of vaccinated over-12s in England. Nearly a third of Londoners are unvaccinated – and many of them are now seeking urgent medical help as a new wave of the pandemic hits the country. Dr Laura-Jane Smith, a respiratory consultant who works on a Covid ward at King’s, said on Friday: “I have seen four new patients admitted to the ward this morning aged between 40 and 90. They are all unvaccinated. “I haven’t sent anyone to intensive care recently who has had any vaccines. Even if people who are vaccinated are getting sick, they’re not getting as sick. The ones we are seeing are going home much quicker and with less complications. It’s hard to hear people who are so sick saying: ‘I just wish I had got the vaccine’.” Smith and her colleagues now face the prospect of another NHS winter crisis as Omicron spreads across the country. She said: “We are trying to be optimistic that it can’t possibly be as bad as last January, because that was awful.” Last week (the seven days to Friday 17 December), 5,538 people had a confirmed positive test result for Covid in Southwark, the hospital’s local borough. This is an increase of 188% compared with the previous week. On Friday, the UK reported a record number of new Covid cases for the third day in a row, with 93,045 new cases. Hospital admissions in London are climbing sharply where Omicron has rapidly taken hold. Scientists from the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine have warned that Omicron is likely to be the dominant coronavirus variant by the end of the month and, under the most optimistic scenario, there could be 175,000 hospital admissions and 24,700 deaths in England between 1 December and 30 April next year. At 8.45am on Friday in a ground-floor conference room at King’s, staff hold a daily incident coordination briefing, with 90 staff taking part online from about 20 departments. The 724-bed hospital already has a 97% occupancy rate and, according to the most recent government data, out of 119 critical care beds, just five are free. Staff are falling ill or isolating at an alarming rate. Plans are being drawn up to double the number of intensive care beds in two units and convert other wards for Covid patients. The trust is currently looking after 142 Covid patients, compared with 773 during the peak of the second wave in January. Of these, 17 are in critical care beds. Lesley Powls, head of emergency planning and clinical site operations at King’s, compared the intense preparation to an “incredible moment of calm” before a tsunami. She said: “It’s my job to write the plans and put the plans in place. And there’s a point where you think: ‘OK – we’re ready.’” Powls said initial indications were that patients who were being admitted were not as sick as in previous waves. She said: “Last year, going into Christmas and New Year, we were seeing patients presenting at our emergency department who were so unwell they were going to critical care as the first place of admission. “What we are seeing at the moment is patients who are going to general wards for maybe 24 to 48 hours and are then able to go home. We genotype all of our samples and we are certainly seeing some genotyping highly suggestive of Omicron.” There may be multiple factors involved in this decreased severity: these include the impact of vaccines, better drug treatments and the possible lesser severity of Omicron. This is good news because it means Covid patients can this time be discharged at about the same rate at they are being admitted. Powls said the initial indications were that the trust would have the capacity to cope, and it wanted to ensure that other services were available for non-Covid patients. She said there was a concern services could be overwhelmed, but she did not consider it a significant risk based on the evidence she had seen to date. A report by Imperial College London published last week found no evidence of Omicron having lower severity than the Delta variant, but said more data was required. It said booster vaccines would be critical in mitigating the impact of the virus. Doctors say whatever the severity of the Omicron variant, they are grateful for the range of treatments now available to help patients. These include the anti-inflammatory dexamethasone, the first drug proved to save the lives of people with Covid, and antiviral drugs including remdesivir. Hospital staff say the speed at which the vaccines and new treatments have been made available is “phenomenal” and are a ray of light in the fight against the disease. Professor Clive Kay, chief executive of the King’s College Hospital NHS foundation trust, said one of his main concerns was ensuring there were adequate staffing levels to cope with demand. The trust employs nearly 14,000 people, but the number of staff isolating or off sick because of Covid has risen from 160 to 517 in just over a week, on top of usual workforce absences. There were 242 nurses off sick, isolating or caring for a household member last Friday. Prof Kay said: “It means that we are having to look at scaling back some of the non-urgent routine activity.” He confirmed that initial data suggested the most recent Covid admissions were “not as sick” compared with previous waves. He said at the peak of the first wave in spring last year about one in four or five patients required critical care, compared with about one in seven or eight now. Hospital staff – whose efforts have been described by Prof Kay as “truly incredible” – are uncertain what the next few weeks and months will bring, but say they are prepared for whatever comes through the doors. Prof Kay said: “We can’t say we won’t be able to cope because we have no choice. We’ll just have to cope.” This view is endorsed by hospital staff, who have had little respite. Critical care matron Bartley said: “We haven’t turned a patient away, and we’re extremely proud of that. We will respond and we will look after patients to the best of our ability every single time.”Every December, the arrival of rain signals the beginning of the “hungry season” in Madagascar. It will be months before the next rice harvest on the island, which is experiencing the worst drought in 40 years in the south of the country. One million people are struggling to find food in the region due to what the World Food Programme described as the “first climate-induced famine”. Global heating was not the main cause yet, scientists concluded in a recent study, blaming poverty and a heavy reliance on annual rains instead. But in the face of increasingly unstable rice production – the main staple – as Madagascar becomes hotter and drier, the yam, an unloved tuber, has become a source of hope in the one of the poorest countries in the world that is not in conflict. “We have a lot of yam species in Madagascar. It was a staple food for Malagasy ancestors but, after the introduction of rice and cassava, we forgot about it,” says Mamy Tiana Rajaonah, a botanist with Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew (RBG Kew), who has led a project cultivating wild yam species for low-income families on the island, which lies in the Indian ocean off the east coast of Africa. Three-quarters of Madagascar’s more than 27 million population live below the poverty line, and 17 million live in rural areas, relying on rosewood, rice, vanilla and other natural resources to survive. Some of the island’s 40 or so native species of yam are enormous, growing to more than a metre in length in potato-like contortions. They are a nutritious source of starch, micronutrients and protein in a country where child malnutrition is rife. But they, too, are threatened by deforestation, global heating and land use change, putting already fragile livelihoods at further risk. Jean Zamany, a farmer from Mahagaga, a village in the north of Madagascar, said the Kew project had helped his community to confront a belief that cultivating yams would bring famine. He is now part of an association of yam farmers and the crop is used to make fried meals, soups and cakes. “We are concerned about climate change because we don’t have enough rain, and when it rains the amount of water in a few days causes a flood and destroys our crops in the field. It brings more sand in our rice field,” said Zamany. “We have produced more and more yams to store for the hungry season. We also sell yams to buy rice during the rainy season but try to keep a lot of yams back to feed our families.” Daniel, a farmer from Andafirano village in central Madagascar, agrees that yam cultivation has improved food security as the climate changes. He was part of a project run by RBG Kew (its Madagascar base is its only one outside the UK) and the NGO Feedback Madagascar, and now has 120 yam plants from three native varieties. “People aren’t used to eating yams, so it’s strange for them. That might be why some people aren’t keen to eat them,” he said. “Farming yams requires work like digging the holes. It also requires water – but water is increasingly insufficient.” RBG Kew is one of four charities supported by the Guardian and Observer 2021 Climate Justice charity appeal, which is aimed at helping communities at the sharp end of the climate crisis. The others are Global Greengrants Fund UK, Environmental Justice Foundation, and Practical Action. Through RBG Kew’s work in Madagascar, a team of mainly Malagasy botanists, researchers and conservationists is working to document and preserve the country’s biodiversity, which will be crucial to improving resilience in a changing climate. According to Kew research on the impact of the projects, yam cultivation has helped to double the mean household income, and production has continued in many communities. Money from Guardian and Observer readers could help expand community-based cultivation approaches such as growing native yams to feed primary school students, and developing community nurseries to protect forests on which millions of Malagasy rely – all while documenting and protecting the country’s unique biodiversity. “Yams are inherently relatively resilient things. You can’t grow them in no rainfall, but you can grow them certainly in seasonal climates with relatively low rainfall. So they are crops which have some potential for the future,” said Paul Wilkin, head of ecosystem stewardship at RBG Kew. “These species are unique to Madagascar, they’re only found there and are a key part of cultural and dietary heritage for people who have no other options.” • Donate to our charity appeal hereKirsty Ferris started volunteering in the South Downs national park when she turned 18 and wanted to “give something back” while getting experience with practical outdoor work. Now 22 and running her own garden design business, she has spent hours coppicing trees, building fences, laying hedges, helping conserve grassland and improving access to beautiful countryside. She said: “Carrying out work that directly helps the environment is immensely rewarding and gives me such a sense of pride.” But Ferris is one of only a relatively small number of young volunteers at national parks across the UK. It emerged recently that the average age of volunteers at some national parks is 63, and now under-30s are now being urged to sign up to help preserve some of the nation’s richest landscapes for future generations. A combination of ageing rural populations, competing demands on young people’s time and a lack of accessibility by public transport has left many national parks with no young volunteers – a problem they are increasingly keen to tackle. The Yorkshire Dales national park this week launched a push to get more youngsters involved in stewardship, after noticing that none of its 300 regular volunteers was under the age of 30. It has introduced two initiatives – one for groups of under-18s who want to spend a day carrying out conservation work at the park , and another for 18- to 30-year-olds who want to focus on a specific area of interest. Neil Heseltine, chair of the Yorkshire Dales national park authority, said: “Connecting young people with nature through educational, skills-based or volunteer activity is how we foster a new generation who understand, love, explore and advocate for the unique environment of the national park.” He added that he hoped young people would “forge a lifetime connection” with the Yorkshire Dales. It is a similar story at the Brecon Beacons, which has an average volunteer age of 61. “While we hugely value the skills that more-experienced volunteers bring to the national park, we would love to diversify our volunteer base and add the energy and enthusiasm of younger volunteers to the team,” said Amanda Brake from the Brecon Beacons national park authority. “A big focus of our work in early 2022 will be on restoring some of our 16,000 hectares of upland peat bogs. Peat is a really important carbon and water store, but it is easily damaged - restoring peat habitats can reduce the loss of these carbon stores and help to mitigate climate change. Volunteers will be helping to carry out surveys, practical peatland restoration tasks, and path repair work to minimise erosion.” She said volunteering “usually doesn’t require any specific experience – just a willingness to get stuck in and give things a go”. The North York Moors is another national park looking for younger volunteers, especially for its youth council, which helps make decisions about the future of the park as a rural community and green environment. It has received funding from the National Lottery Heritage Fund to offer transport for families and young people. Mary-Jane Alexander, youth engagement officer at the North York Moors national park authority, said: “There are many aspects of national park policy that impact directly on young people, not least how we address the escalating climate emergency, a lack of affordable housing and declining local services.” She added that it is “absolutely right that young people have a say in these matters”. John Packman, chief executive of the Broads Authority, which manages the Norfolk and Suffolk Broads, said “inspiring people to care for nature” was part of the role of national parks. “We see time and again the transformative effect volunteering can have on young people’s lives through their connection to the land. “These volunteers so often become influencers and leaders, helping engage their peers to share their passion and become actively engaged in environmental matters too. This is why young volunteers are so very important to us.” But it is not all planting trees and fixing fences. Bob Cain, a 20-year-old volunteer, is part of a governance project at the Caingorms national park, and through that has gained invaluable skills and experience – including a visit to Finland. “There are a lot of negative stereotypes associated with living out in the sticks and not really having much to do. So it’s exciting to see what you can do when you put your mind to something, and it’s also great to have adults and these networks supporting you, because it’s very difficult to just do these things on your own.” Cain, who is in his fourth year of a degree in politics and international relations at Aberdeen University, feels volunteering has given him a rare understanding of how things work in the real world. “I think volunteering, especially on the political level, opens your eyes to the real way things work. “A lot of people seem to come to the project lacking confidence, and lacking public speaking skills, and that has been delivered to them. It’s something they will have for the rest of their life.”Keanu Reeves covers his face with both hands. Long bands of the actor’s straggly, jet-black hair flit from side to side as he shakes his cradled head. Reeves, who is 57, has a new Matrix movie out soon. It will be the first instalment in that famous sci-fi series since the turn of the century, when a visually splendid trilogy – The Matrix, The Matrix Reloaded and The Matrix Revolutions – shook blockbuster cinema to its foundations. I have just been telling him what an unforgettable outing that first Matrix movie was for me, back in 1999, when I saw it in a packed, noisy cinema full of people who couldn’t sit still for excitement. I’ve also just admitted to Reeves that, when The Matrix Resurrections is made available later this month, via various platforms, I’ll probably stream it at home, probably on a laptop. I only intend this as a light prompt to get him talking about Hollywood in 2021, a curious time for showbusiness, with Covid precautions and advances in streaming tech combining to make so many movies available for home viewing at the same time as they appear in cinemas. But perhaps Reeves is someone who feels things more deeply than most, because suddenly he begins to plead with me, through muffling fingers: “Dude? Don’t stream that movie… Don’t you fucking stream that movie.” This conversation is taking place on Zoom, across a few time zones – it’s evening in my London and morning in his Los Angeles. By his own admission, he is not a morning person. As a young actor he’d tell his agents that if they wanted him to get a part, they must not send him to auditions before 11am. I note, today, that we’re talking at 10am Pacific. Adding to his slightly frayed-seeming vibe, Reeves has only just flown back to LA after a film shoot in Paris. Jet lag woke him at 6am this morning. He drank a coffee, ate a banana, smoked an American Spirit Blue and got dressed in his habitual black T-shirt, black denim and black boots. Now he’s on a Zoom call with me, staring out from between his hands and asking: “What are you, crazy? You’re going to stream the new Matrix on a laptop? His harangue continues, getting louder (“My GOD, man”)and more eccentric (“I’m about to book a cinema for you, Thomas”) until some subtle, delicious shimmer behind his eyes lets me know that Reeves is teasing and has been all along. His hair sticks out at funny angles after all he’s pulled at it. He pats his knees, smiles, and says mildly: “I mean, sure, stream it if you have to.” I lay this out in detail to illustrate Reeves’s mode of expressing himself, which is eccentric, blasts of silliness mixed with seriousness, and not at all similar to any other famous person I’ve spoken to. He has a facility for poker-faced Canadian irony (he grew up in Toronto) and a mannerly reserve that he assumes is a part of his inheritance from his mum (she grew up in Hampshire). “I think there’s an English formality my mom carries, and that’s become a part of me, too,” he says. Friends of Reeves have said in the past that he is a listener first, a talker second, and I recognise in him some of the tricks of the passive conversationalist. He is unsqueamish about letting a silence linger. After statements, he sometimes repeats them to himself in an undertone, as though revisiting the words for possible flaws. Whenever he is asked a question he hasn’t heard before he tends to look into the distance and think for a while before giving a short, firm, well-formed answer. When I ask him what qualities define a good listener, Reeves stays motionless for so long I assume our Zoom connection has failed. Then he answers: “I think it’s interest and care. I’m interested in whoever I’m speaking to. I care.” His parents met on a beach in Beirut. This was in the 1960s. They were both freewheeling young travellers. Reeves’s mother, Patricia, had fled England. His father, Samuel, was a Chinese-Hawaiian who hadn’t settled anywhere either. After Reeves was born in 1964 the family moved to Australia. When his parents separated, Patricia took Reeves and his younger siblings to New York and, eventually, Toronto. She worked as a costume designer. “My mom had her atelier,” Reeves recalls, “where I would pick up pins and clean on the weekend for allowance money.” He has said many times that he never had a substantiative relationship with his biological father, but there was a stepfather, Patricia’s second husband Paul Aaron, who played an important role in his introduction to movie-making. “I believe I was 15? It was my summer holiday from school. And for a parent it’s, like, what do you do with this kid over the summer? I know, we’ll make him a production assistant on a movie!” Aaron was a director who was about to start shooting a schlocky action flick called A Force of One, starring Chuck Norris. (On its German release, the movie was brilliantly renamed Der Bulldozer.) Reeves was taken on as crew. He fetched things. He managed crowds during outdoor shoots. He recalls, with pride, ferrying a Sprite to the Hollywood legend Claudette Colbert. Meanwhile, he tells me, “I was watching the grips, I was watching actors, I was seeing how a film set really works, the call-sheets, the generator, the lights, the lunchtimes.” His main task was to lug buckets of ice to keep all the on-set drinks and snacks cold. When I ask if this role ever felt demeaning, Reeves screws up his face and protests. “Naw, man, I could start lugging ice right now. A movie is all-hands-on-deck. I love all-hands-on-deck.” Indeed, there are many accounts of Reeves’s good-guy attitude on film sets (pictures recently appeared online of him rolling heavy equipment up a hill during the Paris film shoot) and also credible testimonies of his everyday generosity. Secret charitable donations. Rides for stranded strangers. Of Reeves, Sandra Bullock said recently, “I don’t think there’s anyone who has something horrible to say about him.” After his experience on The Force of One, he says, continuing the story of his youth, he enrolled at a performing arts school in Toronto. “For one year,” he hastens to add. “They didn’t let me back in after the year.” Bad behaviour? I ask. “My line has always been that I had artistic differences with the principal,” he says. And what’s the truth behind that line? Reeves frowns. “I was a bit of a handful I guess. I was a ‘Why?’ guy. I was a ‘How come?’ guy.” By then, Reeves was already booking acting work, both paid (Cornflakes ads) and not (community theatre). “I was living in a friend’s house. I had enough money. I left Toronto when I was 20 and I drove to Hollywood.” He went to auditions in town (doing better in the ones post-11am) and landed a few good supporting roles, notably opposite Dennis Hopper in River’s Edge in 1986. From 1988 he went on a hot streak, accumulating memorable cameos in Dangerous Liaisons and Parenthood and starring alongside his friend Alex Winter in the first of three Bill &amp; Ted comedies. I ask Reeves about being a “Why?” guy – a “How come?” guy – when you’re also an actor-for-hire. If the need to question authority is in his bones, what has it been like to submit to the will of all-powerful directors? “As I see it,” he says, “the job is about investigating ‘Why?’, investigating ‘How come?’ You enter into a collaboration with a director to get those answers. When you don’t have an agreement, when you have conflict – and, yeah, there have been situations where my relationship with the director has been at odds, I might have been emotionally immature sometimes, I might have shouted a few ‘Fucks!’ – then it becomes a battle in the editing room. Luckily I’ve only had a couple of those instances. I’m not gonna say the names of those films, by the way.” Impossible to guess which films he means; he’s made so many. Point Break with Patrick Swayze. My Own Private Idaho with River Phoenix. He was the baddie in Much Ado About Nothing and the studly saviour of Winona Ryder in a Dracula remake. All of the above were crammed into a heady 24-month period between 1991 and 1993. Reeves works a lot. This has often meant his projects overlap, blending at the edges. A few years later, he began his work on the Matrix trilogy, a production that lasted till 2001. The first Matrix was an unqualified hit. It earned £300m in cinemas worldwide, sold record numbers of DVDs, and prompted a story in the New York Times headlined “How The Matrix Changed The Rules for Action Movies.” After that, Reeves went to work on two sequels without much clue what his directors had in mind in terms of the continuing story. Those directors, Lana and Lilly Wachowski, have since suggested the story they told across the trilogy (about finding one’s true identity, resisting suppression and convention) was an allegory of trans experience. Reeves never twigged that at the time. Not many people did. Either way, he’s clearly proud of the work he achieved with the Wachowskis. His feeling is: art belongs to its creators first and foremost. You must do your best to honour their intentions. I wish he’d been there, two decades ago, to say something wise like this to me after I sat through those two Matrix sequels. My experience of watching them went through phases, first excitement, which turned by increments into panic and boredom, finally becoming a thick and soupy disappointment. In 1999, when I was 17, the first Matrix seemed to me the least boring film ever made. Over and over I guessed what might come next in the story. In 2001, when I was 19, the sequels gave me my first taste of artistic disappointment: how impossible it is for a much-imagined thing to live up to one’s own limitless expectations. When I tell Reeves this he is sympathetic. The third Star Wars movie was his own big let-down, he says. He was 19 when Return of the Jedi came out. “I went in, like, ‘Wow, I wonder, are they gonna do this, and will they do that…? And then I was, like, ‘Oh no. Oh no.’” Reeves clears his throat. “Um, so I totally get it. I know that experience as a filmgoer. But I just try to let films be, y’know? I try to think about what the creators were going for. It’s their work of art, man. I try to come to their art and meet it wherever it is.” This is well expressed, as is Reeves’s lovely description of the passage of time, when he describes the decades of his professional life that came after The Matrix. Each year, he says, seems to slip away that little bit faster than the last, something that always puts him in mind of the turning wheel of an audio tape. “When you’re young,” he says, “you have a big old reel of that tape left, right? And so it appears to revolve slowly. Then, time passes, and there’s less and less tape left on the reel. It spins faster. It spins faster.” Economic and elegant with his words, Reeves has occasionally put this ability to use by publishing poetry. In 2011 and again in 2016, he collaborated on coffee-table books with the artist Alexandra Grant, lines of his mournful verse appearing alongside Grant’s eerie drawings and photographs. A Hollywood star who takes a risk like this and commits his name to poetry must expect a degree of fascination and even scepticism from the public. Adding to the intrigue of these books, it has since emerged Reeves is in a romantic relationship with Grant. But the way he talks to me about his writing – without shyness but also without bravado –makes it all seem a natural expression of some challenging things he has been through in his life. Years ago, when Reeves was in his mid-30s, he and his then-girlfriend lost a child in late pregnancy. That girlfriend later died herself in a traffic accident. He has known other bereavements, including the loss of his friend River Phoenix in 1993. (“He was a special person,” he said recently of Phoenix. “So original, unique, smart, talented, fiercely creative. Thoughtful. Brave. And funny. And dark. And light.”) Reeves talks to me in general about grief, explaining that his 2016 book of poems, Shadows, was an effort to externalise it, “contextualise the grief, even be inspired by it, even find a certain pleasure in it… Let [the grief] move, and not be trapped inside it… It just put things in a new shape that I could carry or have with me.” Was it cathartic, I ask, to revisit those difficult feelings and write them into verse? “Absolutely,” he says. I ask if there was any emotional cost as well. He thinks for a long, long time before answering, “Yeah. But, hopefully, I have enough in the bank to pay that cost.” We talk about his work again. In the past decade or so, Reeves says, “I’ve wanted to get as much done as I can before that turning tape runs out… How old am I now,” he asks, rhetorically, “57? Around the time I hit 40, there was this idea of creating more from my artistic loins.” This has meant two or three movies per year, everything from apocalypse blockbusters (2008’s The Day the Earth Stood Still to samurai thrillers (2013’s 47 Ronin) to a comedy in which he voiced an animated cat. In the middle of all this, when he was in his late 40s, Reeves made his directorial debut, a 2013 kung-fu movie, Man of Tai Chi. Busy, busy, busy. Probably the most significant movie from this part of his career was 2014’s John Wick. An unapologetic fight movie, it was made in collaboration with two of Reeves’s former stunt colleagues from The Matrix, Chad Stahelski and David Leitch. They had a basic concept that proved effective. What if the fights they staged in their film were all limited by what Reeves himself could physically perform? The resulting action sequences had a visceral, haggard, can’t-look-away quality (probably born of a 50-something man absolutely exhausting himself for our viewing pleasure) and John Wick won over an unexpectedly big audience. Reeves says, “I remember thinking, ‘I wonder if the Wachowskis have seen it. I wonder if they liked it.’ I never reached out to ask.” Certainly the public liked what they saw and John Wick has since spawned two sequels, with more to come in 2022 and 2025. Meanwhile Reeves has circled back to work with at least one of the Wachowski siblings, the coming new Matrix movie directed by Lana. There’s a story that on the first John Wick, when budgets were tightest, the stunt men and women Reeves fought during those long action sequences would play dead, lie still for a minute, then stand up and scuttle around behind the camera to be killed all over again. It occurs to me, as my conversation with Reeves comes to an end, that his long, strange and meandering career has been a bit like this. Shoot. Shoot. Lie still for a bit. Shoot again. Before we say goodbye, I remind him of that lovely analogy of his, about the unspooling tape that seems to turn ever quicker. By working so regularly, so relentlessly, has he been trying to slow the turning of time? Reeves listens to the question gravely, stares to one side while he considers how best to reply, and finally gives the same answer three times. “It doesn’t slow down time. It doesn’t slow down time. It doesn’t slow down time.” The repetition prompts some final thought, and Reeves sighs. “If anything, it speeds everything up.” The Matrix Resurrections is in cinemas from 22 December This article was amended on 20 December 2021 because an earlier version misnamed the film A Force of One as The Force of One; and also to remove some personal information.I propose an advent calendar that lasts the whole year long. Admittedly, it’s on these, the colder, sicker days that we need a little treat the most. A tincy wincy treat to get us through the morning and allow us to claw our eyelids open and feast upon the splendour of another day, a country polluted and bereaved, and covered with a fine dusting of whichever variant has chosen to join us this week. But then January comes and we are still in need, and February, and March, and we’re still in need by spring, in need of a special little treat to propel us through the longer days. It is our responsibility to stay cheerful and positive, and we do this by medicating with one very small Milky Bar after breakfast. At some point in the last decade came a universal acknowledgment that advent calendars were wasted on children who, unlike us, still had faith that sweet things were due to them. The chocolates were replaced by fingers of gin, or “craft accessories”, or whisper-sized beauty products and miniature perfumes, for women like me who find relief by temporarily extinguishing our ugliness and stench. In our house I cobbled together one for my daughter using last year’s calendar and some Hanukkah coins, to keep her on her toes. As I carefully sealed each window I considered what else I would hide in an adult version, a celebration of a year half-lived. A lateral flow test, of course, and a delicately folded mask, and a new Britney song, and a little NFT, and a sealed vial of the shepherd’s pie that killed a woman, and a fake arm, useful for pranky anti-vaxxers, and an argument about Adele, and a voucher for one of those obscene supermarket delivery companies that promises to bring you cereal within half an hour, the existence of which signals Earth’s early death rattle. On TikTok this week, a series of videos of a disgruntled customer opening her $825 Chanel advent calendar went viral. It was the first time Chanel had sold an advent calendar and it was designed in the shape of a perfume bottle. It joined similar luxury beauty brands, like Dior and Saint Laurent, in offering an opportunity for fans to buy a Christmas present for themselves, no doubt fully aware of the bookish horrors from in-laws to come. The most expensive this year is Tiffany’s at $150,000, a 4ft-tall white oak cabinet with a reproduction of a Jean-Michel Basquiat painting on the front and 24 gifts inside. Typically, these luxury calendars will be marketed as a bargain – if we were to add up the virtual value of the products inside they might exceed the (still staggering) price of the calendar, but truly, this was a fact only offered by those who had already purchased one to their bewildered partners, widely understood to be a cover story. However, nobody likes to feel they’re having the piss taken, and it was this concern that drove numbers on Elise Harmon’s TikTok page, and then comments on Chanel’s. Over a series of videos (viewed now over 50m times), Harmon used her exquisite manicure to open the calendar’s doors, revealing sample-sized beauty products, a keychain, a sort of string friendship bracelet, and fabulously, a dustbag. A little cloth pouch, the kind something better comes in. At one point, I think it’s when she opens the wrapped stickers, Harmon turns off the camera, so disappointed is she. In that moment all of capitalism glitches, before quickly righting itself. But still, the story had been told, and the internet was in agreement that the calendar appeared to have been assembled by somebody frantically rooting through the office bin muttering “shit shit shit”. And you know what? Fine. On our heads be it. If we do insist on remaining in thrall to the mythology of luxury brands, whose very name elevates a piece of string from trash to jewellery and allows two zeroes to be added to the price, then what else should we expect than exactly that? A time comes when we must decide whether we will stubbornly turn away from the glamorous logoed sirens, singing to us from the rocks, to live our lives hand-knitted and righteous, or whether we will, occasionally, give in to our lust. A lust for soft things made shiny in light, worn by movie stars on a panel about violence. A lust for something stamped with taste. And if we do insist on giving in to our puppyish desire for treats and rewards, the terribly simple way our ears prick up when a certain word is said gently, then isn’t this exactly what we deserve? It is our fault entirely for investing so much in so little, in maintaining such empty hope. Besides, what lies behind the window of an advent calendar is not the important thing. The joy is in the brief death-defying seconds it takes to crack it open. Here is the delight, here is the prize – the knowledge that simply by getting out of bed, today you have won. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWisemanMaggie Gyllenhaal’s feature debut as writer-director is an impressively atmospheric piece of work – filled with longing and dread, and heavy with the anticipation of buried secrets about to be revealed. Deftly adapted from Elena Ferrante’s short source novel, it’s an enigmatic psychodrama that seems to teeter permanently on the brink of cataclysm. The fact that the plot itself stays largely within the confines of down-to-earth domestic reality merely amplifies the sense that we are wading into uncharted waters, and might at any moment be swept out to sea. Olivia Colman is in her element as Leda, a middle-aged woman on a beach vacation in Greece that she insists on calling a “working holiday”. Leda is a professor of languages, a woman who understands the nuances of translating poetry, but who remains distinctly tight-lipped about her own personal situation. At first she seems content to lounge in the sun with her books in what looks like a little corner of paradise. But there are irritants in this garden of Eden, from the giant bugs that fly in through the window at night to the rowdy family from Queens who pitch their loungers next to hers and expect Leda to move along. When she refuses to comply, their stares resemble threats – as if some terrible line has been crossed. Tensions thaw after Nina (Dakota Johnson) loses her young daughter on the beach and Leda promptly finds her – an act that seems to chime with an experience in Leda’s own past. Fragmentary flashbacks suggest a shared knowledge of this panic-inducing sense of loss, and hint that history is repeating itself. Once this lost daughter is retrieved, Nina and Leda form an uneasy bond, with the latter seeing guilty echoes of her younger self in a woman whose desires are evidently not constrained by motherhood and matrimony. Meanwhile, in a parallel past narrative that weaves in and out of the present-day revelations, Jessie Buckley plays the young Leda as a thrusting intellect whose career path is rudely interrupted by domestic life, and who seizes new opportunities regardless of the consequences. Gyllenhaal has described the narrative of The Lost Daughter as being “very strange and painful, but also undeniably true”, as if her experience of being “a woman in the world was being spoken out loud for the first time”. A sense of transgression runs throughout this eerie film as it scratches away at the surface of its central character, revealing complex and contradictory layers of defiance, rage and grief under the apparently placid exterior. I detected more than a hint of French director François Ozon in Gyllenhaal’s beach-bound evocation of secrets and lies, as if the sea itself were about to strip away the sand to reveal jagged rocks. An image of a child’s doll with a worm crawling from its mouth skirts the boundaries of horror, while an air of brooding criminality lurks constantly at the edge of the frame, implying a genre-twisting turn for the worse. The fact that Buckley and Colman seem a somewhat mismatched onscreen pair matters less than it might. Indeed, it’s a credit to both that they breathe such individual life into the figure of Leda, even if the loose ends of their respective stories never quite match up. As always, Colman manages to express deep wellsprings of emotion with few words and fewer gestures – her face telegraphing great swathes of anguish beneath polite smiles and annoyed glances. As for Buckley, she perfectly captures the imprisonment young Leda feels, with the revelation that she hates talking to her daughters on the phone pitched somewhere between self-determination and self-loathing. The versatile cinematographer Hélène Louvart, whose recent credits include Sarah Gavron’s Rocks and Eliza Hittman’s Never Rarely Sometimes Always, achieves a perfect balance between distance and intimacy, bringing the audience close enough to these characters to convince us that we know them while also retaining an air of impenetrable mystery. A jazzy, dreamy score by Dickon Hinchliffe completes the picture, with the textures of a lost vinyl recording bridging the gap between the past, present and future. In cinemas now and on Netflix from 31 DecemberWith 400,000 plant species on earth, it’s always so surprising to me how few have made it into cultivation. Most of humanity, for example, relies on only 50 or so plant species to feed itself. In fact, 60% of the calories that fuel humanity come from the seeds of just three grass species: wheat, rice and maize. The world of houseplants, of course, is no exception. With the mind-boggling range of species from the planet’s warmer zones, only a tiny handful have the ability to handle the unique environmental conditions found in the average living room. The weird combination of low light and high temperatures in winter, central heating that can make the air humidity of your typical home drier than the Sahara, and the need for the kind of durability to enable survival during transit, have led to growers rigorously selecting their offerings so that only those species that have the capability of handling these conditions are marketed. However, sometimes there are species that inexplicably seem to remain rare in the trade, and are thus overlooked by gardeners, despite being perfectly adapted to indoor culture. The wonderful Brassavola orchid has to be one of the best examples of this. Native to the warm, coastal forests of tropical Latin America, they revel in the high, year-round temperatures found in most homes. Compare this to the more popular Cymbidium, which needs really cool, bright winter conditions to flower – impossible to provide without a large glasshouse – and it’s surprising how one has become far harder to track down than the other. It’s not because the Brassavola is lacking in the looks department either – it has spectacularly exotic cream and yellow-green flowers with elegantly elongated, spider-like petals. Pollinated by moths in the wild, these stunning blooms emit a wonderful scent each evening and, being from the tropics, they flower repeatedly all year. When you get a mature, really healthy specimen, it’s not unusual to see it produce so many flower spikes that they create almost a ball of blooms. It’s spectacular. They even have fleshy, slightly “rolled-up” leaves that allow them to cope with far less water than other orchids – perfect if you’re forgetful like me. Grow them exactly like the more common Phalaenopsis, in a bright spot at 18-25C with a weekly dunk in a sink of water before letting them dry out, and you’ll experience this wonder of nature. As they are year-round growers, I feed them at every watering, using a very dilute feed – roughly a quarter of package directions. As I say, they are hard to find. I found mine at a specialist garden centre, but thanks to in-vitro propagation, they can now be sourced from some online nurseries. It might involve a little cyber sleuthing, but trust me, they’re worth it! Follow James on Twitter @BotanygeekIt was a disaster in the making: fierce rains battered southwestern British Columbia, and residents of Vancouver watched in horror as a hulking barge broke free of its tethers and drifted perilously close to a bridge. Instead, winds pushed it away, grounding it on a nearby beach. More than a month later, and despite repeated efforts to dislodge it, the barge remains stuck. But it has also emerged as an unlikely celebrity, placing it in the running for one of the most famous grounded vessels of the year – with the Suez canal grounding possibly beating it to top spot. Earlier this week, Vancouver further elevated the barge’s prestige, temporarily naming the park where it lies stranded “Barge Chilling Beach”. “No matter what storms life may send our way, we’ll always be here for you,” the park board wrote on Twitter, prompting residents to flock to the barge for photos of the new sign. Vancouver Parks commissioner Stuart Mackinnon said the idea was inspired by a staff member and was a riff on an annual parks board Christmas card. He also explained that it is a homage to a park sign in Vancouver that simply reads “Dude Chilling Park”, the rogue creation of a local artist that was eventually adopted by the city and has been stolen multiple times. “We thought that we could have some fun with this, and maybe even give a little bit of joy to the residents,” he said. Removing the barge will require a feat of engineering that neither the coastguard, Transport Canada nor the owners have yet solved. A previous attempt to refloat the barge in early December, by taking advantage of strong tides, failed to dislodge it. Until a new solution emerges, residents will have to give up on the sprawling coastal vistas they once enjoyed. “Lots of people are very upset by the barge,” said Mackinnon. “But Vancouver is a fun place with a wonderful population here, and they have just sort of taken it on as another quirky thing about the city.” Residents have jokingly proposed converting the barge into a nightclub and given the barge its own profanity-laden Twitter account. A Tripadvisor review praised the barge for its “beauty” and “grace”. A local woodcarver has designed tree ornaments in homage of the stranded vessel. And one local company sold “Sorry to barge in” T-shirts for a disaster relief fundraiser. In many ways, said Mackinnon, the barge, and the city’s embrace of it, has been a temporary distraction to the devastation of the province’s recent storms that displaced thousands of residents and killed hundreds of thousands of farm animals. “It’s been a tumultuous time,” said Mackinnon. “It’s small, but this is just a way for the park board to say, ‘Have some fun, have a safe holiday and be well.’”Some of the most popular Christmas presents are being sold online with mark-ups of more than 70% after selling out in major high street stores because of the global shortage of microchips. Supply-chain bottlenecks and the computer-chip shortages are affecting availability of some of the most sought-after gifts, from games consoles to Dyson products. Shoppers were warned last week of a delay of at least one month for some of the most popular iPad models. Games consoles have been in limited supply for most of the pandemic, and companies are struggling to cope with the surge in demand for Christmas. Customers have attacked “scalpers” online for buying stock and pushing up prices. The Microsoft Xbox Series X, launched in November 2020, typically sells for £449.99 but was sold out or in very limited supply at most retailers last week, including Currys, John Lewis, Argos and Asda. But it was available for sale at the online marketplace onbuy.com for £669.49, a mark-up of almost 50%. Sony’s PlayStation 5 console, which also usually sells for £449.99, was widely sold out at retailers last week as well, including on Sony’s own website. It was offered for sale by one online outlet last week for £779.99, a mark-up of 73%. Alex Baldock, chief executive of the electrical store Currys, said last week that the store faced an “acute challenge” in securing orders for popular products for Christmas. It was hard to get a full range of laptops, and the latest Dyson hairstyling product, the Airwrap, was like “gold dust”. The Airwrap retails at £449.99, but was out of stock on Thursday on Dyson’s UK website. A statement on the online store said: “Due to global supply challenges, stock may be limited at certain times, but more stock is coming soon.” The Airwrap was also unavailable online at Amazon, Boots and John Lewis. The manufacture of many electronic products has been scaled back because of a global shortage of microchips, described by the Semiconductor Industry Association in the US as the “brains of modern electronics”. Microchips, also known as integrated circuits or semiconductors, are a set of tiny electronic circuits on a small, flat piece of silicon. Global sales of microchips will reach almost £400bn this year but production concentrated in east Asia has been significantly disrupted by the pandemic. Meanwhile, demand has continued to grow for computer chips that are required for every sector of the economy, from ventilators used to treat patients with Covid-19 to consumer leisure goods to cars. Apple was reported by Bloomberg in October to be cutting production targets of its iPhone 13 by 10 million units because of prolonged microchip shortages. The electronics giant has also reportedly cut iPad production to allocate more components to its latest iPhone. The deadline at the UK Apple store for ordering an iPad mini in time for Christmas was 17 November, and the deadline for an iPad was 24 November. Dispatch times on Amazon last week for a £319 2021 10.2-inch iPad were between one and two months. Clive Black, a retail analyst at investment group Shore Capital, said: “Sales will be down overall because retailers won’t be able to fulfil orders to satisfy all the demand, but the silver lining is that they will be enjoying full-price sales with very little discounting.” Richard Hyman, a retail consultant, said shops already struggling with increased labour costs and supply shortages now faced the additional impact of Omicron, which would almost certainly curb shopping activity in city and town centres this week. He said: “This retail industry is already creaking and now it faces even more pressure.”In the days after the Taliban took Kabul, more than one correspondent shared clips from its streets, marvelling at how fast the city had returned to “surprisingly normal”, with shoppers back out and a sudden sense of quiet in a place that had been constantly braced for the next suicide bombing. The correspondents were men, who apparently didn’t register one stark difference; it was also largely men in their videos. Most of the city’s women had vanished into their homes, terrified of what Taliban rule would mean for them. It could have been a momentary slip of attention, at a time of intense pressure. But in the weeks that followed, this kind of blindness to the particular tragedy unfolding for Afghan women would play out again and again, first in male journalists’ coverage of the Taliban’s victory, and then in international organisations’ response to Afghanistan’s crisis. Afghanistan was already the world’s worst country to live in as a woman before the Taliban took control. But with the group curtailing employment, and even trying to banish women’s faces from TV screens, it plunged to new depths, restrictions rarely seen in recent decades beyond the pages of dystopian novels, the short-lived borders of the IS caliphate, or the last time the Taliban controlled Afghanistan. This past week marked 90 days since the Taliban effectively barred girls from higher education, with no date for a return to high school. Yet, particularly in the first weeks of Taliban control, that horror, and the unique shadow descending on women’s lives, seemed not to register fully with many male journalists in Afghanistan, or their editors back home in English-speaking countries, from the UK to the US, Australia to Canada (I haven’t followed other languages). It took one of the US’s leading papers four days to cover the Taliban announcement of a defacto ban on secondary school education for girls. On the 20th anniversary of the 9/11 attacks on America, one prominent male correspondent in Kabul wondered on Twitter if “perhaps we can start today... to heal and move forward”. Afghan women were simply wondering if they would study or work again or even leave their house safely. The specific restraints on women’s lives and public roles do not seem to be a priority either for many of the diplomats, UN officials and aid agencies that have begun flying into Kabul again, too often as part of all-male delegations. The UK sent two British men to discuss “the rights of women and girls” with two Taliban men, apparently oblivious or unconcerned about the message that decision sent Afghanistan’s new rulers, as they energetically exclude women from government and public spaces. The United Nations appointed a man to lead the UN Women office in Kabul. When the Taliban brought in its bar on girls’ secondary education, Unicef – the UN agency that looks after children – put out a statement that first welcomed the return of boys-only high school classes, before raising “worries” about the future of girls’ schooling. There have also been frequent calls from men in the international community to “give the Taliban time” on rights, as if women’s ability to feed and educate themselves are mere bargaining chips. This dovetailed with too much reporting that seemed to imply by omission that women’s rights are a niche concern, of interest to and best covered by other women, not an urgent human rights crisis. Around three weeks after the fall of Kabul, I scanned the bylines of prominent male correspondents working in Afghanistan for papers on both sides of the Atlantic. It was an admittedly unscientific survey, but I couldn’t find a single standalone story by any of them about the systemic assault on women’s rights, beyond news coverage of protests by women. Their papers did produce stories about the abrupt truncation of women’s lives, but they were written by women, mostly outside the country. Perhaps the men were oblivious, perhaps they were uninterested. Either way, it was lazy journalism, and a reminder of how much those who write the news determine what makes headlines, and therefore what becomes a focus of international debate. It’s hard not to think this kind of approach makes it easier for the international organisations and diplomats to look at their delegate lists for trips to Kabul, and shrug off the fact that they are all or mostly men, or put out press releases that minimise abuses of women’s rights. The selective blindness seemed to be illustrated, in social media feeds, by a glut of images of, and with, Taliban fighters, presented through a lens of uncritical fascination and sometimes almost giddy excitement. “Half come hither, half I’ll kill you,” read one caption, mulling whether the young Talib was trying to look “sexy or scary”. Another colleague recently shared pictures of himself essentially dressed as a Talib, wearing the black turban embraced by the group. A third, employed by a major international TV network, posted an image of his camera next to a Taliban RPG, with the quip, “I need to upgrade my kit”. It is a strange approach to the footsoldiers of a government whose war crimes include the slaughter of media colleagues – and recent well-documented rights abuses go far beyond controls on women, including reprisal killings and forced displacements and massacres of minorities. Would selfies with the troops of other oppressive governments, from Chinese security forces in Xinjiang, or Iran’s Revolutionary Guards, be seen the same way? There is an urgent need to understand the Taliban. The worldview and ambitions of those who fought for the new government, and implement its rule, will influence how we engage with them. But the visually striking selfies with the Taliban and curated Instagram feeds of young militants at play do more to boost likes and followers (the pictures tend to be popular in the west) than offer any significant insight. For many Afghans at home and in exile, they prompt anger and despair; my phone regularly fills with incredulous screenshots and messages. “Are they suffering from Stockholm syndrome?” asked an Afghan female friend, sharing one of these images. In the financial catastrophe that has followed the Taliban takeover, it is likely to be women who suffer most. Men may be reduced to manual labour or to selling their children, but many women cannot work at all, and it is always girls who are sold. For years, the international community and the media have claimed women’s rights were at the heart of the western commitment to Afghanistan. Never have those concerns been more urgent. If the particular crisis facing Afghan women is not put at the heart of coverage of Afghanistan, and women are not at the centre of negotiations on aid donations and access, the price they and all of Afghanistan pay will be even greater. • Emma Graham-Harrison has reported from Afghanistan since 2009Boris Johnson, mulls one of the few figures to have served in every Tory cabinet since David Cameron’s to the present one, is like a “seafaring voyager from the ancient world” – adventurous, reckless, dominant and storm-tossed. Now, like a stranded mariner, he depends on external forces to bring the Conservatives’ ship of state back to safe electoral harbour. The omens for his odyssey look bleaker by the hour. A shock resignation last night from Lord Frost, the PM’s trusted Brexit negotiator who looked poised to pull off a peace treaty with the EU over the Northern Ireland protocol over the “political direction” of the government. For all the ritual courtesies about his departure being agreed earlier this month and inconveniently leaked to Sunday newspapers, Frost’s key gripe is clear. He disagrees with the leader he served as negotiator and later Cabinet member about “the current direction of travel” on Covid restrictions and believes that Johnson has fallen prey to a nexus of over-zealous advisers advising greater restrictions as Omicron spreads. This may well turn out to be the equivalent of Geoffrey Howe’s attack on Margaret Thatcher – in that case from the pro-European position, the arguments count less than the impact and timing – and Frost has demonstrated Omicron’s potential to determine how dependent Johnson’s survival now is on a mutant virus (insert your own punchline here). Last night, the line from Boris loyalists remained that if the new variant turns out to be milder than feared in its impact on the NHS, this febrile few days will pass and Johnson will emerge as the man who saw the country through a new emergency, balancing warring interests and views as well as any leader reasonably could. If, however, a new test ends up with images of the health service in dire straits and Johnson fails to shake off the opinion among colleagues that he is the main source of the political contagion in his party, the verdict is unsentimental – “the game will be up pretty fast”. Character, control and competence are the focus of concerns that have spilled over into a 99-strong rebellion over Covid prevention measures, driven by an uprising over vaccine passports to enter crowded venues and tightening of mask requirements. The North Shropshire byelection rout was driven, however, not by a spasm of libertarian impulses but by a range of frustrations, requiring different – and often contradictory – remedies. The damage of mass abstentions by Tory voters who have amassed two centuries of local practice in ticking the Conservative box on the ballot brought unsparing clarity to Johnson’s vulnerability. A PM who has thrived on charisma has lost his lustre. It is not the usual Johnson-haters in or outside the party who sound like his nemeses but, most vocally, former allies and champions. The scrappy defence Johnson offered after the knockout blow was not a stellar example of resilience under pressure. We got first-name ingratiation with his Sky News interviewer, while sliding out of a clear admission that he might be part of the problem. (We should have some understanding of baggy eyes for anyone with a newborn, but even the arrival of a baby girl has failed to penetrate the Downing Street gloom.) The toll of the pandemic and a slew of unforced errors have dented his greatest asset – the self-confidence and ability to sound conversational while honing a message that resonates with a range of voters. Ascribing a rout to too much focus on “politics and politicians” reminded me of Communist bosses in 1989 instructing furious citizens not to focus on their miseries and frustrations, but on the excellent grain harvest and factory outputs. The core message seemed to be that Johnson was in charge – “I’m going to have to fix it of course”, but not of anything particular. This is the David Brent school of management. Today backbenchers divide less often on 2016 Brexit lines than they do on fears that Johnson is a swing-in-the-wind chancer – deemed illiberal by those who fret about sweeping changes to citizenship rights and a shrill tone on migrant boats in the Channel, while equally distrusted at the “dry” end of the Conservative spectrum, where they’re fretting about Covid rules restricting individual choices. Brand Boris is being ground down by competing demands. Both sides (unhappily for him) unite in concern about incompetence, drift and high handedness with MPs. One usually loyal female minister confides that the revelations of revels inside No 10 and the leaked video of his press team’s levity about these “opened the floodgates of anger” to the extent that she felt sorry for her constituency staff having to read the insults. The “surge” effect she and others have witnessed was the handling of accusations about illicit or ill-considered parties and a now settled view that Johnson is being dishonest about his knowledge of them or so lax about discipline on his team when the country was in the grip of Covid that he did not care. News that Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, had recused himself from heading the investigation into the vinous Christmas gatherings in Downing Street after taking part in a quiz event compounds the impression that neither Johnson nor his inner team have their disaster-avoidance antennae honed. The investigation should have gone to a civil servant outside the PM’s immediate contacts. Byelections are snapshots that meld local concerns: in this case, poor infrastructure investment and belief that the spending spoils are heading to the “red wall” rather than the Welsh borders. Yet they are also vectors of more potent national mood swings. The young Winston Churchill remembered losing Oldham in 1899 to the Liberals as leaving him “with feelings of deflation which a bottle of champagne represents when it has been half-emptied and left uncorked for a night (a calamitous matter in Winston’s eyes)”. A swing in Christchurch to the Lib Dems presaged the demise of John Major, while Orpington in the 1960s became the “blue wall” bellwether seat for narrow Conservative-Liberal races after a Liberal triumph in 1962. Ruth Davidson’s cover version of the “last chance saloon” metaphor (Ken Clarke’s mordant description of Major’s terminal phase) echoes that outcome. What to do about this is a fraught business, even for an ideological Houdini of Johnson’s calibre. As one Johnson ally in the Lords put it: “As far as the Tories are concerned, the boss is doing a load of un-Tory things in the name of the pandemic they don’t like or understand.” HMS Johnson, they suspect, is sailing under a false flag, having promised a buccaneering rebirth of Britain and delivering instead “high taxes, high inflation, no Brexit dividend and a lot of faff about Covid passports”. The unseemly attack by a Tory backbencher singling out Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer, as the proponent of a “public health socialist state” is a further sign of how quickly disagreements over Omicron control can turn to something much more visceral and divisive. Given that the ruffled Tory helmsman looks more Kryptonite than a purveyor of superpowers, the mood among pretenders to the crown is remarkably subdued. But that might also provide the narrow window for a Johnson reboot. For all the agitation over his many failings, the question many backbenchers will ask is what could a newcomer offer that would provide a clearer recipe for success. Rishi Sunak, the chancellor for the Technocrat Tendency, arrived back at Heathrow on Friday in jogging pants, having badly mistimed a trip to Silicon Valley that felt less than essential and featured foolishly casual optics for a figure in charge of the economy at a time of distress. No such slouchy sportswear is tolerated by Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, whose Christmas card was a dead ringer for a portrait of Elizabeth I exuding Gloriana vibes, with a globe prominently beside her – and a ready stump speech about “confident, outward-looking, patriotic and positive” Blighty. For all the fizzing around a possible challenge, Johnson’s most ambitious would-be successors are more about positioning than a power grab now. Sunak will hope that confronting the cost of living squeeze will allow him to show off his skill in balancing tax and spend, while funnelling money to strategic areas to quell red wall dissatisfactions. Truss is a tensile figure, a survivor in the bear-pit of shifting cabinets and quirky (former Lib Dem, after all) yet ambitious enough to let me know she only pulled out of the leadership contest in 2019 in order not to prolong the May-era misery. Her bumper-sticker pitch of freedom-loving, proto-Thatcherite, however, is a marketing campaign and not yet a proposal for power with the cutting edge it would take to oust an incumbent. Risks of the “Johnson contagion” need to be balanced against the upheaval of changing a leader mid-term. That invariably produces accusations of governing with no mandate or being hustled into an early election on a gamble that might benefit Keir Starmer. So Johnson probably has a short period of respite in which to refocus his premiership before the next wave of economic woes hits home and local elections in May offer the next punishing political health check. The chances of full recovery look slim and, dramatically, the figure he chose to “get Brexit done ” has dealt a blow which will embolden critics on the Tory right. For a prognosis, I would refer to the joke about how many psychotherapists it takes to change a lightbulb. The old answer is just one: but the lightbulb really has to want to change. The new one is that his party may now decide that the great source of heat and light is fading to black. Anne McElvoy is senior editor at the EconomistIn the plywood hut in which Palestinian Iman al-Hathalin and her family have lived since their home was bulldozed by the Israeli authorities in 2014, the warmth from a rickety samovar is welcome. Outside the only window, the winter sky is blinding white: it floods the room with an icy light and sends shadows dancing up the flimsy walls. Everyone has been ill lately, it seems, including Hathalin’s two-year-old daughter, who sleeps fitfully on her lap, and Maya Mark, her Arabic-speaking Israeli guest. “It is not exaggerating to say Maya is like my sister,” the 28-year-old said. “I was so worried when she was sick. We are family.” The friends are catching up in a village deep in the south Hebron hills, about as remote as it’s possible to get within the confines of the West Bank. This rocky, difficult place is one of the fiercest frontlines of the occupation: Palestinian homes, paved roads and water cisterns are repeatedly demolished thanks to a near-total ban on construction, while illegal Israeli settlements flourish. Rather than collapse under these pressures, however, the local community has become a deep wellspring for non-violent Palestinian activism, which has often worked hand in hand with the anti-occupation movement in Israel. In the absence of any meaningful top-down peace process, Hathalin and Mark are part of a new generation of activists who are quietly taking an extraordinary new step. Together with Nnur Zahor, another Israeli Arabic speaker, Mark has created an immersive language-learning course for like-minded young Israeli activists, taught by eight local Palestinian women, including Hathalin. Over the course of several months, the project has helped to forge deep relationships between the students and people across several villages, and the Israelis’ presence is countering a rising tide of settler violence. The project – it has no official name or title – is possible thanks to decades of work by older activists who built up trust between the communities: it is unlikely that it could scale up or be replicated elsewhere. But nothing quite like this grassroots, long-term idea has ever happened before, and everyone involved agrees it is a richly rewarding undertaking. “The people here don’t need us at all,” said Mark, 26. “Being here has taught me to be more modest about activism and about my role. It’s inspiring and a priceless experience, getting to understand the depth of resistance here.” According to the Israeli human rights group B’Tselem, a unique cave-dwelling culture has existed in the Hebron hills since at least the 1830s, the natural shelters used as homes and for keeping sheep and goats. In the decades since Israel’s creation, Bedouin families expelled from the Negev desert have also made their way to these arid foothills, north of their ancestral lands. The territory was captured by Israel in the war of 1967, and is now part of Area C, the 60% of the West Bank under full Israeli control. But Palestinian shepherds and farmers are no longer the only people living here. Dozens of Israeli settlements have been established since the 1980s – many illegal not just under international law, but Israeli law too. Encouraged by Donald Trump’s unyielding support for Israel’s right, the settlers have grown bolder in the past few years, seizing more and more land that Israel classifies as “state land” or “firing zones”, and their tactics have become increasingly violent. The UN recorded 410 attacks by settlers against Palestinian civilians and property in the West Bank in the first 10 months of 2021, including four killings, up from 358 in 2020, and 335 in 2019. Rather than intervene, the UN and rights groups say, Israeli security forces more often stand by or even join in. The Palestinians can also turn to violence. Earlier this week, gunmen ambushed a car with Israeli license plates as it left Homesh in the northern West Bank, killing a 25-year-old and wounding two others. Stone-throwing, shooting with live ammunition, cutting down or burning crops and olive trees, killing sheep and vandalising property are common. In one of the most recent high-profile incidents, in September dozens of armed men from two nearby outposts smashed through the Hebron hills village of Mufakara, breaking windows and solar panels, slashing tyres, overturning a car and injuring six people. Before the pandemic, Hebron locals were often supported by international volunteers who helped escort children to school on dangerous roads between outposts, and challenged settlers who trespassed on to private Palestinian land. But as the world’s borders closed, preventing travel, local activists decided to turn to Israeli friends. “A few of us decided that we wanted to invite them to come. Not everyone in the area is OK with it, they don’t understand what we are trying to achieve. But before we had to wait to report settler problems, now our Israeli allies can get very close and document everything,” said Nasser Nawaja, a well-known local activist. “The Israelis are learning what it is like to live here. And our children are learning that Jews are not just settlers and soldiers.” Small groups of Israelis have been rotating around a handful of villages in the Hebron hills since spring, although the volunteers asked for their exact locations to be withheld for security reasons. There’s little that seems to bond the 10 or so volunteers on the surface: they come from all over Israel, from different family backgrounds, and while all would describe themselves as politically on the left, they debate what that means. The students have Arabic classes two mornings a week, with a curriculum Mark and Zahor designed especially for native Hebrew speakers. They get to practice in everyday life and there is no ban on discussing political topics, unlike most Arabic programmes in Israel. “When I came, I remember thinking, ‘What am I going to do here? How will I interact, how will I support this community?’ I didn’t understand anything being said in the summer, but now I get about 50% of the conversation. It’s very exciting,” said Maya Eshel, 26, during a group meeting with the Observer at a community centre on a bleak, cold day last Thursday. The group spend the rest of their time helping out as needed. They are most useful as watchdogs: if someone calls to say settlers are approaching a village, or won’t let shepherds reach their land, the volunteers leap into action, grabbing binoculars and cameras equipped with long-distance lenses donated by B’Tselem and hustling to their cars. Sometimes their presence, or Hebrew conversation, can be enough to diffuse the situation. At the very least, they can record what happens and give testimonies to the police, although so far only one incident of dozens reported has been followed up. During our visit, the relaxed end-of-the-week mood in one village shifted dramatically after a little girl ran up to the prefab houses, shouting she had seen two settlers approaching a Palestinian olive grove from the large settlement on the other side of the valley. The adults and the Israeli activists rushed to the nearest clear viewpoint; the village dogs barked. Through the binoculars, they decided the two figures looked like young boys. One appeared to be carrying a saw. On noticing the adults on the ridge, the children stopped, eventually walking back up to the settlement. “Sometimes I am driving somewhere in the jeep, maybe it’s the middle of the night, to somewhere I’ve never been, and I stop and think to myself: ‘What the fuck am I doing here?’” said Matan Brenner-Kadish, 25. “This idea is really not for everyone and, long term, we are just plugging holes in a boat. If what drives you is anger and shame, then this would be exhausting. But if you come from a position of accepting that this brings benefits for both us and them, it’s a different perspective.” The project is not without risk. Earlier this month, three of the group were detained at a police station overnight on charges of not intervening to help a settler who was pushed to the ground by residents when he tried to enter a Palestinian village. Cameras, laptops, phones and a car were confiscated – all without a warrant. The three detained members could technically face sentences of three years in prison. “One of the arguments the settlers use is our presence is a justification for more violence: one explicitly blamed us, said they are attacking because of us,” said Itai Feitelson, 26. “They’d be violent if we were here or if we weren’t here. It shows that what we are doing is working,” said Brenner-Kadish. “And, at the end of the day, if the Palestinians can do this their whole lives, so can we.” • This article was amended on 22 December 2021 with regard to data on Palestinian civilian casualties; the UN recorded four killings, not “murders” as an earlier version said.When Angela Smith* phoned her 93-year-old mother to remind her to take her medication, she asked, as usual, how her day had been. “She said ‘I have been busy on the phone all day. There is a man at the bank who is trying to steal all my money, so I had to go there to help them find him,’” Smith says. Her mother, who has dementia, had been taken in by a common scam. A well-spoken criminal, claiming to be from her bank, phoned and told her that a staff member of the local branch had been stealing from her, and asked her to withdraw cash so that management could trace the notes to the teller. She was persuaded to leave the money under her front door mat to be picked up. But there was no crime in the bank, and the elderly woman lost the £1,000 she had left to be collected. “She was in denial, and she is in still in denial,” says Smith. “From what I can gather, she is very embarrassed and really ashamed about what has happened. In the end, we had to stop talking about it because it was making her so upset.” Fraud of all kinds spiralled during the pandemic, as people were forced to stay at home. A report from the victims commissioner, who acts as an independent voice for victims of crime, says fraud grew by almost a quarter in the year to March, at a time when other types of crime were decreasing. Just under 200,000 of the victims were elderly and vulnerable, it says. Separate figures from Action Fraud, the national reporting centre for fraud and cyber crime, show victims aged over 60 lost almost £370m in the 13 months to November. Paul Hewitt’s 76-year-old mother, Sally, thought she was getting a windfall when a caller phoned to say she was due a council tax refund of £900. She duly gave the “well-spoken English man” her banking details. Luckily the bank, Santander, spotted an attempt by the fraudsters to withdraw cash from the account, and stopped it. When the fraudsters then rang back to check the details, Hewitt’s father cut them off. While she did not lose any money, Hewitt says his mother, who has vascular dementia and Alzheimer’s disease, has had her confidence dented. “Because of the Alzheimer’s, she suffers from depression and, when she does things wrong, she feels very guilty about it,” says Hewitt. The effect of being taken in by scammers can be very damaging to the elderly and vulnerable, according to Age UK, the charity which helps older people. Policy manager Joel Lewis says scams to do with rebates, vaccines and test-and-trace systems became more and more frequent through lockdown. Criminals are quick to jump on consumer trends when selling their deceptions – for example, as sustainability has become more popular, “green” scams, such as making homes energy efficient, have become more prevalent, with Citizens Advice estimating millions of people have been targeted. “The crime can have a profound and life-changing impact in someone who is already struggling on a low income, and is then defrauded out of a couple of thousand pounds,” says Lewis. “That could be the thing that sends them over the edge. If they were struggling to stay connected with the outside world, that could be the thing that causes them to withdraw even more, and could have even greater impact if they lose social contact.” Older and more vulnerable members of society are often the victims of repeat offences, as information is circulated amongst criminals about easy targets, says Lewis. The elderly are also particularly susceptible because they are typically at home during the day, often live alone, have some disposable income and use their landlines. Amy Martin’s* grandfather Tom, who has Alzheimer’s disease, has not had an ATM card since he was convinced to pay a group of men in cash for a roof repair which was never done. He had withdrawn £1,000 over three days and handed it over. He then hid the fraud from his family. When the deception was discovered, his family held on to his bank cards and now give him cash when he needs it. But because of his condition, he spends a considerable amount of time every day looking for his cash card. Last month, a scammer phoned in an attempt to get his bank details, and he left notes around the phone saying that he had to find his card. “He can’t spell, and can’t really write, and we know that they must have pushed him a bit. My mother noticed that there were notes everywhere,” says Martin. “It stresses him a lot at the time and he doesn’t then remember it because of the Alzheimer’s. At the time, it causes him considerable distress. They now have to keep a close eye on him.” * Names have been changedThe billionaire space race Space made the headlines on many occasions in 2021: the landing of Nasa’s Perseverance rover on Mars, the arrival of a rare meteorite in the UK, the launch of a mission to hit an asteroid, the discovery of almost 200 new planets beyond the solar system – all shared their moment of fame with the public. However, the most extensive coverage of space news was probably of the 11-minute flight to outside the edge of Earth’s atmosphere made by William Shatner, AKA Captain James T Kirk of the USS Enterprise, in October 2021. The flight was the second made by the New Shepard rocket, named in honour of the first American in space, Alan Shepard, and operated by Blue Origin, a company owned by Jeff Bezos. New Shepard’s first passenger flight in July 2021 carried Bezos and three others, but Richard Branson pipped Bezos to the post of being the first billionaire to make a space flight by taking off in Virgin Galactic’s rocket, Unity, nine days earlier. A back-and-forth bicker about whether Branson had been into space has rumbled along ever since. Branson’s flight only reached 55 miles (88km) above the Earth’s surface, so didn’t cross the Kármán line, the boundary 100km above the surface that marks the edge of space. Bezos’s flight did. These voyages are significant technological developments. But why should we care about a handful of the fortunate few who have been transported into space by extremely wealthy individuals who can afford their own spacecraft? The importance comes in what this represents for the future. We have seen, over the last decade or so, the development of individual private companies building satellites. Now we have companies – like Elon Musk’s SpaceX – with their own rocket programmes, winning contracts from government agencies to carry out launches for them. SpaceX has also carried cargo and astronauts to the International Space Station for Nasa. Space tourism might be thought a natural next step in space exploration – and there is nothing wrong with private enterprise taking this forward as long as it is monitored and regulated appropriately. And that is where these flights are significant. They open up a whole new series of issues to be addressed before space travel can move from control by governments to the private sector. The International Civil Aviation Organisation, an agency of the UN, oversees policies to ensure safe, secure, effective and fair access to the skies. The UN also has an Office for Outer Space Affairs, which is responsible for application of the Outer Space Treaty. I do not know if the two organisations are discussing under whose responsibility space tourism falls – but I do know that the Outer Space Treaty, which came into force in 1967, is almost solely concerned with the activities of governments, not private individuals or companies, and so should be revisited as a matter of urgency. Leaving all this aside, I thought there was a much more exciting first in the history of spaceflight that occurred in 2021. It was the flight of Ingenuity, the little helicopter carried by Perseverance to Mars – the first flight on another planet. Now that is an achievement to write home about. Monica Grady Monica Grady is professor of planetary and space science at the Open University Racial biases in the healthcare system 2021 was the year when it became widely understood that inequalities in health outcomes for black and Asian people were partly the result of a mix of professional, systemic and technical biases that together produce institutional racism. It was a year when many people bought pulse oximeters believing that, if they became ill with Covid-19, a finger-tip reading would alert them to seek medical assistance. However, black and Asian people learned that their pulse oximeters were three times more likely to miss low oxygen levels in dark skin. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, who is himself from a Pakistani family, launched an investigation in November. However, this is in a pandemic where platitudes that “we are all in the same boat” swiftly gave way to a reality of “we are all in the same storm, but not in the same boat”, as it became clear that black and Asian people were much more likely to die from Covid-19 than white people. Clearly, technical biases do not help. 2021 also saw publicity given to revelations that black and Asian women were respectively four and two times more likely to die in childbirth, and to have more stillborn infants than white women. These systemic, institutional biases were not even recorded in national statistics until reported by MBRRACE (Mothers and Babies: Reducing Risk through Audits and Confidential Enquiries across the country). The Office for National Statistics, which has now convened an Inclusive Data Taskforce to ensure that everyone counts and is counted, will no doubt produce figures in the future. The oximeter and childbirth examples say little by themselves about professional practices and discrimination. However, in May 2021 the airing of a BBC documentary, Subnormal: A British Scandal, led to an apology from the BPS Division of Educational and Child Psychology for its history in the 1960s and 1970s of diagnosing large numbers of black children as educationally subnormal and having them removed from mainstream education. Yet, even the Inner London Education Authority had documented that they knew many were not “subnormal”. Taken together, these examples point to a healthcare system where black and Asian people have reasons to question whether they will gain equal treatment. As the pandemic has shown, unless we are pulled into the same boat, no one can be sure that they are safe. Building trust that, for example, vaccines are designed with black as well as white people in mind, requires that trust more generally is built. 2021 may, hopefully, prove to have been a landmark year when enough people recognised the importance of building genuine equality in the healthcare system. Ann Phoenix Ann Phoenix is professor of psychosocial studies at University College London Cop26: time to act Global heating isn’t just the story of this year; it’s the big beast in the background (and sometimes the foreground) of every other scientific development this century. But there were some big science milestones this year, and a significant shift of emphasis. In August, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (the IPCC) published the first chunk of its Sixth Assessment Report, which covered the state of our knowledge about the climate system and what science can tell us about what will happen next. The overall message was the same as the Fifth Assessment Report in 2014, but even clearer and stronger: things are bad, and drastic action is required to keep the worst consequences at bay. But there has been a significant shift this year from hand-wringing to action, even though progress on the “action” bit is still far too slow. The media focus on events at Cop26 rather than the climate science itself is a good thing: more science will always be important, but we already have more than enough science to act. The next steps are about the flow of money, political and humanitarian priorities, and the messy business of global collaboration. But robust science will keep that process honest: we can predict the consequences of our actions, and those predictions must motivate us all, government, business and individuals alike. Helen Czerski Helen Czerski is a physicist and oceanographer at University College London Fibromyalgia: new understanding could lead to treatments for chronic pain Fibromyalgia – characterised by widespread pain, crippling fatigue and emotional distress – affects 1 in 40 people, predominantly women, but has no known cause or cure. Like many other chronic pain conditions, it is considered a “functional neurological disorder”, best explained by differences in how the brain processes and attends to pain signals. The current treatments therefore include CBT and stepped exercise, but have limited efficacy. A King’s College-led study published in 2021 may change all of that. Researchers injected mice with antibodies from fibromyalgia patients and found they developed difficulties related to the patients’ symptoms: reduced movement, grip weakness, and increased sensitivity to cold and pressure. Mice injected with antibodies from healthy adults did not develop these problems. The authors conclude that fibromyalgia is an autoimmune disorder. If replicated, this finding would revolutionise the diagnosis and treatment of this, and possibly other, chronic pain conditions. The mice in the study recovered when the antibodies had cleared from their systems, raising the hope that treatments that reduce antibodies, such as plasma exchange, may end the misery of fibromyalgia for millions of people across the globe. Francesca Happé Francesca Happé is professor of cognitive neuroscience at King’s College London A boom in precise protein-structure prediction by AI In more than 60 years since the first detailed structure of a protein was determined at atomic resolution by X-ray crystallography, a series of increasingly powerful experimental techniques had resulted, by 2020, in structural elucidation for well over a third of all proteins encoded by the human genome. Nevertheless, a large part of the proteins remained intractable for traditional laboratory methods, resulting in a major gap in our efforts to make sense of the protein-coding genome sequence information. 2021 has seen major advances in overcoming this limitation, based on AI-powered computational structure-prediction methods of unprecedented accuracy. In July, DeepMind’s second generation of the AlphaFold algorithm was used to generate a comprehensive atlas of protein structures for almost 99% of all human proteins, including tens of thousands of structures for critically important components of the human body that had evaded previous experimental characterisation. Excitingly, all this information is freely available to the global research community through the Alphafold Database hosted at the European Molecular Biology Laboratory in Cambridge. This breakthrough was followed by another publication in August in which a group at the University of Washington in Seattle took AlphaFold’s AI approach to the next level. In a living cell, proteins rarely carry out their functions in isolation; instead, they engage in a complex molecular dance guided by protein-protein interactions. The enhanced algorithm managed to accurately predict the molecular details of these interactions, taking us an important step forward towards an understanding of the dynamics of human cell physiology. Combined with the massive acceleration of genome sequencing, these new computational tools for predicting the detailed three-dimensional structure of the cellular machinery are rapidly being deployed in laboratories worldwide, enabling new strategies for drug discovery and making sense of the function of the human body. And the story of AI applications in biology is not going to end here. Watch this space in 2022. Eriko Takano Eriko Takano is professor of synthetic biology at the University of Manchester Extreme weather becomes more extreme The last year has been anticipated by climate scientists for a good while, with both the delayed Cop26 conference and latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report finally released. But it has been the unexpected aspects of nature – and the inability of governments to properly prepare for them – that has provided the reality check of climate risk in 2021. The “heat dome” that inflated itself and sat over North America this summer was perhaps the moment that made climate scientists go wide-eyed. The fact that temperature records were not just broken, but completely obliterated across wide parts of Canada and the US, was the first indication that something new was happening. When the heat turned to fire, destroying millions of acres of forest, wiping out whole communities, the academic oddity became a frightening reality. Heatwaves and fires in the eastern Mediterranean had a similar effect, while parts of Australia, having suffered years of drought and fire, were flooded. The devastating floods that killed more than 200 people in the world’s most developed region around the Rhine showed that money and democracy are no protection against nature at her angriest. They also showed that advances in weather and flood forecasting are useless unless authorities heed their warnings and act swiftly. Hannah Cloke Hannah Cloke is professor of hydrology at the University of Reading Record numbers of children living with obesity The most significant story of the year for me was not a breakthrough but a setback. In November the National Child Measurement Programme revealed a shocking increase in one year of the numbers of primary schoolchildren in England living with obesity – up from a fifth to a quarter of those aged 10-11. More shocking are the widening inequalities – 14% of children in the most affluent neighbourhoods live with obesity, compared with 34% in the most deprived. The pandemic has exacerbated these trends, but they long predate it. Poverty drives obesity, as do environments that make healthy eating and physical activity increasingly difficult. Fast food outlets, junk food adverts, pedestrian injuries and air pollution are far greater in our poorest neighbourhoods, and green spaces far less common. Evidence from cities improving these environments shows promise. Creating healthier towns and cities is challenging, and resisted by powerful commercial interests, but its impacts go well beyond childhood obesity. It would improve children’s mental health, reduce adult obesity and in turn dementia, type 2 diabetes and many cancers. Re-greening our urban environments, prioritising play and pedestrians over traffic would also contribute to a net zero world. Reversing this setback for children’s health through science-led policies could then become the breakthrough story, protecting us all, and our planet. Theresa Marteau Theresa Marteau is a behavioural scientist and director of the Behaviour and Health Research Unit, University of Cambridge The Winchcombe meteorite: a gift from space On 28 February 2021, there were more than 1,000 reports of an unusual streak of light across the skies of the UK. But scientists were already on the case – the UK Fireball Alliance’s cameras had picked up the signal and were busy estimating a landing site. The fireball was a meteor, an extraterrestrial remnant of our early solar system hurtling at hypervelocity through our atmosphere, ending its journey in pieces, scattered across rural Gloucestershire. A meteor is more than just a remarkable sight; we can back-track its trajectory through the darkness to work out where it came from, and also predict where fragments will land. Recovery teams were deployed, and multiple pieces were found in a family driveway and a nearby sheep field. The meteorite – the first of its kind recovered in the UK for 30 years – was a primitive “carbonaceous chondrite”: a rare specimen containing materials essentially unaltered since the formation of the solar system circa 4.5bn years ago. To recover an uncontaminated primitive meteorite is unusual, and allows us an opportunity to learn about the basic building blocks of planets, and how the Earth came to possess the resources required to sustain life. Analysis suggests that the Winchcombe meteorite comes from an object near Jupiter’s orbit which contains water and ice, and has a chemical makeup similar to our Sun. As scientists, we spend a lot of time looking up and out at the vastness of space. Missions like Jaxa’s Hayabusa2 and Nasa’s Osiris-Rex have been sent to asteroids with the express purpose of returning samples to Earth, and the recently launched Nasa Dart mission aims to test the technology required to divert larger and more threatening space rocks heading our way. But the Winchcombe meteorite is like a gift from the universe, landing on our doorstep, delivering a sample of the early solar system directly to us for analysis and inspiration. Emma Bunce Prof Emma Bunce is head of physics and astronomy at the University of Leicester, and president of the Royal Astronomical Society. Fatty RNA particles to the rescue, for some at least While the first vaccine made from genes was approved last December, it was only in 2021 that we learned how effective the Pfizer jab was in the real world. The idea is that this genetic material, known as ribonucleic acid, or RNA for short, is transported into cells where the antigen is manufactured to create the immunity from disease and death. In theory, these RNA vaccines could be tweaked in response to new variants. Two other things make RNA vaccines remarkable. First, it took 10 months from sequence to vaccine approval, a remarkable sprint when it normally takes a decade. Second, the vaccines introduced tiny fatty particles safely into mainstream healthcare. RNA vaccines are packaged within tiny fatty particles and these fatty shuttle buses are absolutely essential when it comes to getting RNA into the cells. This excellent science has highlighted two other issues. Vaccines do prevent serious disease but do not always stop transmission, and we will need to rapidly halt transmission in future pandemics. Our economies depend on this. Additionally vaccine inequity makes a mockery of international vaccination efforts, as illustrated by the Omicron variant. While vaccination rates in the UK hover at 70%, the comparable figure for the African continent is just over 4%. Ijeoma F Uchegbu Ijeoma F Uchegbu is professor of pharmaceutical nanoscience at University College London The role of nature in tackling global heating is finally recognised This year, a huge scientific effort over many decades finally paid off in policy terms. The United Nations climate conference held in Glasgow (Cop26) has been labelled “Nature’s COP” because of the high profile given to conserving and restoring natural ecosystems, in particular forests, as a way of tackling global heating. On just the second day, world leaders (now more than 140, covering more than 90% of the world’s forests) pledged to end deforestation by 2030. Data demonstrating the importance of forests to the planet’s carbon balance has been extremely hard won. Literally thousands of scientists have been measuring tree growth, tree death, and emissions, from thousands of forest plots, over many, many years. Collaborations such as ForestPlots.net, RainFor and the Global Ecosystems Monitoring network have done incredible work drawing together and standardising these essential field measurements. The resulting data has demonstrated, for example, that the vital role of intact tropical forests in soaking up anthropogenic carbon emissions is starting to reverse, and have allowed calculations of the potential contribution natural climate solutions could make to tackling the climate crisis. There is widespread scepticism about the extent to which the Glasgow leaders’ declaration on deforestation can be delivered: similar pledges in the past have spectacularly failed. However, such clear recognition that there is no path to net zero without nature is a very positive step. Julia PG Jones Julia PG Jones is professor of conservation science at Bangor University • This article was amended on 19 December 2021 because an earlier version misnamed Alan Shepard, the first American in space, as “John Shepard”. A picture caption was amended on 4 January 2022 to reference BioNTech in the development of the “Pfizer-BioNTech” vaccine.Archive on 4: Piers Plowright, Soundsmith (Radio 4) | BBC Sounds Radio 1’s Pop 101 With Scott Mills (BBC Sounds) The Lotte Berk Technique (Radio 4) | BBC Sounds Dear Daughter (BBC World Service) | BBC Sounds Nick Ferrari/Eddie Mair LBC For a few years now, media companies have been huffing on about the power of the story; how humans connect by telling gripping yarns, whether that’s a drama about a King Lear-style family dynasty or an advert about a lonely chocolate bar. I don’t mind this. Us audio fans know that storytelling is all: from true crime to documentaries, we rely on producers constructing a compelling narrative. One of the most innovative and influential of these was Piers Plowright, who died in August. He was given a suitable elegy in last night’s Archive on 4, made by Falling Tree’s Alan Hall. Born in the late 1930s, brought up in Hampstead, Plowright hailed from a different era (and class). The voices in his early recordings have all but disappeared now: their clipped precision; their ability to simultaneously repress emotion and reveal all. Plowright was a genius at constructing a story, both in the way he interviewed his subjects (“How did he find them?” you wonder) and how he put together the resulting programme. Mr B, his 1990s documentary about a schoolteacher, James Bellamy, was immensely moving (“The point of radio,” said Plowright, “is to reveal their secrets”), and the great producer Cathy FitzGerald, whose programme I reviewed last week, recalled a particular sentence of Bellamy’s in it: “We had killed and wounded and maimed and blinded and tortured and baked, what, 50 million people? And now, after that, we had to be kind.” Plowright thought of his programmes as composing a piece of music, and I found myself casting about for his documentaries after this show: here’s his Stepping Stones, also produced by Alan Hall, and a short piece called Setting Sail, for your delight. Storytelling is also the surprising basis for a new Radio 1 podcast, Pop 101. At least, surprising to me: I listened to the first episode, about Billie Eilish, fully expecting a short interview as the show’s hook. But this didn’t materialise. Instead, we got 15 minutes of Scott Mills and co-host Chris Stark recounting Eilish’s early life. Mills is the storyteller, Stark is in charge of what Victoria Wood called “chiming in”; wondering what a futon is, for example. The premise of the series is that each episode discusses an inanimate object that has proved important in a celebrity’s career. Sam Fender’s object, in episode two, is a beer pump, because he was discovered working in his local pub, and returned there with his Brit award, which the pub promptly turned into … a beer pump. Eilish’s object was the aforementioned futon: her mum and dad slept on one in the living room so that Eilish and her brother had a bedroom each. According to Pop 101, this indicated the extent of Eilish’s parents’ support of their children’s creative talent. (OK, I suppose; though you could argue that the futon situation was more to do with them not having much money.) Having interviewed Eilish this year, I was mildly irritated by the show’s payoff: that Eilish still lives in her parents’ home, with the legendary futon. She doesn’t: she has her own place. The problem with constructing a neat story is that tiny facts can wreck the narrative. I also could have done with a little more care with the storytelling in Radio 4’s The Lotte Berk Technique. Lotte Berk (1913-2003) was an ex-dancer who created a fitness regime for women that was rumoured to improve their sex lives. Great hook for a programme, and singer Nadine Shah was an excellent presenter choice, but the producers missed a few story beats. We needed more about what Berk’s exercises did, and what she was actually like (details, anecdotes). This, especially when her daughter, Esther, revealed that Berk stopped having sex with her husband, and instead hooked up with other women through her fitness coaching. A little more digging would have made things clearer, though this was an enjoyable programme, and Shah an engaging presenter. Over on the World Service, there’s an immensely wholesome new series, Dear Daughter, in which Namulanta Kombo, the mother of a five-year-old girl, gets parents to write and read out a letter to their daughters. It’s lovely, though I’m hoping for more grit as it continues. There’s a reason that fairytales are usually the darkest of stories. Finally, I’m enjoying the combative approaches of news journalists to the unceasing shiftiness of the current government. On Wednesday, LBC’s Nick Ferrari informed Dominic Raab that the prime minister was like a football manager waiting to be sacked. And Ferrari’s compadre, Eddie Mair, briefly interrupted Boris Johnson’s 5pm address just to correct some information. “It’s not 780,000 new Covid cases,” he said. “It’s 78,000.” Telling tales.At the beginning of Matthew Bourne’s vivid reinterpretation of The Nutcracker, the cast wander on to the stage and gaze wide-eyed at the audience. Their anticipation and wonder sum up the magic of the season. A treat is in store. Bourne’s rethinking, which starts in Dr Dross’s orphanage and ends up in Sweetieland, is now 30 years old but more clever and shiny than ever, full of witty detail. Anthony Ward’s designs gleam with imagination: grey tiled walls open up into a white landscape full of skaters, and then into the pink excess of a sugar dream crowned with a tilting wedding cake. Through these, Cordelia Braithwaite’s graceful, good-hearted Clara makes her journey, thwarted in life and in dreams by the malicious Sugar (Ashley Shaw), who steals the Nutcracker (Harrison Dowzell, first a lurching ventriloquist’s doll, then a handsome prince) by sheer sensual ambition. They are surrounded by a brilliant array of characters including a humbug bouncer, the glamorous, skittering Marshmallow Girls, and two Cupids in pyjamas, whose blindness is a real problem. It’s all beautifully danced, full of glorious invention, mining Tchaikovsky’s music (here played live) with an understanding of its expansiveness, but also a feeling for the melancholy longing that runs under its great melodies. It’s one of Bourne’s best. Blissful. On screen, another darker fairy story is reimagined by the BalletBoyz (Michael Nunn and William Trevitt), director Richard Jones and movement director Sarah Fahie, in an adventurous new silent film of Rumpelstilzchen. This spare telling of the Grimm brothers’ tale of a strange creature who turns straw into gold in return for the promise of a baby unfolds through telling gestures to David Sawer’s unsettling score. The cast, including an unrecognisable Jane Horrocks as Rumpelstilzchen and Tanya Reynolds (Lily in Sex Education) as the put-upon daughter, bring the whole thing to life with the urgency of their emotion. It’s oddly discomfiting but fascinating to see. Star ratings (out of five) Matthew Bourne’s Nutcracker! ★★★★★ Rumpelstilzchen ★★★★ Matthew Bourne’s Nutcracker! is at Sadler’s Wells, London, until 30 January and touring until 23 April Rumpelstilzchen is on Curzon Cinemas, Sky Arts and FreeviewBack in the age of pen and paper, I started a ‘travelling cookbook’, the idea being that, when we went away on a self-catering jolly – of which there were many back then as I fly-fished for a living – all the handwritten favourite recipes therein would travel with us. One day, I thought, I could pass it on to my children. The internet, and blogs, have now largely done away with a need for it, but it remains a prized, and delicate, member of the family (the children fight over who will get it). In it there is one recipe I’ve never shared, until today, for chocolate pavé, and I bring it to you in the spirit of Christmas, in case you have someone to go and see and are short of a present or just fancy making it for yourself. Unless someone hates chocolate or is allergic to the ingredients, this has never failed to please and its elegance belies how easy it is to make. You take 200g of very good, 70% chocolate and you melt it with 50g of unsalted butter and 60g of cream, in a bowl atop a simmering pan. Take it off the heat then stir in 25g of icing sugar, sieved, and 60g each of crystallised ginger and chopped nuts (pistachios are very good here as are toasted almonds or hazelnuts). Then spoon the mixture into a lightly greased and baking paper lined tin of about 8cm x 26cm. Set in the fridge and, when ready to eat, turn it out, dust with cocoa powder and slice thinly while you quiver with anticipation. Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaBMy son’s in that sweet twilight period of Christmases past; neither completely ignorant of what Christmas is, nor so radically materialistic that he forms his entire year around it. He’s three and a half, whereas my earliest memories of Christmas begin around four, by which point I was so gleefully mercenary I read the Argos catalogue like a holy text and frequently scoured our home for hidden presents as early as summer. This latter activity was merely good operational sense, since I spent much of my childhood being gifted presents for my younger brother Conall, by well-meaning aunties and uncles who couldn’t get my 10 siblings’ and my name, correct. No such event was more traumatising than when he, aged three, was given a double-barrelled Nerf gun with plastic scope, while I, aged six, was given a small train that played nursery rhymes. My father, very much the Pontius Pilate of early 90s Northern Ireland, refused to accept a mistake had been made. This left me to dejectedly push my sad little lullaby locomotive round the living room carpet, while being pelted with foam projectiles by a toddler holding a gun so big he could barely lift it above his knees. My son, on the other hand, is still young enough to enter Christmas with a certain glad cheeriness, but without much in the way of actual expectations. Since my wife and I are both Irish, we refer exclusively to Santa, and it is unclear whether he knows this person is the same one his nursery friends refer to as Father Christmas. We could start referring to him as Father Christmas ourselves, but such an affront to Irish culture would be too traumatic to contemplate, and if anyone back home found out we’d almost certainly have our citizenship revoked. He’s clear that Santa brings presents, and this week he asked if he could draft a letter to that effect. We accepted his demand, with happy thoughts of minting magical Christmas memories. In the event he became quickly distracted, decided he was actually writing to his nana, and then drew a whale, before abandoning it altogether. It leaves us not sure what to get him, but reasonably confident he’ll be happy with anything. And therein lies the rub. I’m fully aware that the season is too commercialised. But for some reason, his ambivalence underwhelms. What do you get the child who’ll take anything? I should be delighted that he has not been corrupted by the materialism of Christmas but, shamefully, I feel the opposite. It’s as if, once it’s been shorn of avarice, some essential aspect of childhood Christmas is missing. I chide myself for being impatient with his reluctance to be as covetous as I was. I should learn to enjoy it while it lasts. It’s either that or we get him an old Argos catalogue. That ought to speed things along. Did Ye Hear Mammy Died? by Séamas O’Reilly is out now (Little, Brown, £16.99). Buy a copy from guardianbookshop at £14.78 Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeatsClive Rowe, 57, has become a living legend as a pantomime dame. A star of musical theatre (as well as being known for his performance as Norman “Duke” Ellington in The Story of Tracy Beaker), he is on his 14th panto at Hackney Empire, London, as Dame Trot in Jack and the Beanstalk, and with his tremendous singing voice, high-pitched innuendoes and generous personality is reaffirming faith in a Christmas institution. He is also, for the first time, with Tony Whittle, co-directing the show. Do you, as King of Panto, get a tremor of anticipation as the season gets under way? While I might love that “King of Panto” accolade, there is an incredible tradition of panto across this country: we’ve so many great dames who are equally wonderful. I just get up there and have fun and am pleased if people have fun too. As to the tremors, I’ve had to quiver for two years as Jack and the Beanstalk was put off because of the pandemic. What makes Jack and the Beanstalk so beguiling as a story? It’s the idea that evil can be beaten by a pure heart. It’s about the joining together of friends. The message is that if you persevere, you can win in the end. That’s a beautiful message. And it’s great to let kids understand that friendship and love are the most powerful things and are still out there. Do you ever feel you’ve had enough of panto and wish you could put it… behind you! Stop it! Stop it! No! I said to one of the company the other day: “I can’t do it if I don’t enjoy it.” Pantomime would be one of the worst things to do if you didn’t enjoy it. How conscious are you, when performing, of Hackney Empire’s extraordinary history? The theatre is now celebrating its 120th birthday. I’m a great believer that energy doesn’t die. I’m not spiritual but the energy that has been in this building vibrates through the brickwork… There have been some great performers at Hackney Empire and we become part of that legacy. It’s such a beautiful theatre – you get out on to that stage and it’s gorgeous. In spite of its size, it feels intimate, you feel very close to the people. Do you live in the borough? I live in south-east London, close to Crystal Palace. I’m not a Hackney man but hope they’ve adopted me by now. What’s your favourite panto costume? My “bags for life” costume this year – it’s so witty and clever – designed by Cleo Pettitt, constructed out of bags. Marks &amp; Spencer has become “Marks and Dentures”, New Look is “Old Look”, Burger King is “Burper King”. You’re definitely a bag lady with a difference. How did co-directing with Tony Whittle (who also plays Councillor Higginbottom, your love interest) work out? When I was first approached, I said: “It’s too big for me as a first-time director.” But I knew Tony and I would get on – we trust each other. My biggest learning curve was people management. I learned there are certain ways to talk to performers to get the best out of them – you can’t approach every actor the same way. As Dame Trot, you pick a male admirer every night from the audience. I’ve always wanted to ask: how do you judge who to pick? It’s completely and utterly random. Some shows are easy, you know who you want and get it absolutely right. There might be a glint in their eye or they might look away. But you want that little bit of shyness. They shouldn’t be scared, but if you see that little blush when you’re talking to them, you know they’re game but not used to it. But you won’t know whether you’ve got it right until you’ve got them stood up. Where were you born? What did your parents do? I was born in Hope hospital in Oldham, Greater Manchester. My mother worked in an Osram lightbulb factory. She left my father when I was very young. There were seven of us – I’m the youngest. I’ve no idea what my father did. I only met him two or three times in my life so I didn’t know him at all. How did your theatre career come about? I went to Oldham College because my mother wanted me to be an intellect – but failed my exams, apart from art. At 17, I’d been doing amateur theatre and told myself if I’d not passed the exams by the time I was 19, I’d apply to drama school, not because I wanted to be a professional actor but because it would give me time to work out what proper job I could do. My plan was to do amateur theatre, then work in a factory or as an electrician. But you got into the Guildhall School of Music and Drama. Was that fun? It was fantastic – it wasn’t heavy, because acting was my hobby. They asked me to be an animal in a zoo. Lots of students complained but I was like: “Absolutely, I’ll be whatever animal you want – I could be working in Warburtons bakery.” I chose a Thornback ray, a little pink fish. All it does is it lies down, then swims a bit, then lies down. I did that for three hours. It was fantastic. You once joked: “My workout routine is getting up from my couch to answer the door to pick up the food that has been delivered.” What will your Christmas dinner consist of? I’ve been invited to a friend’s house and his family lays on a fantastic Christmas dinner. They live about five minutes away. Last time, there were three different types of stuffing. What would you like as a Christmas present? Apart from all the big things such as world peace and the end of Covid – and I’d love those things – I don’t know. I’m incredibly happy and don’t know what I would get that could make me happier. Maybe a promise that I’ll be allowed to work until the day I drop – that’s what I’d like for Christmas. Jack and the Beanstalk is at the Hackney Empire, London, until 2 JanuarySanta Inc (ITV2) | ITV Hub And Just Like That… (Sky Comedy) David Baddiel: Social Media, Anger and Us (BBC Two) | iPlayer Impeachment: American Crime Story (BBC Two) | iPlayer In the realm of stop-motion animation, ITV2’s eight-part US comedy Santa Inc, starring Sarah Silverman and Seth Rogen, is best described as a festive-themed, potty-mouthed Wallace and Gromit. I’m not about to argue for comedy with a swear jar, and profanity is to be expected from an adult animation featuring Silverman and Rogen, but in Santa Inc it’s such a relentless bombardment of pointless crudity (“It’s Christmas fucking Eve”; “You token elf cunt”), the humour is all but flattened, as if by a descending Monty Python foot made of hard old plasticine. For all that, the show, created by Alexandra Rushfield (Shrill), didn’t really deserve its US reception, which was so dire (a 4% audience score on Rotten Tomatoes!) that I sympathise with Rogen’s view that the mainly Jewish-made series, with liberal subtexts, may have been targeted by “white supremacists”. Along with lively animation, it has a strong cast and a decent premise: Santa’s north pole operation restyled as a quasi-Amazon warehouse, complete with rehab-bound celebrity reindeer and overworked employees. Silverman plays Candy Smalls, an elf striving against workplace sexism to be Santa’s successor, while Rogen is an amiable, wannabe progressive Claus, “the coolest, dopest Santa ever”. The cast includes Gabourey Sidibe (Precious) as a frisky reindeer, and Nicholas Braun (Succession) as an overimpressed intern with shades of Cousin Greg. From the two episodes I sampled, where Santa Inc goes awry is in the lazy, dated presumption that subverting the concept of Christmas is all it takes; that we’re all going to be shocked into hilarity by the notion of reindeers addicted to crystal meth, or Santa receiving a blowjob from Mrs Claus (under his robe, small mercies). The show is funnier when it stops trying to be a yuletide South Park, and sweeter and sharper in its throwaway moments: Santa arriving in a snow globe vehicle; a snowflake who whinges: “This is harassment.” Santa Inc doesn’t warrant its online kicking, but it remains a cracker in search of a bang. Over to Sky Comedy, where And Just Like That… , the 10-part Sex and the City sequel, with Michael Patrick King at the helm, arrived saddled with differing expectations. High, because of the at times inspired TV series about men-obsessed New York thirtysomethings that ran from 1998 to 2004. Low, because of the subsequent film spin-offs, of which the execrable Sex and the City 2 was like being menaced by a zombie franchise clomping towards you in tattered Manolo Blahniks. The now-fiftysomething leads, Carrie (Sarah Jessica Parker), Charlotte (Kristin Davis) and Miranda (Cynthia Nixon), are all married, while the ultra-libidinous Samantha is awol, thanks to real-life froideur between Parker and Kim Cattrall – an absence lamely explained here as a professional spat, which is surely an opportunity missed. Samantha should have been crushed to death at an overexuberant orgy. I wanted to enjoy this (why shouldn’t an aged-up SATC be funny?), but having viewed the first two episodes, I’m thus far underwhelmed. The fashion is creaky (at one point Carrie channels Norma Desmond through Molly Parkin), it’s unconfident about things like age (Miranda’s grey hair; Carrie’s primness on a sex podcast), and it tackles its own narrow, privileged Big Apple past too simplistically in the form of new diverse characters. Miranda, returning to college, shares excruciating scenes with her lecturer (Nya Wallace, played by Karen Pittman), but would a former New York lawyer really start babbling about a black woman’s hair braids? Conversely – spoiler alert – when Carrie’s husband, erstwhile toxic bachelor “Big” (Chris Noth), perishes after a Peloton bike session (resulting in a real-life rushed-out Peloton ad depicting him running off with the instructor), it’s all screen tumbleweed and scant pathos. Let’s hope And Just Like That… improves with the speed and ease its title suggests. In the BBC Two documentary David Baddiel: Social Media, Anger and Us, the comedian and author, who has more than 790,000 Twitter followers, pondered the toxic effects of social media, saying: “I want to find out if something originally designed to help us talk to each other is just leading to everyone shouting at each other.” While acknowledging social media’s uses as a marketing tool/ communications forum/ ego massage, Baddiel also explored the darker sides: rage (the documentary opened with a TikTok family’s car being firebombed), algorithms and cancel culture (“The revenge of the forgotten?” wondered stylist Ayishat Akanbi); lack of regulation and ever sinister sociopolitical forces; the vulnerability of users such as Baddiel’s daughter, Dolly, who spoke eloquently of how her past struggles with anorexia were exacerbated by social media’s lure of an off-the-peg identity. Along the way, Baddiel had his brain scanned as he was pelted with positive tweets (cue dopamine hits) and abusive ones (fight or flight). He also took a Twitter break, later “readdicting himself”. This was an ambitious documentary that endeavoured to place everything (big tech, global politics, human nature itself) on the same microscope slide. Social media emerged, as it always does, as a vast, grinning, grimy genie that, for good or ill, has escaped from a bottle long since smashed. Still on BBC Two, Impeachment, American Crime Story’s 10-part retelling of Monica Lewinsky’s affair with Bill Clinton, has felt sluggish at times. However good Sarah Paulson’s portrayal of Lewinsky’s betrayer-in-chief, the gruesome, self-important Linda Tripp, there’s been far too much time spent watching her trudge to her Pentagon work cubicle with her calorie-controlled lunch. In this penultimate episode, Lewinsky (Beanie Feldstein) faces the grand jury. Bombarded with humiliating questions – “Did the president stimulate your genitals?” – she drifts away to stunned near silence. Feldstein has portrayed Lewinsky delicately but justly, keeping the focus on her. Clinton (Clive Owen) is rightly relegated to a mere plot device, grovelling for his wife’s forgiveness: “Twenty-five years – you’re the only one whose opinion I give a shit about.” It took its sweet time, but finally, with this episode, Impeachment became a woman’s story; a rousing of feminine furies. What else I’m watching… Succession (Sky Atlantic) Succession has a gift for amazing series finales, and this one soared and convulsed: a full-blown family opera of confession, breakdown and brazen Judas moves that changed everything. Flawless performances all round, but Kieran Culkin’s bruised, squirming Roman was a revelation. The Witcher (Netflix) Season two of the fantasy epic starring Henry Cavill and Freya Allan, full of brooding kings, wafting sorceresses, elves, grunting sword fights in studded armour, swirling, ominous mists and intense women with mysterious powers. Superior magick for those that like it. I’m a Celebrity… Get Me Out of Here! final (ITV) Won by Danny Miller (Emmerdale). Thank you, Wales, but that’s quite enough of the draughty castle vibe. Might the show return to Australia for 2022? Richard Madeley (taken ill this series) could return and do his full shift.Walking to meet Louise Glazebrook, I see dogs everywhere, even in central London, even on a rainy weekday lunchtime. A Shiba Inu in a neatly belted mac trots past; a shaggy sphere on its owner’s lap in a café peers through a dense fringe at her pastry; a sleek sausage shimmies, belly grazing puddles. There are more dogs than ever in Britain now – around 12.5m, following an unprecedented pandemic boom (the Dog’s Trust estimates around 1.5m extra dogs were acquired in the past 18 months) as we sought solace at a frightening, lonely time in man’s best friend. But for every wholesome dog and owner in matching onesies on Instagram, or adorably clever TikTok trick, there’s an ankle punctured by razor-sharp puppy teeth, a rug heading for the bin, a shoe concealing an unpleasant surprise or a neighbour grimly purchasing a value pack of earplugs. And it’s far worse than that: many lockdown dogs – some bred in appalling conditions and sold by criminally irresponsible dealers, seeding behavioural problems for the future – are being surrendered to shelters as their owners realise they were unprepared for dog ownership and unable to cope with their pet’s needs. It’s a disaster for dogs and terribly sad for us. We need emergency relationship therapy, which is where Glazebrook comes in. She’s a dog behaviourist, but there’s as much human as dog behaviour involved in her work. A canine-human Esther Perel, she’s adept at unpicking how we misunderstand each other, then offering compassionate, sensible solutions and strategies. Unsurprisingly, Glazebrook is more in demand than ever – people are desperate. She’s had calls in the middle of the night and even on Christmas Day. “I had someone tying their dog outside our front door trying to leave it,” she tells me over coffee. We’re both, sadly, dogless: Pip – her rescue collie – is at home; so is my ancient whippet Oscar. I get it, I’ve seen it. In addition to her private clients (from families to celebrities), puppy classes and online courses with her Darling Dog Company, Glazebrook is a BBC regular, troubleshooting all manner of canine conundrums. Most recently she appeared on 12 Puppies and Us, which followed the ups and downs of a dozen families and their pandemic pups. You see the stressed owners’ shoulders drop in relief as she takes charge. A confident, kind, never-judgmental presence, she is passionately dog-centred, but realistic about what stretched families can manage. Her solutions can be as simple as giving a dog a quiet space away from the overload of family life or making sure a puppy is getting enough sleep. “We’re all going through different things in our lives,” she says. “A massive part of my job is going, ‘OK, that’s the ideal situation, but that’s not going to happen. So what’s realistic and how can we make a difference?’” Now we can all get a bit of Glazebrook wisdom without calling her at midnight. The Book Your Dog Wishes You Would Read is a passion project, planned before Covid but given new urgency by everything Glazebrook witnessed during. Writing it (in 12-hour shifts in a friend’s office) was “intense” she says. “I actually got really emotional, because I saw in lockdown what we as a society were doing to dogs. I remember sitting there one night just crying – we call ourselves a nation of dog lovers, yet essentially, we’re fucking them over. It felt like this really horrible moment for dogs.” That doesn’t mean it’s a grim read – the book is packed with positive, practical advice. Yes, Glazebrook has firm views and clear rules. If you’re getting a puppy, it must be at eight weeks, and you must devote a big chunk of time to settling any dog in. She includes non-negotiable red flags for breeders you should walk away from (you absolutely must see a puppy in a home setting with its mother; service station handovers, no photos and trembly pups are complete no-nos). Glazebrook was horrified at how the pandemic allowed unscrupulous puppy farms to flourish and is desperate for this cruel trade to end. But mainly, her absolute, infectious delight in dogs is apparent on every page (there are surprises, too: I had no idea licking you can be a polite dog way of saying “go away”). Play is central to Glazebrook’s philosophy and the book is joyfully filled with play suggestions: cardboard boxes, “go find it” challenges and sensory games. She’s light years away from the macho Cesar Millán school of “alpha dog” domination and far too glamorous to be labelled the “new Barbara Woodhouse”. At 40, she’s too young to remember those sturdy tweeds and stentorian Home Counties tones. “We don’t have to command them,” she says. “It should be a relationship.” I’m interested in the doggy relationships that have shaped her. Glazebrook was, she says, born dog mad. “My mum and dad say I have always been obsessed, even when I was two.” Her first love was Buster, her grandparents’ working Labrador (“they gave him a cup of tea every night, I vividly remember that.”) Next came Gus, a neighbour’s “big, black, frisky Labrador” who Glazebrook basically adopted. “They let me have him all the time. After school I would go and get him. He would play with me in the garden; I would walk him; I would do training stuff with him…” Already at school she was desperate to work with dogs. “Everyone else wanted to be a lawyer or a doctor or whatever, it was not really the done thing.” She studied sociology and childhood studies, “But at university, I became obsessed with the security dogs, I started taking them out and exercising them!” Her work as a toy industry researcher focused on play has clearly not gone to waste, but Glazebrook spent all her wages and spare time on dog training courses and placements. She volunteered in council kennels, walking dogs on “death row. I wanted them to have a last walk.” Then, after a stint working with street dogs in India, Glazebrook started running the Dogs Trust’s Take the Lead programme, working with young offenders and rescue dogs. That experience gave her vital insights into what can influence our relationship with dogs. “I remember there was this young kid who I was talking to about how would we start trying to get this particular rescue dog to drop a ball. He said, ‘Well, you would kick it.’ I said, ‘Why would you do that?’ and he said, ‘Well, if I’ve got something and I don’t listen, my dad kicks me.’ At that point, you just go, well, that makes complete sense. Those courses were incredible for realising that we’re not all coming at it from the same place; we’re all coming at it from different angles.” Glazebrook’s professional experiences have been complemented by a long line of beloved fostered and adopted dogs, from Henry, a mysterious Great Dane-Boxer mash -up found during the Dalston riots who eventually found a home in the country (“He took a bit of my heart with him”), to deaf bulldog Cookie. Cookie was the first dog Glazebrook and her husband got together, “our angel dog” who over 10 years saw them through the birth of their two children. The unbearably sad, but necessary, last chapter of the book on end of life, touches on the heart-rending decision to have Cookie put to sleep. “The loss is so huge. I think honestly it took about two years for me to be able to process.” After Cookie there was Fred, a 65kg rescue Great Dane, and Barnie, her parents’ “hilarious” bulldog, who was rehomed after being provoked into snapping at children in his previous home. It’s a whole sequence of love, learning and loss that has helped shape her philosophy: if we’re unique, strange individuals, so are dogs. “With every dog you learn something new,” she says. Her husband must like dogs, I hazard? They have been together since they were 17 and his childhood spaniels also formed part of Glazebrook’s doggy education. “He loves them. He’d be absolutely screwed if he didn’t.” Now Pip, a smooth-coated rescue collie, shares their east London home (plus two kittens found in a freezer, and Walter the rescue tortoise). The decision to bring Pip into their lives perfectly illustrates what Glazebrook preaches most fervently – it’s vital to analyse and understand your circumstances before you choose a dog, rather than picking a breed you think looks cool, and ending up with a dog that is incompatible with your lifestyle, making everyone miserable. Some of the most intractably difficult and sad situations Glazebrook sees are where someone buys a working dog without being able to give it the hours of exercise and stimulation those breeds need. Sometimes in these cases there is no happy resolution possible. This is what she’d most like people to take away from the book. “Considering what you are going to bring into your life is your job. The dog can’t do it!” Glazebrook’s son wanted a Labrador puppy, but her daughter, then aged five, is autistic and has sensory processing disorder and it was not the right time or set of circumstances to bring a puppy into the home. Of Pip she says: “As a visual, he’s not a dog I would necessarily be drawn to,” but she took her own advice. She recommends clients consider every dog on rescue websites, not just the ones that appeal instantly. After a long, careful search, Glazebrook met Pip. “I just knew straight away that he would be ideal and we could make him really happy.” After two years in surely the best home any dog could dream of, that’s apparent from his appearances on her Instagram stories. A gentle, slightly tentative-looking soul, Pip has blossomed and relaxed, learning to enjoy ripping up cardboard boxes in search of treats and becoming truly playful. Her focus on play is a shaming revelation for me. I did not really realise how vital it is, even for adult dogs. Beyond chucking balls or toys for Oscar to retrieve, we don’t play much. I feel sad realising how much he’s missed and can’t resist asking for a few tips. Glazebrook gets instantly caught up in working out a gentle play routine for my ball-obsessed old man who can’t manage the frenetic fetching he used to love. At one point, she folds her napkin to show me how to hide treats for him and recommends calming chews soft enough for his elderly teeth. “I bet everyone does this,” I say, sheepishly. She nods: they do. Like any therapist, she’s had to get better at setting boundaries. Spending time under the skin of a dog-person relationship can be intense, whether it’s young offenders or A-listers. “You’re getting so involved in people’s lives… you’re invited into people’s homes. I love it, I’m quite nosy and always have been, and that’s a massive privilege, but equally it is a massive responsibility. And it comes with that feeling of offloading.” Hopefully the book will help, but in our dog-obsessed, dog-confused age, I doubt Glazebrook will get a breather any time soon. Thankfully, I don’t think she minds much. “I just think there’s a wonder about them. The love they give you is incredible.” The Book Your Dog Wishes You Would Read by Louise Glazebrook is published by Orion at £14.99. Buy a copy for £13.04 at guardianbookshop.com Styling by Hope Lawrie; green dress from a selection to hire, Ghost at byrotation.com; trainers veja-store.com; red crepe dress Ganni at fenwick.co.uk; hair and makeup by Juliana Sergot using Bumble &amp; Bumble and skincare by Dermalogica; shot at Holborn studioEach time I’ve gone for a Covid jab, I’ve walked out with a warm glow. It wasn’t just relief to have the protection, or awe at the scientific feats that were pulled off to get a vaccine in my arm, but a sense of national pride in the NHS, an institution that is collectively ours, there for us in good times and bad. Just seeing the NHS’s distinctive blue-and-white logo is enough to make my heart swell a little. I am far from alone. Britons feel more proud of the NHS than we do of the royal family or the armed forces. It’s been a constant source of frustration for the supposedly patriotic political right over the past 40 years, leading former chancellor Nigel Lawson to coin the cliche of the NHS as an English religion in the early 1990s. According to them, our soppy sentimentalism is holding the country back from getting the healthcare we need. Times have changed: recent years have brought us the phenomenon of Tory health ministers proudly sporting that logo on pin badges on their lapels. But there remain a number of politicians and commentators who are cynically using the pandemic to argue that the NHS is structurally unsound and in need of major reform. The argument goes like this. We are spending more on the NHS than ever. Too much is eaten up by bureaucracy. If we keep on at this rate, NHS demand will eventually crowd out spending on things like schools and the police. But despite all that record-breaking resource, we suffer inferior health outcomes than many of our European neighbours. The pandemic has made things worse, and the only way to fix this is to do the unthinkable: break up the NHS. Its proponents present themselves as cool-headed rationalists battling the pathetically romantic predilections of a nation. But the reality is that their argument is as ideologically fuelled as arguments come, and it relies on some highly disingenuous sleights of hand. First, on spending: their analyses draw on 2020 data to argue that the UK spends more on health than any other European country as a proportion of GDP. But the year of coronavirus is a terrible year to draw international comparisons: that spending includes all the extraordinary pandemic costs such as test and trace and protective equipment, while the GDP hit by the pandemic varied hugely across countries. The UK had to spend more than countries which already had a much better public health infrastructure. We also got terrible value for money in some areas, thanks to dreadful contracting decisions that had nothing to do with the NHS; and I haven’t seen many argue we should have spent less on vaccines. Long-term data show just how efficient the NHS is. We spend significantly less per person than comparable countries such as Germany, France, Switzerland and Sweden. We have far fewer hospital beds a head, way below Germany, France and Austria, and fewer doctors and nurses a head than the OECD average. Pro-marketisation proponents argue that too much goes on pencil-pushers. (Would they really want to be treated in a hospital populated with frontline clinicians, but no managers?) The 2012 NHS reforms that tried to introduce more competition and are now in the process of being reversed ended up creating more bureaucratic inefficiencies, not to mention a huge one-off price tag. The second sleight of hand is to ignore why Britain has poorer health outcomes than some of our neighbours, for example on infant mortality and cancer survival rates. These outcomes are more a product of societal factors – levels of obesity, economic inequality and air pollution, for example – than a reliable guide to the quality of a country’s healthcare system. Quality of care obviously has an impact, but it is generally good, and often outstanding, in the NHS. That’s not to say there aren’t pockets of low standards of care – just look at the recent spate of hospital baby death scandals – but why would ripping up the system do more to address these than focusing on more granular issues such as cultures around safety, addressing gaping staff shortages, and quality of leadership? “Almost every paper I’ve read says broadly the same thing: there’s no single form of healthcare system that’s demonstrably better or worse than another, and the costs of transitioning to another system are huge,” I’m told by Siva Anandaciva, chief analyst at independent health thinktank The King’s Fund. The real story is this. Until 2010, the NHS had historically been given real-terms funding increases of 4% a year on average: not a sign of inefficiency, but of the fact that countries spend more on healthcare as they get richer, cutting-edge health technologies become more expensive over time, and ageing societies have more people who need more healthcare. However, over the past decade, the NHS has received the tightest funding settlement in its history, way below this average. Recently announced cash injections will help but do not fill the gap or fix a lasting legacy of old and dated equipment, pay and recruitment freezes that have left the NHS severely understaffed, and a lack of capacity that meant non-critical operations, such as hip surgery, were being suspended during winter crises well before the pandemic hit. The real danger from the anti-NHS ideologues is not that they succeed in getting a big-bang break up of the NHS but that they help hawkish politicians such as Rishi Sunak to succeed in winning the crazy argument that we are spending too much on our health. A myth of this pandemic is that there will be a moment when the NHS implodes: there one minute, not the next. Reality is far more insidious: the guarantee that the NHS is there for you when you need it might succumb to gradual erosion as waiting lists soar, repeat surgery is cancelled and ambulance waiting times grow dangerously long. As this continues, more of those who can afford to will opt out of the service, undermining the NHS creed of universality. That is the ultimate prize for some on the right who would like to see the NHS become a residual safety net rather than the institution to which we collectively turn in times of need. • Sonia Sodha is an Observer columnistBrexit minister Lord Frost’s late Saturday night resignation prompted frenzied reaction on social media including a lively row on a Conservative party Whatsapp group ending with culture secretary Nadine Dorries being deleted by former chair of Brexit supporting backbenchers in the European Research Group. Some welcomed Frost’s departure, others immediately went to leadership questions. Here’s what they said: Nigel Farage, former head of UK Independence party and Brexit leader: “Lord Frost is leaving the government because he is a conservative and true Brexiteer. Boris Johnson is neither” – Twitter Dominic Cummings, former adviser to Boris Johnson: “Frosty built a great team, with great officials &amp; spads working harmoniously, to do an outstanding job in extremely tough circumstances given the [PM] wd smash &amp; crash hourly, promise us Churchillian resolution then collapse, &amp; wd never read the papers” – Twitter And that Tory WhatsApp group row: The row on the Whatsapp Conservative Party Whatsapp group, Clean Global Brexit, as revealed by Sky News’s Sam Coates. Theresa Villiers, former Northern Ireland secretary: “Very worrying that Lord Frost has gone.” Andrew Bridgen, backbencher and Brexiter: “Worrying? It’s a disaster. Lord Frost was concerned about the policy direction of the gov. So are most of the Conservative backbenchers.” Marcus Fysh, backbencher, in reply: “Frost is a hero and 100% right on this. The whole point of Brexit is radical supply side reform and moving away from the EU model, yet ministers are happy just to give hard won power put in their hands to achieve this to officials who will do the opposite.” Geoffrey Clifton-Brown, backbencher, in response: “This is a further hammer blow to the PM. He desperately needs a really strong adviser at No 10 who he can trust. Probably from the Brexit team. A leadership challenge is not the answer at the moment because all the same underlying problems will be there.” Culture secretary Nadine Dorries, in response: “The hero is the Prime Minister who delivered Brexit. I’m aware as someone said today that regicide is in the DNA of the Conservative party, but a bit of loyalty to the person who won an 83 majority and delivered Brexit wouldn’t go amiss.” Steve Baker, former chair of the ERG, then deleted Dorries from the group, saying: “Enough is enough.” Andrew Bridgen: “About time, thanks Steve.” Andrew Bridgen again: “The Prime Minister is running out of time and out of friends to deliver on the promises and discipline of a true Conservative Government. “Lord Frost has made it clear, 100 Conservative backbenchers have made it clear, but most importantly so did the people of North Shropshire.” – Twitter Simon Hoare, chair of the Northern Ireland affairs committee: “I can’t say I’m sorry. He was unsuited to the “doing of politics”, never understood the need for personal rapport or the importance of trust. I hope whoever takes over will be from the Commons where we can all question directly.” – Twitter Nikki da Costa, former former director of legislative affairs at No 10: “Lord Frost is one of the most disciplined, focused, and strategic individuals I have ever met. A formidable brain but also a leader who, with Oliver Lewis, brought together talented officials to deliver the impossible. He has nerves of steel and somehow gave us faith to wait.” – Twitter Lady Hoey, former Labour MP and Brexiter fighting Northern Ireland protocol in the courts: “Terrible news. The only Minister who understood the protocol couldn’t work. Brilliant in the Lords with the many many EU zealots and Rejoiners Calm and thoughtful. A big blow to Government – shows how far they have moved away from Taking Back Control over Protocol.” – Twitter. Arlene Foster, former DUP leader: “The resignation of Lord Frost from the cabinet is a big moment for the Government but enormous for those of us who believed he would deliver for NI. Wishing him all the best.” – Twitter Julian Smith, former Northern Ireland secretary: “The interests of Northern Ireland – across community now has to be the priority as the government finalises its negotiations with the EU. Pragmatism and solutions for both unionists and nationalists is key. Dogma has run its course” – Twitter Lionel Barber, former editor of the Financial Times: “So farewell, Lord Frost You did a lot of damage in a very short time. Your timing is as opportunistic as ever (E.J Thribb)” – TwitterHe may have hung up his pencil in 2020, but Richard Rogers was never the retiring type. The architect made his name with buildings that exploded their inner workings on to their outsides, dressing galleries and offices with rainbow symphonies of ducts and pipes. He became known for an equally colourful neon wardrobe, along with his love of public debate and bon viveur lifestyle. Not that the pencil was ever Rogers’ favoured tool. He had always been, by his own admission, a terrible draughtsman, and he was dyslexic. He preferred to talk, ideally over a glass of wine and good Italian food. A tutor’s report from 1958 concluded: “His designs will continue to suffer while his drawing is so bad, his method of work so chaotic and his critical judgment so inarticulate.” Yet in his four decades in practice, and as an advisor to government, Lord Rogers of Riverside probably influenced the face of urban Britain more than any other architect of the late 20th century. He might be best known for his “inside-out” monuments to pipes: the magnificent Pompidou Centre in Paris and the still-thrilling Lloyd’s building in London. But his impact in the UK has been less about his own buildings and more to do with his influence on public policy, particularly under New Labour in the early 2000s. As chair of the Urban Task Force, he ushered in the era of regeneration that has seen UK cities adorned with canal-side apartments and cafe-lined squares, a vision of Barcelona street life transplanted to British shores, sometimes at a cost to existing communities. His image of the “compact city” was presented as one of inclusivity and equality, but it would also foster greater displacement and division, producing a form of investment-fuelled development that has seen his own practice design some of the most expensive housing ever built in the UK. While the socialist Labour peer argued for a city for all, Rogers Stirk Harbour and Partners were designing the fortified luxury apartment schemes of One Hyde Park, Neo Bankside and Riverlight, stacks of investment units that became symbols of London’s extreme inequality. Although his name has always been above the door of the partnership, Rogers himself had little to do with the office’s increasingly corporate work of the last decade or so. His early buildings remain by far the most compelling – perhaps none more so than his first major project. Erupting like a psychedelic oil refinery in the middle of the Marais, the Pompidou Centre was a shock to Parisian tastes when it opened in 1977, and it is no less startling today. Designed with Italian architect Renzo Piano, it was conceived as a mechanical transformer of a building, a new kind of robotic architecture that would respond to changing needs, with plug-in components and moving floors. Huge digital screens would entertain crowds on a great sloping piazza outside, while escalators in glass tubes would shuttle people up and down the building’s facade, forming a dynamic backdrop to the mime artists and musicians below. It was saturated with colour, its exposed pipes and ducts painted in the bright reds, blues and greens of the media age – a feature that would continue in Rogers’ work for years to come. The point, he said, was that “culture should be fun”. It had a bumpy ride: the screens were dropped, the floors didn’t move and fire regulations curtailed some of the more daring ideas. Pressure groups filed lawsuits against the project, while a Guardian art critic said the “hideous” object should be covered with virginia creeper. But the architects were vindicated by the public reaction: around seven million people visited in the first year, more than the Louvre and Eiffel Tower combined. The building set the mould for museum galleries to be conceived as gigantic flexible containers and it provided a premonition of the city-boosting statement cultural architecture that would be at the top of every mayor’s shopping list for years to come. The French tanker of art also set the aesthetic and ideological agenda for Rogers’ practice. Structure would be exposed – and jauntily painted – and express what it was doing, in as didactic a way as possible. The ambition was to make buildings lighter and more flexible, to minimise structure while maximising space and light, and reduce demands on energy and the natural environment, in pursuit of a technological sublime. In London, the sculptural potentials of this hi-tech age were first proven in the new HQ for insurance giant Lloyd’s of London, completed in 1986. With floors clustered around a 60-metre high atrium, lit by a barrel-vaulted glass roof, its most radical move was to place the service cores outside the building in a series of towers. This freed up more floor space for desks, and let Rogers revel in the dynamic interplay of staircases, glass lifts and toilet pods on the facade, in a polished frenzy of stainless steel. Twenty-seven years later, the firm would explore the same ideas across the street, in steroidal form, with the Leadenhall building. Nicknamed the Cheesegrater, its services are again shuffled to one side to free up floorspace and create an animated ballet of lifts on the facade – almost three times the height of Lloyd’s. In a nod to Rogers’ many pronouncements on the importance of public space, the tower was jacked up on 30-metre-tall legs to free the space below, although the resulting plaza feels more like a high-security open-air lobby. None of his designs have quite matched the visceral thrill of the Pompidou or Lloyd’s, but Rogers continued to produce elegant and engaging public buildings, from law courts in Bordeaux and Antwerp to the Senedd building in Wales, where an image of transparency and public accessibility were always central. His tensile white tent for the Millennium Dome, while ridiculed at the time, has gone on to house one of the most successful live performance venues in the world, as the O2 Arena. My favourite is Rogers’ terminal for Madrid-Barajas airport, for which he won the Stirling prize in 2006. It is rare for an airport terminal to be a place you might actually want to stay for a while, rather than escape as soon as possible. With its undulating bamboo roof floating above an avenue of branching rainbow-coloured columns, it is a calming place that soothes the stress of international travel. It took just eight years from conception to completion, a stark contrast to his practice’s scheme for Heathrow Terminal 5, which was subjected to the longest public inquiry in British history and took 19 years to be built. As a result, it seemed outdated by the time it opened. I first encountered Rogers while working at London’s City Hall in the mid-2000s, when he was chief adviser on architecture and urbanism to then-mayor Ken Livingstone. He would come in every now and then to review our work, and occasionally take the team out for a boozy lunch. I remember offering him some water one lunchtime, at which he looked aghast. “I don’t drink water,” he exclaimed with a beam, clutching a glass of white wine in one hand, and a glass of red in the other. “Fish fuck in it.” • This article was amended on 1 and 3 September 2020 to clarify elements of the design of the Lloyd’s building, and to correct a reference to the Welsh National Assembly, the former name of the Senedd.When Ghislaine Maxwell’s defense case started last Thursday, her team tried pulling off a near-impossible task – making the British socialite accused of sex trafficking seem likable. Indeed, the first defense witness in Maxwell’s Manhattan federal court sex-trafficking trial, former assistant Cimberly Espinosa, described her ex-boss in glowing terms. “I highly respected Ghislaine. I looked up to her very much and I actually learned a lot from her,” Espinosa testified, later commenting: “She treated me fair and nice and it was fun.” Maxwell’s lawyers didn’t have to call Espinosa, of course – they don’t have to do anything, let alone mount this sort of courtroom crisis PR campaign. Prosecutors must prove their case beyond a reasonable doubt and the defense doesn’t have to prove innocence. Yet now that the legal drama is entering its final stages, even the fairest of jurors likely won’t be able to ignore prosecutors’ attempted portrayal of Maxwell as a privileged socialite. Prosecutors contend that Maxwell committed crimes to preserve her gilded lifestyle alongside disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein, so this characterization might color how jurors now weigh the case. The defense’s mounting of a campaign on likability – a common courtroom tactic – is a response to that prosecution attack. If Maxwell were more likable to jurors, there just might be a slight chance that the baggage associated with wealth doesn’t completely weigh her down. Hence the importance of statements from Espinosa, which cast Maxwell as a friend of the working woman who helped her staff out. “I attribute my career right now as an executive assistant to what I learned supporting Ghislaine,”Espinosa said. Maxwell, 59, is being tried for six counts related to her alleged involvement in Epstein’s sexual abuse of minor teens. Maxwell was apprehended at a tony New Hampshire property in July 2020. She maintains her innocence. Epstein, a convicted sex offender whose high-profile and rich associates included former US presidents Donald Trump and Bill Clinton, as well as Prince Andrew, killed himself in a New York City federal jail more than two years ago, while waiting on his own sex-trafficking trial. Closing statements in Maxwell’s case are scheduled to start on Monday. Maxwell worked to satisfy Epstein’s many whims, from shipping sand and palm trees to his private island, to stocking all his homes with a preferred bread. By describing Maxwell’s work ethic as tireless, Espinosa cast her more like Epstein’s employee than his high-flying equal. On Friday, testimony from another former assistant sought to foster Maxwell’s likability. Michelle Healy, who worked at Epstein’s New York City office from 1996 to 1999, said he and Maxwell were her bosses. “She’s fantastic,” Healy said of Maxwell. “She taught me a lot. I respected her. She was tough, but she was great.” Defense attorney lawyer Laura Menninger asked Healy questions to rebut testimony from the former house manager of Epstein’s Palm Beach mansion. That manager, Juan Alessi, had alleged that Maxwell instructed him to never look Epstein in the eyes. Menninger asked: Did Maxwell ever warn people against looking her in the eye? Did Maxwell ever give her orders on how she could speak with people? “No,” Healy said. Healy said that she hadn’t worked out of Epstein’s other properties and had only been to his New Mexico ranch once due to a family emergency. Her description of this visit also portrayed Maxwell as magnanimous. “The only time I went to Zorro Ranch … my sister got into a very bad car accident and broke her jaw,” Healy said. “And Ghislaine was kind enough to take me there.” Espinosa and Healy’s positive portrayals aren’t surprising, considering that lead attorney Bobbi Sternheim addressed Maxwell’s wealth in her opening statement. “You’ve heard many negative things about Ghislaine Maxwell and the evidence is going to show many exceptional things about Ghislaine Maxwell – well educated, well traveled, a graduate of Oxford,” Sternheim told jurors. “She socialized with extraordinary people, she can pilot a helicopter, she speaks numerous languages and she has worked her entire adult life.” “She is being pegged as the rich girl, the socialite,” Sternheim argued. “But privileged background, comfortable lifestyle, status – they may be things that easily check the wrong box, but they are not crimes.”Canada’s largest port is shut down. Highways have snapped, buckled and crumbled. Bridges are washed into raging rivers and landslides rumble down mountainsides, burying cars and stranding travellers. Rail lines linking the west coast to the rest of North America are damaged. Oil pipelines cease operating. Three years ago, officials at Vancouver’s main transport hubs were told to prepare for a scenario in which nearly 3 million people in south-western British Columbia were cut off from the rest of the country. Those warnings became a reality in mid-November when the region was hit by record rainfall, flooding and landslides. But in their meeting, officials had gathered to plan for a far more devastating disaster: a powerful earthquake, known as the Big One, that has long been predicted to strike the region. The widespread destruction from the flooding has highlighted the vulnerability of the region’s infrastructure, but experts warn that if the province fails to learn from the current crisis, it faces larger, deadlier and costlier disasters in the future. Geologists say a massive earthquake will almost certainly hit south-western British Columbia in the coming years, with the odds as high as 30% over the next half-century. Residents have long feared the Big One, a rupture of the Cascadia subduction zone far offshore that will unleash a tsunami and inflict widespread destruction.As many as 10,000 people could die in southern British Columbia and the Pacific north-west of the United States. Fires alone could cause as much as C$10bn in damage. Water lines will be severed. First responders could be unable even to leave their stations. The last large quake in the area – the Cascadia megathrust in 1700 – was strong enough for its effects to be felt all the way across the Pacific in Japan. But the Cascadia plate boundary has been “eerily quiet” for many years, said Edwin Nissen, a seismologist at the University of Victoria. “Most people here likely haven’t actually felt an earthquake in their lifetime. And so they’re a bit disconnected from what could happen.” Even a smaller quake could prove catastrophic if it strikes closer to an urban centre. “The danger is that there could be a bullseye hit on one city,” said Nissen, pointing to the 2011 quake that struck Christchurch, New Zealand, the effects of which are still visible a decade later. “A localized quake could be far more devastating even than the Big One.” But experts also say the recent flooding in the province has given the region a rare glimpse into its fragility – and a chance to fix that. “People don’t appreciate the importance of critical infrastructure until you see a flaw in it,” said Jean Slick, head of the disaster management program at Victoria’s Royal Roads university. “When they’re in our own back yard, it gives us this opportunity to understand the threat in a completely different way.” Officials in British Columbia have faced criticism for never activating the mobile emergency alert system even as it became clear that days of heavy rain would have a devastating effect on communities. Meanwhile, evidence suggests the province knew its diking system, which failed, wasn’t up to standard. Residents forced from flood-ravaged areas detailed days of confusion when searching for shelter. One month after the floods, British Columbia remains in a state of emergency. At least one major highway system will take months to fully repair and thousands have lost their homes. Landscapes have been altered and the route of at least one major river has changed. But as the province begins the difficult task of cleaning up and rebuilding, experts hope the floods will also help the public understand the risks that emerge from urban planning decisions. “When you get the premier and ministers saying this is a natural disaster, we’re left thinking that nature did this to us. But there are no natural disasters. Flooding is a natural hazard. We build and live and work in floodplains. We’re the ones that create disaster risk,” she said. “The question is, how do we live with risk?” Slick, who served as an expert adviser on the BC auditor general’s report into the province’s earthquake preparedness, says recent events have had a “focusing” effect on how people understand natural hazards and risk. Empty store shelves and panic buying from both the pandemic and floods have exposed the costs of ignored warnings and the importance of preparing for future crises. “When we rebuild, let’s not put blinders on and just focus on floods. Let’s make sure that we’re considering all hazards, like climate risks and earthquakes,” she said. But rebuilding often comes with an eagerness to return to normal as quickly as possible. “There’s going to be a rush to rebuild, and [there’s pressure] to put things back the way they were before,” said Glenn McGillivary, managing director of the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. “But is anybody going to stop and say, ‘Hey, wait a minute, why don’t we build this thing better, so we’re not doing this again in two more years?” Even simple changes can lead to outsized benefits. As one of the province’s natural gas providers upgrades its metering system, McGillivary and others have called for seismic shut-offs to be installed on every line, as is common in Japan, to prevent fires after an earthquake. But previous studies suggests British Columbia remains unprepared for a large tremor. “We know that there will be a big earthquake, but we’re still not as prepared as we should be. And scientists are saying atmospheric rivers will get much stronger due climate change and flooding would get much worse,” said Nissen. “That next big earthquake could be 100 years away. That’s not even in our lifetime. It almost feels hypothetical,” he said. “The cost of doing something is astronomical. But the cost of doing nothing is even worse.” • This article was amended on 19 December 2021. An earlier version said that gas is rationed in major coastal cities. In fact those restrictions ended on 15 December 2021.I was asked to write about bell hooks’ life and legacy but I realized it would not be true to the spirit of how she lived for any one person to sum her up. Instead I have gathered a communal offering of memory, friendship, loss and love for the visionary we’ve lost. bell spent her life standing up against “imperialist white supremacist capitalist patriarchy” – a phrase she said she didn’t much like but which connected all the forms of domination that are enslaving us in the world today. I watched her create, along with other women, a vision of Black feminism that invigorated an entire generation. She taught me personally about so many things: decolonization, the tyranny and trap of masculinity, how love must be our guiding principle in all that we do, the roles white women can and can’t play in this movement. bell once wrote that “one of the most vital ways we sustain ourselves is by building communities of resistance, places where we know we are not alone”. So I reached out to gather some memories from, as Stephanie Troutman says, “the beloved community bell helped to create”. – V (formerly Eve Ensler) Tamura Lomax, PhD I would not be a Black feminist if it were not for bell hooks. The Feminist Wire would not exist without hooks’ urging to “talk back”. I came to Black radical resistance through her. While social media didn’t always value hooks (we will talk about this more honestly one day – in fact, after her critique of Beyoncé and capitalism folks were quite vicious), I would venture to say there would be no hashtag or internet feminism without hooks’ insistence on plainly and brilliantly articulating Black feminist theory. She gave us tools for reading popular culture, relationships, history, politics and so much more. She made us face our complexities, contradictions, consumptions and appropriations. May we better and always honor her work and life by daring to sit with what audiences found so compelling about her contributions, including the parts we don’t like. Stephanie Troutman (Robbins) It is hard to know the right story to tell about my legendary friend, the singular Dr bell hooks. When I think of bell, the words and concepts that come to mind are: radical self-acceptance, feminist agency, community and love. These were the values that bell hooks was deeply believed in and hoped to inspire above all else. These life lessons are her legacy. They are the lessons I embrace and aspire to across the spaces and identities I occupy: mother, teacher, friend, mentor, wife, junior-elder. bell’s reminder, in Teaching to Transgress, that “no education is politically neutral” have been my anchor and guiding light as a teacher, mentor and scholar. So much of my professional identity, which bleeds into my whole self, I owe to the work, ideas and writings of bell hooks. I envision her now, IN GLORY, on the ancestral plane wondering over the beloved community she helped to create and inspire. Gloria Steinem The words of bell hooks are intimate and universal at the same time. She should have been here for many years to come, and the only comfort now is that her words will be here always. Imani Perry I met Gloria (and I always called her that) when I was 19 and an intern at South End Press 30 years ago. She always spoke to me in the ways of the Black south, familiar loving cadences, even when she was talking about Marxian theory or critical pedagogy. She argued and she was outspoken. She was not pious. She was a Marxist with a red Mercedes. She studied Zen Buddhism and would fuss with you. She contained multitudes, as it were. If you ever talked high theory with her, you knew she absolutely could have gone that route and been a traditional academic rockstar. Yet she rejected a conventional academic style, and chose instead to merge those heady ideas with folk ways and deep spiritual questions and teaching as an ethical practice. She wanted to bring us – her readers, especially her young adult readers – into the fold of ideas that were in the service of building a more just and humane world. She was devoted to the process of us collectively working together against domination. Quentin Walcott I once met bell hooks, at her dark, barely lit apartment at an undisclosed and mysterious downtown Manhattan location. She was hungry and wanted to go to eat. As we did, she sized up and tested me to determine how authentic and genuine I was about my work against gender violence. She challenged my notions of accountability, pointing out that it is not the job of women, particularly black women, to educate and supervise men while also dealing with racism and sexism. Despite the flak she received over the years for her feminist critiques of masculinity, I could tell that she loved Black men and believed that we – me – were indeed redeemable. She loved, challenged and held us accountable. Billy Korinko When I first began exploring what it means to be a white man, and an aspiring feminist ally, I believed that feminism was just about the liberation of women. But bell hooks’ work challenged me to think about pain I had experienced in my life and how this pain was the byproduct of patriarchal thinking and living. Her work was not about centering men’s experiences, but rather illustrating the damage that patriarchy also enacts on men. hooks made clear that men’s pain, insecurities, fears, and inability to connect with others emotionally are all connected to men’s allegiance to patriarchy. She is sort of saying, “The call is coming from inside the house!” Her work has provided men who feel frustrated, insecure, lonely and emotionally stunted a blueprint for change. The question is, are we wise enough to pick it up? Crystal Wilkinson When I met bell in 1993, I was a single mother, a burgeoning writer trying to find herself. I had read her books. I knew she was from Kentucky. bell hooks and Gayl Jones were the only Black published women writers I knew from my home state. I was in awe of the power hooks wielded on the page, how she made me believe in my own agency. I squeezed myself and my twin girls into a crowded community center to sit on the floor and listen to her speak in those early days, amazed that she had fire and intelligence and an accent like mine. Fast forward to the early 2000s when she had returned to Kentucky, and we worked in Berea where she lived. By then we were friends. She invited me to her house. We broke bread. We talked about love, Black liberation, family, girlhood and the beauty of the Kentucky landscape. Her ability to talk of the mundane from the comfort of her living room with the same power that she wielded at the podium was astounding. Honestly, she wasn’t always easy to love. Equal parts bite, tender hand and intellect, she may have been the most complicated person I have ever met or will, but I loved her fiercely and know she loved me. She taught all of us so much until the end and now she’s left us to continue our lessons on our own. Zillah Eisenstein Our first meeting was at Haverford College, where Hortense Spillers had arranged a session on racism in the white women’s movement. We were very young then, me in my late 20s, bell in her early 20s. We stayed in contact for most of the rest of our lives. We shared clothes, especially scarves, and talked about our bodies and how they were a gift and a burden. I kept reminding her, as she declined in these last years, and often felt alone and forgotten, that she was always present in the lives of women, especially Black women and girls who she taught to talk back; to see their commodification and reject it; to demand space in the center and the love they deserve. Imara Jones So often we think that to be radical is to be loud. But through her quiet demeanor, coupled with her ringing indictment of the fundamental toxicity of our society, bell hooks was a constant drip of water which bent rocks to her vision of how everything could be better. She was a radical woman if there ever was one; powerful not only in what she said but how she said it. Another key lesson I learned from her is the patient power of radical love. It means that in conflict we lean into our humanity as a way to break our own chains, as well as those which imprison oppressors. It means we show up for others even if it’s the last thing we want to do. Radical love is the requirement of our time. David Zirin It is no exaggeration to say that the scholarship of bell hooks changed my life. Her great gift was that she could push you to challenge your own ingrained privileges and bigotries while also pulling you in closer. It was a talent that affected all of our activism: challenging ourselves to be better while also being open to people still processing their own muck. As she said so beautifully: “Rarely, if ever, are any of us healed in isolation. Healing is an act of communion.” We are either going to heal together or continue to bleed out. Thank you, bell hooks, for always steering us through healing. Deborah Willis One beautiful afternoon in June of 1992, I had a long chat with bell hooks and discovered that we both loved the portrait that Moneta Sleet, Jr made of Billie Holiday for Ebony magazine. We felt moved by the image and the sensitivity he presented in her pose. We talked for a long time about why it was so important that we think and write critically about black images and how they affect the African American community. She ended up writing In Our Glory: Photography and Black Life, an essay she contributed to my edited volume Picturing Us: African American Identity in Photography. She taught me a lot over time about mixing history, images and personal memory, embracing difficult moments with laughter while building a narrative about African American joy and the complexities of Black life. I love that she wrote about Love so often and I connect her to Dr King’s imagining a “Beloved Community”. I thank her for her choices as she moved through life. I will always treasure our time together. Byron Hurt Growing up, and then as a young college student, I saw the world almost entirely through the lens of a heterosexual, Black American male. I was raised to give voice to issues that mostly affected Black boys and men. bell hooks changed that for me. Once I started reading bell’s essays and books, I couldn’t stop. Her book Ain’t I A Woman? Black Women and Feminism helped sensitize me to the plight of Black women, and her book The Will to Change forced me to grapple with the ways in which patriarchy is self-defeating and destructive to boys and men as well as girls and women. When I set out to make my documentary I AM A MAN: Black Masculinity in America (1994), bell hooks was at the top of my list of interviewees. She graciously agreed to my request for an on-camera interview. I drove from Boston to interview her in her Lower East Side apartment. She was kind, down-to-earth, and loving. She dropped so many jewels during her interview that it was hard to select which to include in the film. Hers is the very first image and voice that you hear in I AM A MAN, and intentionally so. From the opening frame, I wanted other Black men to hear her, to see her, and to feel her urgent call for us to interrogate patriarchy and the culture of masculinity. Charles Knight I keep bell hooks’ The Will to Change: Men, Masculinity, and Love close to my desk and return to its dog-eared pages again and again. Years ago I gave a copy to my son Eric and it was he who told me this morning that bell had died. bell could hold passionate anger at the social and cultural structures of oppression and domination – and still fiercely love those compromised by them. Despite her personal suffering in the patriarchy, bell somehow had the capacity to see that “patriarchal culture does not care if men are unhappy” and that men are also aggrieved by the “failure of love”. Her empathy astounds. She was a teacher and I imagine she recognized early that it is through empathetic connection that students really learn, especially when the subject matter is dealing with the really tough stuff within ourselves and our society. May more like her carry on. Evangeline Lawson bell hooks had the tawny skin tone of my grandmother, the bright and passionate eyes of my niece and the diminutive stature of my mother. And a love so deep for Black people that it poured from the pages of her work and into our very souls. In all of those things both beautiful and complex, bell embodied the fire in her spirit that ignited all of us brown-skinned girls to take up space in this world. And to not apologize for it. Her reminder – to walk boldly in our femininity, to acknowledge past hurts, but to be ever-persistent in our willingness to give love, all while allowing it to propel us toward victory – is what I hope we can carry on as her gift to legions of women to come. DaMaris Hill bell hooks is radical. This was evident in her radical self-agency, radical living and radical loving. Her words were affirmations and grace. Her books were palaces to dwell in. To know bell is to exist in a space where existential freedoms and safe harbor coexist, a place that is a type of nirvana for a Black girl, for any human being. She is joy and in this moment we are dancing with her, all of us, the generations and futures, the legacies and new lives. Kevin Powell I am profoundly saddened by the death of bell hooks, my mentor, friend, sister, one of our greatest writers and thinkers. I am just glad I was able to travel to her house in Berea to pay my last respects days before her passing. I cried sitting there with her as she slept, thinking of our 27-year history, of the man I am now because of her. I told bell over and over again how much I loved her; I told her over and over again, THANK YOU. Forty-plus books in 40-plus years and so many lives and minds and souls touched by her words, even those who may have disagreed. I will miss her voice, smile, the way she always kept me on my toes, the way she always said both my names. But bell did what she came to do, and as Nikki Giovanni recently said about life, we go on. Sleep well, bell, you have earned it. Mahogany Browne bell hooks suffered no ignorance. In this refrain may we witness Black feminist thought as a place of a sovereignty. The revolutionary idea of a Black femme body governing her ownness is a radical intellectual movement we assemble through text, discussions, and debate. hooks provided the tools for true freedom dreaming. Her lessons served as a direct call to action. She left no ignorance to morph and feed in the shadows. Through her love for arts, letters and Blackness bell hooks was undeniable in the act of legacy keeping.Since the weekend, I have been running in my revived 2020 standup show in impressively Covid-secure Scottish comedy clubs, filled with the forgiving laughter of the simply-glad-to-be-alive. On Sunday night I walked the south side of York Place, Edinburgh, towards the Piccante chip shop on Broughton Street. Crossing to the north side of the road to avoid a pile of human excrement, I found myself sidestepping a puddle of human vomit instead, Odysseus steering between Scylla and Charybdis toward the Ithaca of my steak pie. But those two horrors of the Edinburgh night, or three if you include the picture of the deep-fried Mars bar in Piccante’s window, were by no means the worst images I saw last week. The photo of the Christmas 2020 party of the London Conservative mayoral candidate Shaun Bailey made for even grimmer viewing than the filth-soiled Scottish footpath, or the fat-fried chocolate bar. Was it really worth Bailey risking the mass hatred of the distraught and the bereaved just to attend an event that looked about as much fun as the retirement event of the disliked supervisor of a logistics hub based in the perineal scrublands between the M42 and the A5? Apparently so. No one can deny that the photo ought to end Bailey’s career, and should see him face the same criminal prosecution and fines a similarly celebratory member of the general public would. But at the time of writing Bailey has simply stood down as chair of the police and crime committee. This is a shame, as Bailey could easily have helped the police solve at least one crime, although the cowed force seem increasingly answerable to the Conservatives’ whims alone, and is about as independent from government influence as the Daily Telegraph. Will Johnson’s puppet emu, Cressida Dick, decline to investigate Bailey’s festive canapé atrocity, just as she has declined to pursue the 18 December Downing Street party, even though it turns out an actual police officer may have entered it when an alarm was set off, and therefore could confirm exactly who was there, whether they were socially distancing, and whether the canapés looked as if they had been provided by the same caterers that did Bailey’s Conservative mayor campaign party three days earlier? Will Emu Dick investigate the Downing Street quiz on 15 December, where human resources told players to “go out the back”, presumably to avoid detection by Emu Dick’s super-sleuths? We are used to the police covering up corruption and death in custody, but they will not win back public trust by covering up evidence of professional catering as well. Emu Dick is like Sherlock Holmes if, instead of having to extrapolate who had murdered the dead Dartmoor aristocrat from the evidence of a lone walking stick, was instead shown a verifiable film of the murder in progress, but was still unable to figure out if any crime had even taken place. Now both Bailey and Allegra Stratton, designated expendables, have been hurled under lying Boris Johnson’s party bus, while Turds himself continues to ride on the open deck undaunted, shouting the same three old jokes through a megaphone: “They jabber, we jab. They dither, we deliver. They vacillate, we vaccinate.” Did Jethro die for this? If you can bear to scrutinise its foulness, the Shaun Bailey party crime scene photo is horrifyingly illuminating in terms of what it tells us about who makes up a random selection of young contemporary Conservative activists. Behind Bailey is Conservative councillor Adam Wildman, associate director of the PR firm Teneo, a man whose grasp of what makes good PR should mean he considers his position. On Wildman’s Twitter header he amusingly describes himself as a “recovering policy wonk”, or at least he did until he deleted the account on Wednesday, meaning Emu Dick won’t be able to find him simply by using social media. To Bailey’s left, raising a glass of wine to toast the thousands of grandmothers expiring alone in care homes, is the property developer and Tory donor Nick Candy, husband of the Australian singer Holly Valance, who is soon to release a joint single with him entitled We Dance, Laughing, on the Graves of the Covid Dead. Surely Valance’s role as an ambassador of the Children’s Trust must now be in question, due to Candy’s contempt for humanity. Indeed, the American word for sweets is considering changing itself to Ebola by deed poll. In front of Bailey, in his Christmas jumper and crouching on bended knee, beard-cheeked and enviously eyeing a depleted plate of canapés, is Timothy “Tim” Skeletor, whose blue-skulled ancestor Skeletor of Eternia envied the might of Castle Grayskull and saw the meek as futile worms who did not deserve to thrive. And lying on the floor at the front of the photo, again raising a glass to honour the then 72,000 Covid deaths, is Jubal the Hutt, great great great great great great great grandson of the gluttonous slave-girl enthusiast Jabba the Hutt, of Star Wars fame. The legacy of Jabba’s ill-gotten galactic criminal gains, discreetly laundered in London of course, are a major source of finance for the Tories, from a trust fund anonymously managed by Bailey’s braces-wearing pal, the ostentatiously prostrate Jubal. Bailey’s party not only reveals the contempt in which his party holds the common man, it also reveals the nature of the company it keeps. On Wednesday morning, from Newcastle to London, I listened to local radio phone-ins. Distressed Tory loyalists, who had never quite grasped the more intricate deceptions of the Brexit campaign, could nonetheless easily decode the Shaun Bailey party photo. The people they had voted for thought they were collateral, just old meat to be shovelled into a furnace. I got a Greggs’ corned beef slice south of Leicester and drove home. Rescheduled national 2022 dates of Stewart’s 2020 tour, Snowflake Tornado, are on sale now; the December 2022 London dates of his 2023 tour, Basic Lee, are also on saleThe health secretary impressed parliament last week when he said daily Omicron infections were estimated at about 200,000. This was classic “number theatre” – pulling a big statistic out of a hat without supporting evidence. Although the Health Security Agency (UKHSA) later briefed the press, it only publicly revealed its workings on Thursday: it had estimated 23,000 Omicron infections on 7 December, then assumed exponential growth with a doubling time of 1.9 days. We will have to wait for infection survey estimates to know if this is accurate. Exponential growth simply means something increases in proportion to its current value – the bigger it gets, the more it increases each day. This does not necessarily mean “fast” – a savings account has this kind of growth, even with a 0.1% compound interest rate. Doubling times are, unsurprisingly, how long it takes for a value to double. A popular trick in finance is to estimate the doubling time by dividing 72 by the annual interest rate, provided it is low. A 4% compound interest rate (remember that?) would mean your capital doubled in around 72 divided by four, or 18 years. Note: 72 is chosen as it is easy to divide and roughly equals 100 times the natural logarithm of two, as given by a standard mathematical model. The UKHSA was assuming a somewhat faster doubling time for infections, of about two days, which implies the numbers of infections were increasing by 41% a day, since 1.41 times 1.41 is roughly double. This is an extraordinarily rapid and worrisome rise. Exponential growth phases inevitably end, through changes in behaviour, prior immunity or simply running out of people to infect, although turning points remain hard to predict. UKHSA has warned against extrapolating this curve further – it would mean 18 million infections by Christmas Day. There is an old joke about fitting an exponential curve to the number of Elvis Presley impersonators, reckoned to reach a third of the world’s population by 2019. This did not happen. Exponential growth can’t go on for ever, so treat such projections with suspicious minds. • David Spiegelhalter is chair of the Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence Communication at Cambridge. Anthony Masters is statistical ambassador for the Royal Statistical SocietyStephen Mangan, one of the most disarmingly likable comic actors around, is not obvious casting for Dickens’s isolated, abject, miserly Scrooge. But sitting in a dressing room on a December afternoon, he appears unnervingly transformed. His good-looking, rueful face with its great outbreak of a smile (familiar from TV shows such as Green Wing and Episodes) is topped with a thick grey mop of hair which he has had specially dyed to look the part in A Christmas Carol at the Old Vic. “It took seven hours at the hairdresser to get it bleached – my scalp was in bits”, he volunteers. And he has a new grey beard to match. “Mangan actually means luxuriant growth of hair – ‘mang’ is a type of mane,” he laughs – which sounds like the esoteric answer to a quiz question I have not asked. Mangan, 53, is a huge fan of quizzes: “I’ve always loved quizzes, linguistic puzzles, logic challenges and silly stuff,” he says, and we start to chat about the seasonal pleasure of Christmas games and the lively scene from Jack Thorne’s stage adaptation of Dickens’s novel in which Scrooge’s nephew and friends rack their brains: is it an animal? Does it live? Does it growl? Eventually, they crack it. The answer to their riddle is: Mr Scrooge himself. Mangan’s fondness for quizzes has an offstage life too. He has recently published a book for children, Escape the Rooms: an entertaining, heartfelt, problem-solving adventure. It is, in the least mournful way, about the process of grieving – something he knows about having lost both parents to cancer when in his twenties. Two bereaved children have to unlock the secret to a teasing sequence of rooms to free themselves. The book is illustrated by his sister, Anita, who when she puts her nifty pencil to paper turns out to have a gift for the gruesome. “We’re only a year apart and very close,” he says. His pride in what she has pulled off is evident: “Our family had its own sense of humour. I didn’t need to explain anything to her.” The story’s upshot is: “Be kind to yourself, don’t try to solve it all in one day” – as good a message as any at Christmas. Mangan admits to feeling frustrated by the “enforced division” between comedy and drama, believing the best stories make you laugh and cry. “It might sound odd,” he says but, in his book, he hopes to “unlock grief through comedy”. And in his case, grief really was a key to unlocking his life. After his mother’s death (she was 45), he decided life was too short to be a lawyer (he had just graduated in law from Cambridge). He auditioned for Rada instead: “Acting was what I’d wanted to do as a career but had not perhaps had the courage.” One of the nicest things to emerge through our conversation is Mangan’s urge to encourage and console others. He volunteers that the “overwhelmingly tough” stage of bereavement does not last. And when I ask how he contends with life’s more workaday challenges, he suggests (for himself and us) the proactive route out of an impasse: “The best way of doing something is to start doing it. We’ve all got things we put off but write that first word or knock on that door or pick up that phone – you don’t know how it’s going to end – but begin it.” It is a hopeful strategy yet his optimism is always tempered by realism and he acknowledges: “It’s over 30 years since my mother died and I’m still dealing with it.” He remembers his childhood Christmases vividly. His parents were Irish Catholics and the family lived in north London. Christmas was “hugely exciting – we were the kids who were in our parents’ bedroom at 3.30am, saying: ‘Is it time to open the presents yet?’” He was, he confesses, an altar boy and laughs: “I figured if you had to go to church, you might as well be in costume and on stage.” And yes, his family played all the Christmas games. Was he any good at charades? His reply is unexpectedly diffident but when I ask about his quiz prowess, I tempt him into boasting: “I’m not bad. I’m quite competitive. I did Celebrity Mastermind and I’m happy to say won my heat and I’ve done Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? Twice.” He lives in Primrose Hill and has three sons (14, 11 and five) with the actor Louise Delamere. Two of the boys have graduated from believing in Father Christmas but the youngest is hanging on in there. The family is now conspiring to keep the festive deceit going. Mangan must be fun as a dad – you need go no further for clues than to consider the proposed title for his second children’s book: The Fart That Changed the World. “It’s a working title,” he says. I can’t imagine a child who wouldn’t want to read on. But could we get back to Scrooge? By the second half of Matthew Warchus’s celebrated production, Mangan’s Scrooge is taking on a hectic benevolence. He is wearing his heart on his red, ragged, brocaded sleeve and there is not a dry eye in the house. Is the role moving to play? “It is – there is blow after blow to my emotional wellbeing. Scrooge has this awful realisation that he hates who he has become. He’s in his 50s and has time to do something about it. It gets me every time because we all have regrets. I find it odd when people say they have no regrets. Who doesn’t? Who doesn’t have friendships or loves they handled badly and would do differently now? Who doesn’t have people they love but who they feel they don’t show it to enough?” “For Scrooge, giving is the revelation,” he concludes. How extravagant is Mangan himself? He is good on meals out, he says, but it is his wife who takes on the chore of Christmas presents and the opportunities for getting it wrong. “She’s great at it,” he adds. Scrooge is given a weirdly tattered scarf as a Christmas present. And I say we all know – and most of us have been given – that scarf. What is the strangest gift he has ever received himself? “I was given an aubergine at university by someone called Penny. I never worked out why … with emojis now, aubergines have come to mean something different…” Before parting company, we bond on the issue of Christmas crackers and that moment of sitting around like tipsy kings and (in Mangan’s household and mine) trying to guess the punchline to cracker jokes. Could he possibly have a stab at explaining why cracker jokes and their accompanying questions are so bad? Before attempting it, he exclaims at the feeble gifts inside (“How many little screwdriver sets do you need?) and then: “I don’t know why the jokes are so bad, it is crazy. Once the acting dries up, I’m going into business to make Christmas crackers with good jokes and quizzes.” Mangan’s crackers – they will be worth the wait for sure. • A Christmas Carol is at the Old Vic, London SE1 8NB, until 8 January • Escape the Rooms by Stephen Mangan, illustrated by Anita Mangan, is published by Scholastic (£6.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyAs the US braces for the likely resurgence of the Republican party in 2022’s midterm elections, rightwing media is preparing, both behind and in front of the scenes, to exert its influence over the rest of Joe Biden’s presidency. The flagship conservative news network, Fox News, has continued a lurch towards the right that accelerated with the rise of Donald Trump. But a more insidious presence is the rise of a conservative media ecosystem, or echo chamber, that seems likely to coalesce what was once considered the fringes of rightwing thought. Fox News bounced back from a brief threat from even further right networks like Newsmax in early 2021, but in the process, it has weathered a pair of lawsuits, and the departure of Fox News’ most high-profile “straight news” journalist. Chris Wallace, who had been at Fox News for 18 years, frequently served as the daytime counterpoint to the swirling rightwing opinion that fills Fox News’ night-time schedule. Wallace’s departure appears to have been amicable. “The bosses here at Fox promised me they would never interfere with a guest I booked or a question I asked, and they kept that promise,” Wallace said, while the channel said: “We are extremely proud of our journalism and the stellar team that Chris Wallace was a part of for 18 years.” But for those who follow the comings and goings at Fox News, Wallace’s exit represented a further step away from its claims to be a mainstream news channel. The almost symbiotic relationship between some Fox News hosts and the Trump government was exposed this week, when it emerged three of the network’s personalities had frantically texted Mark Meadows, Trump’s former White House chief of staff, during the 6 January insurrection. The House committee investigating the attack, which had obtained the messages, released the material which showed numerous high-profile Fox personalities had frantically texted Meadows as hundreds of Trump supporters stormed the US Capitol. “Hey Mark, the president needs to tell people in the Capitol to go home. This is hurting all of us. He is destroying his legacy,” Laura Ingraham, the host of The Ingraham Angle, wrote. Brian Kilmeade, co-host of the morning show Fox &amp; Friends, texted Meadows: “Please, get him on TV. Destroying everything you have accomplished,” while Sean Hannity wrote to the chief of staff: “Can he make a statement? Ask people to leave the Capitol.” Unlike some of his Fox colleagues, Kilmeade criticized Trump the next day. “If the president doesn’t tell people over and over again that we were robbed, they stole it, march down there and protest it doesn’t happen,” he said. Fox News remains the most popular cable news channel by far, with an average of 1.3 million viewers and 2.4 million in the 8-11pm slot – when its rightwing personalities Sean Hannity, Tucker Carlson and Ingraham host their shows. Through the year the network has engaged in themes attractive to the right, including some hosts and guests dabbling in vaccine skepticism, although other hosts have told viewers they should consider getting a Covid-19 vaccine. Carlson, Fox News’ most-watched host, has also championed Kyle Rittenhouse, who was acquitted in November of murdering two people at a Black Lives Matter protest. The network has also been sued by two different election technology companies over election fraud conspiracy theories. Angelo Carusone, the president of Media Matters, a progressive media watchdog, said Fox News had made the decision to pander to the Trump base more than a year ago, to fend off criticism and competition. On the night of the presidential election, in November 2020, the network was the first to call – correctly – the state of Arizona for Joe Biden, which led to intense criticism from Trump, and election night chants of “Fox News sucks” among some Republican voters. In December, Newsmax, an upstart hard rightwing news network, jumped ahead of Fox News in the ratings, for one time slot, for the first time ever, while Fox News’ favorability among Republican supporters dropped from 67% to 54%. “What we’re seeing now is the effects of that calculated business decision. Right after the election Trump supporters are all mad at Fox News, so their ratings tank a little bit,” Carusone said. Carusone said Fox News responded by putting personalities like the incendiary Carlson “front and center”, to bolster its rightwing credentials. It was always clear that some Fox News hosts had a close relationship with Trump – Hannity literally appeared onstage with the former president at a campaign rally in 2018. But the further insight into just how close certain personalities are to Trump and the far-right came when Carlson was accused of dabbling in falsehoods when his three-part documentary Patriot Purge aired on Fox Nation, Fox News’ streaming-only sister channel. The documentary, which was promoted on Fox News as “The True Story Behind Jan 6”, attempted to rewrite the events of the riot, advancing theories that violence that day was instigated by leftwing activists, and that the insurrection may have been an FBI false flag operation. Patriot Purge is “full of falsehoods”, the factchecking website Politifact wrote, and it “floated several conspiracy theories”. Snopes, another factchecking website, found that Patriot Purge “uses deceptive tactics and false statements to rewrite history”. The documentary triggered the resignation of longtime conservative Fox News commentators Stephen Hayes and Jonah Goldberg, while NPR reported that Wallace had expressed concern over the documentary to Fox News management. “It’s basically saying that the Biden regime is coming after half the country and this is the War on Terror 2.0,” Goldberg told NPR. “It traffics in all manner of innuendo and conspiracy theories that I think legitimately could lead to violence. That for me, and for Steve, was the last straw.” Heather Hendershot, a professor of film and media at MIT who studies conservative and rightwing media, said Fox News’ flirtation with conspiracy theories and extremism is more than “simply a reflection of the current state of the Republican party”. “Fox News actively and deliberately adds fuel to the fires of extremism. Perhaps the best recent example is the network’s enthusiastic embrace of Kyle Rittenhouse,” Hendershot said. “After Trump was elected in 2016, as Fox News continued to lurch harder and harder to the right, it still seemed reasonable – if overly optimistic – to understand the network as a sort of schizophrenic entity, with the opinion people on one side and a handful of reputable news people beholden to journalistic conventions like factchecking on the other. “The departure of Chris Wallace, however, should disabuse us of any such naive notions. It sends a strong signal that it is people like Tucker Carlson and Laura Ingraham, who are most central to the network’s identity, and we should only expect the situation to get worse.” Beyond just Fox News, the right wing is investing in a slew of efforts to create its own echo chamber – in “an attempt to circumvent what they see as an increasingly liberal internet and media ecosystem”, as Axios reported. The efforts include building apps, creating cryptocurrencies and setting up publishing houses to pump out books written by people on the right. A conservative video service, Rumble, is set to go public in a $2.1bn, while Trump’s yet-to-launch social media network, Truth Social, aims to go public in 2022. In mid 2021 the “Magacoin”, a pro-Trump cyrptocurrency, also gained publicity this year, but suffered a knockback when the Guardian reported that poor security configuration in a website associated with the currency exposed the personal details of users. Carusone, however, said the right wing seeking to create its own media world is not a new thing. “The right has for decades had an echo chamber. Rush Limbaugh used to have 25 million listeners, and the listeners called themselves ditto heads – they would echo back the things that he would say.” The modern version of that is different, given the power of social media, but the right has experimented with even fresh-seeming formats before – Hannity once even launched a dating site, Hannidate. The website is no longer active. Unlike Hannidate, however, the rightwing eco-system is growing – and seems like it will be here to stay for a long time.Mass lateral flow testing cut the number of people needing hospital treatment for Covid by 32% and relieved significant pressure on the NHS when the measures were piloted last year, a study has shown. Liverpool conducted the first city-wide testing scheme using rapid antigen tests in November last year, amid debate about whether or not lateral flow tests (LFTs) were accurate enough to detect the virus in asymptomatic carriers. It expanded the project to cover the whole of the Liverpool region, offering people LFTs whether or not they had symptoms. Key workers did daily tests before going to work to show they were not infectious. Now an analysis has shown that it was more successful than Liverpool’s scientists and public health teams had anticipated, after they compared Covid cases and outcomes in the region with other parts of England. Professor Iain Buchan, dean of the Institute of Population Health, who led the evaluation, said: “This time last year, as the Alpha variant was surging, we found that Liverpool city region’s early rollout of community rapid testing was associated with a 32% fall in Covid-19 hospital admissions after careful matching to other parts of the country in a similar position to Liverpool but without rapid testing. “We also found that daily lateral flow testing as an alternative to quarantine for people who had been in close contact with a known infected person enabled emergency services to keep key teams such as fire crews in work, underpinning public safety.” The Covid-Smart project ran from December 2020 to July 2021, and 668,243 people – about 45% of the region’s 1.5 million residents – took part. Key workers saved 8,292 work days by taking the rapid tests instead of isolating. Of 34 Covid cases, only three were missed by LFTs. Buchan said that the results demonstrated that LFTs could be used to help keep the NHS functioning during the Omicron wave. Ministers have adopted a similar model to avoid a “pingdemic” as infections have soared. Last week the government announced that double-vaccinated contacts of someone testing positive could avoid isolating if they took a daily LFT for seven days and continued to test negative. Buchan said: “As the more infectious Omicron variant sweeps through communities this winter, access to rapid testing will be important for keeping key emergency, social care and NHS services afloat with test-to-release or daily contact-testing schemes. “To make testing useful, communities need to understand how to use a test and what the results mean. Timing is critical – you can become infectious very quickly, so taking a test the day before you mix with other people is not as useful as taking the test just before you meet up. “And the more you encourage those you mix with to ‘test before you go’ the more risk you will take out – this kind of crowd-sourced health security is the new normal.” In October, researchers from University College London found that LFTs were more than 80% effective at detecting a Covid-19 infection of any level, and 90% effective at detecting those who were most infectious. PCR tests are often described as the gold standard of testing, and they can spot genetic material from the virus within the body several weeks after a person stops being infectious. LFTs only detect material from the surface proteins of a virus which are found when someone is infectious.Piers Corbyn has been arrested on suspicion of encouraging people to burn down MPs’ offices. The Metropolitan police said a man in his 70s – whom they did not name – was arrested in Southwark, south London, in the early hours of Sunday. “The arrest relates to a video posted online in which people were encouraged to burn down MPs’ offices,” the force said. Earlier, the Met said it was assessing a video that appeared to show Corbyn, 74, calling for MPs’ offices to be burned down. The video, shared on social media, shows Corbyn, a prominent anti-lockdown protester and brother of the former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, criticising politicians who voted for Covid restrictions. After urging the crowd to “hammer to death those scum who have decided to go ahead with introducing new fascism”, Corbyn appears to tell a crowd in the video: “You’ve got to get a list of them … and if your MP is one of them, go to their offices and, well, I would recommend burning them down, OK. But I can’t say that on air. I hope we’re not on air.” He also says: “We’ve got to take down these lying MPs. And we’ve got to support and welcome all of those who have rebelled or voted against Boris, ie rebelled from the Tories or my brother and his mates who voted against the measures yesterday, which is a step forward.” Legislation to introduce vaccine certificates in an attempt to slow the spread of the Omicron variant passed on Tuesday, despite a rebellion of 99 Conservative MPs voting against. On Saturday, Piers Corbyn addressed crowds outside Downing Street at an anti-vaccine protest in Westminster. Thousands of protesters had gathered from 12pm in Parliament Square, from where they marched through the capital. According to the Met, officers suffered minor injuries during “scuffles”. Police say that the arrest, on suspicion of encouragement to commit arson, took place at 1.45am. The home secretary called the police to investigate on Saturday evening, describing the video as “sickening”. Priti Patel wrote in a tweet: “The Piers Corbyn video is sickening. I back the police to take the strongest possible action against him.” The shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, also condemned the video as “appalling”. She wrote: “We have lost two MPs to terrible violence in recent years – we know how incredibly serious this is.”Shropshire is lovely, but not often big news. Last week’s byelection there, with a large swing from Tory to Lib Dem, is particularly huge news because in many constituencies the business of politics is about electing the same party election after election. Critics of first past the post as an electoral system point to this as a big democratic problem but maybe it’s got a silver lining… for those moving house because it appears our political views don’t just drive how we vote, but also where we move. So concludes new research published by Warwick University that examined population movements between 346 local authorities from 2002-2015. It turns out there are significantly more moves between areas with similar political preferences. The reason why isn’t very encouraging for anyone concerned about political polarisation. The researchers used data to show that we like to live around people who share similar values – those living in areas where their politics are dominant are more likely to say they “feel at home”. Hence the advantage of constituencies rarely changing hands – it avoids disappointment for those migrating into them. Obviously, there are negative social consequences, too, chief among them the reinforcement of group thinking. It is also bad politics: in a first-past-the-post system the last place you want to move is one where your party is already winning. • Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation. Read more at resolutionfoundation.orgEverything about this Cabaret is big. The original vision of Kander and Ebb in making such a dark and jagged musical experience. The gifts and the reputation of the two stars – Jessie Buckley and Eddie Redmayne. The ambition of director Rebecca Frecknall and designer Tom Scutt in spreading the action beyond the stage, transforming one of London’s most trad proscenium-and-gilt theatres into a manky dive: the Kit Kat Club in 1930s Berlin. Oh, and the ticket prices. Going down stone steps (all plushness spent), the audience are met with challenging looks, lace cami-knickers, suspenders, Doc Martens, sequined eyeshadow, accordion players behind beaded curtains, pelvic grinding in the bar. Neither here nor on stage is there much merriment, despite the glam-schlock, the tumult of fake fur and satin and chiffon. There is never much doubt about the direction of the evening. Redmayne’s Emcee does not so much preside over the rise of fascism as embody its core. Sometimes in clown trousers and jaunty cone hat, sometimes letting his bare chest multitask, muscles arguing with each other for dominance, he is often feral – a new kind of fantastic beast – and often like a fairground creation. Buckley, meanwhile, as Sally Bowles, is never less than human. In bo-peep bonnet and slightly rumpled bob, she is forthright, and never more so than when singing. She makes each of her numbers into an individual drama – she must, you think, have written them herself: the title song is spat out with personal pain and cosmic sarcasm. Maybe This Time is broken apart, her voice shrunk by the difficulty of believing in romantic hope. The unexpected centre of desire is the love affair between the elderly landlady (Liza Sadovy) and her German Jewish lodger (Elliot Levey), both acting with restrained melancholy. Who would have thought that so much saucy tenderness could be conveyed by the handing over of a pineapple? This is a big achievement and a breakthrough for Frecknall and for Scutt – the occasion on which two major talents get widely recognised – though I find the more modest work both have done elsewhere more imaginatively stirring. Redmayne approached Frecknall with the idea of directing Cabaret, having admired her superb production of Tennessee Williams’s Summer and Smoke three years ago. There is an obvious irony in glugging champagne while watching a musical about precariousness, decadence, inflation and the rise of fascism; it is, I think, a stretch to see the audience’s semi-complicity as a further ring of the immersive experience. There is an almost-paradox in the way on-the-edge, hand-to-mouth, defiant existences take on a glittering magnificence: a danger of the down-at-heel looking monumental. At times the splendour of the show detracts from its tawdry danger. James Graham’s exciting new play, co-produced by the Young Vic with Headlong, rushes at the audience like a newshound after a story. Best of Enemies seizes on an apparently niche event, making it seem central to an understanding of American history and illuminating Britain’s current condition. Inspired by a documentary by Morgan Neville and Robert Gordon, the drama is in part a verbatim reconstruction of the 1968 television debates between William F Buckley Jr and Gore Vidal, representatives of the right and left wing in America, and partly an imagined reconstruction of the circumstances surrounding them. The two patrician intellectuals discuss Reagan and Nixon and Vietnam and whether freedom breeds inequality; they lean back in their chairs, making their audience a present of their language and their entrenched hostility. They are quick and funny and fluent, but gradually egotism and the push for ratings that was the spur for the programmes whip them into personal insult, narrowing their arguments. In a vicious and puny spat, Vidal calls Buckley a crypto-Nazi and Buckley calls Vidal a queer. Welcome to today’s poisoned barracking. This is a feast of acting. As Vidal, Charles Edwards is adroitly poised, both lolling and taut; David Harewood’s Buckley is a marvellous contradiction, his body as relaxed as if he is stretching out after a tremendous tennis game, his face overactive (as indeed it was in life), tongue flicking out like a lizard, mouth swivelling sideways. Harewood is – as Buckley was not – black, and his casting proves a masterstroke: he makes you rehear every word of reactionariness. Never more so than when he is on stage with the finely pensive Syrus Lowe who, as James Baldwin, is the conscience of the play. Best of Enemies is supremely concerned with celebrating verbal exactness, yet Jeremy Herrin’s galvanic production gets to the centre of things before a word is spoken. Above the area where the men confront each other, Bunny Christie has hung huge screens, which display archive footage, and also become the cubicles of TV executives. These screens dominate proceedings, just as television shenanigans began to dominate the real-life debate – and two clever men faded into becoming celebrity antagonists. In 1957, Alice Childress, a founding member of the American Negro Theater, was due to be the first black woman to have a play on Broadway. The producers asked for various changes; she refused; the staging did not take place. That play was Trouble in Mind, which captures Childress’s own experience. A white director is putting on a play about a lynching. The parts for the mainly black cast consist of maids and the murdered man, “simple people”, the director says. All are required to be passive; the actors mug up their roles, swaying with spread palms. One woman protests, demanding some realism, though she knows “white folks can’t stand unhappy negroes”. The director says he can’t sell that kind of realism to his producers. Childress died in 1994; a lifelong activist, she would probably not have been surprised to see how little change there has been to this power dynamic. This is not quite the scorching evening it might be – Nancy Medina’s production sometimes moves rather too stiffly – but Tanya Moodie is impressive throughout: a never-flinching force who comes to glory in the play’s closing sequence. Left alone, she pushes a huge platform to the front of the stage, as if about to shoulder the world like Atlas. Clambering on it, she listens first to canned applause, then opens her arms to the audience in front of her, who greet her with the real thing. A lovely moment of theatrical alchemy. Star ratings (out of five) Cabaret ★★★★ Best of Enemies ★★★★★ Trouble in Mind ★★★ Cabaret is at the Playhouse, London, until 1 October 2022 (new cast after 21 March) Best of Enemies is at the Young Vic, London, until 22 January 2022 Trouble in Mind is at the Dorfman, National Theatre, London, until 29 January 2022One of the pleasures of being married to a woman doing an MA in medieval literature is that she has become a fount of words that have long ago sadly fallen into disuse. Last week’s gem was goliardic: “Of or pertaining to Goliards, wandering students in medieval Europe disposed to conviviality, licence and the making of ribald and satirical Latin songs (from Old French, glutton, goliard).” Nifty, eh? I’m not sure, though, when you can drop that into a conversation, what with Christmas parties being cancelled left, right and centre, but I think it conjures up a more romantic image of roistering youngsters than today’s lager louts. Less welcome is another new word, to me at least – “onboarding”, which I encountered in a newspaper supplement about talent management: “The action or process of integrating a new employee into an organisation or familiarising a new customer or client with one’s products or services.” I think you’ll agree that that is fairly grotesque and should not be encouraged. I’m also pretty certain that in the good old days the word used would’ve been inducting. I was also brought up short by a caption in a newspaper business section that referred to an “Amazon fulfilment centre”. It looked mighty like a warehouse to me, but perhaps I’m missing some logistical nuance. But probably not. More delightful to the ear was the most wonderful malapropism on Channel 4 News, about the No 10 Christmas parties brouhaha, that sorting out the mess would be like cleaning out the Aegean stables. In my last column, I wrote about the sticky issue of how properly to pronounce Omicron and I was impressed by some pretty fancy footwork by Matt Frei, again on Channel 4 News, who sidestepped the entire minefield by opting for “the Omi variant”. I guess that’s why he gets paid the big bucks. • Jonathan Bouquet is an Observer columnistFor the past few weeks, I’ve been getting ready for Christmas. As well as putting the tree up ridiculously early, I’ve made the cake, bought the presents and assembled the stockings. Even though my children no longer believe in Santa, the crinkle of my dad’s old golf socks stuffed full of presents on Christmas morning still makes their faces light up. But this year, for the first time since they were born, I won’t be there to celebrate with them. I’m leaving my husband Fred, daughter Inès, 15, and son Vincent, 12, to row 3,000 miles across the Atlantic as part of the annual Talisker Whisky Atlantic Challenge. My four-woman crew of mothers is called the Mothership, and between us we have 11 children, the youngest of whom is four. At the end of November, I flew out to La Gomera in the Canaries for two final weeks of preparation before we set off on 12 December. Walking out of the house at 5.30am knowing I wouldn’t see my children again for at least two months was the hardest moment of all. If it goes according to plan, the next time I see them will be on the shore at English Harbour in Antigua at the end of January. The longest we’ve ever been apart is two weeks. My husband has been fully supportive, in the same way that he put up with me doing endless marathons in my 40s. He’s the main cook at home as well as the stricter parent, so I have no qualms about leaving him in charge of the household for several weeks. Finally getting around to writing our will was an unsettling moment – there’s nothing like confronting your own mortality. It’s been harder with my kids, who have put my decision to take part in the race down to a midlife crisis. While my crewmates have been dealing with tears from their kids, I’ve had to put up with sarcasm. “I couldn’t care less what you do,” my son told me during a last meal out together. I’ve been troubled by the thought that in order to deal with me going away, they’ve started to withdraw from me. Their brave faces are even more gut-wrenching than tears would be. It’s not only family who are worried. I’ve been immensely moved by the love and affection I’ve had from friends in recent weeks. They’re excited for me, but there’s another undercurrent of feeling that only the most outspoken express: what if I don’t come back? The first box you have to tick when you sign up for TWAC is the one which says, “I accept that ocean rowing is a dangerous sport.” It’s less dangerous than it used to be – the boat that race founder Chay Blyth first rowed across the Atlantic in 1966 was fully open to the elements – but there are many risks involved. Mrs Nelson, the sturdy 28ft boat that will be our home for at least 40 days, is designed to roll and pop back up if we capsize. My worst fear is that it won’t, and we’ll be upside down in our tiny cabin in the middle of a storm. Everyone imagines we have a safety yacht behind us at all times, but although there are two, there are 36 boats in the race fleet. We’ll probably only see them once, and for most of those 3,000 miles we’ll be bobbing around on our own. In an emergency, we’d have to summon the nearest ship. At 3am, the enormity of all the unknowns we are about to experience can be overwhelming. So what has motivated me to take on this extraordinary challenge, one that only 226 women in the world have ever completed? Is it just a midlife crisis, or something deeper? The straightforward answer is that the opportunity came around by chance and I felt I would regret it forever if I turned it down. The Mothership had a late drop out at the end of June, and my friend Jo, who I’d rowed with at Oxford University, felt I would be a great fit for the crew. But there’s more to it than that. Three years ago, I was made redundant from my job as a magazine editor. One day I was looking after 40 staff and two magazines, and the next I was waking up at home with a terrible gin hangover wondering what I was going to do for the rest of my life. I floundered for a while, but then life began to slot into place again. In June 2019, I went (as a beginner) to a paddleboarding competition in Lake Annecy in France. Having not rowed competitively for 24 years, I rediscovered both the joy of being on the water and the thrill of racing. There, I met Debra Searle, who famously did the Atlantic challenge alone in 2001 when her then-husband had to be rescued from their boat, suffering from anxiety. I listened to her tales of life at sea, little imagining I would be doing the same just two years later. The trip inspired me to take up rowing again, at the Lea Rowing Club in Hackney. Although the two seasons I’ve done have been dogged by shutdowns due to the pandemic, training to compete this summer at Henley Masters ensured I was fit enough to join the ocean rowing crew at the last minute. In the past couple of years, I’ve also interviewed Kelda Wood, the first disabled woman to row the Atlantic solo. She was unsparing in her description of how hard it was and how much she’d hated being alone, yet she was so fulfilled by what she’d achieved. Then I chatted to Pip Hare, who sailed around the world solo in the Vendée Globe. Like Debra, they were both amazing, tough women whose words inspired me and made me wonder what I could be capable of. And now, here I am, about to set off for the world’s toughest row. I’m facing 40-50 days at sea, rowing two hours on/two hours off continuously. We won’t sleep for more than 90 minutes at any one time because in our off shifts we also have to fit in eating, going to the loo (in a bucket), and washing the salt off our bodies. Blisters and sores will develop rapidly if you don’t. Pain will be constant. I already know from our long practice rows around the Solent that the last 15 minutes of any two-hour shift can be teeth-clenchingly agonising. It took my hands days to recover from a 72-hour row, so I have no idea what state they will be in after six weeks. There will be little we can do for aches and pains bar taking some ibuprofen and soldiering on. Rowers are most likely to be removed from the boat with sea sickness, which develops once you lose sight of land. Some can’t adjust and the constant nausea becomes too debilitating. Everyone who has completed the crossing will tell you that it’s 80% in the mind, but beforehand contestants tend to focus purely on the physical. We’ve been doing two-hour sessions on the rowing machine, weight-training and endless pilates. The cabins are awkward to climb into at the best of times, let alone when the boat is crashing up and down 30ft waves, so flexibility is key. Building resilience is even more important. I’ve thought a lot about those early days of motherhood, when I went through 17 hours of labour, then days of sleeplessness, coupled with the huge emotional burden of having to keep a small human alive. That is one of the strengths of the Mothership: as mums, we have to be tough, resilient, and excellent multi-taskers. This isn’t simply a personal journey of recovery. My wider aim is to show that being a mother doesn’t mean being subsumed by your children. It’s not selfish to want to push yourself and experience extraordinary things, and I hope it will inspire women and girls to believe that adventures aren’t reserved solely for men. I also love the sense of satisfaction I get from raising money by putting myself through intense pain – it’s a peculiarly British trait. We’re lucky enough to have secured a sponsor in the shape of Tritax Big Box, a real estate investment company, so every penny we raise goes to our charities, Women in Sport, the Felix Fund and the Noah’s Ark Children’s Hospice. Out there on the ocean, when times are really tough, it will help to know we are not just doing this for ourselves, but for others as well. It is heartbreaking that I’ll be missing this precious time with my children – there aren’t that many Christmas Days left before my daughter turns 18. Instead I’ll have to put up with one crackly phone call, as I open the present they’ve hidden in my luggage. I will miss them terribly, and they will miss me. But I know they are secretly proud of me and that makes it all worthwhile. justgiving.com/team/themothershipAt first, the black blob spotted between rocks along the shores of San Diego this week was mistaken for a ball of tar. But as a concerned surfer approached, it became clear that this was something special. The finned creature had a gaping underbite that revealed nightmarish spiny teeth, small black eyes, a tentacle-covered appendage and bulb protruding from its head. Scientists at University of California San Diego’s Scripps Institution of Oceanography swiftly identified it as a Pacific football fish, a deep-sea dweller so rare that only 31 specimens have been found in more than a century since it was first discovered. The recent find, however, marked an even more remarkable moment. The Pacific footballfish is the third to wash ashore in California this year, a highly unusual event given its extreme reclusiveness. At this point, no one knows how or why the fish appeared – but scientists are excited about the opportunity to learn more. “The fact that a few washed up this year might just be serendipity for us,” said Ben Frable, an ichthyologist and the Collection Manager of Fishes at Scripps Institution of Oceanography who is examining and preserving the fish. He dismissed the idea that this was an indication that something was amiss. If that was the case, he said, there would be many more. But the two that were recovered this year (a third was photographed on the beach but disappeared before scientists got to the scene) are already offering the chance of new insights about the species. “We don’t know a lot about even the basics of how they live,” Frable said. Made famous as the monster from the depths in Pixar’s Finding Nemo, the Pacific footballfish is one of over 100 species of anglerfish found around the world. Scientists know they typically dwell thousands of feet beneath the surface and lure unsuspecting prey into their mouths with the help from the flashy bioluminescent bulbs that dangle from their heads. They are covered in spikes and their sharp teeth are not used to chomp but to trap other fish, squid, and crustaceans that dwell in depths of up to 3,300ft, according to the California Academy of Sciences. But this description applies only to the females. The males have evolved to become little more than sexual parasites that fuse themselves to their mates, losing all their internal organs – including their eyes – in the process. Connected for ever, the male retains only his testes to provide sperm in exchange for food. The latest discovery, a female that measures about 15 inches and weighs 5.5lb, was in almost perfect condition aside from some slight scuffs and a small missing chunk probably caused by a curious seagull. She’s spiny but flabby, Frable said, and he could feel several big lumps in her abdomen. After X-rays and a quick peek inside, the scientists discovered she had sand in her belly. Most of the footballfish discovered wash ashore with completely empty stomachs. It’s unclear if that is connected to their demise or if the fish just don’t eat very often. They are, after all, “just floating around in a giant black desert”, Frable said. The fish is now being preserved before undergoing more studies. “Specimens like this, every time they wash up, can provide additional clues.” The other recently acquired Pacific footballfish, which was discovered in Orange county’s Crystal Cove in May, has already expanded scientists’ understanding of the species. It was also on display for several months this year at the Natural History Museum in Los Angeles, which enabled members of the public to catch a glimpse of the unusual creature. William Ludt, the assistant curator of the ichthyology collection at the Natural History Museum, said the exhibit fueled excitement about the find. “There’s a lot we don’t know about this species in general,” he said. “It is exactly the type of thing we want to put on display so people can see it and learn about the world around them and about the strange creatures that are in their own backyard.” That’s also why it is so important that anyone who encounters an animal on the beach alert officials who can get it into the right hands. Each one has the potential to provide a piece of a puzzle scientists are trying to solve. “Each one of these that comes up is a treasure trove of information,” Ludt said.Supply chain issues. Labor shortages. Rising prices. Mask mandates. These are some of the biggest challenges facing small merchants this holiday season and I can tell you on behalf of many of my clients that it’s not making for a very merry Christmas. But there’s thing that is saving the season for thousands of business owners and no, it’s not Rudolph. It’s a financing program called buy now pay later, or BNPL. And its use has exploded recently, particularly among small businesses. “It’s one of the stars, actually, of the holiday season for us,” Dan Schulman, the CEO of the payments service PayPal told CNBC. “During Black Friday, our volume on buy now, pay later was up almost 400% year over year. We did some 750,000 transactions alone in one day.” PayPal says it had more than a million first-time users in one month and its BNPL usage is “well over 10 million consumers”. BNPL has become so popular that a report from marketing insights agency C+R Research says that about 60% of US adults have used it when buying products and of those who’ve used it, 80% plan on using it for holiday gift-buying, according to data intelligence firm Morning Consult. Younger people love the option too. Nearly 60% of Gen Z and millennials have bought a product on social media using a buy now, pay later option, according to a study from StitcherAds. E-commerce firm Adobe’s Digital Economy Index, which analyzes direct consumer transactions online, said revenue on Cyber Monday from buy now, pay later plans rose 21% from a year ago. So what is BNPL? It’s not a new concept. In fact, your grandparents will probably recognize it. That’s because BNPL is just like the old layaway programs they used back in the day, but with a 21st-century twist. In the olden days, layaway programs were only used for big purchases like a dining room set or a new Zenith color TV (with remote control!). But today’s BNPL programs are being used for smaller transactions, both online and in store, and consumers can walk away with the product after making their first payment. PayPal Credit, Affirm, Klarna and Afterpay are among the most popular platforms used by merchants of all sizes. For a small business, BNPL is easy to set up. A consumer wants to buy something. The BNPL service is offered as a plug-in payment option on an e-commerce site or in-store by the merchant. The consumer usually has an interest-free period where they make installment payments over a period of a few weeks or months. There’s usually no credit checks and consumers can avoid using their credit cards where they have to pay off their balance that month. Of course there are some downsides. For consumers, late fees and interest payments could be steep – as much as 25% in some cases. Credit limits are smaller and credit reports can be affected if payment isn’t made on time. For merchants, most BNPL arrangements still require a fee which, according to the Kansas City Federal Reserve can range from 1.5 to 1.7% of the purchase value (including tax), as compared to the cost of a typical debit or credit-card transaction, which ranges from 1 to 3%. But on the other hand, it makes it easier to sell products. And research shows that when BNPL is offered, customers actually buy more. In fact, BNPL users plan to spend on one gift what the average shopper plans to spend for the entirety of their holiday shopping this season, according to the above Morning Consult report. “I think there is an impulse element to this, and that these companies do make a lot of money by partnering with retailers,” Joe Buhrmann, senior financial planning consultant at eMoney Advisor, told MarketWatch. “There’s a lot of data that people spend more when they use buy now, pay later, [and] they come back again and again.” Is that such a bad thing? Maybe for the undisciplined consumer. But considering all the other headaches small businesses have to deal with this holiday season, BNPL is providing (almost) as much cheer as a glass of eggnog. If your business hasn’t signed up for one of these plans, you may be missing an opportunity.Port Isaac The Golden Lion pub, perched high above the harbour in Port Isaac, has it all – snuggly wood panelling, a roaring fire and good beer. Winter is the perfect time to visit this fishing village – the gift shops may be closed, but the village won’t be swamped with the Doc Martin fanclub. There’s a spectacular circular walk past Kellan Head to Port Quin – or continue on to the Rumps, an iron age fort jutting out from the Pentire headland. Stay in a former pilchard cellar, a National Trust property nestled right on the shingle at Port Quin – and brace yourself for a gale. Carolina Cellar, from £307 for two nights in January, nationaltrust.org.uk The Roseland Peninsula On the south coast, the Roseland Peninsula is a hidden gem with beautiful beaches and secluded bays. In Portscatho, early risers can watch the sun come up with coffee and custard tarts at Tatams café above the beach or have a winter sea swim, if you dare. There are plenty of pubs to check out – the Plume of Feathers in Portscatho, the King’s Head at Ruan Lanihorne, and the Roseland Inn at Philleigh are all cosy places for a pint by the fire. Stay at Cow Parsley Cottage, a short walk from Philleigh. With two outdoor baths set side-by-side in its garden, what could be better than taking a hot bubble bath in the cold air at sundown? If you’re lucky, you’ll see the resident barn owl, too fly past. Cow Parsley Cottage, from £180 per night, penhallowfarmholidays.co.uk Zennor, near Penzance You can’t miss the Gurnard’s Head. This bright yellow pub is like a dollop of English mustard on the cliffs, a beacon of warmth and hospitality above the jagged rocks. Weary walkers can find good food and an open fire. There are lovely bedrooms upstairs. Before you settle in, clear your head with a stomp across the fields to the Gurnard’s Head itself, a towering rock promontory with big Game of Thrones energy. Once the cobwebs are dealt with, head back to the pub. You’ll want to book table 18 in the window, with the best views of the sea. Winter breaks from £185 for two, dinner B&amp;B, Sun-Thu, gurnardshead.co.uk Mousehole Mousehole does winter in style: in December and January, the harbour is festooned in a spectacular display of old-fashioned Christmas lights. Stay in the Old Coastguard – sister hotel to the Gurnard’s Head. It has the same irresistible offering of good food, good wine, cosy bedrooms – and it’s kid- and dog-friendly. Catch a matinee at the nearby Newlyn Filmhouse, in a converted fish merchant, before heading back to the Coastguard for dinner. Winter breaks from £185 for two, supper and B&amp;B, two nights Sun-Thu; Sunday Sleepovers £207.50, for lunch, supper and B&amp;B, oldcoastguardhotel.co.uk Falmouth Spend lazy days exploring Falmouth town and relax with a Breton cider by the fire at pub-bookshop Beerwolf Books. Eat the best pasty of your life at Proper Pasties, a hole-in-the-wall joint on Upton Slip, or enjoy an espresso and some socialist theory at Rubicund, a radical bookshop-café in the historic St Georges Arcade. Stay at the Star and Garter, a foodie pub with three apartments upstairs, which have everything you need in the depths of winter: a soft bed, a deep bath, a massive telly, and killer views. The apartments are self-catering, but the food (and rum) in the pub downstairs is exceptional. Apartments from £170 per night. Breakfast boxes are available for £35 extra, which include everything you need for a hearty fry up; starandgarterfalmouth.co.uk Porthleven and the Lizard The village of Porthleven, on the south coast, is famous for images of vast waves breaking over its harbourside walls and churchduring winter storms – and the best seat in town is at the Ship Inn, an atmospheric pub where you can watch the sea explode against the harbour walls. Walk to nearby Lizard Point, then warm up with lunch at the Polpeor café, perched perilously high on the cliffs. Stay in Pednagothollan, a large house on the Lizard cliffs with views of Kynance Cove, which has great prices for winter stays. From £995 for 7 nights, sleeps 6; forevercornwall.co.uk Helford, near Falmouth If the weather gets too much, retreat to the sheltered creeks around the Helford Passage. Here, nestled among ancient woodland, you’ll find the Ferry Boat Inn, perched on the banks of the river, with tables outside so parents can eat and drink, while kids play on the beach. Come for the Sunday roasts, which are indecently huge and delicious. Nearby Trebah Garden is a subtropical paradise teeming with tree ferns, bamboo and hydrangeas. It also has a private beach, perfect for wild swimming – yes, even in winter. Stay at Little Trenant Barn on Polwheveral Creek, which comes with its own rowing boat, called Sandy. From £145 per night, sleeps 4; airbnb.co.uk Trevose Head At Trevose Head spindly trees dot the wild cliff tops and the sea booms in dramatic gorges. Constantine, Booby’s and Trevone are great beaches for a stormy stomp. If you fancy eating out, locals rave about Prawn on the Lawn in Padstow, which won UK seafood restaurant of the year in 2020. And stay at the cosy Pig at Harlyn Bay, a warren-like country pile: guests are actively encouraged to collapse into with velvet armchairs by the fire. Collapse, cocktail in hand, before tucking into exceptional food in the candlelit dining room, scented with dried rosemary and woodsmoke. From £150; thepighotel.com Penzance In bad weather, Penzance’s seafront becomes a theatre where the waves put on a thrilling show. After a walk along the promenade, explore the thriving independent high street where chic homeware boutiques, such as No 56, rub shoulders with old-fashioned gems like Jim’s department store, where you can buy everything from a set of vampire teeth to an enamel pie dish. Don’t miss Tam O’Shanter, a tiny shop selling traditional wool jumpers, frame-knitted by “83-year-old Frank”. Warm up at the Honey Pot, a cosy café that serves roasts on a Sunday. Chapel House, a serene hotel in the centre of town, has baths in the bedrooms and views of St Michael’s Mount. From £160 per night; chapelhousepz.co.uk Portholland, near Mevagissey Enjoy a windswept walk along Portholland Beach before lunch at the Kings Arms in the nearby fishing port of Mevagissey. It’s a proper pub, with excellent wine and plenty of atmosphere – think heavy wooden tables, a flagstone floor, and daily menus scrawled in chalk. Book ahead for their Festive Feasts through December. Chapel House on Portholland Beach is the ultimate cosy stay for new year and beyond. Curl up with a book while the rain batters the arched windows which face straight out to the sea. From £100 per night, sleeps 6, children welcome, sawdays.co.ukIt was the misfortune, or perhaps privilege, of the critic, writer and professor Sylvère Lotringer, who has died aged 83, to be best known not as the man who launched postmodern French theory to America, but for his supporting role in his second wife’s 1997 semi-fictional epistolary memoir about her erotic obsession with another man. In I Love Dick, later turned into an Amazon series with Griffin Dunne as Lotringer, the French professor goes on sabbatical to California, accompanied by his wife Chris Kraus, an experimental film-maker, who falls in love with the eponymous academic, modelled on the British critic Dick Hebdige. Lotringer joins the correspondence, signing himself in one letter as Charles Bovary, casting himself thereby as cuckolded husband to Emma Bovary and Dick as her lover Léon Dupuis. The couple invite Dick to join what amounts to a postmodern art project that blurs fiction and reality. The project would involve pasting the letters in the correspondence on his car and around his house. “It seems to be a step toward the confrontational performing art you’re encouraging,” Lotringer writes to Dick at one point. In reality, Hebdige issued unsuccessful cease and desist letters. Kraus and Lotringer publicised the book by reading from their letters to Dick on radio shows, never qualifying the correspondence as fiction but rather the letters as fiction: they were, they explained, piercing the false conceit of literature that protected the privacy of the author. The I Love Dick project was French postmodern theory in action, since the couple conceived it as akin to the feminist art stalking projects of the postmodernist artist Sophie Calle, who was Jean Baudrillard’s student. Baudrillard, for his part, was one of the philosophers whom Lotringer introduced to the US and with whom he collaborated on several books. Lotringer was founding editor in 1974 of the postmodern theoretical journal and publishing house Semiotext(e), which enabled Lotringer to work, as he put it, as a “foreign agent provocateur” bringing together French theory and contemporary American art to fruitful collaboration. The project did not always work well. In 1975, he organised a conference, Schizo-culture, in New York, at which French postmodernist and poststructuralist philosophers for the first time met American artists, along with radical political groups including the Black Panthers. Michel Foucault lectured on repression, while John Cage performed the chance-generated piece Empty Words. But fights broke out, speakers insulted each other, and Foucault was accused from the floor of being a CIA agent. The psychoanalyst Félix Guattari announced just before his panel: “I am the chair of this panel and I abolish this panel,” and then left. And yet, this conference and Semiotext(e), both Lotringer’s ideas, profoundly changed American intellectual and artistic cultures, for good or ill. Lotringer was born in Paris, to Polish Jewish immigrants, Doba (nee Borenstein) and Cudek Lotringer, who ran a fur shop. Sylvère and his older sister, Yvonne, were the only Jewish pupils at their school. After enduring the Nazi occupation of Paris, the Lotringers emigrated to Tel Aviv in the new state of Israel in 1949. There Sylvère joined Hashomer Hatzair, a socialist-Zionist youth movement and experienced life in a kibbutz called Bar Am. “[We] shared everything … Socialism was a reality,” he recalled. It was a collective idyll he sought to recapture in his later life. He and his family returned to Paris and, after graduating from the Lycée Jacques Decour, he studied for a BA (1962) and an MA (1963) in comparative literature from the Sorbonne. He then enrolled at the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, where he studied with Lucien Goldmann and Roland Barthes. His doctoral thesis, defended in 1967 and written with assistance from Leonard Woolf, whom he met while carrying out research in Britain, and following conversations with Clive Bell, TS Eliot and Vita Sackville-West, was entitled: Virginia Woolf: De la Mort des Valeurs aux Valeurs de la Mort (“From the Death of Values to the Values of Death”). “I got my PhD as a way of postponing the draft,” said Lotringer. “Algeria was our Vietnam, and I wasn’t exactly keen on being sent there.” Indeed, at the Sorbonne he had led student protests against France’s colonial war. Lotringer taught for two years (1965 to 1967) for the French government’s Cultural Services in Turkey. He went to the US in 1969 to become assistant professor of French at Swarthmore College, Pennsylvania, before joining the comparative literature faculty at Columbia University in New York in 1972. Even though he taught there until his retirement in 2009, he claimed to find academia increasingly stultifying: “The student rebellion was only four years [past] and no one dared [mention] it any more.” Founding Semiotext(e) was a liberation. He recalled that one early issue of the journal was about art and madness: “trying to outplay the madness of capitalism by going further into it. This is what we’ve been doing ever since.” During the late 1970s, Lotringer took to wearing a studded leather jacket and hanging out with his students at punk shows at CBGBs and SoHo art shows. He followed Baudrillard in opposing to the end of his life the idea that revolution against capitalism was possible; rather, what the latter called “fatal strategies” need to be developed. “There’s no ‘other side’ to capitalism, it is everywhere,” Lotringer said. “Cut one tentacle from the monster and others grow faster on other limbs. Capitalism is crawling inside of us all too, the best and the worst, and we have to keep pushing its creative energy in other directions, dodging the reduction to commerce and self-interest.” Lotringer and Kraus, his second wife, whom he married in 1988, separated in 2005 and later divorced. His first marriage, to the translator Lucienne Binet, also ended in divorce. He is survived by his third wife, the artist Iris Klein, whom he married in 2014; by his daughter Mia, from an earlier relationship with Susie Flato, a co-founder of Semiotext(e); and by two grandchildren, Jonah and Nico. • Sylvère Lotringer, critic, writer and theorist, born 15 October 1938; died 8 November 2021The Girl Before 9pm, BBC One Hundreds of well-off, seemingly smart people are desperate to rent One Folgate Street – a soulless London grand design rented out by a cryptic landlord (David Oyelowo) who has a list of 100 ridiculous stipulations such as “no books”. For Jane (Gugu Mbatha-Raw), the house is a place to escape a recent trauma. But this is a thriller series, not an observation on the housing crisis – Jane soon learns the fate of the girl who lived there before (Jessica Plummer). Hollie Richardson The Royal Variety Performance 7.20pm, ITV In the second of his Christmas telly specials, Alan Carr hosts a night of performances by stars such as Rod Stewart and Elvis Costello. Then hold on to your hats: the cast of Moulin Rouge perform. HR Daniel Barenboim: In His Own Words 9pm, BBC Four From his roots as a piano child prodigy in Buenos Aires to his meteoric rise to fame in classical music, the conductor and pianist speaks candidly about his music and life, as well as his relationship with Jacqueline du Pré. HR Rob &amp; Romesh vs Christmas 9pm, Sky Max Having asked the former’s Instagram followers to suggest a Christmas challenge, Rob Beckett and Romesh Ranganathan are training to join the circus ahead of a potentially dangerous gala performance. Acrobatics and knife-throwing are among the skills that do not come easily. Jack Seale Michael Bublé’s Christmas in the City 10.15pm, ITV Ladies and gentleman: the Christmas Crooner has arrived, celebrating 10 years since his chart-topping festive album (it feels much, much longer to be honest). Expect an hour of comforting, reliable entertainment. HR Buried 10pm, Sky Crime Not-so-festive fun. In 1969, eight-year-old Californian Susan Nason was abducted and murdered while walking to school. The crime remained unsolved for 20 years, until Susan’s childhood friend Eileen Franklin claimed, via a “buried” memory, that her own father George Franklin was the perpetrator. This four-part documentary unpicks the case. Ali Catterall Film choice Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse, 6.45pm, Film4 Despite being separate from the Marvel Cinematic Universe, this terrifically creative animation’s multiverse plot seems to have influenced the direction of the main Avengers series. Taking sustenance from the comics, directorial trio Bob Persicheti, Peter Ramsey and Rodney Rothman deliver many dimensions of Spidey, principally Shameik Moore’s Black teenager Miles Morales, but also Spider-Woman, a film noir version and Peter Porker, a web-slinging pig, as evil is vanquished again. Simon Wardell The Invisible Woman, 11.45pm, BBC Two A corrective to the seasonal Dickens love-in, this biographical drama directed by and starring Ralph Fiennes is taken from Claire Tomalin’s book about the Victorian author’s lover, teenage actor Ellen Ternan. In the 45-year-old Dickens, whose great novels and compelling theatrical readings have made him a star, Ellen (Felicity Jones) finds a kindred spirit but realises the path she is taking could lead to disgrace. Fiennes portrays Dickens as an emotionally complex figure – egotistical and cruel to his wife, Catherine (Joanna Scanlan), but also with a love of life in his bones. SW Live sport Premier League Football: Tottenham Hotspur v Liverpool 4.15pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Klopp’s team visit London.With the Senate adjourned for the holidays and Joe Biden’s Build Back Better social and climate package stalled, the president’s remaining agenda is at the mercy of the 2022 midterm election year. So the practical question is: what should be his, and the Democrats’, first priority when Congress returns in January? Biden obviously wants to get his spending package passed. But swift action on voting rights is essential. Republican state legislatures will soon begin drawing partisan congressional maps that federal legislation would outlaw. Several states have already changed election laws in ways making it harder for people in minority communities to vote and giving Republican legislatures greater power over election outcomes. To be sure, any new national voting rights legislation depends on altering the Senate filibuster so the 50 Democratic senators (plus the vice-president) can pass it. (Senate Republicans won’t go along.) Hence the urgency of Senate Democrats agreeing to carve out voting rights from the filibuster. It’s important to put this into a larger context. Saving American democracy requires stopping three powerful forces already on the way to destroying it. The first is Trump’s big lie that the 2020 election was stolen. That baseless claim is now believed by some 60% of registered Republicans. The lie fits with the Republican party’s understanding that demographic trends will work against it in future elections unless it shrinks the electorate. The second is big anger spread by the media, especially Fox News and Facebook. Big anger is boosting their ratings and revenues by inciting divisiveness, racism, panic and paranoia. Yet it’s undermining trust that democracy depends on. The third is big money, from large corporations and wealthy individuals. It’s inundating political campaigns, supporting one-sided issue ads and bribing lawmakers on both sides of the aisle to support measures that will further enrich corporations and the wealthy and block measures that will cost them. The big lie, big anger and big money reinforce each other because they all depend on Americans believing that democracy is rigged against them. And, to a shameful extent, it is. Urgent steps must be taken against all three. The first step is to set national voting-rights standards in light of Trump’s big lie. Senate Democrats must enact the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Amendment Act in January, when they still have a chance to prevent much Republican state voter suppression and electoral manipulation. If they fail to do this they will be complicit with the Republican party in using Trump’s big lie to shrink the electorate. Trump and his Republican co-conspirators must also be held accountable for their attempted coup in the months after the 2020 election, leading up to the 6 January attack on the Capitol. Hopefully, the House committee now investigating it (with the crucial and courageous participation of Republicans Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger) will report its findings early in the new year. Timing is essential. Republicans must not be allowed to delay the committee’s work. If they take control of the House next year they are certain to shut the panel down. Once the committee reports its findings, the justice department must take legal action against Trump and all lawmakers implicated in the attempted coup. The second step is to constrain big anger emanating from social media, Fox News, and other outlets. There are two ways to do this without undermining freedom of speech. Revoke Section 230 of the Communications Act, which now protects digital media providers from liability for content posted by their users even if that content is harmful, hateful or misleading. There is no continuing justification for this legal protection, particularly at a time when the largest of these providers have become vast monopolies. Create a new “fairness doctrine” requiring that all broadcasters, including cable, cover issues of public importance in ways that present opposing perspectives. This will be difficult to enforce, to be sure, but it would at least affirm the nation’s commitment to holding broadcasters to a higher standard than merely making money. The third step is to get big money out of politics. The supreme court is unlikely to reverse its shameful decision in Citizens United v FEC and related cases, given the current makeup of the court. A constitutional amendment allowing the government to limit money spent on campaigns is extremely unlikely. But campaign finance reform is possible by matching small donations with public dollars. This was in the original For the People Act and should be added to the Freedom to Vote Act. These are the minimal essentials for containing the big lie, big anger and big money. Biden, Democrats and any remaining principled Republicans – along with the leaders of nonprofits, universities, labor unions, grassroots organizations, racial justice and environmental advocates and business – must wage war to save American democracy. And this war must start as soon as possible. Nothing else we do for America is as important. Nothing else that needs doing in America is possible unless we do this. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comCricketers, more than most sportspeople, measure their achievement in numbers – be that runs scored, wickets taken, or matches played. So you can understand why Eileen Ash was so celebrated for her record-breaking innings: at 110 years old she was the longest-living Test cricketer of all time by an impressive margin of seven years (the runner-up was South Africa’s Norman Gordon). After her death, the tributes paid from the cricket world recalled her energetic and enduring spirit as much as her bowling achievements for England and Middlesex. During the last decade of her life, she found a popularity she had never experienced during her playing days, and the England men’s team even took to the field wearing black armbands in her honour on the first day of the current Ashes series. A right-arm seam bowler, Ash played seven consecutive Tests for England between 1937 and 1949 in an international career interrupted by the second world war. “The war was a terrible waste of one’s life,” she later observed. “I’ve been lucky, though, because I’ve had extra years over 100.” Like so many female cricketers, Ash’s pioneering contributions in the early days of the women’s domestic game – playing first-class matches for Middlesex, South of England, and the Civil Service – were largely uncelebrated by the cricketing establishment of the time. It wasn’t until she had achieved her personal century that her profile became elevated, within and without the sport; her 100th birthday was marked with the gift of honorary life membership of MCC, a club that had refused to accept female members or even to allow them to play at their Lord’s ground until decades after Ash’s sporting retirement. Thanks to her longevity and to her ease in front of a camera, Ash and her seven-Test career became a signifier for the history of the much-ignored women’s game as a whole, and a link to the golden, interwar period when the organisation of the women’s game was first founded. That era uncovered and inspired some powerful talents, including Myrtle Maclagan and Betty Snowball. In belatedly feting Ash, cricket was in effect tipping its cap to an entire lost generation. Born in Highbury in north London, Eileen Whelan, as she was then, fell for cricket extremely early – her two brothers and her father both played for a local club, and her uncle had given her her first bat by the age of five (she used to take it to bed with her, along with a ball and a set of stumps). She did not, however, come from the usual background for a female cricketer of the time. Her parents, James, an assistant accountant in the civil service, and Charlotte (nee George), who was in service, were neither well-off nor well-connected. She did not go to one of the private schools where most prewar women’s cricket was played, but instead to Ursuline Convent school for girls in Ilford, Essex, where only hockey was on the menu. A natural athlete, she captained the school hockey team and excelled at squash, but pursued her passion for cricket whenever she got the chance. She followed her father into the civil service at the age of 18, joining as a telephonist, at least in part because she had heard she would be given days off to play cricket for her employer. Seven years later, in 1937, she made her England debut against Australia, taking four for 68 in what would remain her best international performance. She played in all three Tests of the drawn home series, finishing with more than creditable figures of 10 wickets at an average of 23. Unfortunately for Ash, the war was on its way and she was then unable to take to the crease for her country for more than a decade. Her government work saw her seconded to MI6, a period about which she retained a strict discretion until the day she died: even if, as her son suggests, it might have been partly to make it seem more glamorous than it really was. England did not play again until after the second world war, but on their return to Australia and New Zealand, 11 years later, Ash was picked for all four Tests, despite being in her late 30s. The oldest woman selected, she emerged wicketless, but her strength and stamina remained an asset and her gregariousness was much appreciated on a tour as packed with travel and official engagements as it was with net practice. Her diaries from that time, kept private during her lifetime, remain in the family and are likely to be a valuable addition to the cricketing archives. An encounter with Don Bradman resulted in him giving her one of his bats – which she later kept by her bed in case she ever needed to fight off a burglar. She met her husband, Wilfrid Ash, when they lived on the same road in Ilford during the 1920s, and in their later years they lived in Norfolk in a house next door to their son, Christopher; Wilfrid died in 2004. Ash, who continued to play golf until 98, frequently suggested that yoga and red wine had helped her have such a long life, although she also pointed out that it was important to “like other people”. A private woman, she disliked to navel-gaze. Instead she expressed herself through her passions; she was an avid driver of a yellow mini and later enjoyed a taste of wider fame when she appeared on a TV documentary about centenarians behind the wheel. When she heard that 97-year-old Prince Philip had rolled his Land Rover, she considered it a sign and gave up the next day. But her boundlessly adventurous spirit never left her, and for her 106th birthday she aped another beloved England cricketer, David Gower, by taking a passenger trip in a Tiger Moth. She is survived by Christopher, three grandchildren, Ben, Anna and Harriet, and eight great-grandchildren. • Eileen Ash, cricketer, born 30 October 1911; died 3 December 2021I’m absolutely thrilled that Rose Ayling-Ellis has won Strictly Come Dancing – it’s a landmark moment for the deaf community. I am so proud of her. When I first heard about her appearing on the BBC’s Saturday night dance contest, I was unprepared for what an impact she would have – on me and the general population, both as a dancer and as an advocate for deaf rights. It’s amazing to see somebody like me dancing on national TV. I’ve been absolutely blown away watching her over the past 13 weeks. I was born profoundly deaf which means I can’t hear anything out of either ear. My parents noticed when I was two and a half that I wasn’t responding to sound, but because I had spina bifida the doctors assumed I had a learning disability. They were reluctant to give me a hearing test. My parents fought them, and I was eventually diagnosed and given hearing aids. Ayling-Ellis has been instrumental in creating a powerful positive change in public attitudes through the beauty of her dancing. I grew up in a hearing world with a hearing family, which was isolating at times. But I loved dance lessons and competitions. Sadly, I had to stop after I had an operation. When I first went to university, I wasn’t provided with qualified interpreters or any communication support in my exams. I couldn’t hear and I failed them. The university apologised, but it was too late. I started at the University of Reading in 2017 after leaving that first course and I attained a first in education studies, in part thanks to the support the university provided me with. I have since got a job as the advocacy officer at RNID, campaigning to remove barriers for the deaf community. I hope I’ve had an impact with the work I do. People often say to me: “Oh, you can’t do that – because you’re deaf.” Ayling-Ellis has shown that deaf people can do anything – dancing, acting and plenty more. Why shouldn’t we? I agree when Ayling-Ellis says “it’s a joy to be deaf”. It’s such a joy to be part of this wonderful community and to use British Sign Language (BSL) – both to communicate with other deaf people but also, as Ayling-Ellis’s dance partner, Giovanni Pernice, has shown by embracing BSL, as a way for deaf and hearing people to work together. I hope to see more of that in the media in future. The deaf community’s ideal vision of a perfect world is hearing people communicating with us using sign language, while employing all aspects of deaf awareness: eye contact and clear lip patterns, too. BSL tutors, including myself, have witnessed a surge in interest in learning sign language since Ayling-Ellis appeared on Strictly. It’s amazing, and I hope that interest remains now the show has ended. Even learning a little bit of sign language can allow a hearing person to make a difference to the deaf community. Anyone wanting to learn BSL should use an accredited provider to ensure they have a qualified teacher who will teach them about deaf culture as well as BSL. There are challenges to being deaf – but it’s society that creates those barriers, not being deaf. I have every belief Ayling-Ellis will continue to inspire change, even now she has hung up her dancing shoes. • This article was amended on 20 December 2021 to set out, at first mention, the full name British Sign Language, thereafter abbreviated to BSL. Annie Harris is an advocacy officer for RNID and teaches BSLWriting from Los Angeles in 1965, the Scottish film academic Colin Young told readers of Sight &amp; Sound magazine that Hollywood was “turning out tired material that is irrelevant to what is really going on inside Americans”. Young, who has died aged 94, became instrumental in helping to improve that situation. In his capacity as chairman of the department of theatre arts at the University of California in Los Angeles (UCLA), a position he held until 1970, he facilitated an especially fecund period during which the student body included Francis Ford Coppola, Lawrence Kasdan, Barry Levinson, Ray Manzarek and Jim Morrison (who formed the rock band the Doors), John Milius and Paul Schrader. “He used to collect all sorts of odd people,” said the documentary maker Terry Macartney-Filgate, who taught at UCLA. “Anyone who interested him could get in the programme.” Young encouraged his students to look beyond their own horizons in search of inspiration. “There was a generation of Americans who didn’t find themselves in their own films, but they did, funnily enough, in European films,” he said. One unexpected consequence of the thriving American cinema he had helped to shape was that the students he went on to teach at the National Film School (known since 1982 as the National Film and Television School) in Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, “couldn’t bear to think of working anywhere in the world except Hollywood”. Young was the school’s founding director, and his students – who regarded him, according to Movie Maker magazine, as “a kind of benevolent godfather” – included Terence Davies, Bill Forsyth, Beeban Kidron, Nick Park, Julien Temple and the documentary makers Nick Broomfield, Molly Dineen and Kim Longinotto. Among later intakes were Lynne Ramsay and Joanna Hogg, whose autobiographical diptych The Souvenir (2019) and The Souvenir Part II (2021) features scenes based partly on her time at the school. Park, whose graduation film, the stop-motion Wallace and Gromit short A Grand Day Out (1989), took seven years to make, called the NFTS “a playground to develop the craft of storytelling”. Davies recalled butting heads with Young only once, when he suggested removing an eye-catching shot from the director’s 1980 short Madonna and Child. “I hit the roof and went home full of indignation,” Davies said. “But on the way home I realised he was right … I apologised to Colin and that was a good lesson for me – if you’re seduced by how good it looks you should probably get rid of it.” Not that there were many hard and fast rules. The school had no written curriculum or formal limit on hours and term times. This was a loose, practice-based endeavour in which, as Young put it, “everyone did a bit of everything”. He and his colleagues, he said, “change our mind all the time about the best ways to do this job. So that it’s never the same place two years running, it’s always a new school – regenerated!” Born in Glasgow, Colin was the son of Agnes (nee Holmes Kerr) and Colin Sr, who owned three confectionery shops called the Sugar Bowl. His passion for film was rooted in the Hollywood movies he saw as a child at Saturday matinees. He was educated at Bellahouston academy, and on being called up enlisted in the Intelligence Corps. At St Andrews University, he got his master’s in philosophy and morals in 1951. Harbouring journalistic ambitions, he began working for an Aberdeen newspaper where he filled in as film reviewer, though the rigour of his critiques sat unhappily with advertisers, and his tenure in the role was brief. He travelled to California where he worked as a gardener to save the money necessary to enrol at UCLA. By his second year, he was teaching there to help cover his fees. After gaining his theatre arts degree there, Young briefly joined the writing department at MGM as a “technical adviser”, and was impressed by the unfussy attitude of his colleagues. “These guys just did things by the seat of their pants,” he said. “I was amazed how quick they were to spot a weakness in the story without ever wishing to change the story, but simply to strengthen the storytelling.” In 1958, he became Los Angeles editor of Film Quarterly magazine, which published some of the first English translations of writing by the auteurist critic André Bazin; Young was also its London editor for 21 years from 1970. He was invited back to UCLA to teach, and given the department of theatre arts to run in 1965. He brought in esteemed guest tutors including Jean Renoir, and helped create the university’s ethnographic film programme as what was called an ethno-communications programmme, which provided opportunities for film-makers of colour; these included Charles Burnett, director of Killer of Sheep (1978) and To Sleep with Anger (1990). Young argued for the importance of film school over learning on the job. Here, he said, students are given “the chance to practise with film and get it wrong, again and again, until they eventually get it right”. He returned to Britain in 1970 after being invited to apply to found the country’s first national film school, a move by the government to revitalise the British film industry. He was looking, he said, for candidates who were “emotionally mature and intellectually lively – and have a feel for putting images together meaningfully and interestingly. In short, they must be publicly-spirited egomaniacs who are terribly talented.” The school opened its doors in September 1971. Initial students were given the task of making a documentary on some aspect of Beaconsfield life; Broomfield focused on a local MP, while others set up a sentry post on the edge of the town, stopping people to ask them for passports and then filming the results. He left the school in 1992 and established in Paris the Ateliers du Cinéma Européen, a training and development centre for European producers. He was made a Chevalier de l’Ordre des Arts et des Lettres in 1987 and a Bafta fellow in 1993. Writing in 2004 in the Journal of British Cinema and Television, Duncan Petrie argued that Young’s “contribution to the development and maintenance of a serious film culture ... makes him as important a figure as his fellow Scot, John Grierson”. The seeds of Young’s philosophy were there from the start. In 1954, he published an article about film societies in which he advocated the migration from viewer to practitioner, insisting that any climate “in which film watchers will be encouraged to become film-makers, even at an amateur, exploratory level … is a development in the right direction. There comes a time when a man cannot listen to another word about film criticism. He simply has to forget talking, and go out and shoot some film.” In 1987 he married Conny Templeman. She survives him along with their children, Keir and Zoe, and two sons, Colin and Cairn, from his first marriage, to Kristin Ohman, which ended in divorce in 1985. • Colin Young, film educator, born 5 April 1927; died 27 November 2021The health secretary, Sajid Javid, has made clear that tougher Covid restrictions could be imposed in England before Christmas, after the government’s Sage committee warned that hospitalisations could peak at between 3,000 and 10,000 a day unless action is taken. Javid acknowledged that data about the Omicron variant remained incomplete – but suggested it might be necessary to make decisions before a full picture is available. Asked to rule out new measures pre-Christmas, he said: “We are assessing the situation; it’s very fast-moving,” adding, “there’s a lot of uncertainty, there are gaps in the data, but we must work with the data we’ve got, we mustn’t let perfection be the enemy of the good.” Speaking on the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show, Javid stressed that it was already clear that Omicron spread very quickly, adding that there were likely to be many more cases than official data is showing. In minutes published this weekend, the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) urged the government to reintroduce “more stringent measures … very soon”, warning that cases were set to reach between 600,000 and 2m a day by the end of the month if action was not taken immediately. Pressed about Sage’s advice, Javid said: “It’s a very sobering analysis, we take it very seriously.” He said he and his colleagues would be assessing the advice, alongside the wider effect of potential measures, including their economic effects. Echoing the message of England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, earlier this week, Javid also called on the public to be careful about socialising in the run-up to Christmas. “It’s time to be more cautious. We know this thing is spreading rapidly,” he said. Javid said he would be taking a lateral flow test before seeing his elderly mother, and would hug her less than usual. Cabinet ministers are understood to have discussed the possibility of fresh restrictions in a call on Saturday, with the prime minister keen to hold out until after Christmas. Pressure on the government over Covid curbs has been intensified by the shock resignation on Saturday night of the Brexit minister, David Frost, who made clear that his objection to the “plan B” measures put in place last week was one of the reasons for his departure. The changes, which included widening mandatory mask-wearing and requiring Covid passes at large venues, were passed only with Labour support, with 100 Conservative backbenchers rebelling against the changes. Boris Johnson has promised to recall parliament if he judges that tougher regulations are needed over Christmas – though he could issue non-binding guidance to the public without doing so. The shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, told Trevor Phillips on Sunday on Sky News that Javid was “a hostage to his own party” on Covid. “The prime minister has a big problem when it comes to the crisis of confidence in his leadership in his own ranks, and crucially that is impacting on the government’s public health response,” he said. Streeting said that if parliament was recalled in the coming days, Labour was ready to support more restrictions if these were recommended by scientists. “He doesn’t have to negotiate with the people holding him to ransom on his own backbenches, because we will act in the public interest, we will put public health before party politics,” he said. The London mayor, Sadiq Khan, who declared Omicron a “major incident” in the capital on Saturday, argued that further controls on mixing should be introduced. “If we don’t bring in new restrictions sooner rather than later, you’re going to see even more positive cases, and potentially public services like the NHS on the verge of collapse, if not collapsing.” He suggested the right moment to move might be after Christmas, given the importance for people’s mental health of meeting up with their families.Richard Rogers, who has died aged 88, changed the face of urban Britain more than any other architect of the late 20th century. He was author of the groundbreaking Lloyd’s building in the City of London and the Pompidou Centre in Paris, but his impact was manifest less in his own buildings than in his influence on public policy, which saw a fundamental shift in the perception of inner cities away from being something to endure or escape, to being something desirable to enjoy. He ushered in the era of “regeneration”, seeing British cities adorned with canal-side apartments and cafe-lined squares, if sometimes at a cost to existing communities. Shortly after New Labour came to power in the landslide election of 1997, Rogers was appointed to chair the Urban Task Force, a quango charged with identifying the causes of urban decline in England and recommending practical solutions to bringing people back into cities and putting an end to suburban sprawl. The findings, published as Towards an Urban Renaissance in 1999, called for a new generation of “compact cities”, advocating the redevelopment of post-industrial brownfield land with high-density flats, shops and cafes, along with investment in public transport, public spaces and public facilities. Five years later, housing densities had risen from an average of 25 to 40 dwellings per hectare, and 70% of development was on brownfield land. Rogers’ principles would define the model of urban regeneration for the coming decades, for better and worse. His vision was presented as one of inclusivity and equality, but it would also foster greater displacement and division, producing a form of investment-fuelled development that saw his own practice design some of the most expensive housing ever built. While the socialist Labour peer argued for a city for all, his office was designing the fortified luxury apartment schemes of One Hyde Park, Neo Bankside and Riverlight, stacks of investment units that became symbols of London’s extreme inequality. Rogers often credited his urbane, cosmopolitan outlook to his Italian upbringing. He was born in Florence, in an apartment with a view of the Duomo. His father, Nino, was a doctor, whose own father, a dentist, was a British émigré to Italy. His mother, Dada (nee Geiringer), was an art-lover, who became a potter. She was the daughter of an architect and engineer from a notable Trieste family, and had once been taught English by James Joyce. They moved to Britain in 1939 to escape the rise of fascism, finding lodging in a single room in a boarding house in Bayswater with a coin meter for the heating and a bath in a cupboard. Cold, smoggy London at a time of rationing was a culture shock for the young Rogers. As he later recalled, “life switched from colour to black and white”. He was sent to Kingswood House boarding school in Epsom, a place he described as “brutal and unfair”, where he was regularly beaten and bullied, an experience that prompted him to become a good boxer. He grew in confidence at St John’s school in Leatherhead, where he discovered sporting ability, but he struggled with dyslexia and left school in 1951 without A-levels. It was during these years, Rogers later wrote, that he realised there was more strength in working as a group than being a solo high achiever, an outlook that would go on to inform his collaborative model of practice. During a major retrospective exhibition at the Royal Academy to mark Rogers’s 80th birthday, the curators admitted that they struggled to find a single drawing by the man himself. Rogers spent his national service stationed in Trieste, which proved to be a formative period. While on leave, he worked in the office of his cousin Ernesto Rogers, the feted architect of the Torre Velasca in Milan, which inspired him to apply to study at the Architectural Association on his return to London. He was an enthusiastic, if inconsistent, student. A tutor’s report in 1958 described his work as “chaotic and inarticulate”, but he impressed the examiners with his final project, a school for children with special educational needs in Wales, using locally grown timber and designed so that the pupils could participate in building. One of Rogers’s tutors, the brutalist architect Peter Smithson, noted his “capacity for worrying about the effect the building will have on people and a concern for shape on the inside,” which would prove to be a constant theme. Rogers met Su Brumwell in his third year. She was studying sociology at the London School of Economics and her parents were socialists, with deep roots in the Labour movement, giving Rogers early exposure to the political left. They married in 1960 and travelled to Yale the following year on a Fulbright scholarship, after Rogers spent a short spell working at Middlesex county council’s architects’ department. At Yale he met Norman Foster, and was taught by Paul Rudolph, whose designs for Yale’s Art and Architecture Building would have a great influence on his own designs for the Lloyd’s building years later. After graduating, he worked briefly in the San Francisco office of the corporate firm Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill, which provided a useful lesson. “I quickly came to realise,” he wrote, “that working in someone else’s architectural practice was not for me.” On returning to the UK, Rogers, Brumwell and Foster, along with Foster’s wife Wendy Cheesman, set up a practice, Team 4, and began by designing a house for Brumwell’s parents in Cornwall, called Creek Vean. It was a steep learning curve. It took six years, almost bankrupted both the designers and their client, and saw Rogers and Foster summoned to the Architects Registration Council for practising without a licence. Their factory in Swindon for Reliance Controls, built in 1967, had a smoother ride. In its use of standardised industrial components, this elegant shed presaged the direction Rogers’ work would go on to take. The following year, after Team 4 split up, he and Su developed the ZipUp House, a prototype home designed to be assembled quickly and cheaply from insulated panels of the kind used for refrigerated trucks. “Buying clothes off the rack is the norm,” Rogers wrote. “We wanted to do the same for the house – an affordable, speedy kit of parts.” The concept was never realised, but the thinking influenced Parkside, the modular house he built for his parents in Wimbledon. A model of the ZipUp house, a streamlined yellow pod on bright pink legs, stood in the foyer of his office for decades to come, as the original high-tech, factory-assembled dream from which all else would be spawned. Rogers’ technology-driven production line principles would soon be explored on a much larger scale in a project that would change his career forever. In 1969 the French president, Georges Pompidou, announced a competition for a new multidisciplinary cultural centre on the vacant site of the Plateau Beaubourg in Paris. Rogers teamed up with the Italian architect Renzo Piano, to whom he had been introduced by his doctor, and, together, they dreamt up the most radical proposal of their lives. Their scheme for the Centre Pompidou was to be a great oil refinery of art, a mechanical transformer of a building, inspired by the comic book fantasies of Archigram and Cedric Price for a new kind of robotic architecture that would respond to changing needs, with plug-in components and moving floors. Huge digital screens would entertain crowds on a great sloping piazza outside, while escalators in glass tubes would shuttle people up the building’s facade, forming a dynamic backdrop to the mime artists and musicians down below. It was saturated with colour, its exposed pipes and ducts painted in the bright reds, blues and greens of the media age – a feature that would continue in Rogers’s work for years to come. The point, he said, was that “culture should be fun”. Their winning sci-fi vision met with a frosty reception in Paris. The architects were booed at the press conference, where balls of paper were hurled, along with accusations that they were building a low-brow supermarket of culture, an ocean liner run aground in the Marais, and a jungle gym for King Kong. Pompidou died and his successor cut the budget. The screens were dropped, the floors did not move and fire regulations curtailed some of the more daring ideas. Pressure groups filed lawsuits against the project, the Guardian’s art critic said the “hideous” object should be covered with Virginia creeper, while Robert Delaunay’s widow Sonia said she would rather burn his paintings than have them exhibited in the building. But the architects were vindicated by the public reaction: visitor numbers were five times those predicted. Around seven million people visited in the first year, more than the Louvre and Eiffel Tower combined. The Pompidou Centre marked a watershed: it was both a late flowering of 1960s utopianism and a premonition of the city-boosting “iconic” cultural architecture that would define urban regeneration in the decades to follow. The Parisian cultural tanker set the aesthetic and ideological agenda for the Richard Rogers Partnership, later Rogers Stirk Harbour + Partners, which Rogers founded in 1977 on his return to London. Structure would be exposed and express what it was doing, in as didactic a way as possible. It would be jauntily coloured too, matching Rogers’s vivid wardrobe of neon braces and acid-hued shirts. The ambition was to make buildings lighter and more flexible, to minimise structure while maximising space and light, and reduce demands on energy and the natural environment, in pursuit of a kind of technological sublime. In London, the thrilling potentials of this high-tech age were first proved in the new headquarters for the insurance giant Lloyd’s of London, completed in 1986. Formed of three towers around a 60-metre high atrium, lit by a huge barrel-vaulted glass roof, its most radical move was to place the service cores outside the building. This freed up more floorspace for desks, and provided Rogers with a chance to revel in the sculptural forms of staircases, glass lifts and toilet pods on the facade, composing a vertical symphony of polished stainless steel. It suffered a similar critical reception to the Pompidou at the time – it was subjected to accusations of “bowellism”, for presenting its innards on the outside – but it has since been recognised as one of the most significant buildings of the 20th century, in 2011 becoming the youngest structure to be Grade I-listed. Two years later, RSH+P completed the Leadenhall Building across the street, a tapering behemoth almost three times the height of Lloyd’s, known as the Cheesegrater, which followed similar principles, placing services to the north to free up the floors and creating an animated ballet of lifts on the facade. In a nod to creating more public space, the tower was raised on legs, 30 metres up in the air, although the heavily-managed plaza beneath has the feeling of a high-security lobby. The 1980s also saw Rogers begin to take a more prominent role in public life. In an exhibition at the Royal Academy, titled London As It Could Be, he set out ambitious plans for the capital, together with Foster and James Stirling, including burying the road along the Victoria Embankment to create a pedestrian-friendly public riverside, introducing new lightweight footbridges across the Thames and banishing traffic from the north side of Trafalgar Square – some of which ultimately happened in different forms. Rogers increasingly saw it as his duty to defend the cause of contemporary architecture against more conservative forces. In a series of high-profile speeches throughout the 1980s, the Prince of Wales launched a tirade of attacks on modern architecture, famously describing a proposed steel and glass extension to the National Gallery as “a monstrous carbuncle on the face of a much-loved and elegant friend.” In a speech to the Corporation of London’s planning committee in 1987, referring to Rogers’s proposals for Paternoster Square, he said: “You have to give this much credit to the Luftwaffe: when it knocked down our buildings, it didn’t replace them with anything more offensive than rubble.” So the style wars began. Rogers responded with a long article in the Times, rejecting the Prince’s “Disneyland approach” of bolting on “disposable symbols like decomposed classical columns, pediments and cornices, or flimsy Gothic turrets and Egyptian palm trees,” and attacking his misuse of royal privilege to intervene in the planning system. Rogers maintained that the Prince’s interventions behind the scenes cost his firm work on a number of major projects throughout his career, including the transformation of the Royal Opera House and, most contentiously, his masterplan for Chelsea Barracks, which was shelved in 2009 after Prince Charles contacted the Qatari royal family. If the Prince wielded power behind the scenes, Rogers himself enjoyed a very public platform. He set out his vision for a new generation of sustainable compact cities in the Reith Lectures in 1995, published as Cities for a Small Planet two years later. In 1996 he was made a Labour peer, as Lord Rogers of Riverside. As the chair of the Urban Task Force, he argued for densely populated hubs linked by public transport, walking and cycling, and championed “the urban environment’s capacity to emancipate and civilise, rather than segregate and disempower”. With the establishment of the Greater London Authority in 2000, and the election of Ken Livingstone as the first mayor of London, Rogers was appointed to head up the new Architecture and Urbanism Unit, charged with improving design quality in the capital. “Ken wanted us to influence more than policy,” Rogers wrote. “He wanted us to make things happen.” The A+UU published design guides on streetscape, housing, density and green space, mapped high streets and town centres to identify opportunities for infill development, and launched a plan for 100 new public spaces across London. Only a few of these flagship projects were ever completed, but the A+UU played an influential role in putting design at the top of London’s political agenda – something that was swiftly removed by the next mayor, Boris Johnson, much to Rogers’s fury. While the built output of his practice never quite matched the visceral thrill of the Pompidou or Lloyd’s again, Rogers continued to produce elegant and engaging public buildings, from the law courts in Bordeaux and Antwerp to the National Assembly in Wales, where an image of transparency and public accessibility were always central. His tensile white tent for the Millennium Dome, while deemed a failure at the time, has gone on to house one of the most successful live performance venues in the world, in the form of the O2 Arena. Rogers was awarded the RIBA gold medal and Pritzker prize, and won the Stirling prize twice, for the Barajas airport, Madrid in 2006 and the Maggie’s Centre at Charing Cross hospital in 2009. The former is a rare thing: an airport that does not make you want to escape as soon as you have entered. With its undulating bamboo roof floating above an avenue of branching rainbow-coloured columns, it is a calming place that soothes the stress of international travel. It took just eight years from conception to completion, a stark contrast to Rogers’ scheme for Heathrow Terminal 5, which was subjected to the longest public inquiry in British history and took 19 years to be built. As a result, it seemed outdated by the time it opened. Outside the office, Rogers’s home life was a constant whirlwind of family and entertaining, conducted in a magnificent Georgian house on Royal Avenue in Chelsea, which he gutted to form a vertical stack of spaces around one gigantic triple-height room, nicknamed the piazza. Decorated with artwork by Andy Warhol, Cy Twombly and Philip Guston, it was a lively social hub where he and his second wife, Ruth (nee Elias), co-founder of the River Cafe, whom he had married in 1973, hosted parties and charity benefits for their extensive network of friends. It was a welcoming place, where nosy guests were encouraged to feel at home and explore, discovering everything from the bright green Lino in the loo to the neatly ordered rainbow landscape of Rogers’s sock drawer – which once inspired a dedicated article in the New Yorker. While he lived in a converted Georgian terrace, Rogers always espoused a future of modular homes that could be built on a production line, although he never quite achieved his goal. The main prefab housing scheme he realised was a group of suburban homes for Taylor Wimpey at Oxley Woods in Milton Keynes, in 2007, which were plagued by leaks and legal claims. The practice also developed a “Homeshell” concept for prefabricated flat-pack housing, which they trialled on several sites in London, but have yet to succeed in scaling up. By contrast, his office enjoyed huge success in the luxury apartment sector, producing gleaming glass towers of flats across London, Monaco and Taipei. “Our society has decided … that we will tolerate this worsening level of inequality, despite the fact that it is socially corrosive and economically inefficient,” Rogers wrote in his 2017 memoir, A Place for All People. “Our politics cannot be made a slave to the narrow interests of the super-rich.” As time went on, the gulf between what he espoused for the greater public good, and what his practice actually did for the elite few, grew ever wider. Nonetheless, he will be remembered for a series of radically innovative buildings, which still have the power to shock 40 years on, and for putting the importance of sustainable, liveable cities at the top of the political agenda. He is survived by Ruth and their son Roo; and by three sons, Ben, Zad and Ab, from his first marriage, which ended in divorce; and by 13 grandchildren. His youngest son, Bo, died in 2011. • Richard George Rogers, Lord Rogers of Riverside, architect, born 23 July 1933; died 18 December 2021The weather forecast for tomorrow is fine and the last rites have been booked. Get there early, or you might miss it. Thanks for the emails and messages, sorry I haven’t been able to get to them all. Wishing Joe Root an ice bath, and everyone else, a lovely day. I’ll leave the last word to our Ali in the Adelaide press box: What a blow for England in the last over, after a valiant rearguard from Stokes and Root - who was hit twice in the knackers today, once during warm-up, then by Starc. If he’d still been there at the close, there may have been hope. But starting tomorrow with a jittery Pope at the other end? I hope I’m wrong. I fear I’m not. With the ball, England had a better day, especially in the first hour, and unveiled a surprising hat-trick of twirlers in Root, Malan and the ungainliest 0ff-spinner in history, Ollie Robinson. Nooooooo! Root fends at a full one, with just four balls left of the day. Smith does a jig of delight and that is stumps! 43rd over: England 82-3 (Stokes 3, Root 24) Lyon, jumper clad, wheels in as the ground empties around him. Stokes keeps him out. A maiden, one to go till stumps. “I think Root and Stokes had better up the scoring rate,” chirps Dean Kinsella, “They don’t want to leave too many for Pope and Buttler to get tomorrow evening!” 42nd over: England 82-3 (Stokes 3, Root 24) They take two twos with Root hobbling like a man who has spent a long time in the saddle. Two overs left. He’s up and running again, and Starc lets him off the hook by sending the next ball wide of off stump. Not sure if he’ll have to go off here, he’s in agony. He shooes the camera away as the twelfth man holds up a modesty towel and they examine the damage. Root’s down... hit in the groin by Starc, how much can one man bear? 41st over: England 78-3 (Stokes 3, Root 20) England survive Lyon’s penultimate over, with fielders swarming the bat. Three overs left. In continued support of Rory Burns, Timothy Saunders writes: “If you sent all the Test openers in world cricket in to bat in England in April, facing Jamie Porter, Ben Coad, Tom Bailey and Darren Stevens, I’d back Rory Burns to top score.” 40th over: England 77-3 (Stokes 3, Root 19) Stoke almost gloves a 141kph beauty, then Starc cuts one through him, jack-knifing him at the midrift. An lbw appeal off the last, but it is too high. If England survive this, they deserve a demi-cheers. Four overs remain. 39th over: England 77-3 (Stokes 3, Root 19) Four men surround Stokes as Lyon steps in, he steals a single. Root gets a ripper that turns off the leg, then doesn’t play a shot at the next - jitttttttery. Five overs left. “Ben Jones’ tweet from over 37 was right,” types Tom VD Gucht. “Sadly, he may also be our best bet as captain too.” He always seems to just rescue himself from being dropped, but I’m not sure that’s enough, unless you’re Mike Brearley. Good captain for Surrey though. 38th over: England 75-3 (Stokes 2, Root 18) Stokes is resolute as Stark again steams in, bowling in a short-sleeved cable-knit as the temperature starts to drop. The concentration is dripping off Stokes who defends and defends and defends. Ah, the television is now saying there are still six overs left in the day. 37th over: England 75-3 (Stokes 2, Root 18) Lyon is back - wicketless but deserving. He’s on the money immediately, beating the outside of Stokes bat, and Stokes steals a single from the last ball of the over. Six overs left I like this: 36th over: England 74-3 (Stokes 1, Root 18) Starc gets his go as the evening slips away. Dot, Dot, Dot, Dot, Dot, Dot out of the black. Seven overs left. Tim de Lisle - er why aren’t you in bed - writes: “With Burns making 34, England still have only two players who’ve reached 40 in this series – Root and Malan, twice each.” 35th over: England 74-3 (Stokes 1, Root 18) Root is in the zone. Feet, head, bat. Softly, softly, catchee monkey. Eight overs remaining. Alan writes from Scotland, with a smug air. “Just to let you know after iinflicting “botch up boris” on us and almost causing us a national heart attack by leading in the Final of Euros, we cricket loving Scots would like to thank the English cricket team for keeping with tradition &amp; f..sorry “messing “ up ... from DAY 1 of an Ashes Series in Australia. “This means the long Christmas weekend- “ the crucial third test” - will able a selection boxish period of pleasure &amp; delight as not only will we Scots be able to dip regularly into the Guardian’s OBO reports for a feast of falling wickets we will also be nourshed by the comments of Engerlans exasperated supporters ! “So players &amp; fans keep up the good work we are loving !! Poor Root .however he has just confirmed what most people thought... the only English cricket player with any ...” Alan, do you have no mercy? 34th over: England 72-3 (Stokes 0, Root 17) Green, an overgrown teddy bear with a killer streak, runs from the shadows into the light. Root picks up a couple but is content to play back the rest of the over. “Morning Tanya from a misty Yorkshire,” taps Alex Gerrard. “I don’t want to be Eeyore, but at 70-3 it seems that England’s chances of winning this one are now less than 50-50. Hope I’m wrong.” In Root we hope. Nine overs left today. 33rd over: England 70-3 (Stokes 0, Root 15) Found it! Stokes plays out another maiden. 32nd over: England 70-3 (Stokes 0, Root 15) A maiden for Green, who beats Root with a beauty that anchors him in the crease. I must run and find my charger. 31st over: England 70-3 (Stokes 0, Root 15) Beautiful, testing, bowling. The high point for England early in the over when Root drives with pizazz to pick up three. A shame for Burns who had worked hard to get himself in. Now Stokes comes in blind under lights. That was coming....Richardson had beaten Burns earlier in the over, as he squirted one just wide of the slips. This time he catches the outside edge, where Smith redeems himself by picking up a low neat catch in the slips. A brave rearguard by Burns, but again, not enough. 30th over: England 63-2 (Burns 30, Root 12) Green takes his giant steps back to the top of his run-up and zips a bouncer over the ducking Burns. A tricky maiden. Guy Hornsby’s reasons to be cheerful: 29th over: England 63-2 (Burns 30, Root 12) Lyon gets a break and Smith brings on Richardson. Joe Root has nudged past Alastair Cook with the most runs as England captain, average just below 50. A glance at the list reminds me that Gooch averaged 58! as captain. Incredible. A nice maiden from Richardson to start. 28th over: England 63-2 (Burns 30, Root 12) Root cuts Green’s first ball to the boundary with celestial ease. “It’s frustrating that the Aussies aeem to have so many strong and fit fast bowlers like Starc whilst England’s always seem to end up getting injured,” ponders Tom VD Gucht. “ It reminds me of Bugsy Malone when Dapper Dan keeps beating Fat Sam due to his battery of splurge guns against the pies Fat Sam serves up.When Fat Sam tries to make his own splurge gun, it ends up blowing up in his face and taking out Knuckles. Perhaps, Silverwood needs to take a move from Bugsy’s playbook and round up an army of down-and-outs (including a young Dexter Fletcher) to defeat them.” 27th over: England 57-2 (Burns 30, Root 6) The artificial shadows are now stretching across the Adelaide pitch like accusatory fingers, as the smell of Christmas tree suddenly wafts over from the corner of my living room. What’s at the top of the OBO tree? Root sweeps Lyon safely to pick up a single and that’s DRINKS! 26th over: England 57-2 (Burns 30, Root 6) Smith duly brings on Cameron Green, the baby-faced assassin. Root pushes him into the off side for a casual run to the safety of the non-striker’s end, leaving Burns to negotiate the rest of the over, including overturning that caught behind decision. Brushes the thigh pad not the bat. Given out on the field but Burns calls for DRS immediately 25th over: England 56-2 (Burns 30, Root 5) Another fierce over from Lyon, the ball lifting and fizzing and lunging. Burns survives a leading edge. 24th over: England 54-2 (Burns 29, Root 5) Neser flies through another over but in the gully, Root’s nemesis is warming up. In a final plea to stay on, Neser knifes past Root’s outside edge. Beautiful. “The thought of Merkel on the receiving end of ‘Sir’ Alan Stanford’s pitch has brightened my morning,” types Niall Mullen. 23rd over: England 52-2 (Burns 29, Root 3) Root has ants in his pants as he gets down on his knee twice in a row to sweep Lyon and misses both times. Enough! The ball is bouncing all over the place. 22nd over: England 48-2 (Burns 28, Root 1) Root off the mark with a single into the covers. An hour or so left in the day as the sky turns purple above the Adelaide cathedral. Stay in your seats. Not saved by DRS. The ball nipped back and Malan hadn’t advanced much down the pitch. Would have hit the top of middle stump. A pretty but inconsequential 20. At first sight, looked pretty out, and the umpire raises the finger... but Malan calls for the DRS 21st over: England 48-1 (Burns 28, Malan 19) A chance, put down! Malan pushes forward and Lyon brushes the outside edge of the glove but Smith at slip doesn’t seem to pick the ball up clearly and fumbles it to the ground. 20th over: England 47-1 (Burns 28, Malan 19) A vigorous maiden from Neser, but no cigar. 19th over: England 47-1 (Burns 28, Malan 19) A Lyon maiden spoilt by a four bounding through backward point as Malan cuts. Tasty shot. Block by block, England build. Chris Fowler punches the keys on his typewriter hard“Would it be tempting fate to say Burns and Malan look almost comfortable here?” Yes, Tanya, it would. Not just tempting fate, but inviting it out for a bout of fisticuffs, blindfold, in a sewage farm. With a challenge like that, I’d be amazed if England still have any wickets standing at close of play today. (Over the top? Perhaps. But Fate has to hear it loud and clear, and turn peacefully back to its pint.) 18th over: England 43-1 (Burns 28, Malan 15) Rory Burns charges into a cut off Neser sending it skidding behind square for four. Luckily he has more confidence in himself than the rest of us do. The camera cuts to a long-view and we see the sun setting ominously. 17th over: England 39-1 (Burns 24, Malan 15) Malan cuts well, but I can’t help feeling he might come a cropper against Lyon. Here he tries to cut one that beats him. Another quick-fire maiden. Rick Harris has inside knowledge of the recent trade talks: “I think you need to understand that part of the recent Trade Deal with Australia was a clause agreeing to let them win the Ashes on their own turf in order to boost their self-esteem as a nation, which otherwise let’s face it would be pretty low. When seen in the proper context England are actually distributing international aid to a developing country.” 16th over: England 39-1 (Burns 24, Malan 15) Michael Neser replaces Mitchell Starc and immediately sends down a maiden. An email - hello Kim Thonger! “Now that Angela Merkel is no longer Chancellor of Germany, I wonder if she might be persuaded to become England cricket coach? Her man management and political skills are second to none and she could surely absorb the necessary cricketing knowledge in next to no time with her formidable intellectual prowess?” Now, that is a brilliant suggestion. I’d love to see Angela in one of her signature trouser suits cocking an eyebrow at the ECB execs. 15th over: England 39-1 (Burns 24, Malan 15) Malan cuts Lyon’s last ball, pinpoint through the field, for four. And the runs tick over. Would it be tempting fate to say Burns and Malan look almost comfortable here? 14th over: England 34-1 (Burns 23, Malan 11) Starc again with a remodelled field, but still no breakthrough. Feels like time for a bowling change by Australia. 13th over: England 32-1 (Burns 22, Malan 10) Lyon rips past Burns, at slip Steve Smith is laughing. Burns has two close fielders either side of the wicket, crouching, waiting as Burns bobs about. Great over and another maiden. 12th over: England 32-1 (Burns 22, Malan 10) Malan plays and misses outside off stump. In slow motion, we see him close his eyes in frustration. A maiden from Starc. 11th over: England 32-1 (Burns 22, Malan 10) Malan leans onto the back foot, and cuts Lyon, confidently for four. Late and luscious. “Morning from Spain Tanya.” Good morning Dave Langlois Drastic measures but involving only two team changes, three if you count Root. First, bring in Bairstow as wicket keeper and number six instead of Buttler. Second, bring in Morgan instead of Pope. I know, I know, its yonks since he’s played red-ball cricket never mind test cricket But he averages 30 in tests compared to Buttler’s 33 and Pope’s 31, so no great difference there. And the runs his captaincy would win (by encouraging his own team and outthinking the enemy) would be countless. He would also come to the crease with a credit of 20 runs to start because Root, relieved of captaincy pressures, would be averaging 60 something instead of 40 something.” Nice idea, but I don’t actually think Morgan likes Test cricket. 10th over: England 27-1 (Burns 22, Malan 5) Starc again, he’s a menacing spectacle sprinting out of the shadows, far more physically imposing than England’s bowlers. England survive, picking off runs here and there. “Aside from the ritual awfulness,” writes Andrew Moore, “what is it about Ashes cricket in Australia? We’ve had several tight series in England, but struggling to think of a competitive series over the last 40 years. Even the two England won weren’t close. I blame the atrocious beer.” Good point! Though Australia and India managed an absolute cracker earlier this year. 9th over: England 24-1 (Burns 20, Malan 4) Ah, Nathan Lyon, we’ve been expecting you. Burns quick-steps down to meet him on the half volley and flicks Lyon’s second ball through mid-wicket for four. The next beats him; Burns comes out to meet the next in a strange kind of square dance. Ooof, this is looking tricky. “Was Joe batting in the nets without a box?” asks Nick in Dorset. “I’m astounded if so. First cricket lesson you ever learn at Primary school. Metaphor for the shambles this latest tour has become. No doubt Joe will ‘learn the lessons and move on’. (If he can)!!” This is a little beyond my knowledge base, but I think it was just throwdowns. Anyway, we’re back on.... Optimism with your cornflakes, from Ian Wilson: “Morning Tanya from rainy Turkey. So England just need 2 centurions and 4 guys to get a fifty each and a comfortable win by 3 wickets sometime after tea tomorrow, is it asking to much when the first 7 batsman after Hameed, have all scored a test match hundred, plus Broad at number 10, or am I just being over optimistic?” Shall we leave that question hanging? Time for a bowl of muesli, as the light dawns on a misty December morning in England. Some of the spare Australian squad are running out on the pitch as the light dims over beautiful Adelaide. Maybe this might brighten English hearts - Tim points out the last time England survived 134 overs in the fourth innings to secure the draw. 8th over: England 20-1 (Burns 16, Malan 4) Cameron Green is astonishing in the gully. How can such a big man be so nimble? Malan is trapped by a beauty from Richardson, which hits him zip on the knee. He’s jumping though, and Smith decides not to review, and is right. And that, my friends, is tea. 7th over: England 20-1 (Burns 16, Malan 4) England survive a yes-no-sorry, thanks to the fielder slipping over. Burns cuts Starc uppishly for four. Damn, that was a nice shot. “Dear Tanya.” Hello Vanessa in Eastbourne! “ABC commentary through the night was mildly mocking. Then they put on Kim Hughes, the stereotypical Aussie bloke from the 1980s. The horror! Guffawing, making lewd “jokes”, boasting.... We don’t deserve this, do we?” Ewww! I have always had a soft spot for Hughes after reading Christian Ryan’s brilliant book Golden Boy, but glad I slept through that! 6th over: England 16-1 (Burns 12, Malan 4) Richardson bustles in, energy fizzing from every steps. Burns dabs him down the ground nicely and with remarkable confidence. “Hi Tanya.” Morning Colum Fordham! “Desperately trying to find a positive twist to England’s performance. I think I’ve come up with one: Dawid Malan for Man of the Match for the Touring team. After a superb 80, England suddenly realise they have a competent leggie in their team when over 400 runs behind on a turner and he duly takes his first test match wicket with loop (or ‘tadge’ if you will). He then flays his first ball for a glorious cover drive. It’s a no-brainer.” I agree! What did Ed Smith know? 5th over: England 7-1 (Burns 9, Malan 4) Malan is hit on the thigh pad first ball, the fourth zips through him. The natural shadows have almost covered the pitch and out of the corner of my eye, the floodlights are on. 4th over: England 7-1 (Burns 8, Malan 4) This is the first time in the series that Hameed has been out before Burns, so the first time Burns and Malan have batted together. Off his first ball, Malan drives Richardson through the covers with the richness of a slice of Christmas cake. 3rd over: England 7-1 (Burns 7, Malan 0) Burns survives a thriller from Starc, picking up three through square leg off the last ball. A horror stat for you: 2nd over: England 4-1 (Burns 4, Malan 0) Oh dear. A brutish ball from Richardson and Hameed doesn’t have an answer, the ball flying from the outside of his gloves into Carey’s . He could have left it. Hameed walks off the pitch, his head bowed the entire way. 1st over: England 4-0 (Burns 4, Hameed 0) With three slips and a gully licking their lips in anticipation, Starc charges in and Burns leaves the first ball. The second screams past the outside edge. Burns, face smeared with suncream, sends the third off his hips and away to the boundary. The fourth, squares him up again. He leaves the fifth and the sixth bounces awkwardly and Burns jabs it away. And breathe. It looks like Rory Burns is going to face the first ball. The horror! The horror! On the outfield the Australian bowlers are looking tall and menacing, as Burns and Hameed bump gloves and march into the lion’s den. The ball after smoking a six, Richardson top edges and Buttler, this time, holds on. And that is the declaration with a lead of 467 and 45 minutes till tea. 60th over: Australia 219-8 (Green 29, Richardson 1) Thanks Tim, go and enjoy some well-deserved zzzzzs. Australia plough on despite the regular loss of wickets: waiting for... twilight? Do or die from Starc sees him toe-ending the ball high but into the hands of Pope on the boundary. 59th over: Australia 214-7 (Green 27, Starc 17) Starc can’t be too bad or he’d have retired to get some treatment before the declaration comes. Meanwhile Malan is still on, but he’s now being milked. Australia lead by 451. Why they are still out there, I’m not sure – maybe they’re terrified of Stokes, though the target he chased at Headingley was 360, not 450. And that’s drinks, so I’ll leave you in the sparkling hands of Tanya Aldred. Thanks for your company and correspondence. I’ll be back this time tomorrow, if England last that long. 58th over: Australia 207-7 (Green 23, Starc 14) Starc seems to have hurt himself – he’s holding his back. But he’s well enough to hit Root for six, the first of the whole innings, swung over midwicket. 57th over: Australia 196-7 (Green 20, Starc 6) Starc, facing Malan, is beginning to warm up – two, one, one, with one ball going for three byes as it spits and Buttler turns his back on it. 56th over: Australia 189-7 (Green 20, Starc 2) Green cuts the first ball of this over for three, threatening carnage, but Root recovers well and keeps Starc quiet. In pink-ball Tests, Root is almost a frontline bowler. 55th over: Australia 185-7 (Green 17, Starc 1) Another decent over from Malan, but surely Starc will soon wield the long handle. And here’s Tom van der Gucht, with a short history of English coaches. “England’s woes seem to follow a similar pattern,” he says, “whereby we try a likeable English-born county coach, only to bin them off for a steelier international coach with a clearer vision who goes on to secure an era-defining achievement. Bumble made way for Fletcher who won us the Ashes and rebuilt the template for the England team (though, in all fairness, Bumble had wanted central contracts too). Peter Moores then made way for Andy Flower and England became the world T20 and Test champions. Moores then made way (again) for Trevor Bayliss who landed the World Cup. I guess what I’m wondering, is who’s the next coach going to be and what will their era-defining achievement be once Silverwood is binned off after the Ashes?” Ha. Great analysis, except that Bayliss isn’t steely – he’s an old softie. 54th over: Australia 180-7 (Green 12, Starc 0) So we have two part-time spinners bowling at the same time, and each of them has a wicket. Root’s tender parts must be feeling a little less tender. Another one! To another part-time spinner! Carey tries to cut Root but succeeds only in chopping onto his stumps. 53rd over: Australia 174-6 (Carey 1, Green 12) Malan is being congratulated by the commentators on the loop in his trajectory, or as they put it, his tradge. He has one for six, and it’s a big one – Labuschagne, the most consistent batter in the world. Malan!! Getting his first Test wicket as Labuschagne fails to get hold of a slog sweep and gives Stokes a much easier catch than the last one. It won’t make any difference, but it’s put a big smile on the face of the normally deadpan Malan. 52nd over: Australia 171-5 (Labuschagne 50, Green 11) The Aussies are now doing so much better that even Cameron Green has reached double figures. Labuschagne tucks Robinson into the gap on the leg side, helps himself to two and reaches yet another Test fifty. He’s gone from strokeless to remorseless. 51st over: Australia 166-5 (Labuschagne 48, Green 8) Well here’s a surprise – Dawid Malan to bowl his part-time leg-spin. And he does well, finding some turn and not handing out any freebies. But bringing him on is an admission that England were wrong to leave Matt Parkinson, a proper leggie, out of their squad. They even left him out of the Lions’ game against Australia A. The thinking hasn’t been close to joined-up. 50th over: Australia 163-5 (Labuschagne 46, Green 7) A hard-run two from Green off Robinson takes Australia’s lead to 400. Not even Stokes can save England now. That wonder catch, by the way, gave Robinson his seventh wicket in the series, so he’s top equal with Nathan Lyon, Mitchell Starc and Pat Cummins, who took as many wickets in one Test as the others have in two. 49th over: Australia 157-5 (Labuschagne 44, Green 4) A better over from Woakes, who reels off five dots after letting Green clip his first ball for two. As the commentators note, Woakes is better against the right-handers, but he’s having an ineffectual series (three for 228) and if he keeps his place in Melbourne, it will be for his batting. 48th over: Australia 155-5 (Labuschagne 44, Green 2) Labuschagne, who couldn’t hit the ball ten yards at the start of the day, is now having a party. He gives Robinson the charge – or, as the Guardian autocorrect wants me to say, the chargrills – and lofts him over mid-on for four. 47th over: Australia 148-5 (Labuschagne 39, Green 1) Cameron Green has been a giant with the ball in this series and a no-hoper with the bat. Facing Woakes, he’s so anxious to get off the mark that he almost runs Labuschagne out first ball. Pope is onto it sharply at backward point but can’t manage a direct hit. 46th over: Australia 144-5 (Labuschagne 35, Green 0) Robinson, as you may have guessed, is not bowling spin any more. Another stunning catch! From Stokes this time, running round the square-leg boundary and diving to hold onto a hook from Head, six inches off the ground. So Stokes redeems himself and Head departs straight after reaching a superb fifty. 45th over: Australia 143-4 (Labuschagne 34, Head 51) Stokes is off, after that terrible spell, and Woakes is back. Labuschagne pushes his first ball to backward point for three, and then Head belts a straight drive back past Woakes’s left shoulder for four, before top-edging a pull for two to reach 51 off just 49 balls. Australia’s intent is clear: bat for another hour and a bit, stretch the lead to 450, then give England a torrid time before and after tea. Joe Root leads England out after the break, still moving stiffly. It must have been a nasty blow. 44th over: Australia 134-4 (Labuschagne 31, Head 45) Now even Broad is leaking runs: a glance for four from Head, an on-drive for three from Labuschagne. And that’s the interval after a session of two halves. England won the first hour hands-down, despite (or because of) not having their captain on the field. Then Travis Head came in and seized the initiative with the greatest of ease. Australia lead by 371 and England, once again, are high and dry, hoping for a miracle. Here in London it’s time for a walk round the block in the December darkness. See you in half an hour. 43rd over: Australia 124-4 (Labuschagne 28, Head 38) More punishment for Stokes, who is pulled for four and flicked for three by Head, then pulled for four by Labuschagne. Someone in there is a near-run-out as Ollie Pope pulls off a fine save and a fast throw, but Stokes, so often England’s saviour, is serving up rubbish here. He has 0-24 off two overs. 42nd over: Australia 112-4 (Labuschagne 24, Head 30) And here is Broad, but he’s replacing Anderson rather than joining him. Broad beats Labuschagne yet again, but it seems an odd decision to take Anderson off after two overs, unless he’s got a niggle. An email with steam coming off it. “A tall fast bowler forced to bowl off-spin to improve the over rate while a Test match slips out of England’s grasp,” says Nikhilesh Bhattacharya. “Do we need any more proof of how shambolic this Ashes campaign has been? When do we see Silverwood resigning?” Good question. In the words of the great Jenny Lewis, heads are gonna roll. 41st over: Australia 111-4 (Labuschagne 24, Head 30) Here is Stokes – not bowling bodyline, thankfully, but still too short. His first two balls are both pulled for a single, and the fifth is pulled for four by Head. In between are two no-balls and a wide, given for height. Stokes the stand-in captain was terrific today, but Stokes the bowler has made an awful start. The fifty partnership came up with that wide – it’s now 56 off 12 overs of brisk counter-attack, led by Head. And England have bowled 20 no-balls in the series, to Australia’s one. 40th over: Australia 99-4 (Labuschagne 22, Head 23) Labuschagne is missed by Root at slip. A fine ball from Anderson takes the shoulder of the bat. Root, the only slip, has to launch himself to his right and he doesn’t have the required spring in his step, understandably after going for a scan on that blow to his “abdomen”. No blame for not getting there, but maybe some for being there, if he’s not 100 per cent. 39th over: Australia 95-4 (Labuschagne 18, Head 23) Robinson is still bowling spin, which is a waste of his immense talent. He goes for six singles as the batters work out that they can milk him. If Stokes isn’t fit to bowl, Broad has to come back on. 38th over: Australia 89-4 (Labuschagne 15, Head 20) Jimmy Anderson is back for a second spell before high tea. He bowls a tight line to Head, tucking him up on middle-and-off, but Head figures this out and rocks back to nick a single to square leg. “Good morning Tim.” Good morning Kim Thonger. “I think it’s time to ask difficult questions, to think the unthinkable. During the pandemic, has the British government now spent so much money, that it has to find hitherto unimaginable ways to replenish the coffers? Have MI6 recruited key members of the England cricket team, perhaps even all of them, as secret agents, whose task is to lose every game in which they play, allowing the Treasury to place massive anonymous bets on sure-fire losing outcomes? Could you set one of your investigative journalist colleagues on this?” 37th over: Australia 88-4 (Labuschagne 15, Head 19) Robinson does continue with his off-spin, and according to the stattos he’s getting more drift than any other finger spinner in the world. He hasn’t, though, ever taken a wicket with spin (in 26 overs, according to CricViz). Head plays a cut for two and a push for a single. 36th over: Australia 85-4 (Labuschagne 15, Head 16) The ball is still talking, which is quite an achievement when Labuschagne is out there, burbling away like a bore on a bus. Woakes beats him, not once, not twice, but three times, and then hands him a Christmas gift, a half-volley on leg stump. 35th over: Australia 81-4 (Labuschagne 11, Head 16) Robinson continues, but there’s a change of bowling – he’s switched to off-spin! His first ball is straight out of the coaching book: line, length, loop, turn. He goes for two singles but that may be it from Robinson the spinner, as Root is back out there. He may have a pain in the groin but there is, as usual, a smile on his face. Joe Root is in the building! In his whites, moving a little gingerly but waiting to come onto the field. 34th over: Australia 79-4 (Labuschagne 10, Head 15) Head makes it three fours in a row, cover-driving Woakes on the up. He likes the shot so much he tries it again, with less timing, so it goes for two, not four. Woakes bites back with an LBW appeal, but the ball was heading over the leg bail. With 15 off 14 balls, Head is threatening to do what he did in Brisbane – grind England into the dust. 33rd over: Australia 72-4 (Labuschagne 10, Head 8) Labuschagne, facing Robinson, plays and misses yet again, then finally gets a four! With a lovely shot, an on-drive that takes me all the way back to Adelaide in 1991, and Mark Waugh’s hundred on debut. And another one! Suddenly the counter-attack is on. 32nd over: Australia 64-4 (Labuschagne 2, Head 8) Woakes continues and Labuschagne doubles his score with a tuck to fine leg. “I see your second wary little single,” Head says, “and I raise you a whipped pull for my second four.” That takes the lead to 300. Stokes might want to bring himself on, if his knee is up to it. Smith, by the way, was out in single figures for the first time in 13 Ashes innings – a glittering sequence that goes all the way back to this fixture in 2017-18. 31st over: Australia 59-4 (Labuschagne 1, Head 4) It’s Travis Head’s turn to play and miss, fencing at a ball from Robinson that is short and jagging away towards the slips. The sun is out, the sky is blue, the pitch is three days old, but the ball is doing a bit. Another short ball gets the treatment as Head cuts for four, overtaking Labuschagne with one stroke. And that’s drinks, with England unrecognisably good today, but Australia still in charge of the match and the Ashes. 30th over: Australia 55-4 (Labuschagne 1, Head 0) Woakes beats Labuschagne, who has now faced 33 balls for his 1. He’s Bradman in the first innings of every Test he plays, but he’s mortal in the second. 29th over: Australia 55-4 (Labuschagne 1, Head 0) Robinson dug that one in, it did take the glove, and it was another great catch as Buttler went with his left hand. England only drop the easy ones. Buttler takes another screamer! Down the leg side, off the glove I suspect, and safely pouched by Buttler, diving to his left. It’s been the best of hours, it’s been the worst of hours. 28th over: Australia 55-3 (Labuschagne 1, Smith 6) It’s a double change as Stokes sends for Chris Woakes, who beats Smith outside off. So far today we’ve had ten overs, ten runs and two wickets. And Australia are still well on top – 292 runs ahead. For the first time today, I’ve managed to read an email. “Tim,” says Gavin Twedily, “thank you for perhaps the best Guardian preamble (in all sports) I’ve ever read.” Too kind! “It’s downhill from here. The end is nigh. Best wishes world.” Ha. 27th over: Australia 54-3 (Labuschagne 1, Smith 5) England’s stand-in captain turns out to be Ben Stokes – maybe the armband was handed to Buttler, and he dropped it. He makes his first change, giving Anderson a breather and bringing on Ollie Robinson. He keeps it tight too, going for just a single as Smith tucks behind square. 26th over: Australia 53-3 (Labuschagne 1, Smith 4) So Broad gets a go at Labuschagne. England would love to see the back of him, just to be free of his mannerisms. This is another maiden, but not very threatening. 25th over: Australia 53-3 (Labuschagne 1, Smith 4) Anderson to Labuschagne, and it’s not a maiden! After four more dots, Labuschagne dabs into the leg side to move to 1 off 17 balls. Smith’s been out there so long he’s calling for a new pair of gloves. 24th over: Australia 52-3 (Labuschagne 0, Smith 4) A maiden from Broad to Smith, who is again beaten outside off. Australia’s score today is 7-2. It’s almost as if England have finally turned up, and warmed up. 23rd over: Australia 52-3 (Labuschagne 0, Smith 4) Anderson finally makes Labuschagne play, bringing one back in on middle-and-off, and drawing a tentative prod. That ball was clocked at 138kph, or 86mph. And then Anderson hits Labuschagne – in the midriff, I think (and that’s not a euphemism). These two elderly seamers are rolling back the years. 22nd over: Australia 52-3 (Labuschagne 0, Smith 4) Broad is still pitching it up, and to prove it he’s driven for the first four of the day by Smith. Broad strikes back straight away, staying full and beating Smith outside off. England have been a different team today. I hope Root is well enough to be watching the telly. 21st over: Australia 48-3 (Labuschagne 0, Smith 0) England’s old men did that by pitching it up – 1.1 metres further up than yesterday, according to Shane Warne on commentary. In this over, though, they go some of the way back to square one. Anderson is sharp but a touch short and wide, and Marnus Labuschagne is able to leave all six deliveries. 20th over: Australia 48-3 (Labuschagne 0, Smith 0) So we’ve had a run-out chance, a rattle of the timbers, a great catch, a dropped catch and a near-LBW. And that’s just the first two overs. Broad thumps the pad and wheels into one of his celebrappeals, not even looking at the umpire – bad move. It’s not given and it’s umpire’s call on impact, so not out. OMG. Another tough chance, and this time he can’t hold on, low to his right. A big escape for Steve Smith. One brings two! Broad finds the edge and Jos Buttler is back in business, hurling himself to his left to take his second great catch of the match (he may have dropped a couple too). And he is believed to be the captain at the moment. It’s all happening. Through the gate! Anderson barely celebrates, as it’s only the nightwatchman, but it’s better than nothing. And, for once, Australia have lost two wickets before reaching 50. 18th over: Australia 48-1 (Harris 23, Neser 3) Broad is fuller and faster than he sometimes at the start of a spell. And the first ball almost produces a wicket! Michael Neser drove it into the covers, where Haseeb Hameed swooped and pulled off a direct hit at the striker’s end. Marcus Harris, flat out, just made his ground. England have a new plan: getting ’em in run-outs. The players are out there and Stuart Broad has the ball. A statement from the England camp. “Joe Root will not be on the field at the start of play today after being hit in the abdomen during throw downs in the warm-up before play. He is currently being assessed by the England medical team.” We can only wish him well and hope it’s not serious. Abdomen, hmmm... sounds like a euphemism. Will Macpherson, once of the OBO, now on the Evening Standard, spells it out on Twitter: “I think he’s taken one to the knackers.” Need to catch up on yesterday? Geoff Lemon had this to say about the Green-Root moment: This from AAP: Cricket Australia is in the midst of another Covid-19 scare after a broadcast crew member at Adelaide Oval for the second Ashes Test tested positive to the virus. Just days after Australian captain Pat Cummins was ruled out of the Test after being deemed a close contact, officials had another issue to deal with on Sunday. It’s believed the person who tested positive is a member of a radio crew, with both the BBC and ABC – who share some staff – considering whether they can cover the match from the ground on day four. “We have been advised that a member of a broadcast crew has returned a positive Covid result as part of their scheduled testing,” Adelaide Oval said in a tweet. “SA Health are aware and we have begun to trace and notify this person’s close contacts.” Media do talk with players when interviewing, however they have been asked to social distance from them this week. Media have also been asked to wear masks during the Test, while the large section who arrived from NSW and Victoria were tested on touching down and again on the sixth day of their stay. Officials were confident on Sunday that the positive case would not have any impact on the players or match. Morning everyone, or afternoon everyone. All over England, the theatres are closing their doors – but don’t worry, there’s one show that must go on: the long-running farce known as England’s Test team. It has had a bumper year, delighting audiences in New Zealand, India and Australia, as well as in England, where people secretly love having something to moan about, and the football team are threatening to let the nation down by becoming consistently adequate. The gods of sport, always keen on an upset, decided to make this match a handicap. They gave Australia two big disadvantages – an injury to rule out the world’s No.4 bowler, and a Covid ping to take out the world No.1. They even handed the captaincy back to someone who’d lost it in disgrace (there’s hope for Tim Paine yet). They did all they could, short of telling Marnus Labuschagne he had to shut up. And still the Aussies have walked all over England. They piled up 473, decided that was enough, let loose their makeshift attack, and allowed England to make only half as many. The role of Pat Cummins was filled, effortlessly, by Mitchell Starc; the role of Josh Hazlewood by Cameron Green, of all people. The role of Nathan Lyon, which had been grabbed by an impostor for a few months, reverted to its rightful owner on the final day of the first Test. In this one, he’s taken great pleasure in showing England how wrong they were to spurn their specialist spinners. Only two things can stop Australia going 2-0 up. One is the weather – there was a fair bit of rain forecast today, but only in the morning, so it seems unlikely to make much difference unless it’s been held up by the Covid protocols. The other is a doughty rearguard action of the kind that was once England’s stock in trade. The last time we saw one of those was Cardiff in 2009, the time before that Johannesburg in 1995. It would be manna from heaven for England fans now, but it doesn’t seem very likely. And if Australia’s batters were over-cautious last night, they could afford to be. Do join me at 2.30pm Adelaide time (4am in the UK) to see if this familiar tale can produce any kind of twist.Every day feels like a bad dream to Timoty Correas. He spent five months in a jam-packed tent camp before moving weeks ago to a roach-infested hotel full of migrant families in a neighborhood, blocks from the US border where, he said, during the night local crime cartels would load crowds of smuggled people in and out of houses used as hiding places. Like thousands of other people here, Correas and his eight-year-old son are stranded at the US border, always hoping that hardline pandemic-related restrictions will cease and the processing of asylum seekers by the US will resume. Correas, a vegetable seller, fled Honduras to try to find his parents in Houston, Texas, after gang members took over his house with death threats in May. He planned to seek asylum in the US. Correas traveled a month with smugglers through Mexico alongside a tide of other northbound migrants and reached Reynosa, across from Hidalgo, Texas, towards the eastern end of the US-Mexico border, in June. But he and his son found the border essentially closed to asylum seekers. Then, when he recently heard on TV news that the US would begin processing asylum cases through a reboot of former president Donald Trump’s controversial Remain in Mexico program, known as Migrant Protection Protocols (MPP), he was hopeful. Although the program would promise a further six-month wait, it was the best news he’d gotten since the summer. “As I understand it, MPP will apply to families,” he said. “They’ll give us an opportunity to speak with a judge. It feels like a big help, a big step toward entering the US legally.” *** Immigration advocates, however, are fiercely critical of the court-ordered reinstatement this month of the immigration policy that Joe Biden campaigned to repeal, after Trump forced migrants to wait in Mexico, typically in squalor and danger, while their cases wound interminably through a dysfunctional US system. It was one of the final chapters of Trump’s harsh approach throughout, leaving migrants in limbo and greater numbers risking – and losing – their lives to cross anyway via border desert or river. But for thousands of asylum seekers stranded for months on the border with no end in sight, MPP feels like a sign of movement and better than nothing from the US government, which has been expelling migrants under a rule known as Title 42 and blocking most asylum claims under public health grounds since March of 2020. The latest iteration of MPP has kicked off slowly, enrolling 80 people in its first six days in El Paso, Texas, according to the publication Border Report. The US plans to eventually offer MPP at seven ports of entry across the south-west border, although authorities haven’t given a firm timeline. At a muddy tent camp in Reynosa, aid workers said it remained unclear exactly who would qualify for MPP, how many people it would eventually process or how strictly the government would adhere to humanitarian guidelines it set for itself. “Everyone is real excited about it,” said Felicia Rangel, co-director of the Sidewalk School, an aid organization founded when migrant populations first began to accumulate in this area in 2019. “But it’s not a good thing.” Until Trump brought in MPP in 2019, having already tried to block many asylum claims, those fleeing violence who hoped for political asylum were granted refuge in the US and allowed to join relatives in the country, who act as their sponsors, while their cases were heard. Biden repealed MPP upon taking office but continued Title 42, summarily expelling migrants without a chance to make their case. Up to 2,000 such people are living in a camp six blocks from Reynosa’s city center. An additional 1,150 are in tents in a shelter space supervised by the Pathway of Life church and hundreds more are in other shelters, crowded nearby houses or rooms rented by local charities. “Ninety percent or more don’t plan to return to their country,” said Isaac Castellanos, pastor of the Shaddai Ministry church, which offered to host 125 people in tents on its property in late October as the local migrant population began to overwhelm the city. “The option they are waiting for is through MPP.” He said the city has been discussing a large, federally funded shelter for months, but without progress, forcing small private charities to assume support for the humanitarian debacle. *** At the camp in Reynosa’s plaza, 35-year-old Belen Dubon keeps an “information desk” at a bench on the road to the bridge to Texas, where new arrivals come daily, expelled from the US after crossing the Rio Grande. Dubon, a nurse from Guatemala City who has lived in this camp for almost six months, said newcomers are easy to recognize because US authorities remove their shoelaces before expelling them and because they are covered in dust. Every day more than 100 people arrive, she said, escorted across the nearby bridge by US border patrol, then released on Mexican soil. Dubon helps them find food at community kitchens in the camp and space on the crowded ground to sleep for their first night. But this camp and surrounding shelters are full, so many people seek a place elsewhere. “Their guides who brought them come back and pick them up,” she said, referring to human smugglers. “I don’t know where they go.” Most people here see no option to give up on waiting, she said, because they spent thousands of dollars of mostly borrowed money to pay smugglers to get them here. Others, like Correas and his son, can’t return home because their houses were taken over by gang members. Others have sent their children across the border unaccompanied, in hope they would be able to apply there to stay, despite the prospect of being detained. Some of those children’s parents in Reynosa told the Guardian they’ll wait as long as they must to reunite. Parents such as Iris Betancourt, 36, who fled Honduras with her husband and three children in August after a local gang boss tried to make her 13-year-old daughter his wife and wound up at the camp in Reynosa. Dangerous and unsanitary conditions kept the three kids mostly penned up in the tent, she said, while Betancourt’s sister in Houston encouraged her to send them to live safely with her. On 31 October, Betancourt and her husband took the kids out for ice-cream, hugged them close all night then paid smugglers $500 per child the next morning to sneak them into the US, where they expected to be apprehended, and would give authorities the contact information for their aunt in Houston. The kids spent a month and seven days in a secure New York City shelter under the US Office of Refugee Resettlement, then arrived in Houston this month, Betancourt said. “I don’t know when I’ll see them again. I don’t know if I’ll wait here for years,” she said, crying. “I wonder every day, will I get in or not? Will the wait be worth the sacrifice?” *** Aid workers say thousands of children have been similarly sent over by parents in recent months. Figures from US Health and Human Services show more than 13,000 unaccompanied children in government custody as of 10 December, with roughly 500 discharged each day to sponsors across the country. Yet the parents who stay behind at the border face a slim chance of achieving legal entry into the US. Under Trump, MPP had a less-than-1% acceptance rate for asylum cases. Although Biden’s reboot lists new protections for enrolled migrants, it still isn’t clear exactly how the program will operate, said Alex Norman, a former paralegal who helps process emergency immigration parole cases at the camp in Reynosa. “They aren’t going to have the capacity to process thousands of people who are here now,” said Norman, who sits in on calls between DHS officials and local aid organizations. “Or the thousands who are on their way now that they hear there are asylum possibilities.” Eleanor Acer of advocacy group Human Rights First told NPR that MPP was a “humanitarian fiasco” under Trump and would be so under Biden, too. Yet migrants such as Correas, think any sort of shift in US policy is the best news he’s gotten after six months of limbo. His parents fled Honduras in the 1990s when he was a child and his dream of bringing his own son to be with them in a safe city motivates him now to wait indefinitely. “To be with my mom and dad, it will be the greatest gift of my life,” he said. “If I have to wait six or seven months like MPP says, then I’ll have to learn to adapt.”Self Esteem Indie musician turned pop star whose Prioritise Pleasure is one of 2021’s albums of the year Rebecca Lucy Taylor, AKA Self Esteem, began the year hungover after hosting a New Year’s Eve charity raffle for Women’s Aid online, “getting privately pissed, alone in my room, locked down with my poor parents”. She ended it with multiple album of the year prizes for her brilliant second solo LP, Prioritise Pleasure, a pop statement broiling with rage, humour, truth and tunes. “All the things I’ve ever wanted to do seem to be happening. At last!” Taylor’s breakthrough was her album’s lead single, I Do This All the Time, released in April. A half-spoken, half-sung battlecry against self-doubt that mixed sexist statements she has had thrown at her with uplifting mantras, it created a new landscape for honesty in pop, and had a stark, self-directed video to match. “I’d spent so many years worried about so many things, that perversely I was like: what happens if I face these worries or name them or show them? So I did. It makes you bulletproof in a way.” The feedback to the single “was amazing”, but Taylor thought that would be it. The excitement kept going for the album, and her shows started selling out. “I was like: oh my fucking God. Things are really changing.” As a result, her bucket-list started getting ticked off. She performed on Jools Holland (“all my peers had, so at last I could get rid of the jealousy and sadness!”), sparkled on mainstream TV shows such as Never Mind the Buzzcocks, and became a star on social media (her Twitter and Instagram posts and videos are frequently hilarious). A member of the critically acclaimed indie duo Slow Club from 2006 before going solo in 2018, she calls her 15-year rise to fame “a weird underdog tale”, but credits her band, and their friendship, for helping her through. “I didn’t really have many mates before the last few years – I didn’t go to uni, and I lost touch with my schoolmates and didn’t make the kind of friendships you do in your 20s because I was always on tour. But I’m now in a gang, talking absolute shit, speaking to one another about everything, and I love it.” Her band are “like what you hoped the Spice Girls would be,” she says. “We should have a reality show, really.” This playlist is full of songs that speak to what Taylor calls the “non-sexual romance you have with friends you really love”, songs you want to “share and to sing along to with them”. For Christmas, she will be “up north with my first- and second-wave housemates – my parents. I’m cooking the Christmas dinner so I’m already drawing up the extensive ingredients list!” Self Esteem’s playlist for Christmas drinks with friends 1. Niki &amp; the Dove Ode to Dance Floor “Perfect music for being with friends – danceable, emotional, with incredible lyrics.” 2. Deacon Blue Real Gone Kid “Me and one of my best friends, Jess, had a proper movie friendship moment pissed up and dancing in a living room together to this.” 3. Jamelia Thank You “You can’t go wrong with an early 2000s R&amp;B vibe. It’s also good to squat to.” 4. Truth Hurts ft Rakim Addictive “And another one, the sexiest song ever, with a fantastic south Asian vocal sample [from Indian singer Lata Mangeshkar’s 1981 song Thoda Resham Lagta Hai].” 5. Alexandra Burke ft Flo Rida Bad Boys “A really talented pop star let down by racism and sexism. That chorus is like an Abba chorus!” 6. Whitney Houston It’s Not Right But It’s Okay “A great one for singing along to with friends – the narrative, the beat, the way it builds.” 7. Lauryn Hill Doo Wop (That Thing) “Hear that intro and you’re running back from the bathroom, aren’t you?” 8. Rod Stewart Baby Jane “My wild card! I love the melody to this. I should do a contemplative version of this for next Christmas. Come on, John Lewis, let’s have it!” 9. Peter Gabriel Sledgehammer “I’m embarrassingly obsessed by Peter Gabriel. This is a gateway track for my friends.” 10. New Radicals You Get What You Give “It’s such a beautiful song, a proper one to wind down to, when you want to put your arms around everyone.” Self-Esteem’s Prioritise Pleasure is out now on Fiction Records Kathryn Williams English singer-songwriter whose new Christmas album with Carol Ann Duffy is out now A debut novel and a Christmas album with a former poet laureate: it’s been a year of big projects for Kathryn Williams. The Ormering Tide, her gorgeous coming-of-age tale about a girl unravelling the foreboding secrets of an island community, came out in March and was a bestseller in the north, where Williams lives (a Liverpudlian, she has long lived in Newcastle with her husband and sons). From home, Williams also stitched together her festive LP with Carol Ann Duffy on Zoom sessions during the early 2021 lockdown, before taking Midnight Chorus to the studio this summer. Out now, its songs are a glorious mixture of sweetness and strangeness, like Dear Lord, which features a whisky-swigging woman after midnight mass dreaming of meeting Dolly Parton, and Cariad (“cariad” being Welsh for “beloved”) which hymns the magical arrival of a child. Williams found Duffy “formidable” when they first met a few years ago. “But she is one of the kindest, warmest, most down-to-earth people I know, and, of course, she loves Christmas [Duffy wrote festive poems every year as poet laureate]. She also saved me from a ditch once when I was drunk, holding my guitar in one hand and my iPhone in the other, so she’s all right by me.” Making music online has been revelatory for Williams in 2021. She’d avoided it completely in the first lockdown, but in the second, she learned her much-missed parents’ favourite song, Dr Hook’s Sylvia’s Mother, and performed it to them over Zoom, which was “incredibly emotional”. Then came weekly Instagram gigs in her fairy light-strewn garage; she loved chatting to fans, friends and collaborators in the comment thread between songs. “It made me realise that music is about connection more than anything else.” Post-lockdown, Williams headed out to Ed Harcourt’s woodland cabin studio to record her next solo album, due in the spring, and prepare her “best of” collection for next year. But first, we go to Williams’s house for Christmas, where the music starts the day they “put up the tree with hot chocolate and mince pies … but Christmas Day is full of it too.” The Phil Spector and Vince Guaraldi Charlie Brown albums are “absolute staples” before other assortments drift in. “We love music that immediately sprinkles magic into the room.” Kathryn Williams’s Christmas Day playlist 1. Joe Hisaishi My Neighbor Totoro (unreleased Crystal Clear Sound instrumental) “From the absolutely gorgeous and magical 2019 Studio Ghibli seven-inch box set: it reminds me of our little family watching all those films together at home.” 2. Modern Jazz Quartet God Rest Ye Merry Gentlemen (Live in Cologne) “I love how the tune spirals away, as if it’s going off into a daydream.” 3. Ane Brun Silent Night Before the First Day of Christmas “Her voice is like Dolly Parton meets Sigur Rós.” 4. Simon and Garfunkel Silent Night/Seven O’Clock News “The juxtaposition of these songs is about the heartache of humanity, but it’s also a beautiful spell, reminding you of the good in the world.” 5. Burl Ives Silver and Gold “An old Christmas song that reminds me of my grandpa, like old-fashioned Christmas wrapping paper.” 6. Bifrost Arts (feat Devon Sproule) Joy, Joy!!! “This is full of wonder. Devon Sproule isn’t known enough – she’s one of my favourite singers.” 7. Sufjan Stevens That Was the Worst Christmas Ever! “We’re all obsessed with him in our house. All his Christmas music is magical, tender and mellow.” 8. Birdy Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas “Her voice is just like her name, a tiny, gentle creature.” 9. Aimee Mann I Was Thinking I Could Clean Up for Christmas “Another hero of mine – but this one’s a bit more grown up…” 10. Joni Mitchell River “Like a perfect snowglobe capturing a time in a person’s life. Joni’s still the star to aim towards.” Midnight Chorus by Kathryn Williams and Carol Ann Duffy is out now on One Little Independent Records. The Ormering Tide is published by Wrecking Ball Press Olly Alexander British musician and actor who records as Years &amp; Years, and who started 2021 starring in the hit Channel 4 drama It’s a Sin In January, Olly Alexander was locked down in his London flat, eagerly anticipating the broadcast of a Channel 4 series he’d made as an actor, Russell T Davies’s Aids drama It’s a Sin. “I was so excited for it to come out and for the world to see it,” he says, “but I absolutely had no idea it would resonate with people in the way that it did.” It was an instant commercial and critical hit, becoming the most binge-watched show in All 4’s history before winning the National TV awards new drama prize in September. It also established Alexander – as the charismatic, heartbreaking Ritchie Tozer – as a brilliant lead actor. He’s definitely not the new lead in Dr Who, though, he says, despite recent rumours. “Not me!” He’s proud of the fact that the show’s success drove a surge in HIV testing (a record 8,200 were ordered from the Terrence Higgins Trust in one day: the previous record was 2,800). “That real-world impact was so powerful, realising the impact of a story in the conversations that it can create.” Alexander has also stayed close to the cast – “we all know it was a very special thing” – and they’re even doing a celebrity Bake Off special this month. “I’ve discovered I can make shortcrust pastry! That was quite the revelation.” Then there are his musical achievements as Years &amp; Years (formerly a band, it became a solo project in March). In February, he covered the Pet Shop Boys’ It’s a Sin at the Brits, sprawling on a piano played by Elton John (“[he asked] me to perform with him… it was my dream to play the Brits so I owe him my life!”). Four singles followed, including A Second to Midnight with another one of his heroes, Kylie Minogue (“she’s the sweetest, funniest, most genuine person”). His new album, Night Call, arrives on 7 January. Kylie will perform with Alexander again when he hosts the BBC One’s star-spangled New Year’s Eve coverage, as will the Pet Shop Boys and other special guests. It’s no surprise, then, that Alexander’s New Year’s Eve playlist is celebratory, inspired by his teenage years in the Forest of Dean “sneaking into Bristol clubs and Monmouth pubs” discovering dance music. “It’s all party floor-fillers that you know everyone’s going to love.” The Years &amp; Years New Year’s Eve playlist 1. Cheryl Lynn Got to Be Real “One of the greatest songs ever and a queer classic on the Paris Is Burning soundtrack and the Sex and the City series.” 2. Whitney Houston Million Dollar Bill (Frankie Knuckles remix) “An anthem from a legendary LGBT venue that’s no longer with us, The Joiners Arms on [London’s] Hackney Road. Fun times!” 3. Amerie 1 Thing “Any time I play this at any party it just gets everyone going.” 4. Mis-Teeq All I Want “I can sing all the parts! This makes me nostalgic for UK garage, which was a huge scene when I was at Monmouth Comp, which is hysterical, really.” 5. Lucy Pearl Don’t Mess With My Man “I love this so much – I don’t understand why it wasn’t a huge global hit.” 6. Beyoncé Check On It “It’s so hard to pick one Beyoncé song!” 7. Booty Luv Boogie 2Nite (Seamus Haji Big Love Edit) “This reminds me of sneaking into clubs in Bristol when I was 17.” 8. Sylvester You Make Me Feel (Mighty Real) “Sylvester was breaking the boundaries before we were even talking about the boundaries.” 9. Kylie Minogue Love at First Sight “She has to be on every playlist.” 10. Aaliyah (feat Slick Rick) Got to Give It Up “I rediscovered this in lockdown. It’s a great closer, and it’s always good to hear Aaliyah’s voice.” The Big New Years &amp; Years Eve Party is on BBC One on New Year’s Eve from 11.25pm (except Scotland). Night Call is out in January 2022 on Polydor RecordsGood luck generating festive cheer on the same day your show – like every show at this venue – has been Covid-cancelled until the new year. But if that’s a bittersweet backdrop to Le Gateau Chocolat and Jonny Woo’s cheap-and-cheerful songs-from-the-shows cabaret, the duo refuse to surrender to it. With this follow-up to 2018’s A Night at the Musicals, the so-called “ebony and ivory of drag” deliver precisely what fans would wish for: high camp, affectionate send-ups, OTT costumes and flashes of flesh – all underpinned, like the sturdy foundations to a garish building, by Le Gateau’s resonant bass-baritone, still rumbling somewhere in your guts when you’re halfway home. That’s partly down to over-amplification: whether sung, spoken or pretend-squabbled, the show is often aggressively strident on the mic. The best moments are the most delicate – Le Gateau’s fragile take on Whitney Houston, say, before that number devolves into a stompalong. Lacking (by his own admission) his partner’s musical skills, Woo supplies a few lip-synch numbers, multi-roling amusingly to At the End of the Day from Les Mis, and doing a striptease to Sondheim and Jule Styne’s Some People. This is very much the kind of show that expects – and receives – whoops of applause when a skimpy outfit is shed and a skimpier one revealed. “Lower your expectations,” we’re instructed at the start – and sure enough, the show does nothing more than it says on the tin. But it does that with infectious pleasure, and a heightened sense from Le Gateau and Woo of their own ridiculousness. The moment is precious when the former struts on stage, swaddled more like a furball than a feline, to croon from Lloyd Webber’s Cats – while Woo contributes a droll cameo, midway through Le Gateau’s Little Mermaid number, as a rubber-headed shark. By the end, it’s more singalong than show, as the pair take requests, deploy a Sound of Music medley while dressed as matching Marias, and end with a crowd-pleaser from Grease. Our current winter of discontent feels a long way from Summer Nights – but Le Gateau and Woo’s cheeky cabaret is a fun way to take your mind off it. Now That’s What We Call Musicals, Soho theatre, London, returns on 4 January, runs to 22 January.Severe behind his wire-rimmed spectacles but more emotionally engaged than he would care to admit, Will (Winston Duke) bears a great responsibility. Over the course of a nine-day selection process he interviews prospective “souls”, all vying for a single opportunity – to be born and to embark upon a life on Earth. This inventive, daringly spiritual feature debut from Japanese Brazilian writer-director Edson Oda combines a Shyamalan-esque high concept with a dusty lo-fi aesthetic that calls to mind Being John Malkovich. Will watches the lives of his selections unfold on VHS cassettes and a bank of portable televisions; the colour palette is heavy on 1950s municipal filing cabinet green. Pitted against Will – an individual slightly broken by his own experience of life – is Emma (a thrilling Zazie Beetz), an instinctively curious and empathic soul. With its score of spiralling, ascendant strings and a final scene that quotes Walt Whitman’s Song of Myself, Nine Days is, in its subdued way, a profound and powerful commentary on life.There’s a yellow tinge to the photography in George Clooney’s latest directorial outing that makes every shot look like a vintage postcard from the 1970s. And it’s fair to say that this amiable but almost farcically uneventful adaptation of the 2005 memoir by JR Moehringer is also postcard-thin in its plotting and insight. Tye Sheridan plays JR as an aspiring young writer; Daniel Ranieri plays his younger self, a precocious tyke who finds a father figure in his affable Uncle Charlie (Ben Affleck). The young JR hangs around the blue-collar Long Island bar that Charlie runs, charming the grizzled patrons and bumming drinks in return for the answers to newspaper word puzzles. His mother has high hopes for him; she also has cancer, which just sort of goes away halfway through the film. But even with the leverage of serious disease, it’s hard to get particularly invested in JR’s journey from a loving but eccentric working-class background to success at Yale. In cinemas now, and on Amazon Prime from 7 JanuaryThe first feature from Benjamin Cleary (after the Oscar-winning short film Stutterer) is a stylish, near-future-set story of love and loss, in which loss can be avoided thanks to radical new technological advances. Mahershala Ali plays Cameron, a husband and father who decides to protect his loved ones from the truth about his terminal diagnosis by signing up for an experimental programme. An alternative Cameron is created; all of his memories are uploaded, and this new, disease-free version of himself is seamlessly introduced into his life. Ali is tremendous in a dual role that takes in everything from a beguiling meet-cute with his future wife (Naomie Harris) to a third act consumed by grief and doubt about whether he did the best thing for his family after all.The Labour party has been urged to take advantage of a unique opportunity to vote down a raft of last-minute amendments to an already controversial crime bill, which human rights activists have described as “a dangerous power grab”. The 18 pages of amendments to the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill were introduced by government peers in November, on the day nine members of the protest group Insulate Britain appeared in court charged with contempt. Unlike the rest of the bill, however, where the lords can merely send amendments back to the Commons to be reconsidered, because the latest amendments were introduced in the House of Lords they will fall if peers vote against them. But that can only happen if Labour agrees to oppose them, according to the Green party peer Jenny Jones. “If a rebellion by the Lords in defence of civil liberties has any chance of defeating these police state laws, then we need the Labour party to join those of us who plan to oppose the government,” Jones said. “These draconian laws, that will make effective protests illegal, should be seen as part of the attack on our democracy designed to keep a corrupt government in power and minimise opposition. Ironically, it could be the government’s attempt to bypass parliamentary scrutiny by MPs, that enables the lords to defeat these 18 pages of new amendments.” Among other powers, the new amendments will impose potential 51-week sentences for protesters who attach themselves to another person, to an object, or to land, or for protests that obstruct in any way major transport works from being carried out. They also include an expansion of powers for stop and search without suspicion around protests, as well as “serious disruption prevention orders” that will allow authorities to ban named individuals from participating in demonstrations or even using the internet to encourage others to do so. The Liberal Democrats, who have 84 members in the lords, have already vowed to oppose the bill. Brian Paddick, a former senior officer in the Metropolitan police, who has led the party’s opposition to the bill, said further stop and search powers would have a “chilling effect” on the right to protest. “This is particularly true for minority communities, where the use of ‘suspicion-less’ stop and search sees black people 18 times more likely to be stopped than white people,” Paddick said. “If Labour and Conservative peers take a stand and join us then we can stop these reckless Conservative plans. I hope they will join us and stand up for effective policing and people’s rights.” Human rights organisations joined the calls to oppose the changes. Mark Johnson, legal and policy officer at Big Brother Watch, said: “The government’s move to add Orwellian anti-protest amendments to the policing bill at this late stage is nothing short of a cynical attempt to bypass parliamentary scrutiny. “Labour peers have an opportunity to stop these draconian proposals dead in their tracks. It is absolutely vital that all opposition parties vote against the government’s new amendments in order to protect our protest rights and those of future generations.” Martha Spurrier, the director of Liberty, said: “It is the role of the House of Lords to act as a check on this type of power grab, to temper the most dangerous and authoritarian tendencies of the government of the day. “All peers who value democracy must oppose these dangerous amendments – and while there is vocal opposition from across the house and from cross-party peers it’s vital that the opposition are clear and ensure this opportunity is taken to protect our fundamental rights.” The Guardian has contacted the Labour party for comment.Chelsea’s fixture with Wolves at Molineux will go ahead as planned on Sunday after the Premier League denied the visitors’ request to postpone the game due to an increase in positive Covid-19 tests. Thomas Tuchel’s side made the request after recording another three Covid cases in their latest round of testing. It brings the club’s total number of positives to seven after Romelu Lukaku, Timo Werner, Callum Hudson-Odoi and the injured Ben Chilwell all tested positive before Thursday’s draw with Everton. The Premier League board denied Chelsea’s request, however, deeming they had enough players available and the fixture did not meet the criteria for postponement. “We are deeply disappointed that our application was rejected as we felt we had a strong case for the postponement of today’s match on the grounds of players’ health and safety,” a Chelsea spokesperson said. N’Golo Kanté will start the game, his first appearance since suffering a knee injury last month. Mateo Kovacic, who came out of Covid isolation on Friday, is on the bench – one of only four outfield players named as substitutes by Tuchel. Six of the weekend’s top-flight fixtures have been postponed due to rising Covid-19 cases among players and club staff. On Saturday, Aston Villa’s home game against Burnley was called off hours before kick-off due to an outbreak in the Villa squad.The African American art star Kehinde Wiley is probably most famous for his official portrait of Barack Obama, tieless and relaxed yet deeply pensive in his chair. Emerald foliage floats around him, entwining his ankles and bursting into jewel-bright blossoms that symbolise his Kenyan and Hawaiian heritage. The 44th president is himself – photoreal to the last nuance – and yet inserted into this wildly decorative thicket. This is the classic Wiley fantasia. He generally paints less powerful black people than Obama, however: men (and occasionally women) he meets on the streets of the US or Senegal, where he has studios, or in London, where he found models for this latest show. Wiley elevates these people, mainly slotting them into renowned masterpieces – Holbein’s The Ambassadors, say, or Ingres’s equestrian portrait of Napoleon, the horse now ridden by a New Yorker in Timberland boots. He plays beauty against politics, via art history – the overt objective both visual and political dissonance. At the National Gallery, Wiley has introduced a Senegalese youth in a long overcoat into a pastiche of a Caspar David Friedrich painting – a solitary figure looking out across stupendous mist-furled peaks in a scene of Romantic yearning. But the contemporary wanderer is monumental compared to Friedrich’s modest figure, so the impact of his race is greater – though so is the painting itself, almost four metres high. Past art is enlarged, here, to make you think harder about who has the ownership of landscape, history and art. There is a blue glow in the folds of the overcoat that speaks of the studio lighting when the original photograph was taken. That Wiley’s paintings are worked up from digital shots is never in doubt. Two men in Nike trainers play pat-a-cake in the centre of another Friedrich reprise – his famous Chalk Cliffs on Rügen – one of them turning to look us straight in the eye, bringing the old image directly into the present. Two more are perilously adrift on icy green seas, one rowing hard, the other on the lookout for land or rescue: desperate refugees, their foreheads nonetheless glinting in the arc lights. This painting is based on Winslow Homer’s cherished American classic The Herring Net. Indeed, not a single work here relates directly to works in the National Gallery. Wiley’s Ship of Fools II riffs off the eponymous Bosch painting, via Géricault’s Raft of the Medusa (both in the Louvre). It presents four black figures marooned on a boat (its mast the tree from Bosch), waving and shouting and screaming for help. Two more, supposedly in the sea, are clearly standing on some studio floor. Yet the sheer artificiality of the scene is the visual equivalent of Brechtian alienation. You cannot think of these desperate people as sealed off in the hermetic spectacle of a European masterpiece. The old illusions are breached. Nike ticks, Evian bottles, Timberlands – brands matter to Wiley, along with fashion, makeup, complicated cornrows and dreads. These are global signs of the times, a lingua franca that links the terrible news of black kids dying on the crossing between Haiti and Florida to the drowning of migrants in the Channel. Each T-shirt, knock-off watch and logo is meticulously reproduced to a purpose, though by whose hands is not exactly clear. Wiley employs artists in Beijing, as well as Africa and America, to paint these enormous messages. The facture is impressive, but the compositions are sometimes awry. Just as Obama doesn’t quite sit within his seat, so these boats don’t sail on actual seas and their occupants never get wet. Photorealism has its risks, as a style, when it meets the rhetoric of 19th-century art, from Friedrich to Homer to the painters of the American sublime, whose ecstatic colours creep into this show. There are fallouts and gaps, here and there, that expose the inadequacies of Photoshop. Which may be one reason why Wiley’s six-screen film installation, Prelude, is by some way the masterwork of this show. It misses out the middlemen – literally, the old (and new) painters. Wiley flew a group of black Londoners to the frozen wastes of Norway in winter. His camera shows them standing, awed, before glacial fjords and mountains disappearing inside icy fogs. An older man picks his way through deep snow, dapper in his vintage coat. Two youths catch snowflakes on their eyelashes, faces framed in white hoods against the ambient white-out. Two women play pat-a-cake, bravely laughing against the freezing snow. The sonorous exhortations of Ralph Waldo Emerson to learn to live alone in nature are recited on the soundtrack, which also features a rousing orchestral score by the cellist and composer Niles Luther. Some of the scenes are as succinct as haiku – just a footstep or a smiling face; others follow the protagonists on their perilous journeys; still others are sweepingly panoramic. But all centre on black figures in a white wilderness, which Wiley sees as a kind of cage, and the poignant revelation of people who have never seen, or been seen in, such an inhospitable landscape before, eyes streaming in the biting cold. Kehinde Wiley: The Prelude is at the National Gallery, London, until 18 AprilMya Bollaers is a magnetic presence in this Belgian-French film that approaches the story of an adolescent trans girl and her estranged father with good intentions but a thuddingly unsubtle directorial approach. Bollaers brings a fascinating combination of willowy vulnerability and steely fury to the role of Lola, whose father, Philippe (a clunky Benoît Magimel), cuts her out of the funeral of her beloved mother. Flung together to scatter the ashes, Lola and her father gradually reach something resembling an understanding. The screenplay relies heavily on cliches and contrivances, but there’s one lovely moment that speaks volumes: Lola fleetingly embraces her father from behind, he raises his hand to touch hers, but she’s already gone. A connection is possible, but Philippe has a lot of catching up to do. In cinemas and on demandWhen Billie Eilish said this week that viewing pornography at a young age had “devastated” her, 19-year-old Jay recognised the feeling and the experience. “I really identified with what she said. I first saw porn at about 12 or 13 on social media; it came up on Instagram and boys at school would show it around and laugh,” says Jay, who preferred not to use her real name. “Boys talked a lot about porn, especially as we got older. It was less socially acceptable for girls to say they watched it, though we all did, I think.” Jay, who attended a mixed comprehensive in south-west England, said pornography had “really affected how I view my body and sex”. She added: “It’s now I’m older and I’m having sex that I am aware that I have a strong feeling of how sex should be performed and this makes me really sad. I don’t know how to undo that thinking. I’m starting to feel porn actually damaged me.” Advocates for age assurance, a range of measures to check someone’s age before they access a website or app, say under-18s can access pornography too easily. A survey by the British Board of Film Classification last year found that 60% of children between 11 and 13 who reported having seen pornography said it was largely unintentional. Speaking on the Howard Stern Show on Sirius XM radio on Monday, Eilish, who turned 20 on Saturday, said viewing porn at a young age had caused her emotional damage. “I think porn is a disgrace. I used to watch a lot of porn, to be honest. I started watching porn when I was, like, 11,” the top-selling US singer said, adding that it helped her feel as if she were cool and “one of the guys”. “I think it really destroyed my brain and I feel incredibly devastated that I was exposed to so much porn,” she said, adding that she suffered nightmares because some of the content she watched was so violent and abusive. Eilish said that it had an impact on her first sexual relationships. “The first few times I, you know, had sex, I was not saying no to things that were not good. It was because I thought that’s what I was supposed to be attracted to,” she said. Clare McGlynn, a professor of law at Durham University, said Eilish’s comments could help children and adults have a “better conversation about what material is out there on the mainstream sites”. She added: “I think her comments will help us to have a more open conversation, because certainly young people will be able to relate to her.” This week, a joint committee of MPs and peers recommended sweeping changes to the online safety bill, which imposes a duty of care on tech companies to protect children from harmful content. The 192-page report recommended that an updated bill requires all pornography sites to prevent children from accessing their content and called for the introduction of minimum standards for age assurance measures, from entering your date of birth on a pop-up form to more stringent age verification. Under the current terms of the bill, commercial pornography sites would not have to adhere to the legislation if they did not host user-generated content – the form of digital content that is the draft bill’s focus. McGlynn said bringing all porn publishers into the scope of the bill would be a “very positive step forward” but legislation was only “one part” of a solution to the problem. “Young people are still going to find ways to access this pornography. They’re still going to be looking at it, using it and thinking about it. So we still have to have the conversations with them, have a better public conversation about it and have far better sex education in schools,” she said. Dr Fiona Vera-Gray, a colleague of McGlynn at Durham University who has researched the impact of pornography on young women, said the ease with which adult sites could be seen, and their content shared among friends, was “frightening”. She added: “We have abandoned a generation. They get no sex education and too much sexualised material.” Jay says she stopped watching pornography when she was 17 but remains angry about how easy it was to access it. “I watched it through my teen years, say 13 to 17, but then I made a choice to stop. I feel angry now at how much I saw, how easy it was to watch it.”10. Emile Parisien/Tim Lefebvre/Christian Lillinger/Michael Wollny – XXXX This international quartet of contemporary jazz mavericks was invited by German virtuoso pianist/composer Michael Wollny to play four unrehearsed free-jamming nights at Berlin’s A-Trane club, and to massage a studio album from the best takes. It’s sometimes horn-led and jazzy (saxophonist Émile Parisien’s influence), explosively abstract, avant-funky or gracefully choirlike, but there isn’t a cliche in earshot. 9. Ruth Goller – Skylla Bass guitarist Ruth Goller has played bone-crunching punk jazz, harmonically mysterious Ghanaian ritual music, improv and avant-bop, but this uncategorisable venture, inspired by Greek mythology and aided by singers Lauren Kinsella and Alice Grant, joined iconoclastic ideas about guitar tuning and intonation (reminiscent of Derek Bailey) to ethereal, multi-layered vocal sounds sometimes suggestive of 1980s Laurie Anderson, to startling effect. 8. Anthony Braxton – Quartet (Standards) 2020 Sixty-seven tracks on a mammoth live-recorded box set by one-off multi-reeds virtuoso Anthony Braxton, one of the most prolific, unflinchingly exploratory and idiomatically open-minded artists in all jazz. Recorded with a UK touring band including Braxton-attuned pianist Alexander Hawkins, it focuses on a forensic, fearless re-examination of Broadway standards, jazz classics and popular songs. Read the full review. 7. Tim Berne/Chris Speed/Dave King/Reid Anderson – Broken Shadows New York altoist Tim Berne is famous for knottily wrought originals, but this punchy all-covers set with fellow saxophonist Chris Speed, and the Bad Plus bass/drums pairing of Reid Anderson and Dave King, pays vivid tribute to the music of Ornette Coleman, Charlie Haden, Dewey Redman, and Julius Hemphill. The pieces are succinct and memorable, the playing right on the money. 6. Jihye Lee Orchestra – Daring Mind South Korean Jihye Lee was first an indie pop singer, then a jazz composer prodigy whose work has been compared to the legendary Gil Evans and Maria Schneider. Daring Mind, a contrast-packed big-band set produced by Darcy James Argue with Lee, shows just why in its dizzying sweep from bebop to 21st-century rhythm-bends and haunting Schneider-like harmonies. 5. Gretchen Parlato – Flor Her singing can be as quiet as a sigh or as buoyantly melodious as calls by the hippest of birds. New Yorker Gretchen Parlato is a vocal adventurer, but also a delicately ingenious exponent of gliding Brazilian dances and sidelong swing. This terrific comeback set after a parenting break mixes touching originals and covers of composers from David Bowie to Joao Gilberto and Bach. 4. Shai Maestro – Human Israeli pianist/composer Shai Maestro, once mentored by that country’s famous bassist and songwriter Avishai Cohen but a bandleader of rare character for the past decade, made his best small-group recording to date on this session with Lima-born bassist Jorge Roeder, Israeli drummer Ofri Nehemya, and brilliant New York trumpeter Philip Dizack – cinematic, eclectic and profoundly humane music. 3. Charles Lloyd and the Marvels – Tone Poem The music of Charles Lloyd – an octogenarian reeds player out of 1960s John Coltrane and Ornette Coleman but with his own poignantly voicelike sound – comes in several guises. His country-oriented Marvels group, including guitarist Bill Frisell, joins the songs of Coleman, Leonard Cohen and the Beach Boys on a set that sounds alluringly like a vocal album without vocalists. Read the full review. 2. Pat Metheny – Side-Eye NYC (V1.IV) Guitarist Pat Metheny, one of contemporary jazz’s boldest updaters of traditions from freebop to country music and hard rock, picked the classic 1960s funky guitar/Hammond organ/drums trio format for his Side-Eye project – here featuring young multi-genre keys player James Francies, and fiery drummer Marcus Gilmore. This enthralling live recording mixes classic Metheny evergreens and new works. Read the full review. 1. Ches Smith and We All Break – Path of Seven Colours Ches Smith, the New York drummer and composer equally devoted to avant-garde jazz and Haiti’s ancient drums-and-vocal-centred Vodou culture, set himself the fascinating challenge of intertwining those threads. The result was this thrilling mix of haunting folk vocals, conversational multi-instrumental drumming and the kind of rhythmically intricate jazz favoured by his frequent bandleader, Tim Berne. Read the full review.Almost 70 years after his first appearance as one of the Bash Street Kids in the Beano, the character Spotty has been renamed in the comic’s December issue as its publishers seek to reflect more sensitive modern-day thinking. Spotty has become Scotty, following in the footsteps of Fatty, who was renamed Freddy in May, with both changes made over fears the nicknames could be seen as offensive. Michael Stirling, the head of Beano Studios, said: “James Scott Cameron, AKA Spotty from the Bash Street Kids, is now simply Scotty.” The latest name change has been engineered in a cartoon strip in which Spotty is admonished by his mother after kicking a football through a window, who in rebuking him uses his full name James Scott Cameron. One of his friends picks up on his middle name and declares: “Wait, your middle name is Scott? I think I’ve got it. We should call you Scotty.” The character, formerly known as Spotty says: “Yeah. I like that.” And another friend adds: “It suits you.” In issue 4114, Spotty’s moniker has been crossed out on the panel showing pictures of the Bash Street Kids with their names underneath. “As Scotty said to his classmates, there’s more to him than his physical characteristics, and that’s true for any child,” Stirling told the Telegraph. “Much like in 1954, when the Bash Street Kids were created based on the zany antics spotted in the school playground outside the Beano office, kids are still the inspiration for our characters and storylines.” “It’s important to us that our readers see themselves and their lives reflected in Beanotown”. He said the name change would mean minimal adjustment, and there was no chance of him being confused with Calamity James. In May, the Beano’s publisher, DC Thomson, changed Fatty to Freddy after 67 years, making use of his full name Frederick Brown, with Stirling saying at the time: “Kids come in all shapes and sizes , and we absolutely celebrate that. We don’t want to risk someone using it in a mean way.” The Fatty renaming prompted some criticism, including from Jacob Rees-Mogg, who called it “comically woke”, but was welcomed by the eating disorder charity Wednesday’s Child, which praised the publishers for considering “how they are potentially impacting the self-esteem and mental wellbeing of their audience”.Large swathes of the country, including several major cities, have no vaccination walk-in centres, it has emerged, sparking fears the government will miss its target of offering all adults a booster jab by the end of this month. As the tide of Omicron cases surges, thousands seeking a third vaccination without having to wait days or weeks for an appointment are driving miles to neighbouring counties. People without transport and those for whom a walk-in centre is the only option – because they do not have a GP or an NHS number – have no access to Covid jabs. Several cities, including Norwich, Peterborough and York, have no walk-in centres advertised on NHS websites. And there are no walk-in boosters available in entire counties, including Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire, although some offer third doses for people with weakened immune systems. Anna Miller of Doctors of the World, which runs a clinic in London to provide medical care to excluded populations, told the Observer: “If you’re a migrant, and you weren’t issued with an NHS number at birth, the only way you get one is by registering with a GP for the first time. If they can’t register with a GP, which is very common if you’re an undocumented migrant, or even an asylum seeker, [they are] not going to be called forward for a vaccine by their GP, but they also can’t log on to the NHS system and book an appointment.” She added that while some local authorities run vaccination outreach programmes for asylum seekers, these remain patchy and don’t always reach people not living in designated asylum seeker housing. “This represents a complete failure to think about populations who aren’t registered with a GP – so that’s migrants but it’s also homeless people, Gypsy and Traveller communities. It’s not good for any of them.” While most boosters are being offered by invitation or booking via the NHS website, walk-in centres are supposed to play a major part in the rollout. Peterborough council’s website says it has no walk-in booster sites “to ensure that as many eligible people as possible can access boosters in a planned and managed way”. According to the NHS national website, the nearest walk-in to the city is 17 miles away. In Buckinghamshire, a spokesperson for the NHS clinical commissioning group (CCG) said: “To help ensure as many people can get their booster dose as soon as possible, vaccination centres in Buckinghamshire are currently asking people to book appointments for their jabs. This allows the centres to operate more efficiently as work continues to increase vaccination capacity across the county.” Last week there were no walk-in booster sites in the whole of Hampshire, with the nearest sites to Southampton and Portsmouth located on the Isle of Wight. However, walk-in sites have opened in Hampshire from this weekend. Last week concerns were raised about the lack of walk-in booster sites in Hull, which has a population of 260,000 and relatively low vaccination rates. The council’s deputy leader, Hester Bridges, criticised the government for announcing the new booster target “without thinking about what needs to happen for the programme to significantly expand and offer flexibility like walk-ins”. However, on Friday afternoon two new walk-in sites in Hull were announced, each open on one day this week. Hull CCG said booking remained the best option to get the booster. An NHS spokesperson said: “The NHS now has nearly 3,000 sites available, including many in community pharmacies, and the vast majority of people live less than 10 miles from one, so it’s easier than ever to get protected. Undocumented migrants, asylum seekers, and others with no GP registration, are able to get a temporary registration with a GP practice, where they can get their jab direct or use the temporary registration to make an appointment through the national booking service.” However, a report this summer by the Bureau of Investigative Journalism found that nearly two-thirds of GP practices would not register undocumented migrants as patients. Miller, of Doctors of the World, said: “We support people to register with a GP and access medical services every day, and see GP practices routinely refusing to register people without official immigration status. This leaves people without an NHS number unable to book a vaccine appointment and forced to rely on walk-in vaccine centres.” This article was updated on 19 December 2021 to reflect that walk-in centres have now opened in Hampshire.Saturday Night Live ended 2021 on a disappointing note, thanks to the surge of Omicron cases which necessitated the removal of the studio audience, the cancelation of Charli XCX’s performance and the absence of most of the cast and crew. There was doubt the episode would air at all. But the show, as they say, must go on, and so we were given one more new (ish) episode before the New Year. Credit to SNL for deciding to go big even as they had to go small. We open on the main stage, empty save for longtime band leader and saxophonist Lenny Pickett. He’s joined by none other than Tom Hanks, who breaks the bad news to some faint clapping and laughter from the “surviving crew members”. He’s then joined by Tina Fey and with Keenan Thompson they induct host Paul Rudd – People Magazine’s “Most Sexist Man of the Year” – into the five-timer club. Joining the ceremony, via a pre-recorded video message, is fellow five-time host “Famous” Steve Martin, as well as his Only Murders in the Building co-star, Martin Short. When he admits to only having hosted three times, he’s violently shoved offscreen. Rudd and co promise a great show made up of brand-new sketches taped this week and personal favorites from past episodes. Rudd compares it to the new Beatles documentary Get Back: “A lot of old footage but enough new stuff that you’re like, ‘Yeah, I’ll watch that.’” It’s a melancholy opening to what promises to be a very odd episode, but it honestly is kind of moving seeing these members of the larger SNL family gathering out of love and loyalty. Plus, hey, who doesn’t love seeing Hanks, Fey, Martin and Short? The first piece is a new sketch, a commercial for Home Goods. Rudd plays the director, Casey Home Goods (“I got this job on merit,” he assures his actors), while Aidy Bryant and Kate McKinnon play moms and customers. Asked what they want for Christmas, their only answer is “Grandchildren … a son for my son … fiiiive grandchildren.” This initially frustrates Casey, until he too realizes he wants grandchildren. (“Grandchildren are amazing – they don’t blame you for anything, they just play clarinet and get into college. I want that!”) A solid sketch, but it can’t help but feel awkward due to the lack of audience laughter. Next, Fey and Thompson talk about their love of ice skating – “Mighty Ducks forever, bitches,” Thompson exclaims – before segueing into introducing the classic Christmas R&amp;B number Dick in a Box, from Andy Samberg and Justin Timberlake (as well as Maya Rudolph and Kristen Wiig). Rudd introduces An Evening with Pete, a black-and-white short film set in 2058, in which a paunchy, balding, chain-smoking Pete Davidson performs a depressing nostalgia act on the future version of SNL, which is hosted by a robot Colin Jost. Davidson behaves like a boorish has-been, until he reconnects with an old writer and pal and has a change of heart. It’s an oddly structured, meandering sketch, but its somber tone feels of a piece with the episode. Also, Davidson turns in an actual character performance, which is a nice change of pace. Going back in time, Thompson introduces Santa and His Elves from 2015, featuring Bobby Moynihan as an angry Santa and Thompson, Vanessa Bayer and Ryan Gosling as his naughty, horny helpers who intentionally fall behind on their work in the hope that Santa will punish them. (“If I were you, I’d just pull my little green pants down and go to town on me,” Thompson’s kinky elf giddily recommends. Hanks reminisces about the pre-pandemic Christmases, “when the scariest thing to worry about was global warming”. This leads into a sketch from his fifth time hosting, in 1991, The Global Warming Christmas Special. Mike Myers plays scientist and host Carl Sagan while Hanks plays crooner Dean Martin. The two perform a duet about Global Warming before Sagan attempts to explain the disastrous effects of climate change to the chain-smoking, boozing Martin, with some help from Sally Struthers (Victoria Jackson), Isaac Asimov (Phil Hartman), Crystal Gayle (Jan Hooks), Paul and Linda McCartney (Dana Carvey and McCartney herself), George Hamilton (Kevin Nealon) and Ralph Nader (himself). The sketch is prescient as well as extremely dated: there’s a joke about Lorenzo Lamas, for example. On a very stripped-down version of Weekend Update, Fey and Michael Che read a series of dumb jokes with the goal of making Hanks, Rudd and Thompson laugh. Said jokes revolve around OJ Simpson (“I can’t believe I got out of parole early, but I did it, I did it!”); Time Magazine Person of the Year Elon Musk (“You can read more about it on your phone while your Tesla is self-driving you into a lake”); New York City’s first female chief of police (“Instead of stop and frisk, they’re going to go through your phone while you’re in the shower”); the firing of Jacksonville Jaguars’ head coach for kicking a player (“Worse, the player was somehow returned for a touchdown”); and the world’s largest pot brownie (“They came up with the idea after eating the world’s second-largest pot brownie”). It’s great to see Fey back on Update duty, even in this low-key form. A new music video, The Christmas Socks, is a “heartfelt Christmas song about a magical moment between a boy and strange man at a department store”. It’s an incredibly weird sketch that starts out with Kyle Mooney as said boy, who is just trying to buy a pair of socks for his mom before engaging with Rudd’s strange man about his lost pet bird, TJ Rocks. It ends with TJ Rocks (Chloe Fineman) fronting a rock band, before Rudd proposes to the boy’s mother (Bryant) a few minutes after meeting her. It takes quite a while to get to that point, without ever really coming together. Rudd then introduces one of his favorite sketches from the past, Steve Martin’s Holiday Wish (which Rudd memorized and performed in his high school speech class). In the sketch, Martin wishes for all the children in the world to join together in song … before adding unlimited wealth, power, sex and revenge to his wish list. It’s a short, bravura performance representative of Martin’s time on the show. This is followed by a 2013 sketch featuring Paul McCartney and Martin Short as musical duo Caleb and Monty (Caleb sings, Monty plays the triangle), who audition for a spot in a Christmas special. The sweet but dim Monty continually misses his cue, which sends the manic Caleb into fits of rage. Like Martin’s Holiday Wish, it’s a perfect encapsulation of Short’s talents. Hanks presents a Christmas-themed sketch from Eddie Murphy’s return in 2016. Murphy plays “a black elf in sweatpants” who freaks out on a live newscast after a fire and a polar bear attack wreak havoc at Santa’s workshop. Then, Rudd plays an adorable but slightly menacing adult One Direction fan in a memorable sketch from his third time hosting, in 2013. Fey returns to introduce season 39’s Now That’s What I Call Christmas, which sees Jimmy Fallon playing Michael Bublé, Alan Rickman, Pitbull and Harry Styles, Kate McKinnon as Shikira, Jay Pharoah as DMX and Bobby Moynihan as Andrea Bocelli –all of whom play Christmas standards. If you’re one of the people that finds Fallon’s impressions entertaining, you’ll probably have fond memories of this sketch, though the rest of us undoubtedly find it tiring. Of all the past sketches shown tonight, this is the least deserving. Luckily, Fey is back to close the episode on the far superior Christmastime for the Hews, which she has fond memories of watching backstage with her newborn daughter. The claymation segment, set to a legitimately catchy Motown song, sees America’s Jewish population come out to run the streets while all the goyim are at home celebrating Christmas. Rudd, Hanks, Fey, Che and Thompson take a bow and sign off with a heartfelt thank you to all who worked on the episode. Rudd also mangles a quote from Forrest Gump: “Life is like a big, weird chocolate bar. Sometimes it’s delicious, other time it got that orange cream filling in it and it’s like, OK, it’s not what I would have chosen, but it’s better than nothing.” And with that, SNL says goodbye to 2021 with an understandably downbeat but admirably strong and at times moving episode. It’s too bad Rudd wasn’t able to host an entire episode but the show couldn’t have asked for a better guy to lead the ship. Here’s hoping things are back to normal – or at least some semblance of normality – in 2022.Five hundred years or so ago, a significant number of people thought the world was flat. In 500 years’ time, which current scientific theories will be relegated to the same level as the flat Earth theory is now? Richard Cutsforth, Chichester Notes &amp; Queries will return in 2022. Send new questions to nq@theguardian.com. Readers reply String theory. Too weird and inelegant to possibly be right. PrincessWhatever I would say “dark matter”. Science can’t possibly measure the mass of all the matter, or the various forms of energy present in the visible universe, so they invented a “magic matter” to fill in the blanks. reinhardpolley How about the big bang theory? It’s just a theory, is it not? The universe might just as well have been created by a burp from an ancient intergalactic hedgehog. UnironicBeard Trickle-down economics. Mikes005 I have a sneaking suspicion that, in 500 years, humans will have proved that intelligence does not reside in us. We have a planet tailor-made for the survival of all life on the planet, including ours. Despite that, we have humans destroying ecosystems in search of wealth and humans killing humans in search of control. I think Crocodile Dundee said it best: “See that rock over there? It’s been there for thousands of years. Arguing about who owns it is stupid.” That’s the metaphor that describes humanity today, as smart as that rock is. Rcamejo We must dismiss the idea there was a widespread belief in a flat Earth 500 years ago. An interesting and sometimes surprising window on educated medieval perspectives on the cosmos is provided by Dante’s The Divine Comedy, written during the early years of the 14th century and entirely conceived within a spherical-Earth model of the universe. Hell is a huge funnel-shaped structure, centred under Jerusalem, descending tier by tier to its deepest point, which is located at the centre of the planet. Purgatory is an oceanic island in the southern hemisphere, at the antipodes of Jerusalem. Dante frequently makes reference to, for example, how midday on the Tiber equals sunset on the Ganges. Most remarkable of all, when Dante and his guide, Virgil, descend to the deepest pit of the inferno, where Satan stands waist-deep in a frozen lake, and they continue their journey by climbing down Satan’s shaggy pelt into a cavern below the lake, Dante is dumbstruck suddenly to find himself alongside Satan’s gigantic legs, which are now upside-down. Virgil patiently explains to him that he should not be surprised, as they have passed the centre of the Earth, to which all objects are drawn by gravity. Uppsalaman Neoliberalism is a theory well beyond its use-by date now, never mind in 500 years’ time! DiogenesPithos Materialism: the weird idea that consciousness somehow emerges from matter. PlatonicThoughts It’s not so much a matter of what will be (dis)proved, but what will be acceptable. Back in 500BC, Pythagoras postulated that the moon and the Earth were spherical, based on observation and logic. Then, in 240BC Eratosthenes noted that, at midday in one town in Egypt, the sun shone directly down into a well, whereas, at a distant town, at the same time of day, the light arrived at an angle. He used this, and the distance between the two towns, to calculate the diameter of the Earth – and made a pretty good fist of it, too. How did he measure the distance between the towns? This was in the days before Google Maps, so he paid somebody to walk between the two towns and count how many paces it took. That is the painstaking attention to detail, and the endless quest for truth, that epitomise the scientific method. Did the wider world pay any attention? No, because it didn’t fit in with the extant received wisdom that the Earth was flat, a “fact” that was obvious to anyone who looked at the horizon. Then along came Copernicus and, of course, Galileo, whose heliocentric models contravened the doctrine (and dogma) of the all-powerful church. The church ignored their postulations and proofs and insisted on its own – totally unproved – “model”. That is the painstaking attention to superstition and control of the masses, and the endless quest to suppress inconvenient facts, that epitomises virtually all major religions. So, it’s not a matter of being right; it’s a matter of being accepted. Maybe the best we can hope for is that, long before 2521, humankind (if it still exists) will have outgrown the need for religions. LewisWinders Almost none of the above is actually true. In rejecting Galileo’s model, the church was siding with the majority scientific opinion of the day. There was not, as yet, sufficient evidence for heliocentrism. Geocentrism wasn’t a simple superstition, but a well-established system that was able to predict astronomical events quite accurately. The Catholic authorities believed, quite reasonably, that as long as it did that then there was no reason to reject it. Galileo’s own definitive proof of heliocentrism – that the tides are caused by the Earth sloshing about in its orbit around the sun – was, of course, not only unconvincing but flat-out wrong. Moreover, much of the evidence supporting heliocentrism was gathered over the course of the 17th century by Catholic astronomers, particularly Jesuits, who were as committed to evidence-based science as any hard-nosed atheist. JonathanCR Science cannot find a proof for time; there is no experiment that shows that time exists. As a fairly rudimentary aspect of our lives and a fundamental aspect of all applied mathematics and sciences, it might be nice to solve that one. I’m working on a theory that a fitted sheet obeys neither Euclidean or non-Euclidean geometry. Here’s looking at Euclid. flinders 1) That capitalism is a valid – and in any way morally acceptable – way of structuring our economic activity and distribution of resources. To paraphrase Captain Picard: “Our 20th-century ancestors, with their primitive economic systems!” 2) That nation states are a reasonable structure in which to invest sovereignty. 3) This one may be wishful thinking – the idea that the speed of light is unable to be exceeded. If the idea is sound, I hope the Alcubierre drive or something similar is plausible. The idea that we will never be able to explore the rest of the universe is one I find crushingly depressing. BostonMatt The theory that time travel is impossible. I’ve just nipped back 500 years from a post-Covid world to post this comment. FYI, the scientists ran out of Greek letters before we got to the “new normal” in the 2030s. galvinonthewing Five hundred years? By then, I suspect there will be a plethora of theories about the ancients (or aliens) who built cities and mastered arcane sciences such as manufacturing glass, flying machines and creating artificial light, along with generating and transmitting energy. Then there will be the inevitable fables about what happened to them. AwakenstoEmptinessYou’ve had this anxiety dream before, but never so vividly. You come to in a brightly lit, cheerfully staffed Channel 4 pitch meeting, and everyone is looking at you for an idea. You stare down at your notepad: nothing. You check your laptop for “IDEAS_2021.docx” and find it empty. You’re sweating. There really are a lot of people here. And not just faceless executives, either: Davina’s here, urging you on; Noel Edmonds stands looming over a Deal Or No Deal box; Fred from First Dates is doing an encouraging French face at you. “Yeah, uh … The Greatest Snowman,” you say, and there’s a pause. The guy at the front with the blazer-T-shirt combo and the Matt Hancock jeans stops, PowerPoint clicker in hand. “What’s that, then?” The sweat is jetting out of your body in an arc. “It’s, erm. Well. You’ve heard of The Greatest Showman, yeah?” You’re stalling for time. Everyone in this room can see you’re stalling for time. “Well this is The Greatest Snowman. It’s, uh … ” – hold on, you’ve got it! – “it’s a competitive … yeah, no, it’s a competitive snowman-building competition. It’s filmed in the Alps and it’s hosted by Sue Perkins.” “Like The Great British Bake Off for snow?” Davina asks, and you take the cue. “Yeah, only it’s not weird normal baker people crying about flour. It’s celebrities.” You’re losing them again. They like Bake Off. They love Bake Off. “But one of the celebrities competing is … Liam from Bake Off!” Everyone looks at each other, amazed. It’s clicking! You’re getting away with this! “Who else?” says Hancock Jeans, suddenly writing down notes, and you have to think of the literal four first celebrities that come into your head, so when you say them the urgency with which your brain is having thoughts makes you shout them. “CHERRY HEALEY, JOHNNY VEGAS, DANI DYER and LAURENCE LLEWELYN-BOWEN,” you yell, and Davina McCall says under her breath: “Love LLB.” You’ve done it. You just might get out of here alive, you know. They might not fire you on the spot. “And format-wise,” Fred from First Dates is purring, “’ow do you see it? As a – ’ow to say this? – a ‘knockout competition’?” No, you say, that’s the beauty of it. Everyone spends four hours hammering at a snow block with a series of saws, scrapers and drills – and everyone is ranked from first to fifth for their efforts, with an overall winner at the end – but nobody goes home. It’s about the weird camaraderie of the celebrities doing this completely bananas thing in the snow somewhere. It’s about Liam from Bake Off and Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen in his final goth form wearing Christmas jumpers, pulling crackers and getting a bit cheeky on vermouth. There is no heartbreak and no tears. Only Dani Dyer trying to make a Barbie out of snow and it not really translating to screen because snow is white and it’s on a background of white, so basically you’re just watching Dani Dyer, exhausted, pawing away at nothing. There’s a bit where Johnny Vegas, who simply has to be hungover on gluhwein seems to have real beef with Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen about who can best make a snow arch. Davina does some athletic lunges across the room to get really close to you. She leans in. “Sounds fab,” she says. “And the judges?” Noel Edmonds says, in that eerie Edmonds way of his. He’s scoffing (Noel Edmonds does not believe in this: Noel Edmonds does not believe in you). “Who can possibly judge a snowman competition?” Well, Noel, you say, and suddenly you’re feeling braver. Sculptors, that’s who. Snow is just cold clay, isn’t it? We’ll get Taslim Martin from the Royal Society of Sculptors and, for a Nordic twist, two slightly eerie Swedish sisters who don’t understand that to make good TV you have to be nice to people, so keep absolutely slicing Johnny Vegas for not making a realistic-enough horse out of ice. How about that, Noel? How about that, Noel Edmonds? You’ve done it. The entirety of Channel 4 has you on their shoulders now, leading you out of the room in a parade. Davina keeps shouting: “MAKE WAY FOR THE WUNDERKIND!” even though, at your age, that title barely applies. Outside, the big Channel 4 logo is dusted with snow, and Sue Perkins is there to greet you. “Thank you for giving me the most ludicrous opportunity of my career,” she says. Behind her, it’s – it can’t be, can it? It is: the Queen, with a sword, ready to knight you. “One heard about that bananas snow idea you came up with,” she says. “Thank you for helping this country through a difficult Christmas.” The sound is your alarm, but you don’t want to hear it. Just a minute longer in here. Just a few minutes longer in here. It can wait, it can wait, it can wait. The Greatest Snowman is on Christmas Eve, 8pm, Channel 4It’s becoming worryingly frequent for me to get emails from librarians telling me that one of my books has been “challenged”. Recently, two of my titles – This Book Is Gay and Understanding Gender – appeared on a very long list of books that the Texas lawmaker Matt Krause would like to see removed from schools. I’m in good company: Margaret Atwood, the young adult bestseller Adam Silvera, and the V for Vendetta author Alan Moore also feature, alongside Ta-Nehisi Coates, Jeffrey Eugenides and – for whatever reason – a book by James Patterson. Book “banning” is nothing new. Few sights are more enduring, or chilling, than the photographs of Nazi youth raiding Magnus Hirschfeld’s Institute of Sexology in 1933 and burning the books they found there. Book burning remains synonymous with censorship, dictatorship and autocracy. As a writer, I think it’s up to publishers to decide if they want their name associated with prejudice – even with authors and books I disagree with fundamentally on ideological grounds. But this isn’t indicative of some evenly split “culture war”. Krause only wants liberal, or inclusive, books banned. When This Book Is Gay, a nonfiction handbook for LGBTQ+ teens, was first “challenged” – in Alaska in 2016 – everyone was very excited. “You’ve made it now!” people exclaimed, as the furore made headlines all over the US. “It’ll be great publicity.” Even at the time, I was disheartened for the queer youth of Wasilla – Sarah Palin’s stomping ground. What sort of message would removing the title from libraries send out to those kids? That they’re shameful? That they’re sinful? They ought to be hidden from sight? I feared it would force them to the back of the closet. I want to be very clear. None of my books has “turned” young people into lesbians, gay men, bi people or trans folk. If books had that power, I would stand before you a very hungry caterpillar. I didn’t read a book with an out queer character until I read Poppy Z Brite’s Lost Souls when I was 17. Needless to say, I was already well on my way towards understanding my sexual and gender identity. I wrote This Book Is Gay because, from my time working as a personal social and health education teacher, I knew there was a gap in the market. After the repeal of section 28, which forbade teachers from discussing LGBTQ+ lives, professionals were allowed to acknowledge us, but hadn’t been given any advice whatsoever on how to do it. Many teachers were terrified of doing or saying the wrong thing, so there wasn’t an immediate improvement to the education of LGBTQ+ kids. It bothered me that sex education lessons assumed every child was straight and every child was cis. Some simply aren’t. As such, we were leaving queer kids dangerously unprepared for adult life. So I set out to be the “cool aunt” coming with all the advice I wish I’d had as a teenager. True, I didn’t want it to read like a fusty medical textbook. I wanted it to be approachable, funny and relatable. But it’s my straight talking (pun intentional) that has seen the book repeatedly “challenged” – in Wyoming, Florida and Texas (and those are just the ones I’ve been told about) – or outright banned. There have been a couple of UK incidents with parents upset at school libraries, but nearly all of the heat has come from the US. The “conservative activist” Stephanie Armbruster told a committee hearing of Lafayette public library board that it was “so disturbing that I cannot bring myself to talk about some of the specifics in the book that I do have a lot of concerns about”. I don’t mind spelling them out. This Book Is Gay explains how to safely have anal sex; how to access PrEP to avoid HIV transmission; how to find a clitoris; the difference between cis and trans bodies; and I clarify words and phrases that teenagers will have almost certainly read online like “Grindr”, “rimming” or “golden shower”. I figured it was best I told readers rather than them doing a Google image search, right? But that’s only a tiny section of the book. Most of it is about figuring out your identity, coming out and creating fulfilling relationships. On Krause’s 850-strong list of titles he wants banned from Texas libraries, 62% concern LGBTQ+ issues. It’s interesting to me because the political right, in both the UK and US, are obsessed with saying they’ve been “cancelled” or “silenced”. You can dine out very well on your I’ve Been Cancelled media tour. In fact, scrutinising Krause’s list, you won’t find any “cancellable” rightwing topics at all. There’s nothing about gun control, anti-abortion sentiment or so-called gender-critical diatribes. No, the books he wants hidden from young people are about sex education, race, LGBTQ+ lives and – perhaps most troubling of all – those that teach young people about their human rights. Those most decrying cancel culture are being silenced the least. This week I signed a petition from the National Coalition Against Censorship, alongside my valiant US publisher, Sourcebooks, who’ve stood by me since 2015. The petition is calling for an end to these vexatious campaigns to truly silence liberal voices. But my final thank you has to go to the brave librarians and educators who are on the frontline of this toxic “culture war”. It is they who are bearing the brunt of hateful extremists who would cancel queer kids, not queer books, if they could. Juno Dawson is the author of Stay Another DayWomen and ethnic minorities are being held back by white male supremacy and affirmative action is needed in Britain to tackle longstanding injustices, the US civil rights leader Jesse Jackson has said. Jackson, a former presidential candidate and veteran civil rights leader who worked alongside Dr Martin Luther King in the 1960s, on Sunday finishes a tour of the UK to mark his 80th birthday. Jackson told the Guardian: “Women and people of colour are still facing the shadow of white male supremacy both here and in the US.” He added: “We complain about the Taliban but we do it ourselves in a nicer, gentler way.” Jackson believes affirmative action is needed to tackle longstanding injustices which denied opportunities. Affirmative action in the US is credited with boosting the numbers of ethnic minorities employed in key sectors, but UK law would outlaw the British equivalent, which is called positive discrimination. “There must be some form of affirmative action after years of negative action,” Jackson said. He praised the Black Lives Matter movement that sprang up in the US. After the murder of George Floyd by a US police officer in 2020, more than 250,000 people in Britain took to the streets despite the pandemic lockdown, triggering fresh discussions and soul-searching about racial justice. “It is a consciousness-raising movement,” Jackson said. He added that it was “a new name for an old process” and followed in the tradition of liberation movements such as black power in the US in the 1960s. Jackson said: “Racism is not scientific. It is taught in the home, and church, and school, and workplace.” Jackson pointed to sports, where he said black people had done well because the rules were clear and what counted as success was objectively measured, meaning achievement could not be hampered by biases. “The reason … there is a set of rules, that does not apply in government … The rules are public, clear and transparent.” He quipped: “If there’s any doubt, there is a replay.” “But whenever the rules are not fair, and not even the outcome is predicable”, that led to unfairness, he added. Jackson said institutional racism existed both in the UK and US and was deep-rooted: “When slavery was over, the system was not over.” He said there was a “civilisation crisis” and former colonisers had an obligation to those that had been oppressed. Jackson ran in 1984 and 1988 to become the first African-American president of the US, and bids to secure the Democratic nomination via a “rainbow coalition” of ethnic minorities and others who traditionally had not held power.It’s shaping up to be all too familiar. A worsening outlook in the pandemic, a government slow to react, and confidence fading fast among businesses and households. In many ways Christmas couldn’t come soon enough for Boris Johnson’s government, amid a storm of bad news as the prime minister’s Teflon ability to survive political scandal appears to be deserting him at last. But rather than acting as a distraction, the festive period merely highlights the serious problems facing the British economy that could make matters worse. The Omicron variant of Covid-19 has been hitting businesses hard, with the hospitality sector suffering from a wave of cancellations and lost trade during what ought to be the busiest time of the year. Meanwhile, inflation is at its highest for a decade, in an unfolding cost of living crisis that will get worse before it gets better. Both require action. Yet so far the government has been behind the curve, with the cabinet caught in a depressingly familiar conflict between doing the right thing and doing the ideological thing. It ought to be clear by now that stepping up with state support to protect lives and livelihoods has prevented a far worse reckoning for the economy during the pandemic. Early in the crisis, Rishi Sunak promised to do whatever it takes to steer Britain through, ultimately extending £400bn in support. It was hoped before the emergence of Omicron this would be enough: as the chancellor had grown fond of saying, dire forecasts last year for unemployment to peak at 12% have been confounded. What he fails to stress is how that estimate was based on him scrapping furlough in October 2020, a policy he ditched as the pandemic worsened last winter. Much has changed since, not least thanks to vaccines, but there is a worrying sense of deja vu. It’s clear that confidence is again draining out of the economy as Omicron spreads, while faith in the government’s response evaporates. What’s worse, the economic support schemes available earlier in the crisis have largely been dismantled. As infection rates soar, hospitality venues are either voluntarily closing their doors or are managing a plunge in bookings. According to figures from Opentable, seated diner numbers in the past week have slumped to about a fifth below the equivalent period in 2019. Pubs, theatres and nightclubs are similarly struggling. With speculation mounting over the need for tougher restrictions, the prognosis looks bleak. Sunak has been keen to point to measures introduced before Omicron that could help, such as business rates relief for eligible retail, hospitality and leisure businesses in England, and VAT at a reduced rate of 12.5% for hospitality until March. However, there are signs that further action could be coming soon, after the chancellor flew back from California to meet virtually with business chiefs on Friday, who pressed him to intervene. The International Monetary Fund told Sunak last week that contingency plans for a mini-furlough would be required if Omicron forces the government into closing parts of the economy, although vaccines and other mitigating measures would make the kind of severe lockdowns and extensive support deployed a year ago unnecessary. It’s a message taken on by the Bank of England, which argued last week that inflationary pressures were more important to respond to than Omicron, as it raised interest rates for the first time in three years, arguing that successive waves of Covid had tended to come with a reduced impact on GDP and consumer spending. As the Omicron situation worsens and Threadneedle Street withdraws its accommodative stance, Treasury assistance will be increasingly important. Ahead of the Christmas break the top priority should be to support businesses and households through a difficult winter, in response to both the Omicron economic chill and the unfolding cost of living crisis. Grants and loans for hospitality, travel and leisure companies in the worst-affected sectors of the economy are the best place to start, while a targeted reboot of furlough should be announced to operate in lockstep with any tighter restrictions. Torsten Bell, the chief executive of the Resolution Foundation, believes such a version of furlough is vital, despite Treasury reluctance to focus it on specific sectors. While No 11 has long argued that a sectoral approach is too difficult, these claims are overdone, he says, as this was exactly the approach taken for state-backed grants. To ensure value for money, and that the hardest-hit sectors are helped most, threshold tests could be applied; such as if a venue has closed its doors, or if VAT returns show at least a 50% fall in revenue. Austria has extended its furlough scheme until March 2022 with similar tests for access. “Whatever the imminent cause of that economic pain, the right policy answer is to provide targeted economic support. Reviving a more limited version of the furlough scheme is the easiest way to do that and protect household living standards,” Bell said. With a targeted approach the chancellor would meet both the test of responding to Omicron, while recognising that the landscape of the pandemic has fundamentally changed thanks to the vaccine programme. The exit strategy should be, it is hoped, clearer than in earlier waves, making the case stronger still for temporary, targeted support. To dither for longer would put to waste the progress made from the billions of pounds already spent.The resignation of the Brexit minister, David Frost, has prompted much speculation over who his successor might be and the political direction of the UK in its negotiations with the EU. Ireland’s EU commissioner, Mairead McGuinness, warned on Sunday that appeasing the “Spartan” wing of hardline Brexit rebels was not the answer to the impasse over Northern Ireland and other issues facing the new minister. Who will be Frost’s successor? Two former Brexit secretaries, Dominic Raab and Stephen Barclay, are said to be in the frame, along with Iain Duncan Smith. But some are calling for a fresh approach, arguing too much power lay in one man’s hands. “Others have to sort out the mess he leaves behind. This will need more than simply replacing Frost,” the crossbench peer Lord Ricketts, a former under secretary at the Foreign Office and ambassador to France, said on Sunday. “Johnson should take this opportunity to end the anomaly that the minister responsible for relations with our nearest neighbours operates as a lone ranger in the Cabinet Office. “He should give the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office responsibility for EU policy, where it can be properly integrated into wider foreign policy under a senior minister for Europe.” What does the EU say the priorities are? McGuinness told RTÉ on Sunday: “The name will change, but the issues will not.” She said the priority was to stabilise the situation in Northern Ireland, where Brexit had caused divisions that threatened to be deep enough to collapse the devolved government. Another hardliner in the job was not the answer, she argued. “If there will be no compromise, then there will be no progress and that’s untenable,” she told RTÉ’s This Week. “If the priority is simply to appease hardliners in the Conservative party, I think we’re in a very bad place,” she warned. “The priority has to be that whoever replaces Lord Frost comes to the table prepared to negotiate and compromise because we want to find solutions that work for Northern Ireland.” Apart from Northern Ireland, what will be in the new Brexit minister’s in-tray? Critics hope the departure of Lord Frost and the weakening of Boris Johnson clears the way for a new approach to the wider relations with the EU. Three key cohorts could benefit from a new shopkeeper: Scientists After a massive dispute with the EU over contributions to the science and research programme, a deal was struck last December to allow the UK to remain in the £80bn flagship seven-year fund. However, a year in scientists are still locked out. The veteran Eurosceptic Bill Cash surmised they were collateral damage, telling MPs recently their participation in the programme was being unfairly hampered by what he felt was a legitimate dispute in Northern Ireland. Musicians and the creative industries Musicians and performers including Sir Elton John have accused the government of “screwing” their livelihoods, after Frost signed a Brexit trade deal ending visa-free travel for short working tours. Expect the creative industries to seek urgent meetings with the new Brexit minister. British citizens living in Europe British nationals living in the EU trying to return home with a European spouse have implored the government to ease up on immigration restrictions that apply post Brexit. They also want a 29 March deadline for EU or other non-British spouses to apply for a family permit, the prerequisite for settled status to be extended. They say the home office delays are now so bad, taking six or more months to process applications, that British families are being forced to split with one spouse getting home for a new job or to look after an elderly parent and the other staying in the EU. Expect urgent campaigning on this in January.On what would prove to be his penultimate day as Boris Johnson’s Brexit minister, during which he spoke with his EU counterpart, Maroš Šefčovič, for one last time, David Frost was disappointed. He was disappointed with the state of the talks over the post-Brexit arrangements for Northern Ireland. He was disappointed with the EU for failing to finalise the UK’s involvement in its €95.5bn Horizon Europe research and innovation programme. It is understood that he was also pretty disappointed with those who had suggested that he had done a great big U-turn in recent days on Britain’s approach to the European court of justice in Northern Ireland. Actually, he had done it in the House of Lords the previous month but no one had been listening. Such is the lot of our peers of the realm. But, according to Frost’s letter of resignation, when it came two days later, he had become mostly disappointed with two big government policies of late: the reinstatement of Covid restrictions and the hiking of taxes in order to pay the country’s way out of the pandemic. These issues had clearly been on Frost’s mind for a while. He had indicated his displeasure over the government’s economic policies in a recent speech in which he had echoed Margaret Thatcher’s famous Bruges speech. “We have not successfully rolled back the frontiers of the European Union from Britain with Brexit, only to import that European model after all this time,” he said. But those who have known Frost well over the years suggest that there may have been an overarching disappointment bearing down on the ministerial mind. He was the prime minister’s man. Brought into government by him from relative obscurity. Promoted by him to the cabinet. When Frost had decided that he did not want to be national security adviser, a position he had been due to take up at the start of the year, Johnson had acquiesced, giving him his preferred job leading the way on EU issues. But, today, the prime minister is in trouble, both within his parliamentary party and among the membership. Frost is an ambitious man, with every reason to believe he should have a political career beyond this administration. His approval ratings among Conservative members ranks behind only the foreign secretary, Liz Truss. But he remained, until today, all too identifiable with the prime minister. Frost’s resignation letter, while not overtly critical of Johnson, did quite a bit to correct that. “I hope we will move as fast as possible to where we need to get to: a lightly regulated, low-tax, entrepreneurial economy, at the cutting edge of modern science and economic change,” Frost wrote. Sources helpfully informed the Mail on Sunday that such concerns chimed well with the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, who Frost had explicitly namechecked and praised in his November speech. Those who have worked alongside Frost, 56, who is married to Harriet Mathews, the Foreign Office’s deputy political director, describe him as a “workaholic” and a “machine”. This was highlighted recently by his late-night Twitter spars with Ireland’s foreign minister, Simon Coveney. Part of Frost’s drive, it is suggested, has been a determination to prove his naysayers wrong. His solid career in the Foreign Office had culminated with his appointment as ambassador to Denmark, before returning to Whitehall as director of strategy. He quit in 2013 to become chief executive of the Scottish Whisky Association, a well-known outlet for those of a certain standing leaving the Foreign Office. But there appears to have been a sense of unfinished business. In a speech in Brussels at the start of the negotiations over the trade deal, he referenced his old boss, the former head of the diplomatic service, Lord Kerr, who had suggested that Frost was merely “good at doing what he is told”. It was, Frost had said in response, “as if no member of the UK foreign service could possibly have the same view of the European Union as our current prime minister without having been instructed to do so”. It may be the end of “the Great Frost”, as Johnson referred to his minister, in the negotiating rooms in Brussels for now. But Frost is a man on a mission. And you do not work within, and in opposition to, the EU institutions without learning a little about strategy.Drakeo the Ruler, the critically acclaimed Los Angeles rapper, has died after a reported stabbing at a music festival. His press representative confirmed his death to the Guardian but did not give further details. The 28-year-old, whose real name was Darrell Caldwell, had been scheduled to perform at the Once Upon a Time festival in Los Angeles. A source speaking to the LA Times said Caldwell had been attacked on the festival site by a group of people on Saturday evening. He was taken to hospital in a critical condition, where he later died. The festival’s promoter, Live Nation, said: “There was an altercation in the roadway backstage. Out of respect for those involved and in coordination with local authorities, artists and organisers decided not to move forward with remaining sets so the festival was ended an hour early.” A set by Snoop Dogg was cancelled. Caldwell had not crossed into the mainstream, but was a hugely admired cult figure in his city’s rap scene. He released his debut mixtape in 2015, and went on to release 10 more full-length projects. In 2017, he was jailed for 11 months for illegal firearm possession. In March 2018, he was detained once more, on a murder charge dating back to a shooting incident in December 2016. He continued to record music while incarcerated – the mixtape Thank You For Using GTL was recorded down a prison phone line – and was eventually acquitted of the murder charges in July 2019. After a plea deal for a charge of criminal conspiracy, he was released in November 2020. After his release, he made the album The Truth Hurts, including the single Talk to Me with guest star Drake. Drake was among those paying tribute, writing on Instagram that Caldwell “always picked my spirit up with your energy”. The Los Angeles journalist Jeff Weiss, who had campaigned for his freedom, paid tribute, calling him “the greatest west coast artist of a generation, a legend who invented a new rap language of slippery cadences, nervous rhythms, and psychedelic slang”.The Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai has denied that she had accused a former senior official of having sexually assaulted her, in what is believed to be the first foreign press interview since her November essay caused a media storm. “I wanted to make this very clear: I have never claimed, or written about anyone having sexually assaulted me,” Peng said. “With regards to Weibo, it’s about my personal privacy ... There’s been a lot of misunderstanding … There [should be] no distorted interpretation.” The claim apparently contradicted a 2 November social media post, in which Peng accused the former vice premier Zhang Gaoli of having coerced her into sex. The essay was taken down less than 30 minutes after it was published, and Peng became the centre of a global media storm after disappearing from public view for more than two weeks after the essay. Peng’s interview with Singapore’s Lianhe Zaobao, a Chinese-language publication under the state-controlled Singapore Press Holdings Limited, came as fresh footage of Peng emerged online on Sunday. Qingqing Chen, a senior journalist at the state-owned Global Times, posted a seven-second video clip of Peng on her Twitter account. In it, Peng is seen apparently in conversation with two other people, one of whom is the Chinese basketball player Yao Ming. Peng is shown giggling as she listens to Yao speaking. Peng is the only one of the three not wearing a face mask. “A friend sent me this video showing Chinese tennis star player Peng Shuai talked [sic] with Yao Ming, one of the most beloved players in @NBA history, this morning at an event ‘FIS Cross-Country Skiing China City Tour’ in Shanghai,” Chen wrote. Peng’s November post caused concern over her wellbeing internationally. It led fellow tennis stars, including Naomi Osaka and Serena Williams, to demand to know her whereabouts, under the hashtag #WhereIsPengShuai on Twitter. The incident also unleashed a global storm of criticism of China. As a result, the Women’s Tennis Association (WTA) announced its suspension of future tournaments in China early this month. Rights organisations seized on the opportunity to call for a boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics. In Sunday’s interview, Peng also answered the Singaporean newspaper’s question about her email response to the WTA’s CEO, Steve Simon, last month. She confirmed that the Chinese version of the email to Simon was written by her, but said the one published by CGTN, the state-owned English-language broadcaster, was a translation because her level of English was not sufficient. “But they more or less said the same thing,” She said, adding that her email response to Simon was “entirely on my own volition”, and that she has been living freely. “Why would there be people following me?” she rebutted, when asked whether the authorities had put her under surveillance. “The news in that release, including the allegation of sexual assault, is not true,” that letter said. “I’m not missing, nor am I unsafe. I’ve just been resting at home and everything is fine. Thank you again for caring about me.” Simon had said at the time that he “had a hard time believing” that Peng had actually written the email or believed what had been attributed to her. On the same day as Chen’s video clip and the Singaporean newspaper interview emerged, Ding Li, who claims to be Peng’s friend, also posted a series of photos of the tennis player in Shanghai. In one of the photos, Ding, Yao, Peng and two other Chinese athletes – the Olympic sailing champion Xu Lijia and the retired table tennis player Wang Liqin – are seen standing next to a banner for the “FIS Cross-Country Skiing China City Tour” with Shanghai’s Yangpu bridge in the background. The Shanghai stop of the cross-country ski tour took place on Saturday, according to the state-run CGTN news site. As China gears up for the Winter Olympics in February, controversies over its human rights record continue to fester. Many observers outside the country insist Peng is not genuinely free, despite attempts by state media to create this impression. Chinese diplomats condemned unnamed people of “malicious hyping” of the Peng saga.Henry Livings felt that “all plays about writers should be burned, with the exception of Present Laughter.” So Alan Plater says in the prelude of this play, all about the life of writers, which premiered at the Hampstead theatre in 1999. Despite Plater’s knowing irony, Livings’ words haunt this revival and fatally prove his point. Peggy Ramsay, the legendary play agent who represented everyone from Joe Orton to Edward Bond and Plater himself, is its central, indomitable force. Tamsin Greig, as Peggy, plays her as a posh, flouncing and vaguely rakish woman with a witty intelligence. But even Greig’s charisma cannot save this play from its dated ideas and sleepy drama. It is clear that Peggy was a visionary and commanding company boss, unquestionably ahead of her time in the 1960s. But her views on everything from writers’ wives to money-making do not sound maverick so much as outmoded now. We see how she cultivated new writers and created stars of the stage. But the play’s humour also shows us how she hated Hollywood and Americans (which feels like a very old joke), how she looked down on television (same), and sneered at northerners. She seems to distrust other women, too, and disapproves of clients who are married, encouraging them to remain unattached, pay for sex and keep their creative energies primed for the page. While all of this may simply reflect the class-bound norms of her day, it begs the question of why this play should be revived now and what it seeks to say to our age beyond reminding us of Peggy’s professional legacy. Peggy misnames her secretaries, including her latest, Tessa (Danusia Samal), the name of a former employee. But Samal’s character does, in fact, seem generic and interchangeable. The laboured jokes about not knowing the distance between Scarborough and Hull and thinking them merely streets away are overplayed, too familiar in their southern hauteur. The play takes place over one day in the 1960s when three writers visit Peggy: Simon (Josh Finan), who is at the start of his career, Philip (Jos Vantyler), in the prime of starry success and Henry (Trevor Fox) – who is apparently inspired by Livings and now thoroughly jaded. James Cotterill’s set is an office tumbling over with piles of manuscripts, and Richard Wilson’s direction endeavours to give the too static drama some movement, but there is little wriggle-room. The comedy feels too gentle and the drama meandering with characters who have neither enough tension or passion between them. What is a play? asks Simon, and there are attempts to answer it, but nothing very revelatory is dragged up. We head towards an ending in which a longstanding client has killed themself. Peggy steels herself against its sadness, saying it is a “terribly feeble thing to do”. Did Plater want to show her survivor spirit, or something far darker? It looks suspiciously like the latter now. Peggy for You is at Hampstead theatre, London, until 29 January.Whatever political dramas are erupting on a seemingly daily basis – with the flouncing off of the Brexit minister, Lord Frost, just the latest – most people are now exhausted. After repeated lurches from pessimism to optimism and back again, the pandemic will soon enter its third year. The fact that everything has suddenly been upturned at the time of year when we get up in the dark hardly helps. Neither does being led by people who disregard the same rules they want the rest of us to follow. I have been party to enough recent conversations involving rolling eyes and mentions of the clowns in power to know that this is now a big part of the public mood; the astonishing North Shropshire byelection saw it being expressed via the ballot box. If the government has now lost a constituency where 60% of voters backed leave and the last Tory majority was 23,000, where are we? The answer, it seems to me, goes beyond politics and into people’s collective sense of wellbeing, or the lack of it. I am not sure whether human beings need strong leaders, but the idea that the people in charge ought to be responsible grownups seems pretty ingrained in most of us. We now have an array of stories that seem to prove the exact reverse, which reportedly played their part in the Lib Dems’ win: Boris Johnson’s Peppa Pig speech; all those parties; the general sense of a prime minister and government now floundering from one crisis to the next. Thanks to the contortions of North Shropshire’s former MP Owen Paterson, the issue of MPs’ second jobs was also in the foreground. Everything fused with that weary sense of being taken for granted that you often pick up in ultra-safe seats, and the Tories’ fate was sealed. One current element of politics feels particularly remarkable. During the pandemic’s past peaks, tropes about a supposedly unreliable public have often felt like the norm: TV interviewers’ habitually asking bereaved or ill people what they would say to those breaking the rules; warnings that efforts to control the virus may run up against mass “fatigue” and even social unrest. In fact, the past two years have seen the majority of us understanding the need for restrictions, and doing what has been required. Conservatives, by contrast, now seem to be people who either break the rules, or are opposed to them. The result is not just a spectacle of endless hypocrisy, but the sense of an elite at an ever greater distance from the public: some achievement for politicians who put exactly that tension at the heart of Brexit and used it to their advantage. Viewed from a slightly different angle, the current mess threatens another aspect of the Tories’ appeal to their voters, particularly relevant to the rise of Boris Johnson. In the runup to the election of 2019, I had occasional conversations with people in which they acknowledged that he lived in a different universe, but deferentially saw that as the key to his breezy confidence and ability to get things done. Now, amid all those stories of illicit parties and his boundless ineptitude, that air of rarefied poshness may have begun to take on a very different meaning. The abiding impression is no longer of someone whose background ensures they are at ease with the demands of power, but of the kind of chaotic decadence that often comes with plummy vowels and the smell of horses. If that gap between Tory politicians and the public is about class, another kind of estrangement is bound up with a lot of Conservatives’ beliefs. Brexit seems to have pumped a certain kind of Tory full of what an article in the Economist recently summarised as a mixture of “triumphalism and paranoia”: a belief that hard-right Toryism is heroic and visionary, but also constantly under threat (Frost’s exit plays to this narrative). This is the stuff of fanaticism, which British people never like. Particularly when it comes to questions about Covid restrictions, it also seems to lead to a distinction between a lazy, herd-like public and rugged Tory true believers who would like to usher the country into a new nirvana of liberty and self-reliance but think the rest of us are probably not up to it. Among Tory politicians, this is more a matter of latent belief than loud rhetoric, but its place in the wider culture of the English right should be jangling the nerves of any Conservatives concerned about their future. The editor of the Sunday Telegraph, Allister Heath, recently complained that we were “hardly the nation of freedom-lovers libertarian romantics naively assumed us to be, mostly preferring perceived security to liberty”. Too many of us, he said, “like to snitch on neighbours, and are pathologically incapable of rational, full-picture, long-term cost-benefit analyses”. Much the same view lurks in a Tory belief that is mostly voiced outside parliament: the idea that Britain is hopelessly addicted to the NHS, usually explained using that hackneyed quotation from the Thatcher-era politician Nigel Lawson about the health service being the closest thing England has to a national religion. Our belief in universal healthcare delivered on the basis of need, it seems, is still seen as so irrational that it borders on superstition. There are similarities here with Britannia Unchained, the free-market manifesto that was cowritten by five Conservative MPs, four of whom are now in the cabinet, and at least one of whom – Liz Truss – now apparently fancies her chances of being Johnson’s replacement. Remember its most notorious sentence: “Once they enter the workplace, the British are among the worst idlers in the world.” Before yet another U-turn, that rather misanthropic idea was recently recycled into the strange Tory war against the alleged depravity of working from home. In August, one unnamed member of the Cabinet suggested that home-working civil servants should have their pay cut; at the Conservative conference, amid bizarre jokes about “woke-ing from home”, the party chair, Oliver Dowden, said people needed “to get off their Pelotons and get back to their desks”; Johnson joined in with his insistence that we should return to the office for fear of colleagues gossiping about us. Besides city-centre landlords, who was this for? Did they not realise it would soon sound not just unhinged but stupid? If Johnson’s party can find no collective facial expressions other than sneering or smirking, it is hardly going to thrive. What the Tories seem to be finding out, moreover, is that a combination of hardcore ideology and the snootiness of the class system is starting to fatally weaken their claims to speak for The People. Their flag-waving, John Bullish fantasies about our national character surely peaked in the slipstream of the 2016 referendum, and have since dwindled away in the face of proof that most people are kind, law-abiding, willing to make sacrifices for others, and prepared to put up with an amazing amount of what life – and the government – throws at them. To end up on the wrong side of all that takes some doing, but that is what seems to have happened. Such is the puzzle that will be preoccupying Tory minds through Christmas and beyond: if populists lose their popularity, what then? John Harris is a Guardian columnistAndrew Marr has signed off from his 21-year BBC career using a catchphrase from the Anchorman character Ron Burgundy. The broadcaster, who has said he is looking forward to regaining his “own voice” outside of BBC impartiality rules, presented his final Sunday morning show after 17 years at the helm. Bringing his last programme to a close, he said: “I have been so lucky and so privileged to share so many Sunday mornings with you.” Referencing a line delivered by the fictional news anchor played by Will Ferrell in the 2004 comedy film, he added: “I have been wondering how to close this final show, but I can’t do better than quoting my great mentor: ‘You stay classy, San Diego.’” His final programme featured a montage of highlights from the show over the years, including interviews with the last six British prime ministers, as well as Greta Thunberg, Prince Harry, Barack Obama and Vladimir Putin. Among his final guests were the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, and the health secretary Sajid Javid, who both said it had been a privilege to be guests on his show. In response to Khan, Marr said: “Luckily, I am from Dundee, so I won’t get emotional.” Sophie Raworth will serve as the interim presenter of the Sunday morning programme, which will be temporarily retitled Sunday Morning, from 9 January. Raworth will present the show for a “short period” while a recruitment process for a permanent presenter takes place, the corporation has said. Once a permanent appointment has been made, the BBC plans to relaunch the programme with a new presenter, title and look. Marr, 62, has previously said he will focus on writing and presenting political and cultural shows for Global. He said moving to the London-based media company offered him a “new freedom” to do “fast-paced, very regular political journalism on LBC with no filter”. Marr joined the BBC in May 2000 as political editor. He will host an opinion-led programme on LBC in which he will “give his view on the biggest issues of the moment” alongside guests, Global has said, as well as presenting a new programme on Classic FM. He is also to join the New Statesman magazine as its chief political commentator.The mezzo-soprano Pamela Helen Stephen, who has died aged 57 of cancer, was a popular and admired figure on stages in Britain and abroad. Following her debut as Cathleen in Nicholas Maw’s The Rising of the Moon at Wexford in 1990, she made a number of appearances with Opera North, Welsh National and Scottish Operas before making her mark in a series of higher-profile roles. Though not an early music specialist, she won considerable acclaim for the powerful way she inhabited the character of Penelope in the ENO production of Monteverdi’s The Return of Ulysses at the Young Vic, London, in 2011. In Benedict Andrews’ staging, screens on either side of her zoomed in on facial expressions and stage action, enabling the loyal wife’s long wait for her husband Ulysses to be depicted by Stephen with almost unbearable pathos. She also received much praise in the title role of Handel’s Giulio Cesare at Opera North (2012), capturing not only Caesar’s assurance and arrogance but also a more pensive, vulnerable side of the character. Such were her innate empathy and dramatic skills, however, that she was able to make an impression out of all proportion to the prominence of the role she was playing. Thus as Cio-Cio-San’s maid Suzuki in Madam Butterfly (ENO, 2012-13) her response to the unfolding tragedy was etched on her expressive face as well as being reflected in the colouring of each phrase. Similarly as Violetta’s maid Annina, she held the stage whenever on it in revivals of Richard Eyre’s production of La Traviata at the Royal Opera. Stephen performed frequently in Australia too, where she lived for six months of the year with her husband since 1995, Richard Hickox, and their two children, Adam and Abigail, after his appointment in 2005 as musical director of Opera Australia. She sang the title role in Carmen in both Sydney and Melbourne, as well as Nicklausse/Muse in Offenbach’s Les Contes d’Hoffmann, and Sesto in Giulio Cesare. But in a campaign inspired by disaffected singers and a blatantly anti-British sentiment in some quarters of the community, Hickox was accused, among other things, of nepotism with regard to the casting of his wife in leading roles. Supported by the board, he rejected the charge. Born in Solihull, Pamela was the daughter of Audrey Brown, a teacher who also sang for many years in the Edinburgh Festival Chorus, and William Stephen, a marketing director. When she was 10 the family moved to Scotland, where she attended Cults academy in Aberdeen, inspiring fellow pupils with her sparkling Maria in The Sound of Music. She then gained a bachelor’s degree in musical performance at the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama, and subsequently studied opera, lieder and oratorio at the Opera Theater Center at Aspen, Colorado, with Herta Glaz, and at the University of Toronto with Patricia Kern. Early performances with Opera North included the role of Cynthia in Benedict Mason’s football opera Playing Away, the Composer in Paul Griffiths’ Mozartian compilation The Jewel Box, Donna Clara in Roberto Gerhard’s The Duenna, where she made a striking impression in the neo-Baroque aria When Sable Night, Each Drooping Plant Restoring, and the travesti role of the pedlar Lazuli in Chabrier’s L’Étoile, where she was praised for her charisma and her success in somehow contriving “to combine gorgeous tone with a ripe Glaswegian brogue”. A role in which she particularly excelled was that of Cherubino in Le Nozze di Figaro. As her recording on the Archiv label under John Eliot Gardiner demonstrates, she deftly caught the spirit of the lovesick adolescent’s confession in Non So Più, while her delivery of Voi Che Sapete was enlivened by the embarrassed giggles of the blushing page boy in the opening phrases. Her extensive discography of more than 30 recordings also includes the Dryad in Strauss’s Ariadne auf Naxos under Richard Armstrong, the Child in Ravel’s L’Enfant et les Sortilèges under Previn, and Szymanowski’s Stabat Mater under Edward Gardner. Among the recordings she made under Hickox are numbered masses by Haydn, the role of Kate in Britten’s Owen Wingrave and music by Percy Grainger. She fully entered into the spirit of the latter’s shamelessly sentimental Colonial Song, her voice soaring seraphically while uttering timeless vocals such as “La, la, la” and “Da, dee, da”, as suggested by the composer. Other relatively modest operatic roles she undertook with aplomb included Hécube in Berlioz’s Les Troyens at Covent Garden (2012), Martha in Gounod’s Faust (ENO, 2010) and Auntie in Peter Grimes, first at Hickox’s St Endellion Festival in 2008 and then five years later under Vladimir Jurowski with the LPO, on which occasion, looking rather more glamorous in a scarlet frock than the average landlady of the Boar, she conferred an amusingly vampish quality on the character. At the same time she brought a welcome freshness and lyricism to a part generally undertaken by plummier contraltos. She also took the role of Walt Disney’s wife in Philip Glass’s The Perfect American (ENO, 2013). On concert stages round the world her solo roles included Elgar’s Dream of Gerontius, Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony and Britten’s Spring Symphony. Well regarded as a result of her infectious laughter and vivacity, she was, both in the rehearsal room and outside it, unfailingly supportive of colleagues, especially those less experienced than herself. Hickox died in 2008. Stephenis survived by Adam and Abigail, and by her partner, Stephen Lumsden, chief executive of Intermusica Artists’ Management. • Pamela Helen Stephen, mezzo-soprano, born 27 January 1964; died 30 November 2021For England, a day of pyrrhic victories and pointless triumphs. It was their first good bowling day of the series: unfortunately, it began with Australia almost 300 runs ahead in their second innings. Jos Buttler restored his fragile confidence with two fine sprawling catches, either side of the regulation chance he dropped off Steve Smith’s first ball. Rory Burns finally showed some fight at the top of the order, his 34 knocking off a little over 7% of England’s 468-run target. And the captain, Joe Root, courageously batted on despite receiving two painful blows to what was euphemistically described as the “abdomen”, only to perish to the last ball of the day and leave England on the brink of defeat. Best of all, England have finally unearthed a spinner capable of giving the ball a tweak and challenging the outside edge. Unfortunately it was Ollie Robinson, one of their frontline seamers, gamely stepping up for a few extra overs in the morning session while Root was in hospital attending to more fundamental matters. You had to feel for some of the more refreshed viewers back in the UK, watching through a mottled haze as Robinson fizzed his first Test off-break past a startled Travis Head. Was this a waking dream? Had we slipped into a phantasmagorical parallel universe of moving floors and talking rabbits? Oh, hang on. No, Australia are miles ahead in the third innings after choosing not to enforce the follow-on. Life doesn’t get more real than that. Indeed, Robinson was just one of three England spinners deployed on day four as the Adelaide surface began to rag and rip. Finally England had an answer to the famed Indian trio of the 1970s: Bedi, Chandrasekhar, Venkataraghavan, meet Root, Robinson and Dawid Malan. England’s unlikely spin triplets combined for four wickets on Sunday evening in Adelaide, and if it didn’t quite feel like a new era in English spin bowling then perhaps this was because – in common with much of what England do these days – very little about it seemed to have been prepared in advance. After Robinson came and went, Root returned to the field and claimed two quick wickets with a combination of fiddly offies and filthy leggies. Malan took the key wicket of Marnus Labuschagne – at least, it would have been key had Australia not already been 410 ahead – and despite serving up the odd long-hop did a decent enough job. And so England ended up bowling 35 overs of spin in the Test, a curious move for a team who went into the Test insisting that they didn’t need a spin bowler. Indeed one of the more memorable television images from day four was the expression of Jack Leach – England’s main spinner – sitting just over the boundary rope in a yellow bib, watching Robinson bowl and Root about to relieve him. “Unimpressed” barely hints at it. In a way, it was the ultimate vindication of Australia’s pre-series plan: isolate the spinner, target the spinner, hit the spinner out of the attack, out of the team, perhaps even out of the series. Probably Leach will return at some stage. But his mauling at Brisbane had already achieved its primary objective: spooking England into changing tack, forcing them to leave out their best spinner on Australia’s best spinning wicket. The good teams take these setbacks in their stride, show some faith, reaffirm their principles. England, by contrast, are not a good team and have very few remaining principles to speak of. And so when things go wrong – and they often go wrong – there is little to fall back on but feverish improvisation and blind panic. This, above all, is how you end up rotating three part-time spinners on a turning wicket while your actual spinner with a Test average of 31 watches from a chair. Perhaps this is simply the latest example of England’s make-do-and-mend approach in Test cricket, in which players are assessed not simply on their core skills but what you might term their “added value”. Bowlers who can bat a bit. Batters who can also keep wicket. Seamers who can bowl a bit of spin. Spinners who can also captain. Coaches who are also selectors. The omission of Leach may feel like a fleeting aberration but it is in fact entirely in keeping with the prevailing culture of English Test cricket, which is concerned primarily with covering up weaknesses rather than embellishing strengths. By contrast, it now seems clear that tales of Australia’s weakness have been greatly exaggerated. Comparisons with India’s victory a year ago seem particularly misplaced: this was one of the all-time great Indian sides, and even then they needed to chase 329 on the last day of the deciding Test. And so as they head into day five perhaps England need to recalibrate their expectations here. Winning one Test. Drawing a Test. Getting close to drawing a Test. After all, when you are about to lose your 11th Test out of 12 on Australian soil, you probably need to start taking your wins wherever you can find them.Joe Root was praised by the bowling coach, Jon Lewis, after the England captain’s day was bookended by blows to his groin. On a painful day in Adelaide for the touring side Root was struck before play by a throw-down from the spin coach, Jeetan Patel, while warming up and was not wearing a box, forcing him to visit hospital for scans. Although he eventually took the field, further agony followed when the fast bowler Mitchell Starc hit the same part of his body with a ball that jagged off the pitch, forcing a five-minute delay during which the England physio shooed away the Spidercam TV camera and inspected the injury under a towel. Australia need six wickets on the final day of the second Test to take a 2-0 series lead with England ending the day on 82 for four. Lewis, speaking after Root was out for 24 off what became the final ball of the day, said: “Joe’s a strong leader. He showed a hell of a lot of character to get out there and fight because I know he was pretty sore. Once he was hit again, to stay on, could easily have walked off and had a nightwatchman come in. “That’s the character of the man and it shows what it means to him to be England captain. He wants to show how hard he’s prepared to fight to get back into the game.” Asked how Root was after stumps, Lewis replied: “He wasn’t in great shape, so to get another one in there was unfortunate for him. I’ve not inspected it myself but he will be OK in the long run.” Radio coverage of the Ashes, meanwhile, was thrown into turmoil on the fourth day after a member of BBC’s Test Match Special production team tested positive for Covid-19. South Australia’s health regulations forced the entire TMS crew into isolation as close contacts, while a crossover of talent with the local broadcaster ABC similarly led to their commentary box being empty for all three sessions on Sunday. The upshot was the ABC scrambling to lay on a backup service with ball-by-ball commentary provided remotely. Mitchell Johnson, the former Australia fast bowler who terrorised England during the 2013-14 whitewash, was among those who deputised, providing expert analysis from 1,600 miles away in Perth. The BBC cricket correspondent Jonathan Agnew, Steven Finn, Glenn McGrath, Jim Maxwell and Isa Guha were among the broadcasters unable to work, although the latter eventually arrived at the ground later in the day to commentate for the TV rights holder Fox after undergoing a fast-tracked test. A second positive case later emerged among the Fox production team, forcing the broadcaster to shut down the studio it uses for technical analysis – but its commentary box was unaffected by this development. It remains to be seen whether TMS will be affected come the Boxing Day Test in Melbourne. However the issue on Sunday represents the latest interruption caused by the virus after Pat Cummins, Australia’s captain, was forced to miss this game after finding himself the close contact of a positive case last Wednesday. Cummins is expected to return for the third Test although players on both sides are due to be subjected to a more stringent bubble for the next two fixtures because of the rising number of cases in Victoria and New South Wales. These include socialising in smaller groups off the field, dining outdoors and no direct interaction with the public. Cricket Australia are looking to avoid even tighter restrictions as the sport tries to balance Covid safety with mental health.For a variant that came to light less than a month ago, the evidence for Omicron’s potential to wreak havoc has mounted at breakneck speed. What studies have emerged are rapid first takes, but the message they convey is now loud and clear: the scientific case for more restrictions is overwhelming. Without hard and swift action to curb transmission, the NHS faces a battering. The first red flag came in late November when scientists in southern Africa shared early genomes of what became known as Omicron. Soon after they landed, Tom Peacock, a virologist at Imperial College London, highlighted the “awful” mutations that marked it out as a fast-spreading, vaccine-dodging variant. On receiving a text about Peacock’s tweet, Dr Susan Hopkins, the chief medical adviser to the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), conceded it filled her with gloom. The warning spurred research around the clock to nail down the extent of the threat. One of the first to report was Dr Alex Sigal at the University of KwaZulu-Natal in Durban. His team confirmed that Omicron largely escaped antibodies from vaccines or past infection, with antibodies following the Pfizer shot 41 times less effective against Omicron than the original Covid-19 virus. Other data from South Africa, and soon from around the world, showed that Omicron spread like wildfire, doubling every two to three days. As Prof Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer, phrased it: “There are several things we don’t know, but all the things that we do know are bad.” As the infection spread, the UKHSA crunched early numbers to show that two doses of Covid vaccine did little to prevent symptomatic infection, though a booster kicked protection up to about 70%. On Friday, two reports from Prof Neil Ferguson’s group at Imperial College rounded out the picture. Their findings are tentative, but suggest a booster provides 80-86% protection against hospitalisation from Omicron. That is good from an individual perspective, but compares with 95% for Delta. The upshot is that hospitalisation rates for boosted people could be four times higher with Omicron. Further analysis from the Imperial team shed light on the single most important unknown: how severe can Omicron infections be? Data from South Africa gave some cause for hope, with hospitalisations down on previous waves, but the researchers found no evidence Omicron was milder than Delta. There are still hints of good news, however. Lab work led by Prof Ravi Gupta at Cambridge University suggests that Omicron may be less effective at attacking the lungs than Delta. The finding chimes with University of Hong Kong research that found Omicron replicated 70 times faster than older variants in the bronchial tubes, but is less likely to infect the lungs. The hope is this could make the variant spread fast but cause less severe disease. But in documents released by the Sage committee on Saturday – after they pored over updated outbreak modelling from Warwick University and the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine – the assessment is frank. England is “highly likely” to have 1,000 to 2,000 daily hospitalisations by the end of December. Many of these are already baked in and will arrive at hospital doors in the next week or so, regardless of actions taken now. With no further restrictions beyond “plan B”, models point to at least 3,000 daily hospitalisations at the peak of the wave next month. “To prevent such a wave of hospitalisations, more stringent measures would need to be implemented before 2022,” the scientists wrote. That would prevent hospitalisations, not just delay them, as it would give more time for boosters to take effect. Throughout the epidemic, scientists have stressed the importance of moving fast when cases take off. This is doubly true with a virus spreading as fast as Omicron, according to an assessment released by the environmental modelling and behavioural science groups that feed into Sage. If taken soon enough – within days – restrictions like those in place after step one or step two of the roadmap in England need not be in place for more than a few weeks, the experts write. “The timing of such measures is crucial,” they add.When the great Italian film-maker Lina Wertmüller and her fellow controversialist the Polish director Walerian Borowczyk (maker of Immoral Tales) were invited to be headline guests at the Oxford film festival in the late 1970s they were quite unaware that the event wore its lack of a hospitality budget like a badge of merit. Anxious to help out, I offered my mother-in-law’s small terraced house as a possible venue for a party to try to impress two of Europe’s finest. The result was a surprisingly successful gathering for afternoon tea as the pair took politely to chintz and fruitcake, belying their often contentious on-screen imagery. My mother-in-law, ever the perfect host, still hadn’t a clue who they were even after they left.Dutch shopkeepers say they have been “broken” by the Netherlands’ new Christmas lockdown, which has come into effect. “Nowhere in Europe is there such a strict regime as in the Netherlands,” said Jan Meerman, the director of INretail, the Dutch retailers association. He added: “From a health perspective, I understand that something needs to be done, but then it is important that the cabinet also makes a grand financial gesture and generously reimburses entrepreneurs. As far as we are concerned, 100% compensation. Many colleagues are still heavily indebted from the first lockdowns, they can’t take this any more … They are broken by these harsh measures.” As of Sunday, all non-essential stores, bars and restaurants in the country are closed until at least 14 January, and schools and universities shut until 9 January. In a devastating blow to many Christmas plans, households are allowed only four visitors a day on Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, Boxing Day and 31 January and New Year’s Day. Two visitors are permitted on other days. The announcement on Saturday night by the prime minister, Mark Rutte, who had described the lockdown as “unavoidable” due to the wave of the Omicron Covid variant “bearing down”, came ahead of what would be the biggest sales week for many shops. There had been a rush to do last-minute Christmas shopping in many Dutch cities on Saturday night as people became aware of the impending deadline. But the retailers organisation warned that “soon everyone will be going shopping in Belgium and Germany, where everything is open as usual”. The Dutch government provides financial support in the form of compensation for fixed costs where there is 30% loss in turnover in a quarter compared to the previous year and wage support where there is a 20% loss. But Gonny Eussen of the hairdressers’ union, Anko, said the enforcement of the lockdown late into the quarter would leave businesses unable to claim compensation despite losing their best financial weeks. She said: “For the support packages, don’t look at the turnover per quarter, but per month. Because now an important part of December is gone, but we did generate turnover for the rest of the fourth quarter. As a result, many entrepreneurs are probably not eligible for support, even though they miss out on the best weeks.” Across Europe, governments are contemplating tougher restrictions in the light of the spread of the Omicron Covid variant, including in Italy. In Belgium, where thousands of protesters demonstrated in central Brussels on Sunday for a third time against further restrictions, Christie Morreale, the minister for health in the Walloon region of Belgium, could only say a further lockdown was “not on the table for the government at this stage”. Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, called on his country to keep its guard up as the Omicron variant spread and as the number of cases per 100,000 people in Spain rose to 511. “Although the incidence is still lower than in neighbouring countries, it isn’t good because it’s a clear and real warning of the threat to the health of our fellow Spaniards, and as such it must compel us to intensify our actions as the virus grows,” Sánchez said in a televised address on Sunday morning. In the Netherlands, Boris van der Ham, from the Association of Free Theatre Producers (VVTP), said his sector had already resigned itself to a miserable Christmas period following a decision on 27 November to force hospitality to shut at 5pm. He said: “The biggest blow fell two weeks ago when the evening lockdown was announced. Performances cannot simply be moved to the afternoon.” Maurice Limmen, the president of the Association of Universities of Applied Sciences, said the higher education sector recognised the need for the closure of institutions but Loes Ypma, from the organisation representing childcare, said she was concerned. She said: “The closure of schools and out-of-school care has emotional consequences for all children, especially children in a vulnerable situation. Children deserve a safe place, school and out-of-school care is that for many.” The European Commission said on Sunday it had reached an agreement with BioNTech and Pfizer for an extra 20m doses of their Covid-19 vaccine to be delivered to EU member states in the first quarter of 2022. These doses were in addition to a scheduled delivery of 195m doses, bringing the total number of Pfizer/BioNTech doses to be delivered in the first quarter to 215 million, a commission statement said.That’s three fairy-tale villains, right there in the title of Little Bulb’s new show, when most storytellers make do with one, but the only greediness here is that of Little Red Riding Hood’s nemesis. Staged at the Linbury theatre, with Little Bulb drawing on the creative resources of the Royal Opera, Wolf Witch Giant Fairy squishes three fairy stories together to make a gently subversive family show, infused with folk music, aimed at younger children but with a wry, ageless streak. Clare Beresford’s plucky Little Red Riding Hood meets the Wolf on the way to her Grandmother’s house but then gets diverted; she meets the witch Baba Yaga, escapes after a frantic chase, and is washed ashore at the village where the Giant has stolen the golden harp. A few magic beans later, she climbs Jack-like up the beanstalk, saves the day and finally gets to her gran’s house – where Tom Penn’s Wolf, a deliciously arch, castanet-playing baddie in almost pantomime mode, eats her. That’s where the Fairy – bearded, and twirling a beautiful pair of butterfly wings – reveals herself. There’s a homespun, travelling-players feel to the whole thing, a kind of knowing awkwardness, that makes it feel grounded and timeless. That’s thanks partly to the delightful detail and wit of Samuel Wyer’s designs, especially the headpieces. It’s also thanks to the music, which is a flexible, almost constant backdrop to the storytelling: it draws on Italian and Balkan folk melodies, not that it ever does so self-consciously enough for you to realise. Little Bulb’s music director Dominic Conway leads from the guitar as part of a 10-strong cast; together they form an instrumental ensemble including piano, violin, accordion and dulcimer, and they take a role each. Opera audiences might recognise Peter Brathwaite’s self-important Narrator and Claire Wild’s Baba Yaga, throwing out high soprano notes with a fearsome cackle, but it’s Baba Yaga’s flamboyant Cat, played by the director, Alexander Scott, who can’t resist hogging the stage for a song. Wolf Witch Giant Fairy is at the Linbury theatre, Royal Opera House, London, until 3 January.From allegations of cursing the king’s ships, to shape-shifting into animals and birds, or dancing with the devil, a satanic panic in early modern Scotland meant that thousands of women were accused of witchcraft in the 16th-18th centuries with many executed. Now, three centuries after the Witchcraft Act was repealed, campaigners are on course to win pardons and official apologies for the estimated 3,837 people – 84% of whom were women – tried as witches, of which two-thirds were executed and burned. After a two-year campaign by the Witches of Scotland group, a member’s bill in the Scottish parliament has secured the support of Nicola Sturgeon’s administration to clear the names of those accused, the Sunday Times reported. The move follows a precedent by the Massachusetts House of Representatives in the US that proclaimed victims of the Salem witch trials innocent in 2001. Scotland’s indefatigable pursuit of witches between 1563, when the Witchcraft Act was brought in, and 1736, when it was finally repealed, resulted in five “great Scottish witch-hunts” and a series of nationwide trials. The earliest witch-hunts were sanctioned by James VI of Scotland, later James I of England and Ireland, who believed witches plotted against his Danish bride by summoning up storms to sink his ships. Among those accused in 1590 was Geillis Duncan – whose character featured in the Outlander TV series – and who admitted under torture to meeting the devil to thwart the king’s ships. Another, Agnes Sampson, had confessed that 200 women witnessed the devil preach at North Berwick on Halloween where the king’s destruction was plotted. Other well-known cases include Lilias Adie, from Torryburn, Fife, who was accused of casting a spell to cause a neighbour’s hangover; while Issobell Young, executed at Edinburgh Castle in 1629, was said by a stable boy to have shape-shifted into an owl and accused of having a coven. With witchcraft a capital crime, the convicted were usually strangled to death then burned at the stake so as to leave no body to bury. Many confessed under torture, which included sleep deprivation, the crushing and pulling out of fingernails, and pricking of the skin with needles and bodkins to see if the accused bled. The Witches of Scotland website notes that signs associated with witchcraft – broomsticks, cauldrons, black cats and black pointed hats – were also associated with “alewives”, the name for women who brewed weak beer to combat poor water quality. The broomstick sign was to let people know beer was on sale, the cauldron to brew it, the cat to keep mice down, and the hat to distinguish them at market. Women were ousted from brewing and replaced by men once it became a profitable industry. Claire Mitchell QC, who leads the Witches of Scotland campaign, said it was seeking pardons, apologies and a national monument to the mainly female victims of the witch-hunts. “Per capita, during the period between the 16th and 18th century, we [Scotland] executed five times as many people as elsewhere in Europe, the vast majority of them women,” she told the Sunday Times. “To put that into perspective, in Salem 300 people were accused and 19 people were executed. We absolutely excelled at finding women to burn in Scotland. Those executed weren’t guilty, so they should be acquitted.”Here’s Louise Taylor’s match report from St James’ Park: The so called Gulf derby turned into an ultimately painful exposure of the yawning chasm in class currently separating Abu Dhabi owned Manchester City and Saudi Arabian controlled Newcastle United. Both clubs may be regarded as having been “trophy” purchases on the part of their oil rich owners but only table topping City are likely to secure silverware anytime soon. Creditably Eddie Howe’s side refused to surrender but television viewers in Riyadh and Jeddah may have felt the need to watch through their fingers whenever City, and in particular, the outstanding Joâo Cancelo assumed possession. “Saudi Arabia’s going down,” chorused the visiting fans seated high in the Leazes End in response to taunts of “We’re richer than you” from the Gallowgate End and, given that Howe’s side have won only one game all season it is hard to disagree with that assessment. Tellingly it took until the 82nd minute for Callum Wilson to fully test Ederson with a fine header that constituted his side’s first effort on target. Much more here: Right, that’s all from me. I leave you with this impressive number, from a City team that will top the table at Christmas. Bye! The football continues at White Hart Lane - Rob Smyth is all over that one: City’s first goal was obviously a complete defensive calamity, but just look at the defenders’ attempt at closing Cancelo down for their second! They both run towards him before, at the vital moment, one hides to the right, the other hides to the left, and Cancelo is free to shot between them. 90+2 mins: It’s all over! Newcastle weren’t that bad, but City are that good. 88 mins: “It is looking more and more like the decision to sack Steve Bruce and bring in Eddie Howe has backfired,” says Richard Harris. “Bruce was largely undermined by injuries to key players. Howe isn’t noted for his ability to organise the defence, and boy does it show. If Newcastle are relegated the new owners will need to look at themselves and accept they messed up big time. Of course they could buy a £200 million new team next week so I may be proved wrong.” I think they’ve improved since Howe came in, and that their league position approximately reflects the quality of their squad. 86 mins: Jesus, wide on the left, chests down a long ball and heads for the byline, before pulling the ball across goal and into the path of Sterling, who taps in at the back stick! A cherry on the victory cake! Victory-a sponge! 83 mins: There’s shot No5, blazed over by Saint-Maximin. 82 mins: That was Newcastle’s fourth shot, and their first on target. City have had 17 shots, six of them on target. 81 mins: Cracking save! A cross from the right, Wilson heads goalwards, and Ederson palms it away! 80 mins: Jeff Hendrick replaces Almiron in what should be the final substitution. Elsewhere in the Premier League, covid-hit Chelsea are drawing 0-0 at Wolves with quarter of an hour to go, while it turns out Liverpool have also been covid-hit - Thiago misses out on the game with Spurs after returning a positive test, with Jordan Henderson out with an unspecified illness after testing negative. 78 mins: Classy. 76 mins: Cole Palmer comes on for Mahrez. 73 mins: This feels like a dead game now. City pass the ball around for a while with no particular attacking intent. 70 mins: ... Ederson throws it out and City run down the other end, where Sterling’s cross is just too high for Mahrez. John Stones then comes on for Ruben Dias. 69 mins: Saint-Maximin dribbles along the edge of Newcastle’s area and picks the perfect ball through to Fraser, whose low centre is cut out by Ederson, with Wilson lurking. 68 mins: Fernandinho comes on for Rodri. 68 mins: Nearly another! A corner is taken by and then worked back to Mahrez, whose cross is headed just wide by Dias! He wasn’t offside! It’s a lovely cross, expertly finished, at the end of a long period of possession. 64 mins: Zinchenko’s cross is volleyed in by Mahrez, but the linesman raises his flag. This looks tight ... 63 mins: City are monopolising possession at the moment, despite Newcastle’s attempt to put them off their stride through Longstaff’s moustache. 61 mins: Sean Longstaff comes on for Hayden. 60 mins: Newcastle overcommit to a press, De Bruyne gets past Ritchie with a drop of the shoulder and City have a four-on-three attack, which ends with Cancelo blazing over. 57 mins: Another save, Dubravka diving to his left to push away Sterling’s curler. 54 mins: Jesus really should have scored there, but even if his header wasn’t particularly well placed it took an outstanding stop to keep it out. City are still pushing, and Jesus has just had a shot deflected wide. 52 mins: What a save! City keep possession for an age, work the ball down the left then out to the right. Cancelo’s deep cross is knocked back in by Bernardo Silva, and Jesus’s point-blank header is somehow turned over the bar! 50 mins: A really encouraging start to the half from the home side, but they have had three opportunities to play the ball into the penalty area and have wasted them all. 47 mins: Saint-Maximin’s triple lollipop brings nothing but an opportunity to cross the ball straight to Ederson. 46 mins: City start the second half. Joe Willock has been taken off, with Saint-Maximin replacing him. Allan Saint-Maximin is stripped off and ready to go as the teams emerge for the second half! 45+2 mins: That’s half time. City have dominated possession, but in many ways - not including the scoreline, obviously - it’s a pretty close game. If Newcastle hadn’t gifted City a ludicrously abysmal opener, and Martin Atkinson and VAR Craig Pawson hadn’t refused them a pretty blatant penalty, they would be drawing at the break. Should they be encouraged by their decent performance, or discouraged because they’ve still managed to sneak in a defensive self-implosion? 45+1 mins: Jesus drags a shot just wide with his left foot. 43 mins: Newcastle win a corner on the left, and Hayden heads wide at the far post. 40 mins: Nearly a chance for Newcastle, who send Wilson through from halfway but he’s held up on the edge of the City area, seems to get confused by the possibility of passing to Almiron to his right or Joelinton to his left, and eventually loses the ball. 39 mins: There have been plenty of positives here for Newcastle, who are disrupting City well and offering a threat on the break. 37 mins: A quieter few minutes, at the end of a period when the match seemed at risk of boiling over. 33 mins: Then Ritchie and Jesus chase a ball that’s going off the pitch anyway. Ritchie swings an arm towards Jesus, before flying into an advertising hoarding. 33 mins: Ruben Dias is off the pitch having a cut on his forehead repaired. It’s getting quite tasty out there. 31 mins: Silva is booked for a foul, with the home side baying at the injustice of it all. I think Fraser made a slight movement into Ederson when he saw the keeper out of control, sliding towards him. But I’d still say that’s a pretty clear penalty. 30 mins: Cancelo and Fraser race for a ball bouncing into City’s penalty area, as Ederson comes off his line. Cancelo takes the ball, and Ederson takes the man. The home side want a penalty, but aren’t getting one! You can’t blame Dubravka for that one! Cancelo picks the ball up 10 yards inside the Newcastle half, nudges past Willock, cuts inside Hayden, and lashes a right-footer into the net from 20 yards! 25 mins: Another yellow card, this time for Rodri, who ends Willock’s surge through midfield with a kick in the ankles. 23 mins: Bernardo Silva gets down the left, fools two defenders with little shuffles infield, and then passes just behind Zinchenko, who shoots high. 21 mins: This time Hayden does catch De Bruyne, sliding straight through him with the ball gone. He gets a yellow card and, as it’s his fifth of the season, a suspension in return. 19 mins: Ederson comes out to claim Almiron’s cross, though his path is blocked by Wilson. The Newcastle striker is thus steamrollered, and the physios are on to check him over. 17 mins: Off the line! But it wouldn’t have counted! City try to play the ball out again, but Hayden pressures De Bruyne, it runs to Fraser, and his effort beats Ederson but is booted clear by Laporte - and the referee had anyway given City an extremely charitable free kick for a “push” on De Bruyne. 16 mins: Here’s the goal in all its glory. 13 mins: City try to play through a high Newcastle press, but Zinchenko boots the ball into Almiron’s raised arm right in front of the linesman, and the pressure lifts. 11 mins: Close! Joelinton drives low and hard from 25 yards but it goes a foot wide! 9 mins: You will not see worse defending anywhere this season. Indescribably awful. Now Willock concedes a free-kick on the left, from which Cancelo lashes a shot at Dubravka from out on the right. 6 mins: Zinchenko sees Cancelo running into the penalty area and chips the ball into his path, but the pass is overhit and Cancelo does well just to keep it in play and gently hook it back across goal. Dubravka could have come to claim, but there was no need with it looping straight to Ciaran Clark - but then Clark ducked underneath it, leaving Dias to head it in on the bounce from two yards! Newcastle gift Ruben Dias a free goal! 4 mins: Almiron nicks the ball on halfway and runs forwards, the fans roaring him on. Which is perhaps why he didn’t hear Zinchenko coming to take it back again as he neared the City penalty area. 2 mins: The game so far has been mainly stoppage, with Newcastle winning a free kick in their own half and booting it out for a throw-in at the other end. 1 min: Peeeeeeep! Newcastle get the game started. The players are on the pitch! Brace for kick off, everyone. Manchester City have made three changes, with Joao Cancelo, Raheem Sterling and Gabriel Jesus coming in, and John Stones, Jack Grealish and Phil Foden dropping out. Grealish, at least, seems to have taken it well. Not encouraging. Five changes for Newcastle, who are “counting the cost of a couple of knocks and injuries”, according to Eddie Howe. He says he has picked “really good athletes” with “energy and vibrance” because, to summarise, they’ll have to spend the entire match chasing Manchester City players about. The team news has landed, and here it bally well is: Newcastle: Dubravka, Murphy, Clark, Lascelles, Ritchie, Almiron, Hayden, Willock, Fraser, Joelinton, Wilson. Subs: Schar, Saint-Maximin, Hendrick, Krafth, Darlow, Anderson, Gayle, Longstaff, White. Man City: Ederson, Joao Cancelo, Dias, Laporte, Zinchenko, Rodri, Bernardo Silva, Mahrez, De Bruyne, Sterling, Gabriel Jesus. Subs: Stones, Ake, Gundogan, Grealish, Steffen, Fernandinho, Foden, Palmer, Wilson-Esbrand. Referee: Martin Atkinson. Hello world! Manchester City have laid waste to most opponents in recent years, but not Newcastle. At least, not in Newcastle. The last and indeed only time they won there by more than two goals was in October 1956. Sure, since they lost at St James’ Park four times in as many seasons between 2002-03 and 2005-06 City have only been beaten there once, but they have conceded seven goals in their last three visits and tend to struggle there more than you might expect. So, that’s encouraging. Today’s are the last top-flight fixtures before Christmas, so victory would mean City spend the festivities at the top of the table no matter what Liverpool do at Tottenham later, while Newcastle, who have never, ever, been in the Yuletide bottom three since the Premier League began, would overtake Watford and scramble clear if they win by, ahem, nine goals or more (though the Hornets would have two games in hand). It’s 15 years, one month, one week and one day since these teams last played out a goalless draw, and I don’t think that run is likely to end today. Welcome!Steve Borthwick’s Leicester kept up that winning feeling as they made it a baker’s dozen of victories to head into the Christmas campaign and put a stamp on Europe to add to the mark they have made in the Premiership. Win number 13 in all competitions did not come easy as the Tigers trailed 17-12 at the break and were forced to dig deep to get their second win in the Champions Cup. But in the end it was done the old Leicester way with grunt up front and no frills. Dan Cole made the difference as the entire front row was changed on 51 minutes and they helped dig the hosts out of a massive hole. Cole might be 35 in May, have played more than 250 times for Leicester, and have 95 England caps under his belt but in just over half an hour here he showed what an asset he could be, come the next World Cup in France. The tighthead last pulled on England colours in the ill-fated 2019 World Cup final in Yokohama where South Africa’s front row, and their reinforcements off the bench, pulled Eddie Jones’s side to pieces. Here it was the turn of Old King Cole, with help from hooker Julián Montoya and loosehead James Whitcombe to pull the pin on Connacht who snatched a losing bonus point thanks to a late drop goal from fly-half Jack Carty. It was not easy but Leicester did a Leicester and got over the line. “They really challenged us today,” Borthwick said. “They are a really smart team but what is pleasing is our team were able to grab hold of it and change it in the second half.” The key moment came when Connacht were down to 14 men with prop Finlay Bealham in the bin. Bundee Aki was summoned from midfield to bolster the visiting scrum but he could not stop them going backwards and his absence in the defensive line was exploited by Tigers as centre Dan Kelly put Freddie Steward, playing on the wing instead of full-back, through to score. That got Leicester to within a point and they made hay with the extra man when wing Hosea Saumaki ran rings around the Irish defence to score Tigers’ fourth try. Ben Youngs, at scrum-half, put in another invigorated display. The 32-year-old is good enough and old enough for Jones, so maybe Cole is too. “At half-time it clearly wasn’t working and we had to go to a set-piece game,” Youngs said. “We had to work unbelievably hard. At half-time we were able to galvanise ourselves, and go back to the fundamentals of our game. The cohesion and connections weren’t quite working. The finishers came on and did a great job to grind it out.” Leicester were missing club captain Ellis Genge and fly-half George Ford, and they had better get used to that as they are off to Bristol and Sale respectively next season. The official line was player rotation but the Tigers players on the pitch might have been looking into the stands when they turned it around from five points down. Hooker Nic Dolly had opened the scoring for the hosts after an early Carty penalty and when full-back Bryce Hegarty went over it looked like business as usual for Borthwick’s men at 12-3. But they were caught cold when Aki put winger John Porch through and Carty made the most of a midfield mess-up by the hosts. Freddie Burns, making his first start since Bonfire Night, had a day to forget as he and Kelly made a hash of things and Carty took full toll. But with a renewed front row, and a reversion to the old Leicester type, the hosts grabbed a stranglehold on the game, took advantage of their numerical superiority for 10 vital minutes, and squeezed the pips out of the Irish. “The yellow card hurt us, but that’s Leicester Tigers, they flexed their muscles and we paid the penalty,’ said Connacht coach Andy Friend.The so-called Gulf derby turned into an ultimately painful exposure of the yawning chasm in class separating the Abu Dhabi-owned Manchester City and the Saudi Arabian-controlled Newcastle United. Both clubs may be regarded as “trophy” purchases on the part of their oil-rich overlords but only table-topping City are likely to secure silverware anytime soon. Creditably, Eddie Howe’s side refused to surrender but television viewers in Riyadh and Jeddah may have felt the need to watch through their fingers whenever Pep Guardiola’s players, and the outstanding João Cancelo in particular, assumed possession. “All that money and you’re going down,” the visiting fans chorused in response to taunts of “We’re richer than you” – and, given that Newcastle have won only one game all season, it is hard to disagree. Despite certain bright spots, most notably Joelinton’s performance in midfield, it took Howe’s team until the 82nd minute to register their first shot on target when Callum Wilson’s fine header stretched Ederson to the limit. Goodness knows what might have happened had City been at their best, rather than playing within themselves. “The first half was one of the worst we’ve played all season,” Guardiola said. “But the second half was much better.” The Newcastle supporters who shrugged off Covid-related anxieties to swell the attendance to 52,127 deserved more from their willing but limited and error-prone side on the day St James’ Park was stripped of the unattractive Sports Direct advertising hoardings which blemished the ground during Mike Ashley’s ownership. Yet if the off-field aesthetics were much improved, on it, little had changed. Certainly not for Howe who has now lost all his 11 Premier League encounters with a City team on a run of eight successive league wins. The former Bournemouth manager said he had selected a team of “really good athletes” full of “energy and vibrancy”. However his new players’ shortage of streetwise nous was pinpointed as they conceded in the fifth minute after gifting Rúben Dias a free header two yards out. That moment of almost unprecedented generosity served as a microcosm of long-standing defensive ills. It began with Oleksandr Zinchenko stripping Miguel Almirón of possession and chipping a slightly overhit pass into Cancelo’s path. No matter; City’s impressively assured right‑back retained sufficient control to hook the ball back across the box. At that point Martin Dubravka could have come for it but, with Ciaran Clark seemingly well placed to clear, he instead remained on his line, watching horror-struck as Clark inexplicably ducked beneath the ball, permitting Dias to apply the final headed touch. Something had clearly been lost in translation between Howe’s goalkeeper and centre-half with the latter primarily culpable. Already, Cancelo was not merely excelling but reminding everyone he is a total footballer rather than a mere full-back and, emphasising this point, he swiftly doubled City’s advantage. Appropriately, Cancelo initiated the move, exchanging passes with Riyad Mahrez before assuming possession inside the home half and embarking on a slalom-style advance infield which left Joe Willock on his bottom and Isaac Hayden blindsided before he swept a superb right-foot shot beyond Dubravka from 20 yards. Newcastle were subsequently rightly aggrieved not to be awarded a blatant penalty after Ederson upended Ryan Fraser in the wake of Cancelo’s defensive interception. However Martin Atkinson’s refereeing could not be blamed for a defeat in which the sight of the immensely improved, apparently reborn, Joelinton – once again Howe’s best player – dropping back into central midfield and channelling his inner Patrick Vieira appeared emblematic of a Newcastle team slowly improving under their latest manager’s tutelage but taking baby steps at a time when a Great Leap Forward is required. Accordingly even Allan Saint-Maximin’s second-half introduction failed to faze Guardiola’s defence during a 45 minutes in which Dubravka performed wonders to tip Gabriel Jesus’s close‑range header over the bar after Cancelo’s dissection of the black and white backline. With Kevin De Bruyne finally making his presence felt in City’s midfield, remote hopes of a Newcastle comeback faded completely when, following a protracted spell of visiting possession, Mahrez connected with Zinchenko’s cross and sent a first-time volley whizzing past the goalkeeper. Although City’s third goal was initially, erroneously, ruled out for a marginal offside, a VAR review corrected that judgment, leaving travelling fans taunting locals with chants of, “You should have gone shopping.” By the time Jesus shrugged Jacob Murphy aside and rolled a pass across the box for Raheem Sterling to tap in the fourth, Howe was hunting for positives. “The physical effort from my players was extraordinary,” he said. “The result looks bleak but the game’s reality felt very different. We’re heading in the right direction … but there’s a very long way to go.”Johnny Isakson, a Georgia Republican who earned a reputation for bipartisan co-operation as a US senator from 2005 to 2019, has died. He was 76. The Georgia governor, Brian Kemp, confirmed the death on Sunday. In a statement, the Republican said: “Georgia has lost a giant, one of its greatest statesmen and a servant leader dedicated to making his state and country better than he found it. “Johnny Isakson personified what it meant to be a Georgian. Johnny was also a dear friend … as he was to so many.” Isakson, whose real estate business made him a millionaire, spent more than three decades in Georgia political life. In the US Senate from 2005, he became known as an effective, behind-the-scenes consensus builder. His views on flashpoint issues such as abortion became more conservative, however, as Georgia politics moved right. In 2015, Isakson disclosed that he had been diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease. He remained in office until the end of 2019, retiring two years before the end of his term. That year, the Republican Senate leader Mitch McConnell, a ruthless political warrior, told the Atlanta Journal-Constitution: “If you had a vote in the Senate on who’s the most respected and well-liked member, Johnny would win probably 100 to nothing. His demeanor is quite different from what most people expect of politicians.” On Sunday, announcing Isakson’s death, the Associated Press called him “affable”. The Washington Post went for “courtly”. Ross Baker, a congressional scholar at Rutgers University in New Jersey, told the Post Isakson was “a transitional figure … the person who set the tone for debate, who was a facilitator rather than a legislative innovator. “His bipartisan brand of politics harks back to a different era in American politics. With his leaving the Senate, a very important link to the past [has been] lost.” Isakson was succeeded in the Senate by Kelly Loeffler, another Republican. But she lost the seat to Raphael Warnock in 2020, as Georgia turned Democratic blue in an election which cost the GOP control of the Senate and provoked political apoplexy in Donald Trump, the loser in the presidential contest. On Sunday the other serving Georgia US senator, the Democrat Jon Ossoff, said: “Senator Isakson was a statesman who served Georgia with honor. He put his state and his country ahead of self and party, and his great legacy endures. Alisha and I will keep [the former senator’s wife] Dianne and the Isakson family in our prayers.”Duisburg’s match against Osnabrück in the German third tier has been abandoned after racist abuse was aimed at a visiting player. The 3. Liga game was halted by the referee Nicolas Winter in the 33rd minute, with the club’s Twitter account reporting “a racist remark from the stands” was aimed at Osnabrück winger Aaron Opoku. Players from both teams returned to the dressing room, with both sets of fans uniting in a “Nazis out!” chant of solidarity. It was announced over the loudspeaker that the “so-called fan” had been identified and would be removed from the MSV-Arena, with the teams and match officials in discussion over resuming the goalless game. Fifteen minutes later, though, both sides confirmed the game had been called off. “The game is over after VfL Osnabrück is no longer able to compete,” Duisburg tweeted. “We fully understand this. A bitter afternoon for football.” Osnabrück’s official account tweeted: “The game has been stopped. Opoku was racially insulted. Incomprehensible. Aaron, we stand behind you!” “It is always a minority, but this minority could destroy football,” the Duisburg club president, Ingo Wald, told TV channel MagentaSport. “Every fan should make sure that this does not happen.” No new date for the fixture, which had an official attendance of 6,500, has been announced. Duisburg remain 18th in the table and in the 3. Liga relegation zone, with Osnabrück in ninth place.A glance at the Premier League table will do nothing to improve Thomas Tuchel’s mood. Chelsea had arrived at Molineux full of righteous fury after their request for this game to be postponed was rejected. Although Tuchel’s side did not respond by downing tools on the pitch, it was difficult to find many positives after 90 minutes of toil against Wolves cast further doubt on their ability to keep up with Manchester City and Liverpool. Ultimately the only bright spot for an irritable Tuchel, who had seven players out with Covid-19, was that Chelsea refused to wilt. Otherwise this was another tale of frustration for the European champions. They never looked likely to prise Wolves apart and after threatening to make it a three-way title race for much of the campaign, Chelsea suddenly find themselves in danger of falling out of contention after winning only three of their past eight games. Tuchel, who held his head in his heads when a rare opening for N’Golo Kanté went begging, has seen his side pick a bad moment to slow down. Chelsea have fallen six points behind City, a gap that must feel like a chasm given the relentless of Pep Guardiola’s champions, and they are not going to challenge if ruthlessness in attack remains elusive. Nothing is running their way at the moment. Under pressure after a deflating run, Chelsea began to feel the universe was against them when the league rejected their request for a postponement on Sunday morning. Was it right to play on when six other games were called off over the weekend? Chelsea felt otherwise given they had four outfield players on the bench after Kai Havertz, Jorginho and Ruben Loftus-Cheek became the latest to go into quarantine and the sense of injustice had clearly got to Tuchel, who cut an agitated figure on the touchline from the start, hammering Reece James for giving away possession early on. Chelsea – with Ben Chilwell, Romelu Lukaku, Callum Hudson-Odoi and Timo Werner having tested positive for Covid-19 before their draw with Everton last Thursday, made an unsurprisingly hesitant start and were fortunate not to be behind after 15 minutes. João Moutinho moved unchallenged through midfield and Tuchel’s reaction was volcanic when Marcal overlapped on the left and zipped a low cross to the far post, where Daniel Podence was waiting to guide the ball home. Enraged by Chelsea’s defensive shape disappearing so easily, Tuchel hopped up and down before returning to the dugout to rant at his assistants. The German seemed liable to erupt at any moment and even the sight of the linesman’s flag going up for offside against Raúl Jiménez, who had tried to convert Marcal’s centre before it found Podence, did not bring him much cheer. As half-time approached, Tuchel was sitting glumly on the bench. Wolves were on top, with Leander Dendoncker, Rúben Neves and Moutinho shading the midfield battle, and they could have been ahead. Édouard Mendy denied Jiménez and an unmarked Dendoncker headed straight at Chelsea’s goalkeeper. If there was an encouraging note for Chelsea, though, it was that they did not give too much away. César Azpilicueta, Thiago Silva and Antonio Rüdiger offered experienced at the back and Kanté, pressed into action earlier than Tuchel would have liked, occasionally looked dynamic on his first appearance since 23 November. Trevoh Chalobah, meanwhile, was battling hard next to Kante. Yet this is not the midfield that Tuchel, who was also without the injured Andreas Christensen, would have gone with in normal circumstances. It spoke volumes that he preferred to go with an underpowered Kante and the inexperienced Chalobah instead of Saúl Níguez and Ross Barkley, although it must be pointed out that the latter pair are experienced internationals. That selection decision had nothing to do with Covid-19; after all nobody forced Chelsea to send Billy Gilmour and Conor Gallagher out on loan before borrowing Saúl from Atlético Madrid for the season. Chelsea, who also decided not to add any under-23 players to the senior squad here, could not feel sorry for themselves. What they needed was a goal. Saúl came on for Chalobah at half-time and there was more urgency from the visitors after the break. Yet there was no way through Bruno Lage’s back three, no bite with Lukaku, Havertz, Werner and Hudson-Odoi missing. Christian Pulisic was a lightweight presence through the middle once again, Mason Mount was busy but ineffective and there was little invention from Hakim Ziyech, who was replaced by Mateo Kovacic after picking up a knock in the second half. The lack of creativity was a weakness again. Pulisic was thwarted by a fine save from José Sá after being played through by Marcos Alonso, Mount saw a shot deflected wide and Kanté miscued at the death, but Chelsea did not create enough. It has become a recurring theme.After the initial shock of two child murders hitting the headlines in the space of a fortnight, apprehension grew among some people working in and around children’s social care. Was it the “Baby P” Peter Connelly story all over again? Would politicians and the media decide, once again, that “something must be done”? Certainly children’s social care gets in the spotlight normally only at times when a child has been abused and killed. Inquiries into Peter, Victoria Climbié and others intensified public and media fury and despair. Now it is the turn of six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes and 16-month-old Star Hobson. Compared with the frenzied tabloid aftermath of the Peter case, this time the media and politicians have been restrained. It was striking that Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, told MPs during his Commons statement on Arthur’s death that he thought social workers were doing “a tremendous job”. Compare that with when Peter was killed in 2007, when politicians and the tabloid media stoked public rage over a child killing. They scapegoated social workers in the London borough of Haringey and their boss, Sharon Shoesmith, was sacked on live TV by the then children’s secretary, Ed Balls. She eventually won her case for unfair dismissal but the degraded public debate cast a bitter pall over child protection, and not only in Haringey. This time the debate does not look nearly as toxic. But there is nervousness that the shock of this month’s high-profile child deaths will fuel a collective urge to rip up the current system of child protection, that the singular deaths of Arthur and Star must be honoured through new legislation. This week, the editor of the Yorkshire Post, James Mitchinson, tweeted that child protection was not fit for purpose. “The leadership, the strategy, the rescue criteria: it is time to clear out the whole lot and start again,” he wrote. “If the system set up to protect babies like Star remains inert when presented with this, it is broken.” Eileen Munro, the emeritus professor of social policy at the London School of Economics, who carried out a review of child protection for the government in 2011, told the Guardian it would be unwise to launch into a major overhaul of social care on the back of such vivid and unusual protection tragedies. There was much to learn from the two cases, she said, not least the impact of lockdown on day-to-day practice decisions. “But I’m concerned the government might adopt the ‘something must be done’ approach. Every time they do that they simply restructure [services]. I’m old enough to know restructurings never work. Keep child protection in perspective,” she said. Annual numbers of deaths from abuse or neglect of children known to social services have remained stable for several years at about 58 in the UK. It could always be fewer, but Britain, Munro points out, “has a relatively low death rate compared with the US and Australia”. However, some councils, such as Bradford, where Star died, have deep-rooted problems with staffing shortages and unstable management – but others, such as Leeds, Essex and Hertfordshire – have reputations for strong leadership and practice. Increasing numbers of children’s services are rated as “outstanding” by Ofsted, Munro says. She calls for a keener focus on the basics, which means the quality of practice and ensuring social workers are not crushed by unmanageable caseloads. Some in Bradford had up to 50 cases at any one time. Munro added: “One of the biggest problems is that we do not have enough social workers with enough time to spend with families to get to know them.” Sir Alan Wood, a former director of children’s services in Hackney and a government adviser, said there was a case for training child protection specialists – to work across social work, police and health – with the forensic skills to understand children and cope with manipulative adult behaviours. But he cautioned against “knee-jerk” reactions to child deaths involving massive structural changes as local safeguarding agency arrangements were reorganised just two years ago. A bigger contextual issue for child protection, he argued, was the underfunding of family help and early intervention services. Nonetheless, a root-and-branch review of children’s social care commissioned nearly a year ago by the government is due to report in the spring. The national review of the safeguarding “lessons learned” from Arthur’s case is also under way. No change may not be an option.Welcome the A-Leagues, the new land of milk and honey. Or, perhaps more accurately, the land of $130m in funding from an American-based global technology investment firm. The Australian Professional Leagues, capitalising on its newfound independence and operational and commercial control of the domestic top flight, announced on Tuesday it had sold off a 33.3% equity share in itself to Silver Lake. The deal, which valued the APL’s properties at approximately $425m, brings the organisation into a Silver Lake investment folio also featuring the likes of The Madison Square Garden Company and City Football Group. Given football has for so long been the reject of the Australian sports sponsorship scene this bounty has, unsurprisingly, been greeted with all manner of excitement across the footballing landscape. According to reports the APL has adopted an eight-pronged strategy to direct the funds towards marquee names, the resuscitation of youth football and greater investment in digital marketing and content – which assumedly has something to do with TikTok. Football Australia, which retains a “good of the game” non-financial minority equity interest in the leagues, is expected to use their sliver of the sale to push forward with plans to introduce a men’s national second division and a women’s FFA Cup. The APL is already set to expand the A-League Women competition next season to 12 teams through the addition of Western United and Central Coast Mariners and has also flagged further investment in the women’s game. Increasingly, though, matters of expansion or new cup competitions across the space only serve to increase focus on the absence of what is the single most pressing need for women’s football in Australia: a full home-and-away season for the ALW and year-round opportunities for female footballers in elite environments. “First of all, we need to extend the season,” City coach Rado Vidošić said mid-week. “I think you need to make this ALW competition full time. We need to extend the season, they need to train professionally all year. I think that is step one.” “For me, this is not working, sending 18-, 19-year-old girls overseas, and they don’t play and just sit on the bench. There’s a lot of girls who are playing overseas who would love to come back home and play for their hometown.” Though it must be acknowledged that fully professional set-ups do not grow on trees and that football has never had an AFL-style war chest to underwrite its competitions, the void that a lack of 52-week women’s programs in Australia – in both a local and international context – is readily apparent. A women’s FFA Cup, for instance, faces the issue that, due to the lack of year-round football at ALW level, the majority of its players spend their off-seasons playing with the very clubs which would ostensibly be facing professional teams in the national stages and providing the competition with its biggest selling point. Illustrating this, on Sunday afternoon NPLW Victoria sides Calder United and South Melbourne locked horns in the final of the Nike FC Cup – a state knockout competition of which the decider had been delayed by Covid – but did so without the service of regulars Melina Ayres, Catherine Zimmerman and Melissa Barbieri because of their ALW duties. Further, as another wave of Covid grips Australia and throws sporting leagues into chaos, the lone ALW player to have tested positive thus far is believed to have done so “in connection with her non-football place of work”. Though it feels like only a matter of time until an ALW player picks up a case at a cafe, supermarket or petrol station, hers is a case that would have been completely avoided had she been part of a full-time professional environment and not forced to juggle her football with an external career. On Wednesday, it was announced Dylan Holmes was set to return to Adelaide United after a hit-and-miss spell with BK Häcken in the Swedish Damallsvenskan, during which the 24-year-old played a combined 261 minutes across 10 appearances. Though a significant boost to the Reds’ 2021-22 campaign, she is the latest player to depart Australia’s part-time professionalism and head over to Europe, only to discover that the grass isn’t always greener. In 2020, Jenna McCormick, following a campaign with Melbourne Victory that earned her a maiden Matildas cap, signed with Primera División side Real Betis only to experience a horror stint in which she “didn’t get the respect that I deserved as a footballer – or as a human first and then as a footballer second”. Emma Checker also returned in 2020, citing in part City’s higher-quality medical standards after sustaining an injury in France which later became a stress fracture in her fibula. “I think Australia is going to find it hard to build a strong cohort of players leading into 2023 because we can’t have them playing in high-quality environments,” Victory director of football John Didulica said. “We need to meet [players] halfway, and that’s having pathways within A-Leagues clubs and within state structures that girls can stay within their club and improve week on week, year on year. There’s simply not enough quality environments in Europe to give the women the structure and pathways they need to be successful.” Will it be easy? No. Will it be cheap? No. But developments across Australian football in the past week once again demonstrate the urgency surrounding the introduction of a full home-and-away season for A-League Women.Amyl and the Sniffers – Comfort to Me If this summer had a local soundtrack, it would be Hertz from Amyl and the Sniffers’ second album Comfort to Me. A product of lockdown in Melbourne, the record wears its circumstances lightly. Over the blazing fuzz of Declan Martens’ guitar, Amy Taylor issues a series of demands to the object of her affection: Take me to the beach Take me to the country Climb in the backseat If you love me Hire me a car I wanna go driving Across the album’s 13 neat, brilliant tracks, Taylor’s eyes are fixed firmly on the horizon, where her future, potential and weekend holiday destinations lie. – Brodie Lancaster Read more: Amyl and the Sniffers’ Amy Taylor: ‘I wanna punch stuff and yell ... but not all the time’ Genesis Owusu – Smiling With No Teeth Smiling With No Teeth – Genesis Owusu’s Aria-sweeping debut – is one of the year’s most inventive, indelible hip-hop records. It’s also one of its smartest rock albums, punchiest pop releases and most lithe R&amp;B records. Drawing not just from rap but also from electroclash, post-punk, garage rock, funk and soul, it reveals the 23-year-old Canberran (real name Kofi Owusu-Ansah) as a Prince-like chameleon, able to shift persona with a sly grace. Amid all the costume changes, though, he never loses sight of his main goal: interrogating the racism he experienced growing up in Canberra and his resulting struggles with mental health. Smiling With No Teeth runs at a brisk clip, often churning through musical ideas at a frantic pace. In Genesis Owusu’s hands, it feels like a breeze. – Shaad d’Souza Read more: Genesis Owusu: ‘I’m Prince, if he were a rapper in 2020s Australia’ Crowded House — Dreamers are Waiting Three albums into their comeback following the death of original drummer Paul Hester in 2005, Crowded House have expanded to a full-blown family affair, with Neil Finn’s elder son, Liam, a fulltime multi-instrumentalist, and the youngest, Elroy, behind the kit. The band’s original producer, Mitchell Froom (who played the heavenly Hammond organ solo on Don’t Dream It’s Over), is back behind the keys, too. The results are sublime. While not as immediate as the band’s classic early work, Dreamers are Waiting feels more like the natural successor to 1993’s Together Alone than either of the band’s last two albums. – Andrew Stafford Read more: Neil Finn on the return of Crowded House: ‘I am ultimately very optimistic about the world’ The Goon Sax – Mirror II It’s been delightful to see the Goon Sax evolve over the years, from high schoolers playing scrappy indie-pop song about home haircuts to this triumph of a record. The trio’s third album introduces new wave and post-punk influences while maintaining their signature hooks and sharp observational lyricism, tracking the strangeness of young adulthood. Complex songs like Bathwater show the band’s songwriting dexterity, changing tempo and style seamlessly within five minutes. Drummer Riley Jones’ songs – her first written for the band – are a highlight, especially the dreamy, fuzzy Desire. Mirror II is a transportive record, expansive in both sound and emotion. – Giselle Au-Nhien Nguyen Read more: The Goon Sax: Mirror II review – striking, superb songwriting by Aussie indie trio Banoffee – Tear Tracks Like her frequent collaborator Charli XCX, the tracks that Martha Brown makes as Banoffee reek of smoke and sweat, echoing with metallic clangs as if trapped in a futuristic rave chamber – not that anyone’s complaining. Her debut, released just before the throes of the pandemic, captured the peak of the party, but almost two years on, the mood has pickled: she’s come home from Los Angeles to a breakup, forced to spend months in Melburnian isolation with her ex. The result is Tear Tracks, both a primal scream on the dancefloor (Tears, Take a Pill) and a 4am heart-to-heart – like the self-lacerating Idiot, where Brown’s voice is stretched plastic-thin, bruised and barbed at the same time. Sometimes the comedown is just as cathartic. – Michael Sun Read more: Banoffee on trauma and transformation: ‘Reshaping myself helped me survive’ Baker Boy – Gela First Nations artists are often burdened with an unfair expectation that their music should comment on that which oppresses them – a heavy cross to bear for the 25-year-old rapper Baker Boy. He said as much on Instagram last year (“As my Baker Boy persona I choose a path of positivity and light”) and his debut album is mostly all about the party. Baker skips through house-y R&amp;B on Headphones, P-funk on Funk Wit Us and early 2000s Timbaland production on Meditjin. There’s defiance to be found in Baker’s unbridled joy, impeccable dance moves, blasts from his yidaki and devastating Yolŋu Matha raps. The album’s title, referring to his skin name, says it all: I am here, I am enough. And if you don’t agree – get off the damn dancefloor. – Nick Buckley Read more: Baker Boy: ‘I wanted to show those kids back in community that they can succeed’ Courtney Barnett – Things Take Time, Take Time Like hearing from an old friend during a long lockdown, the fourth Courtney Barnett album is downbeat but warm, full of tentative crushes, low-key longings and small, vivid moments. In one line capturing the album’s domestic vibe, she urges: “Don’t stick that knife in the toaster.” There’s no big banger on this record, and nothing that defines the zeitgeist as much as Depreston, but small moments like Rae Street add up to a satisfying portrait of 2021’s liminal vibes. – Brigid Delaney Read more: Courtney Barnett on being forced to stop: ‘I felt myself opening up in a different way’ Miriam Lieberman – Just Transforming Not since Deborah Conway crooned “it’s only the beginning” has an Australian singer made optimism sound so dizzyingly effortless. In a year that was short on both hope and travel, Miriam Lieberman’s sixth album is a sonic reminder that the world keeps turning – all lilting folk tunes overlaid with sprightly kora (West African harp), playful strings and dreamy three-part harmonies as though Joni Mitchell and Paul Simon had convened in a Bamako back street. Children come into the world (Song for Lior – a heart-melting lullaby to her newborn son), others face their final chapter (the title track Just Transforming) and the open road beckons (the exultant Last Night). – Janine Israel HTRK – Rhinestones The beloved Melbourne duo HTRK’s sixth album, Rhinestones, is a collection of vivid, elegiac torch songs based around little more than acoustic guitar, the occasional drum machine and lead singer Jonnine Standish’s rich, yearning voice. Inspired by arcane Americana and recalling the stream-of-consciousness folk of Mount Eerie, it’s a stylistic leap from the electronic music Standish and Nigel Yang once made, but one that suits HTRK, whose songs have long felt as if transmitted from some kind of dream realm. HTRK have always made music that can knock the wind out of you, but never so much as on Rhinestones. – Shaad d’Souza Read more: ‘Find freedom in the music’: City of Melbourne to release 40 albums as part of arts revival program You Am I – The Lives of Others It has become de rigueur to declare every new You Am I album their best since the twin towers of Hi Fi Way and Hourly Daily, but this time it might finally be true. Split in half between Sydney and Melbourne, this pandemic-inflicted recording setup enabled a spirited collaboration, leading to unorthodox drum parts – and leaving Davey Lane alone to layer infinity guitars. Speaking of Lane, the ever-reliable guitarist brings two sterling songs to the mix, both sounding like early 70s Stones outtakes, while Rogers name-drops Ulladulla and Mollymook one moment, and takes aim at internet commentators the next. Soundwise, they haven’t reinvented the wheel – they just take it out for another mighty spin. – Nathan Jolly Allday – Drinking With My Smoking Friends Rumours of the artist’s death have been greatly exaggerated. Even though Allday’s fourth album famously marked a shift away from hip-hop and into janglier territory, glimmers of the rapper still inhabit Tom Gaynor’s new indie rock persona. Notably: in his unadulterated candour and that dolewave accent, which has never sounded more personable than on these 10 tracks of suburban ennui and middle-class nihilism. Droll and unassuming, Gaynor’s singing voice has the insouciance of someone busting out a guitar at a party for a few lazy riffs before sucker-punching you with earnestness, spinning stories of taking MDMA at Bunnings (The Paris End of Collins St) and downing wine in the park (Cup of Tea in the Bath) into moments of grand sentiment and fantasy. – Michael Sun Cong Josie – Cong! We all know society’s collapse is imminent. Cong Josie, the new guise of NO ZU founder Nic Oogjes, pedals countrified post-punk for an antipodean pre-apocalypse – the progeny of Mad Max and Chris Isaak; a grifter dressed in a pastel pink, scorpion-bedazzled suit and cowboy hat. Flamin’ Heart’s pounding synths open Cong! like the pre-tremors of this year’s Melbourne earthquake and the album’s lead single, Leather Whip, cracks with dangerous, raw sexuality. Saxophone and backup singers coo over skeletal drum machines across the album. As with NO ZU, Oogjes continues to send up hyper-masculine tropes, but in the guise of Cong, he might also sell your grandma’s wheelchair for scraps. Turns out the end of the world can be awesome too. – Nick Buckley Nick Cave and Warren Ellis – Carnage The title track of this collaboration is hands down the most beautiful song of the year. Listening to it feels like a descent – and just when it brings you right down, it lifts you up again, higher than before. It’s the work of musicians at the height of their powers and peak of their wisdom. The rest of the album doesn’t reach quite the same heights but it’s cinematic, full of experimentation and verve, and a lot of synth. This is a lockdown album, recorded at the height of the pandemic; as Cave sings on Albuquerque: “And we won’t get to anywhere, anytime this year, darling.” – Brigid Delaney Read more: ‘The last person to touch it was Nina Simone’: Nick Cave and Warren Ellis on an old piece of chewing gum Maple Glider – To Enjoy is the Only Thing The dissolution of a long-term relationship and the rejection of religion are explored in Melbourne songwriter Tori Zietsch’s debut album. Zietsch’s sparse, haunting folk hammers home the ephemerality of life and the inevitability of leaving. To Enjoy is the Only Thing exists largely in quiet spaces, mostly finger-picked guitars and gentle piano, making the momentary electric swell of Good Thing even more arresting as she sings, “I’d rather kill a good thing than wait for it to die.” This record is a statement of survival, a falling away from comfort to find oneself. What could be more 2021 than that? – Giselle Au-Nhien Nguyen Even – Reverse Light Years The eighth album by Melbourne indie-rock lifers Even is that rare thing: a double album (17 songs in 80 minutes!) that is the exact opposite of hard work to listen to. Leader Ash Naylor – whose partner and son fell ill with Covid early in the pandemic – used Melbourne’s long lockdowns to create this jangle/power-pop masterpiece, with intricately textured, cleverly arranged songs that enabled his band to stretch out as they never have before. Along the way, he sealed his place as one of Australia’s great guitar heroes: check out his blazing solo on Gold Sunday. – Andrew Stafford Read more: Reverse Light Years by Even review – double album of unalloyed pleasure from indie rock stalwarts Solo Career – The Sentimentalist EP Best known for her work in Sydney post-punk band Body Type, the music Annabel Blackman makes as Solo Career belongs firmly in the witching hour. On her beguiling debut EP, The Sentimentalist, she sings tales of small-scale anguish – family fights, communication breakdowns, annoying ex-boyfriends – atop dusty, bluish synths and hypnotically looping drum machines. Something about the combination of Blackman’s perpetually deadpan voice and the driving force of her beats gives The Sentimentalist an admirable stickiness (Movie is liable to get stuck in your head after a single listen) and places Solo Career in a lineage of underground synth heroes that includes Molly Nilsson, Chromatics, and Geidi Primes-era Grimes. One of the year’s most auspicious debuts. – Shaad d’Souza Vika and Linda – The Wait While they have dabbled in songwriting throughout the years, Vika and Linda work best as vocal vessels for tunes written to fit their soaring, sisterly harmonies. For The Wait, Australia’s finest offer their best: Paul Kelly, Don Walker, Bernard Fanning and Kasey Chambers are among the songwriters whose material is made all the more richer here by the Bull sisters’ renditions. Vika and Linda learned to sing at church; this is certainly spiritual music. – Nathan JollyA charming Robert Redford stars in the 1992 gem Sneakers, a high-tech (for its time) caper made in a post-cold war, pre-internet world when virtual reality was in its infancy and fears surrounding cyberwarfare were mounting. Martin Bishop (Redford) is the head of an Ocean’s Eleven-style group of cyber experts who are working to expose security dangers faced by banks and corporations. After the team are approached by two supposed NSA officers threatening to reveal Bishop’s shady past, the group find themselves blackmailed into using their skills to uncover and retrieve an elusive black box. Their investigation leads them to mathematician Dr Gunter Janek (Donal Logue), who has seemingly been paid off by the Russians and under the guise of a research project named Setec Astronomy (a rather clever anagram for “too many secrets”) has developed a mathematical code that will universally render encrypted files obsolete. Under surveillance, Bishop and co learn that Janek has hidden this code on a computer chip within the black box. After retrieving the device, Bishop and his crew’s curiosity gets the better of them, so they plug in the chip to their office computers during their post-mission celebrations. The device they’ve been hired to retrieve is capable of unscrambling access codes to every major computer system across the world – the ultimate codebreaker. The film is bursting with Oscar winners and nominees. Starring alongside Redford in his team of hacktivists are Sidney Poitier as ex-CIA officer Donald Crease; Dan Aykroyd as wide-eyed conspiracy theorist Darren “Mother” Roskow; and David Strathairn as Irwin “Whistler” Emery, a blind genius with a heightened sense of hearing that proves invaluable to the group. River Phoenix rounds out the likable team as the reserved, socially awkward tech wizard Carl Arbogast – a role that was something of a departure for the then 21-year-old heartthrob. Bishop’s ex-girlfriend Liz Ogilvy (Mary McDonnell) is mercifully not sidelined as just another love interest, but included as a participant in the gang’s mission. Sneakers is a hybrid of genres – part-thriller, part-heist caper, part-buddy cop movie. It’s more cerebral than action-oriented, and Bishop and his gang rely on their wits over clever gadgetry to achieve their goals. The director, Phil Alden Robinson, inserts moments of levity into the serpentine plot – cue the team doing a celebratory dance to Aretha Franklin’s Chain of Fools, or Redford slipping and falling as he tries to slide across a bank counter during a break-in. A key addition to Sneakers’ creative arsenal is heard and not seen. James Horner (later known for his orchestral compositions on blockbusters including Titanic and Avatar) composed the film’s minimalist score, bringing tension and propulsion to the hacking scenes. Sneakers is all about secrets – who’s got them, who wants them, who’s willing to share them, and the lengths someone might go to reveal them. In a cautionary speech given by Bishop’s ideological adversary Cosmo (Ben Kingsley) in the film’s climax, he declares the world isn’t run by weapons, energy or money: “It’s not about who’s got the most bullets – it’s about who controls the information.” What we see, hear, how we work, what we think – it’s all about the data. Sneakers is set in a world before Google, Facebook and smartphones, and, despite being nearly 30 years old, its concerns about privacy and the moral ambiguity over access to personal and corporate information is chillingly prescient.From prisoners to the homeless and people living with disabilities – these are some of the at-risk communities hidden from public view during the pandemic. Now the health workers working with them share their stories. Dr Michael Novy, emergency department specialist at Parklea correctional centre Covid was a little bit outside our realm because we were in a relatively protected environment. That whole barrier of being isolated was somewhat beneficial as long as the virus stayed out of there. There was always going to be an outbreak [though]; you can only build a net, it’s never a wall, and eventually something will get through there. Now they were in a closed community where people live together, many who aren’t vaccinated, so it didn’t take long for the virus to spread. Prison’s a little bit like a game of Jenga – not every bit of wood can go next to every bit of wood – so to move guys around takes a lot of logistics. It was really interesting trying to deliver care through a metal door which was locked. A flap would open up, a finger would come out and you’d do a set of observations, you’d do a temperature [check] and make sure they were OK at least once or two times a day. We managed to look after about 160 inmates who happened to be positive. No one got very sick. They all got better. So the system worked. Covid is a terrible thing. We’ve lost a lot of people, but we’ve learned as an organisation … we can come together. Amelia Starky, acting disability network manager I have a very strong memory of how I felt last year when Covid first came to our shores and we were in the preparedness phase … seeing what was happening overseas and seeing what was coming and feeling really overwhelmed about that. Thank goodness that never arrived at the time, so when Delta came this year I had that internal preparedness. I started this role at about the time Delta was peaking … so my priority was to get people out of hospital who needed NDIS supports as quickly as possible, because we knew being in hospital was not going to be a safe place for them while we were trying to surge for the Covid response. The case numbers were going up and up and up, and [we were] seeing more … come into the hospital … and I remember the very first time I had a patient that passed away. Seeing it in real life, they were in that room, by themselves, family couldn’t come, nurses weren’t going in hours at a time, and everyone doing their best to give them comfort, but the reality is they’re dying on their own. That was really hard. It was really overwhelming to see how vulnerable the disability network was in regards to Covid, and Delta in particular, with the slow uptake of vaccinations of people living with disability and the caring workforce. Matthew Larkin, services manager and homeless healthcare With the Delta wave of the pandemic, the [NSW] Department of Communities and Justice decided that they were going to set hotels up across the city. We were providing a lot of healthcare to [homeless] people going into there … [and] referring [people] into there as well. As that wave progressed, I made it clear to all of my staff that the biggest thing we could be doing at the moment was vaccinating people, because that was the only way we were going to get out of it. Historically, services were working in silos for a very long time and in the last few years we’ve been able to come together and form solid partnerships … We knew it wasn’t going to be like your flu shot rollout, it was a multi-dose vial, there was a lot we needed to take into account but we decided we couldn’t do this alone. We reached out to our more formalised partners … and started off relatively early. The first [vaccine day] was 20 May and it was really busy – we were seeing at its peak about 400 people in a day. We’ve been able to continue on with the hub and we’re really pleased with what we’ve been able to achieve – we’re up [to] 6,000 doses. For me the engagement with my staff … was something to behold. They had side jokes and banter – that kind of engagement and trust is built up over years and years and it eased [participants] into the fact it’s OK to be vaccinated.When I saw Sara* had booked to see me again I was wondering how things had been going with her new baby, who I expected would have been about six months old at this point. It was now August and I had initially seen Sara for a few sessions a year earlier when she had been struggling with the death of a close friend who lived in the UK. At that time, apart from the grief she was experiencing, all appeared otherwise to be going well in Sara’s life. She was in a loving and supportive relationship with Matt, her husband of four years, and was enjoying a successful, though sometimes stressful, career as a recruitment consultant. Sara was also four months pregnant with their first child. She was excited about the new baby, and had committed to learning all she could from popular online pregnancy and parenting sites. She had joined pre-natal yoga classes, was continuing with her spin classes at the gym, and was ensuring her diet was optimal for pregnancy. I noticed Sara was quite anxious about inadvertently eating anything from what looked like a large list of pregnancy food no-nos. She planned to take a year’s maternity leave from December and was looking forward to having some downtime from work, being able to catch up with some of her girlfriends who also had babies, getting on to landscaping the new house and enjoying the time together with her baby. When I last saw her Sara was flourishing in her pregnancy and full of excitement and anticipation about becoming a family. Sara had now returned to see me because things just had not turned out as she had planned or expected. She was exhausted and tearful and, in her words, a complete mess! I assessed Sara as currently not being clinically depressed, but she was clearly struggling and at risk of developing depression. Sara’s baby, Ava, was still not sleeping well at night, despite Sara following all the baby sleep training advice. No matter how much routine Sara tried to establish with Ava, every day was different and she was finding that she just could not get to the things she wanted to achieve. Just getting out the door with Ava was a monumental mission and her plans for getting back to the gym and having social catch-ups with friends were just not happening. To make things worse, Ava was now teething and was irritable day and night. As for getting on to the planned landscaping for the new house … Matt was a supportive and hands-on parent when he was there, but Sara noticed that she now was feeling resentful towards Matt – his life and career were continuing as before and her life felt completely upside down. She was also beginning to resent Ava and sometimes wished she had never had her, which she felt incredibly guilty about. Sara was completely in love with Ava when she arrived and had embraced the feelings of euphoria, excitement and attention from family and friends during her pregnancy and following the birth of the first grandchild for both families. But now everyone had gone back to their lives. While she loved her baby, here she was exhausted, lonely and bored, caught up in feelings of guilt, anxiety and resentment and trying to contemplate what had happened to her. The house was continually a mess, which was also adding to Sara’s stress. To save herself from going crazy, Sara had thought about returning to work earlier than planned but then felt guilty about abandoning her baby and had no idea how she would manage that anyway. Sara was also now spending more time on social media, following celebrity posts and blogs about post-baby life and post-baby bodies, which was just adding to her feelings of inadequacy and dissatisfaction. She despaired at what had happened to her body. Despite all her conscientious pre-birth preparation, Sara felt side-swiped by the reality of becoming a parent and how much her life as she knew it had changed. She had always seen herself as capable and confident and now was confused about why she wasn’t coping. It was very easy to validate Sara’s difficulties and reassure her that hers was a common experience for women stepping out of their careers to have babies. I also reflected upon how western culture particularly does not appear to value supporting and recognising mothers post-birth and they can feel very much forgotten about. Many Indigenous and collective-based cultures have processes that wrap around a new mother so she is not left isolated, exhausted and unsupported and her role in the community is cherished and valued. In her gathering of knowledge and preparation around becoming a parent, Sara had not seen there was a looming “iceberg” of unrealistic expectations that she would quickly bounce back physically and emotionally and resume her pre-baby life. Sara, like countless other new parents, had sailed straight into it. Over the following three months we worked through psychological and problem-solving strategies to help Sara navigate this momentous transition in a much more accepting, self-compassionate and workable way. Although things continued to be bumpy for Sara over the months I saw her, she first and foremost was able to let go of her previous unrealistically high expectations about herself and parenthood and take the pressure and self-judgement off. Instead of focussing on beliefs of inadequacy and loss, Sara worked to transform her view of her life into a new one of richness, resilience and meaningfulness. Sara was more able to accept that it was OK to miss her old life and not always appreciating her baby did not make her a bad parent. She started to take one day and one baby milestone at a time, and rather than projecting challenging days into a never-ending story of stress and overwhelm, reassured herself that these days, like most difficult times, would pass. She started keeping a journal reflecting on her daily highs and lows, accomplishments and new learnings. She also reflected on gratitude and actively sought out the positive moments in her days, and learned her days were full of them. Instead of feeling lonely, isolated and disconnected, Sara developed a practice of self-compassion, well-wishing and connection with all new parents experiencing the challenges and joys of their first baby. Ditching social media gave Sara relief from the dark art of “comparisonism” . Sara began to set boundaries with those offering their well-meaning advice and felt more confident to trust her own decisions with respect to her baby. She negotiated baby-free time with her partner, established a schedule that included rest, exercise, social connections and pleasurable activities, and felt more comfortable in asking for help when she needed it. She learned to live with a messy house! As our time together came to an end, Sara appeared to be much more her old self. Ava was a beautiful, healthy and happy baby and Sara was able to surrender her need to feel in control of everything and instead roll with the daily ups and downs that came with parenting Ava. Sara was now engaging with other aspects of herself and her life, and transformed her pursuit of being a perfect parent into a much gentler and more rewarding journey of being a perfectly good enough parent. * Sara is not a real client, however her case is typical of many new mothers I see in private practice • Dr Barbara Rysenbry is a clinical psychologist and facilitator at Umbrella Wellbeing, based in Auckland, New ZealandA man who was confined to his room at his Melbourne sharehouse and forced to go to the toilet in a bucket after being diagnosed with Covid has prompted calls for better awareness of support available for people isolating during the pandemic. Melbourne man Qas Ansari, 37, said he was worried he would pass Covid onto his three housemates, so they sealed off his room using plastic sheeting, building an airlock over his door, and for two days he used a bucket for a toilet and did not shower. “I understood why it needed to be done, the hardest bit was using a bucket, but if I kept using the bathroom and kitchen I would create more opportunities to get ill,” Ansari said. As Covid cases increase across the country and more people are forced into isolation, service providers are warning that for many people it’s not as easy as calling someone they know to drop off food. In the lead-up to Christmas they say it’s important people know that help is available to those who need it. After Ansari caught Covid in late November his household decided it was best he stay in his room – taking extreme measures to stop him coming into contact with others. “What they did was they had two large plastics sheets,” he said. “One plastic sheet was attached to my door frame with gaffer tape on the ground. A foot gap was left, there was a second plastic sheet attached to the doorway. “If I needed water or food or anything like that, they would place it on the inside, close it up and I would get a text message saying it was in the airlock. “I opened my door and take whatever I needed so the air from my room wouldn’t go into the hallway.” At the end of the day, he would put the bucket he used as a toilet in the airlock, and his housemates would take it away. Ansari is double vaccinated but suffered serious Covid symptoms, including a high fever. “I had wet wipes but even not being able to shower for two days, … you just feel 10 times worse,” he said. “I had a high temperature, I was sweating in my bed, I would wake up with my clothes soaked through.” Cohealth, a non-profit organisation that offers support for people diagnosed with Covid, called him each day to check on his condition. When Ansari didn’t answer the phone they sent a staff member to his home. After witnessing his set up, they helped him move to hotel quarantine. “The first thing I did was just sit in the shower,” Ansari said. Cohealth support runner Heather Svendsen said Ansari’s experience was an extreme case, but many people did not have the means to isolate comfortably. “So many people do not have family or friends,” she said. “I had a gentleman, I rang him, he said you’re the first person who has come to my door in six weeks.” Svendsen said she has been organising supplies – groceries, medication, even laptops – for about eight people each day. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Around 35,000 Covid-positive people have been referred this year to cohealth which serves north-west Melbourne. She said the rise in the number of Covid cases had increased demand. “Melbourne has been full-on for six to seven months now. It hasn’t stopped, our case numbers are still high. “I think now with Omicron, it’s only going to get busier,” she said. There have been moments of joy too – on one run recently to a public housing building one woman mentioned it was her daughter’s birthday. “I couldn’t resist I brought her daughter a birthday, candles and candy. I couldn’t not do it,” she said. “The mum was in tears when she phoned me. She rang my work and told them about it as well. It was beautiful.” Luke Atkin, who works as part of the Covid positive pathways program, said isolating was difficult for many people. “I don’t think for anyone it’s easy, but for many people, it’s really hard for a whole range of reasons,” Atkin said. “People living alone or are isolated, people who have caring responsibilities, or aren’t safe, or people who are living with a mental illness. “This is a tricky thing being confined.” Ansari finished his isolation period this week but still has a persistent cough so is waiting to go back to work. “I’m desperate to get back to work and a normal routine. But there is a real stigma that comes with Covid,” he said.The Morrison government has been warned a coordinated interference campaign unleashed by foreign states or malicious actors through social media platforms is a serious risk to manage in the looming federal election campaign. With the federal contest now imminent, a Senate select committee established in late 2019 to investigate the risks posed to Australia’s democracy by foreign interference through social media platforms including Facebook, Twitter and WeChat has used its first report to urge the Coalition to adopt better protocols before the poll. The new report concludes Australia currently lacks some of the institutional architecture needed to respond effectively and proactively to the threat of foreign interference. The Select Committee on Foreign Interference through Social Media notes federal parliament’s Joint Standing Committee on Electoral Matters has concluded that there was limited evidence of social media manipulation within Australia, including minimal use of bots, during the 2019 federal election. But analysts from the Australian Strategic Policy Institute told the inquiry financially motivated actors from Kosovo, Albania and the Republic of North Macedonia used nationalistic and Islamophobic content to target and manipulate Australian Facebook users during the 2019 election. Australia’s home affairs department also warned in a separate submission that foreign interference activity against Australian interests was now occurring at an “unprecedented scale”. The new report also references a Queensland University of Technology study that concluded there were a substantial number of bots tweeting election related content in 2019, with a majority originating from New York. The Senate select committee, chaired by the Labor senator Jenny McAllister, warns the Morrison government it would be a “mistake” to wait for a serious attempt to subvert a legitimate democratic contest before taking corrective action. The committee says it would be “naive” to believe Australia is immune from the sort of coordinated incursions seen in the United States during the 2016 presidential election, and the general election in the United Kingdom in 2019. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “The policy challenges facing Australia over the coming years are of interest to more than just Australians,” the committee warns. “There are a range of foreign governments, organisations and individuals who stand to win or lose from Australia’s political and policy decisions. “Experiences from overseas show us there are some foreign actors who also seek to introduce discord and social conflict as an aim unto itself,” the report says. “Technological developments mean that these actors have more options available than ever before to influence Australia’s processes.” The report says while there does not appear to have been a large-scale coordinated interference campaign to date, that did not make a case for government inaction. “It is possible, if not likely, that Australia will face such an attempt in the future,” the report says. The committee has recommended the Morrison government establish clear requirements and pathways for social media platforms to report suspected foreign interference, including disinformation and coordinated inauthentic behaviour, and other offensive and harmful content. The report notes that representatives from TikTok “did not know if they were required to report any coordinated foreign interference attempts that they detected on their platform – let alone who they could even report this to”. It recommends the government “clearly delegate lead accountability for cyber-enabled foreign interference to a single entity in government”. The report notes it is “not clear who is responsible for responding to a disinformation campaign that targets the information environment in an election period”. The select committee says the government should establish “non-political institutional mechanisms for publicly communicating cyber-enabled foreign interference in our elections” – including developing protocols for classified briefings to be given to the opposition during caretaker periods. The report notes the decision “to reveal or conceal evidence of a foreign-backed disinformation attempt is one that could have enormous implications during an election campaign”. It says evidence given during the inquiry by the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Department of Home Affairs suggests there is no current obligation in the caretaker convention for the government of the day to brief the opposition if there is evidence of coordinated malicious action. It also recommends a pre-election audit be undertaken through the Election Integrity Assurance Taskforce “to assess capability relevant to detecting disinformation”. The committee recommends the government should “take a proactive approach to protecting groups that are common targets of foreign interference but are not classified as government institutions”. The report notes there are currently no clear protections for groups that “influence Australia’s democracy but sit outside of government, such as diaspora groups, research institutions and political parties”. The deputy chair of the inquiry was the Liberal senator Jim Molan. In additional comments, Molan said he agreed “with parts of the majority report” but he intended to provide “more fulsome additional comments” after the Christmas break.Every surfer knows that sharks live in the ocean. But it’s a bit like car accidents – you think it won’t happen to you. I’ve been surfing since 1966. That day [in 2001], my son and his friends had been out in the water earlier on but luckily, they’d come in and gone, and I was out there by myself. There was no one anywhere on the beach. I’d been out there for about an hour. It’s a funny thing, how life can revolve around just a little decision – that I thought, “Oh, I’ll just catch one more wave.” It was when I was paddling back out to catch one more that the shark hit me. I didn’t see the shark before it got me. It came up behind me and bit the surfboard. That saved my life because it bit on to one of the fins, which prevented it from closing its mouth on one side. That may have been the difference between losing my leg and just losing part of my leg – because as soon as the shark hit that fin, which is made of very hard, sharp fibreglass, it would have lost interest really quickly and thought, “Nah, this is not my food.” It didn’t hurt at all. I often say to people, “It doesn’t hurt to get eaten by a shark.” There’s no pain, initially, because their teeth are so sharp that you don’t feel the bite. It was like if someone puts their hand around your wrist and gives your arm a shake. It just felt like something shaking my leg and I actually thought, what was that? Am I tangled up in something? When I turned my head and saw the blood pouring out of my leg, it didn’t take long to work out what had happened. Although I never saw the shark, I could see it moving under the water after it bit me. That’s when it became pretty terrifying because I was waiting for it to hit a second time. That was probably the longest minute of my life, waiting for it to come back. I did nothing at first – I just lay on my board – because I thought, “If I start paddling, it’s more likely to bite me again”, so I just stayed still. It was a pretty hard thing to do because I was bloody scared by that time. I hit the water really hard with my arm about five or six times because I’ve seen surfers do that over the years to scare a shark away. Then I looked for a wave to ride in and there were no waves coming. Just when you want a wave to help you, nothing. So I had to start paddling to the beach. I probably only went 20 metres or so and a wave broke out behind me and pushed me all the way to the beach. It wasn’t until I was on the beach that I realised what trouble I was in because the blood was pouring out of me pretty quickly. So I had to take the leg rope off the surfboard and tie it around my groin as a tourniquet. I pulled tight but it didn’t stop the blood, which is when I panicked a bit. I guess you have far greater strength in these moments than you normally do, so when I pulled the leg rope tight and it didn’t work, I gave it another almighty tug to tighten it and it stopped the blood flow after that. I had 150 or 200 metres of beach to cross. And then there were probably 35 or 40 steps to go up the side of the hill while I’m trying to hold my leg together, because there’s a sizeable bit of my thigh that’s not there. The shark didn’t eat it, it had just torn it off my leg. So it was hanging down below my knee like a big slab of steak. I started off trying to hold it in the wound while I walked along the beach, crab-like. But that quickly became too much for me and I just gave up and let it hang down beside my leg. I managed to get along the beach and up the stairs, and although I was extremely fit at the time, by the time I got to the top of those stairs, I was more exhausted than I’d ever been in my life – because when you lose blood, you lose your ability to carry oxygen around the body. I didn’t know at the time, but I’d lost somewhere between 20 and 25% of my blood. Then I had another 250 metres to walk along a bush track to the first houses in the village and I only just made that. I got to the first house and just yelled, “help”. People came running out of the houses and I lay down on the front lawn of the house. A woman came out and very coolly went and got some towels to try and stop the bleeding. While the few men there panicked a bit and didn’t know what to do, the woman was quite good! I never think about it anymore now. It was 20 years ago in February this year. I got back in the water nine weeks later. The wound hadn’t even healed and I was putting waterproof dressings on it and getting back out there. I was unlucky that it happened but I was very lucky to survive. But it wasn’t really a “miracle” that I lived – it was a lot of effort put into surviving. I had three young children and I thought they were too young not to have a father. It was the will to survive.As Jhye Richardson and Michael Neser went to sleep after the fourth day of the Adelaide Ashes Test, they could easily have been wondering about what might soon come to pass. Both have bowled well as Australia’s replacement fast bowlers, and over the first four days neither has outperformed the other. Richardson bowled aggressively in the first innings without a wicket, Neser more economically took one. Richardson has so far taken two in the second innings, Neser another. Patrick Cummins will definitely return for the Melbourne Test, Josh Hazlewood might. If there is still a vacancy, the fifth day in Adelaide may yet decide who takes it. These are the conventional unknowns of a cricket series, the sort of questions we expect. Over the past two years, though, we have all become intimately acquainted with the broader unknowns of a pandemic, those millions of small ramifications that run off as tributaries from the lethal central current. On the first morning at Adelaide, when Cummins was ruled out of captaining Australia after being classified as a close contact of a positive Covid case, the media centre was buzzing with activity while reporting the news. On the fourth morning at Adelaide, the media centre itself was where Covid had turned up, and the place was very quiet indeed. A Fox Sports employee and a BBC employee had both recorded positive tests, setting off a cascade of close-contact assessment and precautionary absence. For the first day in so many Ashes series, Test Match Special did not go to air. The whole team had worked out of one broadcast box and testing was required all round. The absence of a British institution reflected the tumult of the cricket team’s tour. The BBC precautions also took out the local national broadcaster, housed next door. The ABC commentary team had been loaning Jim Maxwell and Ian Chappell to the BBC roster, while receiving stints from Jonathan Agnew and Steven Finn in return. What had prompted good humour on air about commentators rushing from box to box was abruptly less amusing. The ABC ended up hastily assembling a small commentary team in Perth to call using television pictures, and the BBC took that feed. All of the above shows the knife edge on which this Ashes series is balancing. The pay TV broadcaster Fox Sports did manage to stay on air despite the misfortune that befell its employee, and it had the resources and clout to get host Isa Guha cleared on the same day to broadcast despite having worked on the BBC broadcast the previous day. But in work environments that are both specialised and crowded, the precarity is obvious. The entire Test match broadcast went off air for an extended period during the Brisbane Test due to a power failure. An infection in the wrong place could easily replicate that elsewhere. Then there is the matter of the players, as the Cummins case has demonstrated. Cricket Australia chief executive Nick Hockley said after Cummins was ruled out that players had been asked to go out in small groups in order to avoid the risk of many being ruled out at once. But a couple of days later the fast bowler Mitchell Starc said he and Nathan Lyon would have been sitting with Cummins at the fateful dinner except that the captain hadn’t checked his text messages. With Hazlewood injured, Australia’s entire first-choice bowling attack could have been ruled out of the match at once, and short of Usman Khawaja bowling first change, the squad would not have had the depth to cover that. Selectors would have been left sifting through the Adelaide Strikers list or making calls to see who was in form in local grade cricket. (Cue the jokes about whether England would have made any runs against that attack.) If enough players of a certain calibre were ruled out, it could lead to matches being abandoned or forfeited, and could give broadcasters a case to ask for refunds on the rights fees they have paid. The potential consequences are enormous. From Adelaide, the teams will travel to Victoria and New South Wales. The restrictions in those states are less strict, with workplace contacts only needing to isolate until a negative test is returned rather than the blanket seven days required in South Australia. But, in Australian terms at least, the cities of Melbourne and Sydney are where Covid is booming. The likelihood of players running across it is higher, and a mid-match case could still derail a Test. It’s not like this hasn’t happened elsewhere – England bailed out of South Africa last December, and India did the same to England last September. This England team might be quite happy to leave Australia and regather composure before returning at a later date. The money riding on the Ashes means everything to both boards, who will co-opt the St Moritz Ice Cricket tournament if that is what it takes to get the series played. But the ice in Australia right now is thin indeed, and below it lie unknowns that are very dark and deep.The French government has called on Boris Johnson to use David Frost’s resignation as Brexit minister to “rebuild trust” with the EU amid uncertainty over the prime minister’s approach in the new year. Clément Beaune, France’s EU affairs minister, who had a series of run-ins with the prime minister’s pugnacious minister, suggested that Downing Street should use the moment to reset the troubled relationship. He said: “We had difficult relations but we always continued the dialogue. I send my best with respect to David Frost after his resignation. It is time for the British government to rebuild a climate of trust with France and the EU in the interest of all.” The announcement that Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, would take on responsibility for EU affairs has done little to clarify how the prime minister will approach various ongoing issues. A remain voter before the campaign, Truss switched to become one of the most vocal backers of Brexit, notably avoiding even mention of the EU in recent speeches about the country’s foreign policy. In recent weeks, the UK government softened its approach to the post-Brexit arrangements for Northern Ireland, with the two sides brokering a Christmas truce in the talks on a relatively positive note. But Truss, who regularly comes out top in surveys of the Conservative membership’s favourite cabinet ministers, has pushed a tough line towards Brussels in the past. One EU diplomat said of Lord Frost’s resignation: “Hopefully the new negotiator will be more pragmatic, making good relations with the EU and its member states relations a priority over the pursuit of a pure, antagonistic Brexit – we’re not holding our breath.” Frost was recognised in Brussels as having both the prime minister’s ear and standing among the most vocal Brexiters in the Tory party. His apparent buy-in to a notable change of tone and policy in recent weeks was seen as a positive. While the EU has not wholly embraced the change of approach, insisting that Downing Street was still seeking to renege on its past agreements, the UK had been offering to focus on issues around trade friction rather than pursue a more thorough going rewrite of the protocol. But while there are some concerns about the future, few tears will be shed in Brussels over Frost’s departure from the scene. He had a willingness to push negotiations to the edge, even on the sensitive issue of the Irish border. Frost inherited and finished the negotiations on the so-called Northern Ireland protocol in the withdrawal agreement, a compromise that guarantees that there is no border on the island of Ireland. But the minister had been scathing about the arrangement, which in effect keeps Northern Ireland in the EU’s single market for goods and draws a customs border down the Irish Sea. His command paper of July emphasised that this outcome had been forced on the Johnson administration due to errors under the previous prime minister. Frost sought to unpick much of that deal, with his most contentious demand being that the European court of justice (ECJ) should not be the arbiter of disputes over the implementation of the law in Northern Ireland. In recent days, there has been a shift to accept that the ECJ will play a role, albeit merely as a reference point on EU law for an independent arbitration panel. Frost privately insisted this was not a new position, but other British officials have indicated that it was a shift, hinting at difficult conversations within government. Diplomats and officials in Brussels were not generous in their assessment of the minister, known to the prime minister as “the Great Frost”. “Lord Frost never got Brexit done; he actually made sure it endured using the Northern Ireland protocol to get his way,” one senior EU diplomat said. “But one year on from the deal he negotiated, what did it bring the UK? Apart from mistrust and deteriorated relationships with most member states?” The diplomat added: “Frost seemed to have a very ideological idea of what Brexit meant and that didn’t make for good neighbourly relations. For now the European court of justice was a bridge too far for Downing Street, but it will depend on his successor whether we indeed see a more pragmatic line emerge.” A further major issue that will require the attention of Truss is fisheries, where the French government continues to insist that it has been hard done by in terms of licences for vessels operating in British waters. Frost has also voiced his frustration that the UK has not been provided with access to Horizon Europe, the EU’s research and innovation programme. Two months ago, the veteran MP Bill Cash, chair of the Commons European scrutiny committee, claimed British scientists were being frozen out of the £80bn flagship research programme because of the ongoing dispute over Northern Ireland.When she was a small child – too young to remember, though her mother has told her this story – Rose Ayling-Ellis was once so delighted to be at the park, she excitedly climbed on to a bench and started dancing. People stopped and, unable to resist her infectious happiness, clapped and cheered along. Two decades later, millions more were clapping and cheering (and, I suspect, sobbing at times) as Ayling-Ellis and her partner, Giovanni Pernice, became 2021 Strictly Come Dancing champions in the most emotional and joyous finale I can ever remember. Yet, for once, it felt as if there were no losers: the runners-up, John Whaite and his partner Johannes Radebe, would have been easy winners any other year, as would AJ Odudu, who had to pull out of the final after an injury, but Ayling-Ellis had something extra – the show’s first deaf contestant, she had to work harder than anyone else, although the effort never seemed laboured. She is a beautiful dancer, light and agile and emotive. She radiates pure joy. “I was so shocked,” says Ayling-Ellis of the moment her name was announced, when we spoke briefly by Zoom, joined by a sign-language interpreter the morning after the final. “It was really weird – it felt like I was out of my body for a moment.” She is tired and happy – “We celebrated last night. There was a bit of prosecco, and dancing” – but she says it hasn’t really sunk in yet. It was emotional behind the scenes, she says; she had to get her makeup redone at least twice before the trophy announcement. But this probably helped when it came to being crowned champion: “I was crying so much beforehand that I ran out of tears,” she says – though as soon as she hugged her mum – who was sitting in the audience with Ayling-Ellis’s boyfriend – she “burst into tears and couldn’t stop”. Despite a strong series, with some of the best couples the series has seen, Ayling-Ellis, 27, was always a favourite. She was the first to get the perfect score of 40, which she did in week six. Her acting skills – she’s in EastEnders – are a given, but the expressiveness in her body (or “musicality” as the judges would put it), when she cannot really hear the music, is extraordinary. One dance, Ayling-Ellis and Pernice’s “couple’s choice”, was a powerful, celebratory routine that featured a silent section halfway through, in tribute to the deaf community. When they performed it again for the final, it lost none of its power – I watched it with goosebumps. “I love it so much,” she says of the show, when we spoke a couple of weeks earlier, after a long day in which she had been trying to perfect the American Smooth. “I love all the ballroom,” she says. “It’s the Latin I’m terrified of – it’s fast, there’s a lot of counting, it’s a bit more solo, you’re not really [dancing close] together. With ballroom, I don’t have to think as much.” She doesn’t “feel the vibrations” of the music, as has been claimed, but instead commits each step to muscle memory and counts them out in her head. “If I had to start thinking about vibration, it would distract me.” Also, she points out, there is a big difference in sound between the live band on the night and the recorded music played in rehearsals. Ayling-Ellis can hear some aspects of music, using her phone to Bluetooth it directly to her hearing aids (when, one day, she forgot to bring spare batteries, she and Pernice couldn’t rehearse). Part of the pleasure of watching the pair dance was Ayling-Ellis and Pernice’s affectionate partnership. “Giovanni has been incredible,” she says. “He really supports every single step – and I mean every single step: even when I’m doing stuff on my own he, off-camera, is giving me timing.” Learning the choreography is difficult for a hearing person; for Ayling-Ellis, it must have been a giant task. There have been days, she says, when she has struggled. “There are a lot of ups and downs and some dances are harder than others. But Giovanni is such a good teacher, and he’s really adapted to the way I learn, rather than making me learn it in his way.” Being on the show, she says, has “been life-changing. I try not to think about it ending too much because it makes me feel really sad.” How has it changed her? “I feel more confident. On the first week, I was really shy, but now I can be myself, and I definitely feel more comfortable in my own skin. The first week, I was like, ‘Everyone’s going to be expecting a deaf person to dance really badly.’” She smiles. “But I definitely proved a lot of people wrong.” When we speak before her eventual triumph, she says while winning would be great, “what is more important is breaking the barrier, proving that deaf people can do anything. I feel that I’ve achieved that, so even if I don’t win, I still feel like I’ve won.” Since Ayling-Ellis has been on Strictly, online searches for British sign language courses have gone up by 300%, and one training company told the BBC that the number of people enrolling had gone up by 2,000%. She has had lots of messages from deaf people, and parents of deaf children, who have said how much watching her has meant to them. “That’s made me quite emotional,” she says. “It’s 2021, and, finally, they’ve got something like that. It’s really good that it’s happening – but why has it taken this long? I didn’t have that growing up, and a lot of deaf people didn’t have that. So it’s really nice that we’ve got somebody out there.” She smiles, and adds: “I can’t believe it’s me.” She is thrilled that appearing on Strictly has challenged perceptions. “Hopefully, it will change the way people look at deaf people. That if they come for a job interview, they won’t freak out about it and will be more excited. I’m glad that it’s happening. We’ve been fighting for so long.” Were there people who were surprised she was going on a dance show? “Yes, because I think a lot of people probably …” She pauses. “I think, for deaf people, the thing we have to live with is that people have such low expectations of us. So when you do things that are normal, it’s like, ‘Wow!’. So I knew that me being on Strictly, a lot of people were probably thinking, ‘How’s she going to hear music, how is she going to dance?’ I always felt like I have to give 120%,” she says, “so that I can seem capable of doing it the same as everyone else.” Ayling-Ellis grew up in Hythe, Kent, and has an older brother; after her parents’ divorce, she lived with her mother. She had ballet lessons when she was a child, but not for long – and that was about the extent of her dance training. “In a home video, you can see all the kids with perfect timing and I’m trotting along behind trying to copy what they were doing,” she says. “I remember my first day with Giovanni, he was really shocked at my posture. He still tells me off for it.” She was, however, a very creative child, “always in my own bubble. I love art and making things, and I communicated a lot with my family through drawing.” She wanted to be an artist. At school, she says, it was the popular kids who did drama. “And I wasn’t very popular, so I never thought about doing drama.” At Ayling-Ellis’s school, there were only a handful of deaf students. “I didn’t get bullied, I still had a good time at school but I had to fight for my education,” she says. “They only had three notetakers, and [the deaf children] were in different classes, so most of them went to a classroom with no interpreter, no notetaker. My mum really fought to make sure I had a notetaker and interpreter with me at all times. I was lucky, but it was ridiculous. Unfortunately, that’s a normal life for many deaf children – they are in mainstream schools with no access.” The hard work was a real test, she says, “because that’s what life is going to be. You always have to fight for your access.” Not having to struggle for this made all the difference on Strictly. “I have an interpreter with me so I can understand what’s going on all the time. If I didn’t have an interpreter there, and I was trying to concentrate, trying to understand what everyone’s saying, I can’t be me, I can’t be myself.” Ayling-Ellis remembers realising for the first time she was different from others around her, when she was around four. “In nursery, we had this special deaf unit. I remember playing with other deaf kids, and looking out the window and it was all the hearing children outside. I thought, ‘Why am I not over there? Why am I in here?’ I genuinely thought everyone was deaf. “I feel really glad that I knew who I was from a very early age. I never ever once thought: ‘I wish I could hear.’ Because if I was hearing, I’d be a completely different person. I wouldn’t have the life experience that I have. I’d just be really normal.” She laughs. “I don’t want to be normal – that’s boring.” Being part of the deaf community “is very special”, she says. “It is the one place I can be where I fully understand everything. In the hearing world, I’m constantly having to lip-read and trying to understand what’s going on. Sign language is so beautiful. It gives you a strong identity, something to be very proud of – the community, the culture. I love the deaf community.” Ayling-Ellis’s family became involved with the deaf community quite early on, and her mother learned sign language. “They’re really supportive, and I love my family to bits, but I did feel, growing up, that I would love to have a deaf brother or sister, or someone deaf in my family. I was very lucky I had deaf friends and deaf people around me. But I wish I’d had a deaf role model.” One weekend, as a teenager, Ayling-Ellis went away on a film-making course with other deaf children. She was interested in animation, but tried it and didn’t like it. “They said I should try acting,” she says. “It was such a safe space, so you felt really safe to be yourself.” She fell in love with acting. She had been a confident child, “quite extrovert”, but had become self-conscious as a teen. With acting, “I felt a lot of freedom. And I realised I was not bad at it.” The director who was running the weekend, Ted Evans, asked Ayling-Ellis to be in his short film. But, she says, “I didn’t think it was something that I could do full-time – I didn’t see any other deaf actors out there.” Instead, she went to university to study fashion design, but kept acting with the Deafinitely Youth Theatre, and her career grew. Ayling-Ellis did theatre work, and had roles in Casualty and the Stephen Poliakoff drama Summer of Rockets before joining EastEnders last year, playing Frankie Lewis. Up to this point, she says being deaf has given her an advantage as an actor, because she is usually always considered whenever a casting director is looking for a deaf actor. “The problem is when it’s not a deaf role – that’s where I’ve found it really hard,” she says. “I’ve gone for auditions and they’ve said, ‘I really liked you, but we’re going to find a smaller role for you somewhere.’ But why can’t I play that role, a character who just happens to be deaf? EastEnders works really well, because the storyline isn’t about me being deaf – she’s just a character.” The conversation about diversity on television isn’t always that inclusive. “You see so many different races and sexualities – and it’s brilliant, it’s what it should be – but where are the disabled people? I can’t see many. It is changing, but very slowly, and in very small ways.” What would it have meant to see a Rose Ayling-Ellis on mainstream TV – in two of the BBC’s biggest shows – when she was growing up? “A lot. It’s not just for me, but also for my parents. When they first had a deaf child, they had never met anybody deaf before.” For parents who may be anxious about a baby’s diagnosis, or not know what it could mean for them, seeing Ayling-Ellis might make them think, she says, “that ‘my child can do whatever they want to do, because she can do that’.” Did she grow up thinking there was anything she couldn’t do? “I grew up knowing there’s always a way around things,” she says, smiling. “I just always knew that other people think I can’t do it, and that was a bigger barrier for me.” She has, with each joyous step, proved what she’s capable of. “It’s so much more than the glitterball,” she says with the immensity of her win still sinking in. “It feels like acceptance for a deaf person to achieve something like that. It means so much, and I know it means a lot for the deaf community, and for anybody who feels a bit different – to never think that you can’t do it, because it is achievable when you are given the opportunity.”Chilean voters headed to the polls on Sunday to chose between two presidential candidates offering starkly contrasting visions for the future, in the country’s most divisive elections since it returned to democracy in 1990. Leftwing candidate Gabriel Boric, a tattooed former student protest leader, has pledged to empower women and Indigenous people and raise taxes and spending in order to create a fairer Chile. His far-right opponent José Antonio Kast is a staunch defender of the former dictator Augusto Pinochet and has promised to dig ditches along the country’s northern border to slow migrants. After years of centrist rule, the sharp choice has resurfaced deep divisions in one of Latin America’s most stable democracies, and revived bitter memories of the country’s recent past. Conservative Chileans are convinced that Boric is a crypto-Communist who would push Chile into a Venezuelan-style economic tailspin. Progressives fear that Kast would overturn fragile social gains and clash with the mostly progressive convention that is rewriting the country’s dictatorship-era constitution. Both candidates claim that it is their rival who instils fear among voters. “This Sunday we are going to say ‘no’ to intolerant people,” said Kast – who frequently rails against the supposed influence of the “gay lobby” – at his final campaign rally on Thursday. “We will defeat fear… We will win by a wide margin because this is what I have been hearing the length of Chile.” Across town, Boric told his supporters: “We are a generation that learns from those who were here before us; we united to defeat the dictatorship, to democratise Chile, [and] to have a new constitution. And now we will come together again to defeat the heir to this government and Pinochetismo – and bring hope to Chile.” “I’m putting my faith in young people,” said Boric voter Cecilia Galaz, 67, as she strode into her polling station in a central neighbourhood in the capital, Santiago. “We are handing over a corrupt, self-centred world, so we need to change absolutely everything if we are to keep advancing towards the sort of society we want to live in.” Close by, 37-year-old Fernanda Medina walked out of the polling station having also cast her vote in favour of Boric. “I’m really excited,” she said brightly, clasping her young daughter’s hand. “But I fear that disinformation is powerful in rural Chile, and some people are inclined to vote in line with the emotions Kast plays on rather than inform themselves of the candidates’ policies.” In rural parts of the country, as well as peripheral districts of Santiago, some voters complained of a lack of public transport to take them to polling stations. Videos circulating on social media showed long lines at bus stops – in bright sunshine and temperatures rising above 30C (86F) – as well as depots full of parked buses. Transport minister Gloria Hutt gave a televised address to “categorically deny” that the government was holding back the buses. She also said that public transport was running “somewhat better” than on a working day. Some Chileans have begun offering carpool solutions to neighbours in the hope of allowing everyone the chance to vote. Acknowledging that the election will be won with the votes of those in the centre, both candidates moderated their platforms in the weeks since the first round. Kast is backed by the right-leaning candidates whom he defeated in the first round, while Boric has has support from across the left, from the Communist party to moderate former president Michelle Bachelet, who this week said Chileans faced a “fundamental” choice, urging them to back a leader who could lead the country “down the path of progress for all”. Kast’s policies resonated with voters unnerved by two years of social protests and recent debates about abortion (which remains illegal in most instances) and migration. But his relationship with Chile’s past has loomed darkly over his campaign. Kast, whose Germany-born father was recently revealed to have been a member of the Nazi party, has previously said that Pinochet would have voted for him and campaigned prominently against the transition to democracy in the late 1980s. Boric, on the other hand, represents the progressive generation brought up in democracy – many of whom harbour a visceral hatred of General Pinochet and his enduring legacy. A reminder of that history came on Thursday when the death of the dictator’s widow, Lucia Hiriart, brought hundreds of people to a Santiago plaza – some of them bearing photos of victims of the military regime. “This has unexpectedly turned into one of the most closely-fought elections,” Mireya García told Reuters. García’s brother was one of thousands forcibly disappeared after the army toppled the democratically elected president Salvador Allende in 1973. “What is at stake is that on the one hand the extreme right is clearly a danger for Chile and on the other hand, there is a candidate who represents the youth,” she said.Leicester City players and supporters can breathe a sign of relief going into the winter break after goals from the defensive duo Sophie Howard and Sam Tierney against Birmingham secured the team’s first points in the Women’s Super League, with this win pulling them above their opponents. Speaking before the showdown between the league’s bottom sides the new Leicester City manager, Lydia Bedford, was confident that if her team could “manage the nerves then they will grow in confidence”. She was right. In a scrappy opening 15 minutes the home team edged things with some neat passing and they were rewarded for their efforts shortly after as the Germany-born Scotland international Howard curled the ball into the bottom corner from just inside the box. From then the confidence boost was clear and the Foxes should have been two up when Natasha Flint squared for the striker Jess Sigsworth but the 27-year-old put the ball wide from eight yards out. With Aston Villa having lost 5-0 against Manchester United in the early kick-off, this crunch tie was more than an opportunity to put a bigger gap between the pair battling relegation. It was also a chance to cut the gap between them and the rest, reducing a nine-point gap between 11th and 10th-placed Villa to seven. Recent matches had suggested it would perhaps be Birmingham brimming with belief going into this tie, having scored four goals in their first two games under the interim manager Darren Carter, trebling their tally this term, despite two defeats. Leicester’s lack of points, though, has been deceiving, with performances not as bad as their league status suggests, having had the worst start for a newly promoted side. Birmingham pressed with a little more urgency in the second half but struggled to carve out obvious chances with the home defence solid. “In certain moments when we needed a bit of quality, a pass or a cross, we weren’t good enough,” Carter said. Instead, a rampaging header from Tierney from a corner kick with 16 minutes remaining would extend the home team’s lead and ease nerves. With 12 games still to play there are a lot of points available, including the return fixture at St Andrews in February, and there is no room for complacency. “We still have 12 big games this season,” Bedford said. “We could take our eye off the ball after Christmas and it’s really important that the girls use this as a platform for the second half of the season. It gives us a little buffer and a little bit of belief.”The Omicron variant of Covid-19 has “extraordinary spreading capabilities”, the top US infectious diseases expert said on Sunday, and promises to bring a bleak winter as it continues “raging through the world”. Dr Anthony Fauci’s warning came ahead of the busy holiday travel period, which he said would elevate the risk of infection even in vaccinated people. In an interview with NBC’s Meet the Press, Fauci, Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser and head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, urged Americans to get booster shots and wear masks. He also appeared to attempt damage control over Vice-President Kamala Harris’s contention that the Biden administration “didn’t see” the Omicron or Delta variants coming. Harris’s comments on Friday were “taken out of context”, Fauci insisted, and referred to the “extraordinary number of mutations” of Covid-19 rather than any lack of readiness. “We were well prepared and expected that we were going to see variants,” he said. “There’s no doubt about that.” Fauci looked ahead to a scheduled national address by Biden on Tuesday, in which he said the president would “upscale” elements of the White House Covid winter plan. “He’s going to stress several things,” Fauci said. “… Getting people boosted who are vaccinated, getting children vaccinated, making testing more available, having surge teams out, because we know we’re going to need them because there will be an increased demand on hospitalisation.” The White House reset comes at the end of a week in which the US surpassed 800,000 deaths from coronavirus and saw a 17% surge in cases and a 9% rise in deaths. Medical experts have warned of an Omicron-fueled “viral blizzard” sweeping the country. Biden has spoken of a “winter of severe illness and death” among the unvaccinated. Fauci repeated such dire predictions on CNN’s State of the Union. “One thing that’s clear is [Omicron’s] extraordinary capability of spreading, its transmissibility capability,” he said. “It is just raging through the world. “This virus is extraordinary. It has a doubling time of anywhere from two to three days in certain regions of the country, which means it’s going to take over. If you look at what it’s done in South Africa, what it’s doing in the UK, and what it’s starting to do right now, the president is correct. “It is going to be tough. We can’t walk away from that because with the Omicron that we’re dealing with it is going to be a tough few weeks to months as we get deeper into the winter. We are going to see significant stress in some regions of the country, on the hospital system, particularly in those areas where you have a low level of vaccination.” Many cases of Omicron are so-called “breakthrough” infections. Florida, one of the hardest-hit states throughout the pandemic, reported on Sunday that about 30% of new infections were in people vaccinated but yet to receive a booster. Fauci and other experts have said immunisations alone will not prevent the spread of Omicron, but are confident that the risk of serious disease or death is vastly reduced in those who are vaccinated. Dr Francis Collins, director of the National Institutes of Health, told CBS’s Face the Nation he was concerned about the effects of Omicron on those who are not vaccinated. “It’s a brand new version and so different that it has the properties to potentially be evasive of the vaccines and other measures that we’ve taken,” he said. “The big message for today is if you’ve had vaccines and a booster you’re very well protected against Omicron causing you severe disease. Anybody who’s in that 60% of Americans who are eligible for a booster but haven’t yet gotten one, this is the week to do it. Do not wait.” In New York, authorities said 22,000 people tested positive for Covid-19 on Friday, eclipsing the previous record since testing became widely available. Meanwhile, a study in South Africa this week suggested that the Pfizer vaccine has a weaker efficacy against Omicron in patients who have received two doses than it does against the Delta variant. The research by Discovery Health, the country’s largest medical insurance administrator, calculated a 70% protection from hospitalization compared with the unvaccinated, and 33% protection against infection.The group said that represented a drop from 93% hospitalization protection and 80% infection prevention for Delta.The UK health secretary has criticised people who have chosen not to be vaccinated against coronavirus as they “take up hospital beds” that could be used for patients in need. Sajid Javid said the unvaccinated – about 5 million people or 10% of the eligible population – were having a damaging impact on society and creating extra pressure on the health system. “They must really think about the damage they are doing to society,” Javid told Sky News on Sunday. “They take up hospital beds that could have been used for someone with maybe a heart problem, or maybe someone who is waiting for elective surgery.” “But instead of protecting themselves and protecting the community they choose not to get vaccinated,” he added. About nine out of 10 Covid patients needing the most care in hospital were unvaccinated, Javid said, referring to people requiring extra corporeal membrane oxygenation for severe respiratory failure between July and November. Javid’s comments came after Prof Stephen Powis, the medical director of NHS England, said the health service was on a “war footing”, with plans being developed to treat 15% of Covid patients at home, with remote monitoring of their oxygen levels. The strategy would allow patients “the same care they would [receive] in hospital but from the comfort of their own home”, Powis told the Sunday Times. “This is better for patients, it is better for their families and it is better for the NHS, as it limited the spread of the virus, which we know at the minute is rising exponentially.” Powis added that plans for “care hotels”, in which the NHS would pay for patients to be looked after by live-in carers, were being drawn up, with three hotels in southern England already operating. An army of 20,000 NHS reservists – former doctors, nurses and non-clinical staff – may be called on to solidify services. Javid urged the unvaccinated to come forward and get jabbed. “They are really having a damaging impact and I just can’t stress enough, please do come forward and get vaccinated,” he said. Javid on Sunday did not rule out the possibility of further Covid restrictions. He said ministers were discussing Covid data “almost on an hourly basis” with advisers. Scotland is ahead of other UK nations in vaccinating its population, with 9% of eligible people still unvaccinated, compared with 10% in Wales, 11% in England and 14% in Northern Ireland. Out of 57.5 million over-12s in the UK eligible for the vaccine, 51.1 million had received one jab (89%) while 6.4 million (11%) had not, according to data from the UK’s health agencies for vaccinations delivered up to 5 December. The UK broke its record daily Covid case tally three days in a row this week, with cases jumping above 90,000 on Friday. On Sunday, the total number of Omicron cases detected surged to more than 37,000. As of 16 December, there were 7,611 people in UK hospitals with Covid and 875 occupying ventilation beds, according to government data. • This article was edited on 21 December 2021 to provide further detail about the figures given by Javid for the proportion of unvaccinated people requiring “the most care” in hospital.My good friend Duncan Chapman, who has died of cancer aged 55, was head of Tessa Jowell’s parliamentary office who went on to play a key role in the rescue of Dulwich Hamlet FC. He was an unsung hero who gave a lifetime of service to the Dulwich community. Duncan and I met in the mid-1990s when we both worked for Tessa, then the MP for Dulwich and West Norwood. Duncan stayed with Tessa for the entire 23 years of her parliamentary career, becoming the linchpin of her team, with his finger on the pulse of even the smallest development in the community. In 2017, as a longstanding fan of Dulwich Hamlet FC and an admirer of its inclusive and progressive role in the local community, Duncan joined the Dulwich Hamlet Supporters’ Trust, eventually becoming joint chair of the trust and then a director of the club. This was a tumultuous time as relations with the owners of its ground in East Dulwich deteriorated, leading to it being locked out – a situation many non-league clubs have found themselves in and seldom survived. The issue reached the House of Commons with a passionate speech by Tessa’s successor as MP, Helen Hayes. The trust that all parties had in Duncan however, allowed him to broker talks between the stadium owners, the local council, and the club. The players returned to East Dulwich after a year, with the promise of a new stadium, having managed to win promotion during their exile. The club paid Duncan their highest honour with an outstanding contribution award. Born in Amersham, Buckinghamshire, to Barbara (nee Williams) and David Chapman, a lecturer in business studies, Duncan was the youngest of five siblings. He attended Chesham high school (now Chesham grammar school) and studied microbiology and genetics at University College London. After graduating he worked for a few years as a patent analyst at Victor Green and Company in London. In 1992 he diverted into politics, where he felt he could help make the world a better place. He began in Tessa’s office and became her office manager until 2015. Duncan was a genuine people person, warm, generous, with a mischievous sense of humour, who found that a gentle squeeze of the arm was far more persuasive than a raised voice. No task was too small and he was unconcerned about receiving credit, being most comfortable away from the limelight. He lived his life through his family and a vast range of interests, loving sport – especially football and cricket – plus music, cooking, new technology and travel (especially by train). Duncan married Trisha Leahy in 1997. She survives him, as do their daughter, Elinor, his sister, Rosemary, and brothers, Martin, Andy and Chris.In a jewellery shop close to Istanbul’s Taksim Square, Seda unzips an elegant black leather pouch and piles her gold jewellery on the counter to discuss selling it all. The shop owner gently places gold chains, rings and a pendant on a small scale, before immediately calling a trader to discuss the latest rates. “I used to look at the price of gold once a week. Now I look roughly 50 times a day,” says the owner, who asks that his name is withheld. He advises Seda to wait – perhaps the price will stabilise. Turkish citizens like Seda, who declines to give her surname, are frantically trying to find ways to cope as the lira continues a downward slide. The currency lost half its value against the dollar this year, falling almost 30% in November alone. Those without foreign currency or gold to sell are finding other ways to cut down, avoiding buying meat or turning to government-subsidised bread stands for sustenance. While the value of their money plummets, inflation has soared to 21%. Yet the president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, has responded with a series of cuts to the base interest rate – in defiance of economic convention. After slashing it from 19% at the start of September to 15%, it was trimmed again to 15% on Thursday, driving the lira to a new lows. Erdoğan has framed this approach as an “economic war of independence” needed to drive up exports, foreign investment and job creation, but many citizens are struggling to adapt and survive to this new reality. Seda says she is looking to sell her gold to buy a house. “My husband said we should get the gold assessed. We’re undecided about what to do because the price of everything is fluctuating,” she says. “We can’t get a loan to pay for it as we can’t trust what will happen with the currency. I don’t know what to do.” “My husband is into crypto,” she adds. “I’m honestly trying to make him stop, it’s causing fights between us. He completely ignores the Turkish lira, he thinks crypto is the future.” Erdoğan spoke at the weekend about how he had lowered Turkey’s inflation to 4% before and promised to again achieve that 2011 level soon, but most economists see his approach as reckless and predict a rate above 30% next year. Many of Turkey’s leading financial figures agree, and the country has had four central bank chiefs in the past two and half years, while former finance minister Lütfi Elvan quit at the beginning of December. “The central bank has been purged of all sensible people, they’ve either been sacked or departed voluntarily,” said Jason Tuvey, senior emerging markets economist at the London-based Capital Economics. “It’s similar to the finance ministry, Elvan was seen as the last sensible person on policy and he was replaced by another Erdoğan loyalist.” Insisting that his “new economic model” will eventually bear fruit, Erdoğan told the public earlier this month: “We know what we are doing. We know how to do it. We know where we are going. We know what we will achieve”. He repeatedly encouraged Turks to take their money out from under their mattresses and put it into banks. Despite economic reforms intended to lower labour costs and spur exports, Turkey also raised the minimum wage. As the lira plummeted, gold traders have begun to sell in ever-smaller increments. One vendor on Istanbul’s busy Istiklal shopping street holds up their current most popular items, tiny ingots weighing two grams, one gram and a miniature half-gram bar, the latter on sale at that moment for 480 lira (£22). Another gold and currency trader, Hakki Liça, says his shop has removed the gold from the front of the kiosk because he was irritated by so many people coming to ask the latest prices, but not buying. If customers have lots of cash to offload through gold sales, he says, he calls traders in Istanbul’s Grand Bazaar and arranges a private sale. Most of his customers prefer dollars, so much so that some are changing Turkish marriage traditions and pinning foreign currency to brides rather than the traditional gold coins. “It’s more affordable I guess. Fifty dollars is better than gold,” he says. “About 70% of the customers are Turks, buying in panic. Maybe they have debts they want to get rid of,” he adds, leaning in to whisper: “Turks are buying a lot.” The lira declined 8% on Friday, while the central bank declared they had intervened to prop up the currency for the fifth time in a month. Turkey’s stock market, the Borsa, was twice forced to halt trading to prevent further losses. “Foreign exchange interventions might continue but they are neither a good strategy nor sustainable,” says Selva Demiralp, a professor of economics at Koç University and a former economist at the US Federal Reserve. “In Turkey, the root cause of the financial turmoil is the loose monetary policy itself. So unless the central bank switches to a tighter stance, demand for dollars will continue.” The government’s decisions are increasingly felt in the pockets of the average person. “Everything is expensive right now, we barely make ends meet. My family has moved in with my father-in-law to avoid paying rent,” says Gunay Akil, standing outside a supermarket known for its low prices. “There’s jobs but no money,” she adds, explaining that her husband’s firm that manufactures kitchen interiors is paying their employees in half-month increments, leaving most of them in arrears. She points to her shopping that day, a kilo of onions and a large cabbage. “This is what’s for dinner tonight – bread, yoghurt, and cabbage soup.” Akil was pessimistic about the coming year: “I have no hope that this inflation will stop.” The government’s promises of an economic boom are proving increasingly unpopular with the Turkish electorate, and appear likely to affect an election anticipated in 2023, if not before. Demiralp, who partnered with political scientists to research voting intentions, phrases it carefully. “Our preliminary research using November data shows that among those people who had voted for AKP [Erdoğan’s party] during 2018, there is a significant relationship between economic dissatisfaction and a reduced likelihood of voting for the current government.” At the gold seller’s, Seda is unwilling to say how she intends to vote, but offered a cautious prediction – “I believe some things are going to change.” Additional reporting Gökçe Saraçoğlu.Time will tell how successful the coaxing of Ange Postecoglou from a club in Japan will ultimately prove to be for Celtic. What is already without question is that an identical summer move, completed by Kyogo Furuhashi, was of huge significance. With just three sublime touches, the former Vissel Kobe forward secured the League Cup against Hibernian. No wonder Postecoglou and Kyogo clung to each other as the full-time whistle blew. Scottish football’s marquee player had delivered precisely when Celtic needed him. For Postecoglou, it meant a first trophy in as many domestic attempts. Celtic deserved to win, just about, but it felt appropriate that the star man was Kyogo. His arrival in Scotland has proven a masterstroke by a club which has had its recruitment struggles in recent times. “He is a brilliant player but a great person too,” Postecoglou said of Kyogo. “He was so determined to get out there today and help the boys. He is not 100%. I don’t know how he did it, to be honest.” Kyogo had been a recent absentee because of a hamstring problem. He shuffled from the pitch to a standing ovation after 83 minutes here, his race run. The winning goal was worthy of an even greater stage. Tom Rogic displayed both presence of mind and skill to float a free-kick straight into Kyogo’s path. With the Hibs defence scrambling, Kyogo looked up before lobbing the advancing Matt Macey from 20 yards. Such is Kyogo’s level of confidence and ability that there seemed little doubt about what would happen next after Rogic capitalised on the set play. Hibs contributed in no small measure to a keenly contested final. The Edinburgh club, under the caretaker management of David Gray as they look to complete a deal for Shaun Maloney, took the lead through a Paul Hanlon header. The centre-half met a Martin Boyle corner, with Josip Juranovic unable to prevent the ball from crossing the line. The problem for Hibs was that they could not hold on to their advantage for long enough to make Celtic sweat. Within a minute, Callum McGregor chipped a pass from the left flank towards Kyogo. The 26-year-old controlled the ball wonderfully with his first touch. His second saw Macey comprehensively beaten. Hibs later had chances to force extra time. Joe Hart saved smartly from Kevin Nisbet and Joe Newell. Nisbet struck a post. There was also a wholly legitimate penalty claim after Carl Starfelt bundled Ryan Porteous over. From the resultant melee, Hanlon blasted over the bar. “It was a blatant push,” said Gray. “How he [referee John Beaton] misses the foul on Ryan is beyond me. He has to give a penalty.” Hibs also had a grievance, articulated by their full-back Paul McGinn, that the free-kick for Celtic’s second goal was taken as it appeared the game was to be halted for a substitution. The smell of cordite never seems far away on these occasions. Not that Celtic cared; their celebrations were as wild as ever. “It’s what this club is about,” Postecoglou said. “You win it then you go on to the next one. My first task when I took the role was to give the fans hope. I couldn’t guarantee success, but I could give them hope. I’ve done the things I believed would set this club back on the track it should be on.” Steven Gerrard, showered with praise during his Rangers tenure, failed to claim a single knockout trophy. Postecoglou has one from one while galvanising this club. Much as he will hope it provides a springboard towards better things, there is an understanding that keeping hold of Kyogo is fundamental to Celtic’s ambitions.It is hard not to think that Pep Guardiola would have been doubly pleased on receiving news of his negative PCR test in the run-up to Manchester City’s visit to Newcastle. Nobody of a sky-blue persuasion would want to miss a visit to this particular corner of the north-east. This is said not just from the prospect of filling one’s boots in the days before Christmas against – still – one of the division’s most fragile teams, but because Newcastle and their city-centre home are touchstones in City’s decade of Premier League glory. St James’s Park will always have a special place in City hearts, from the penultimate game of the season in May 2012 in which an irresistible Yaya Touré was let off the leash to score two late goals and set up the most thrilling final day of them all – leading to a first title of English champions in 44 years and the first of five Premier League wins in 10 years. From this time of year, a rather less glorious version of this fixture arrived two days after Christmas four years ago, in which a tentative Toon were universally panned for their timidity in clawing a mere 22% possession from City. It led to the caricature of Rafa Benítez’s Newcastle that no amount of incremental improvement could ever really erase. Context was removed by occasional Newcastle watchers. This team, daring to spoil the neutrals’ holiday viewing experience, were deemed more globally gutless, simply for not taking the game to England’s finest. Easier said than done against City and especially then, arriving on Gallowgate on a run of 17 successive Premier League wins. The task was as tough this time. With Jamie Carragher trailing the prospect of a home win as something that would be “possibly one of the biggest shocks in Premier League history,” it never felt as if even a repeat of that level of inconvenience for City was plausible, and much less so after Rúben Dias had taken receipt of a gift-wrapped opener for the visitors before the fifth minute was up. Eddie Howe has done much to lift the mood in these parts but there is little suggestion that he is the potential architect of Benítez-esque rearguard actions. Yet City’s own mission, of just sitting tight and waiting for the mistakes to fall as would surely suit ahead of a busy schedule, is almost as alien to them as defensive sensibility is to today’s Newcastle. When Liverpool took the 2020 title from City, it seemed as if the gulf between the pair was greatly accentuated by the latter’s inability to win without playing well. Nowadays they can, but rarely lower themselves to doing so. This Sunday’s City, then, were a dozing alligator under the sun, their majesty mainly dormant, but when they flew into action it was dizzying in its speed, and impossible to legislate for. Newcastle played at being brave and there were growing flickers of resistance as the first half went on. Still, moments betrayed what was on their minds – that they knew what City could do, and so did City. The first significant touch that the largely quiet (and still recuperating) Kevin De Bruyne had was in the 21st minute and Isaac Hayden’s instant and brutal upending of him, a sort of defensive-midfield whack-a-mole that earned the latter a yellow card, underlined the sheer panic the Belgian playmaker – as with many of his teammates - is prone to spread. What other way is there of looking at it? When City turned it up, there was very little the home side could reasonably be expected to put up in their path. Even if João Cancelo can be expected to underlap, how could the hosts be expected to cope with him dashing into the number 10 spot to smash magnificently into the top corner? It was the sort of sequence that suggested he was in a rush to put the issue to bed and get on with something else. Gabriel Jesus’s dash down the left and effort just past the post in the final seconds of the first half was a reminder of just how easily City could go through the gears if they wanted to – and a precursor of what the Brazilian did do to create Raheem Sterling’s late icing-on-the-cake moment. Their only enemy was complacency. There were a few hints of it, most seriously in Ederson inexplicably clattering Ryan Fraser to the ground while nowhere near the ball – the only thing more difficult to understand in that latter action was why VAR didn’t advise Martin Atkinson to look back at it before pointing to the penalty spot. There is no serious argument that an awarded and converted penalty would have stopped City from taking the points, but it might have given them a different situation to manage, and potentially exposed Dias and Aymeric Laporte to a tougher workout. Much has changed in the years since Touré took matters in hand here. It is a wonderful memory for City, but they are such a gifted and poised collective that they rarely look in need of individual superhero acts now.Beryl Howard, my Grandma, who has died aged 85, was a palliative care nurse who rose through the ranks to become manager of the pioneering Michael Sobell hospice, based at Mount Vernon hospital, in Northwood, Middlesex. Beryl was the first nurse to be on the management board of the hospital; as a manager she was also in charge of doctors: both rare achievements in the late 1970s, not just for a nurse but also for a woman. Michael Sobell House, as it was then called, opening in 1977, was at the forefront of the hospice movement. Funded by Sir Michael Sobell, the president of the National Society for Cancer Relief (NSCR, now Macmillan Cancer Support), it led the way in changing the role of hospices from being a place where people went to die, to providing palliative care and improving patients’ quality of life. Beryl was instrumental in this work, and travelled the country advising on palliative care, and recruiting Macmillan nurses. Families were taught symptom control, so that patients could be cared for in their homes. In 1985 she received the NSCR president’s medal, and in 1992 she was made MBE. Born in Rochdale, Beryl was the daughter of Ida (nee Ingle), a psychiatric nurse, and Ernest Barker, an engineer. She went to Rochdale grammar school for girls, then, in 1954, to Middlesex hospital, in north-west London, for her nursing training, settling in that area, and then in Herefordshire. She once said, “I lost my accent on the train from Manchester to London.” There were few nursing roles that she did not carry out, from district nursing to acute hospital care. When Michael Sobell House opened, Beryl was a senior nurse, promoted to manager by 1980. She likened the role of managing her multidisciplinary team to that of conducting an orchestra: ensuring each role was playing out in perfect harmony with the patient and their family at the centre, combining skills, balancing professional and human judgment to deliver the best possible care for the person in need. A CND supporter and lifelong socialist, Beryl took part in the first CND march to Aldermaston in 1958, and continued engaging with politics throughout her life. Never shying away from debate, she was relentless in her readiness to challenge or be challenged by those around her. Reliably found at her kitchen table every day, either in the morning doing the Guardian crossword, or in the evening arguing with the TV, accompanied by a glass of red and a Benson &amp; Hedges (later to be replaced with an e-cigarette), she prided herself on her intellect, wit, and sharp mind, and delighted in shocking her family with her outrageous sense of humour. A marriage in 1960 to Stephen Howard ended in divorce. Beryl is survived by their four children, Claire, Anna, Sara and Jonty, nine grandchildren and seven great-grandchildren.An average of 11 million people tuned in to watch soap star Rose Ayling-Ellis make history as the first deaf winner of Strictly Come Dancing. The EastEnders actor took the glitterball trophy in the BBC One show alongside her partner, Giovanni Pernice, defeating the Great British Bake Off winner John Whaite and his partner, Johannes Radebe, the first all-male pairing on the show. The figures gave BBC One a 57.8% share in the overnight ratings, with the show peaking at 12.3 million viewers, a significant increase on the launch show in September, which was watched by an average of 7 million viewers. Ayling-Ellis and Pernice claimed victory after performing a quickstep, their couple’s choice routine and a showdance. After their Romeo and Juliet-inspired showdance to The Rose by Bette Midler, Ayling-Ellis said: “I’ve become more me than I’ve ever been because of Strictly.” Both finalist pairs had matching scores during the final, receiving a perfect 40 for their revisited favourite dances and their showdances. However, the judges’ marks did not count towards the final result, which was solely down to the public vote. The actor, who was the first deaf contestant on the programme, had used an interpreter during the series. Her couple’s choice dance, repeated in the final, shared her experiences of deafness and featured a long period of silence. The disability equality charity Scope described Ayling-Ellis’s participation in the show as a “massive step forward” for disability representation, but called on more broadcasters to feature disabled people’s talents, saying there was still a long way to go to improve representation of disabled people on TV. James Taylor, the charity’s executive director of strategy, said: “For Rose Ayling-Ellis to have starred week after week on Saturday night primetime – and then lift the glitterball trophy – is a massive step forward. “However, there is still a very long way to go until disabled people are featured fairly on screen. There are 14.1 million disabled people in the UK and their lives and stories are not being told. “Seeing disabled people on TV will only help improve understanding and break down barriers. “So, the fact that Rose’s journey has been beamed into living rooms week in, week out is excellent progress and must be the start of real change.” Mark Atkinson, the chief executive at the Royal National Institute for Deaf People, said Ayling-Ellis’s appearance on the show had given audiences “a beautiful insight into the deaf community and deaf culture”. Strictly Come Dancing will return on Christmas Day for a festive special on BBC One.A Metropolitan police officer is due to appear in court on Monday charged with sexual communication with a child. PC Will Scott-Barrett, who is based in the Met’s intelligence command, was charged in November after an investigation by the force’s online child sexual abuse and exploitation command. The charge is related to an allegation made in February and is concerned with conduct while the officer was off-duty. The Met said Scott-Barrett was suspended from duty after the initial allegation was made. He will appear at Westminster magistrates court.I’m scared of getting lost in the bush. This is unusual for an essayist. Most of us like to go for a walk in disorienting landscapes and get completely lost so that we can write about it. Rebecca Solnit wrote that getting lost is “a voluptuous surrender” but this sounds to me like walking in increasingly frantic circles, getting cold and hungry as night closes in, until you have no option but to dig yourself a little hole and cover yourself in leaves. I like to know that I can get home easily, so when I need to be surrounded by trees and birds and mountain bikers I go to Waimapihi Reserve, close to where I live, and run on the trails that wind all through the forested gully. The reserve has been renamed to acknowledge the history of the place and the significance of the stream and its tributaries flowing through: wai meaning water, Mapihi referring to a local rangatira who used to bathe in the stream. Its old name was Polhill, after some guy who arrived in Wellington on a boat then chopped down loads of trees to sell as firewood. Like songs, you can thrash the same trail for days, weeks, its familiar turns still offering up a private, almost embarrassing joy. The other day I ran up behind a quail that was crouched on the ground, listening for something. It swivelled around, saw me and sprinted off, its plume wobbling over its head like a ringing telephone. Today I saw a raincoated volunteer digging handfuls of leaves from the stream. The stream was full-throated and shining in the moments before it was taken underground into the pipes that run underneath the city and out to sea. On Transient, the main trunkline that winds busily upwards from Aro Valley, the trees curve inwards like tunnels and trick me – every time – into thinking that my shambling plod is in fact insanely fast. At one point, before it ferries you back out into the light, the trail passes a steep shady bank where everything quietens. The trees get darker, spindlier, more watchful. It’s here that I think of the pine hedge that ran around my grandparents’ house in Oamaru. As kids my brothers and I would walk through the hedge, and there was an unnerving stillness to those pines, as if they knew you were somewhere you shouldn’t be. But these trees, mahoe, are different. A little eerie, but ultimately harmless. They peer out at you like old folks on a train. From Transient you flow directly on to Highbury Fling; if you let your legs go you’ll be delivered up to the fenceline at high speed. The fence, which protects the wildlife sanctuary Zealandia, is popular with walkers and mountain bikers, but it’s a bad business, all mean uphills and downhills that turn treacherous in the rain, and I only run it when I’m in a self-punishing mood. Once I saw two takahē progressing along the inside, making noises suggesting that they, too, were unhappy about the steepness of the trail. Another time I saw the broadcaster Kim Hill picking her way along the outside of the fence. I couldn’t tell what mood she was in. This winter I started running at night with a headtorch. The first time I ran Clinical – a short, steepish trail with an overturned wheelbarrow around halfway, like someone raking leaves has thrown a tantrum – it was dark and rainy and I was full of dread. What was I doing, blundering through the bush in the dark? But I pressed on and, moment by moment, the place opened itself up. The rain was soft and feathery. Kākā were screeching as if they’d heard good news. Everywhere I turned, my headtorch revealed treasure – patterns in the bark and leaves and grasses that I had never seen in the day. Even the stream seemed to carry itself differently, bolder with its night-time audience. Suddenly it was a new place again, a wild place that I could almost get lost in. Ashleigh Young is a Wellington writer and editor What’s your favourite wild place? If you would like to contribute to the series tell us about it in 200 words and send it to newzealand@theguardian.comThe West Virginia senator Joe Manchin dealt a huge blow to Joe Biden on Sunday, saying “no” to the $1.75tn Build Back Better domestic spending plan. The White House issued a stinging rebuke in return, stoking a bitter war of words in a party sharply divided between moderates and progressives. The White House accused Manchin of going back on his word. “Senator Manchin’s comments this morning on Fox are at odds with his discussions this week with the president, with White House staff and with his own public utterances,” Jen Psaki, the press secretary, said in a statement. Adding to angry accusations of betrayal from leading progressives including Senator Bernie Sanders, Psaki said: “Weeks ago, Senator Manchin committed to the president, at his home in Wilmington, to support the Build Back Better framework that the president then announced. Senator Manchin pledged repeatedly to negotiate on finalising that framework ‘in good faith’. Citing work by Manchin on the proposed bill this week, Psaki said: “Senator Manchin promised to continue conversations in the days ahead, and to work with us to reach that common ground. “If his comments on Fox and written statement indicate an end to that effort, they represent a sudden and inexplicable reversal in his position, and a breach of his commitments to the president and [his] colleagues in the House and Senate.” Biden and Democrats said this week they would delay the bill until next year but the president vowed it would pass and said he would continue talking to Manchin. But on Sunday Manchin used an interview with Fox News Sunday to announce his withdrawal from such talks – a hugely provocative move in a party in which he and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, another centrist, have held up Biden’s agenda to huge progressive frustration. With the Senate split 50-50 and Republicans unanimously against, Manchin’s opposition means Build Back Better is all but dead in the water. Citing the cost of the plan and economic worries including inflation, the national debt and the Omicron coronavirus variant, Manchin said: “I’ve always said this ... if I can’t go home and explain it to the people of West Virginia, I can’t vote for it.” “I cannot vote to continue with this piece of legislation. I just can’t. I’ve tried everything humanly possible. I can’t get there.” The host, Bret Baier, seemed surprised. “You’re done?” he asked. “This is a no?” Manchin said: “This is a no on this piece of legislation. I have tried everything I know to do.” Manchin also issued a lengthy statement in which he cast the US debt as a spectre haunting all other concerns, domestic and foreign. “For five and a half months,” he said, “I have worked as diligently as possible, meeting with President Biden, [Senate] majority leader [Chuck] Schumer, [House] Speaker [Nancy] Pelosi and my colleagues on every end of the political spectrum to determine the best path forward despite my serious reservations. “I have made my concerns clear through public statements, op-eds and private conversations. My concerns have only increased as the pandemic surges, inflation rises and geopolitical uncertainty increases. “… Despite my best efforts, I cannot explain the sweeping Build Back Better act in West Virginia and I cannot vote to move forward on this mammoth piece of legislation.” Manchin cited a report by the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office which said that if the bill’s spending increases and tax cuts became permanent, $3tn would be added to its cost. Democrats criticised the report, which Republicans requested. Psaki rejected each claim in Manchin’s statement, and said: “Just as Senator Manchin reversed his position on Build Back Better this morning, we will continue to press him to see if he will reverse his position yet again, to honor his prior commitments and be true to his word.” On CNN’s State of the Union, Sanders listed Build Back Better provisions including investment to combat the climate crisis and improve health and social care. “I’ve been to West Virginia,” he said. “And it’s a great state, beautiful, but it is a state that is struggling. “[Manchin] is going to have to tell the people of West Virginia why he’s rejecting what the scientists, the world is telling us, that we have to act boldly and transform our energy system to protect future generations from the devastation of climate change. “… I hope that we will bring a strong bill to the floor of the Senate and that Joe Manchin should explain to the people of West Virginia why he doesn’t have the guts to stand up to the powerful special interests. “… If he doesn’t have the courage to do the right thing for the working families of West Virginia in America, let him stand up and tell the whole world.” Analysts would counter that Manchin is the only Democrat in major office in a state which voted solidly for Donald Trump, cuts his cloth accordingly and could easily switch allegiance, putting the Senate back in Republican hands. In his statement, Manchin echoed Republican claims that Build Back Better is “socialist” in intent, saying: “My Democratic colleagues in Washington are determined to dramatically reshape our society.” Sanders, a self-identified democratic socialist, promised to make Manchin’s stance an election issue, saying: “I think … that right up to the 2022 election [we ask]: ‘Which party is prepared to do the right thing for the elderly, for the children?’ “By the way, we talk about kids, I want everybody out there to know if Manchin votes no, those $300 tax credits that have gone a long way to reducing childhood poverty in America? They’re gone. That’s all. We cut childhood poverty by 40%, an extraordinary accomplishment. Manchin doesn’t want to do that. “Tell that to the struggling families of West Virginia.” In the 50-50 Senate, Manchin has gained huge power. He voted for coronavirus relief and a bipartisan infrastructure bill, big-ticket spending items. But he has opposed reform to the filibuster, the rule that requires a supermajority for most legislation, even in answer to Republican moves to restrict voting among Democrats. The infrastructure bill was “decoupled” from Build Back Better to ensure passage through the Senate. Ayanna Pressley of Massachusetts, one of six House progressives who voted no on infrastructure despite assurances from Biden that he would get all senators on board for Build Back Better, refused to blame the president for Sunday’s disaster. “My lack and deficit of trust was about Senator Manchin,” she told CNN. “He’s continued to move the goalposts. He has never negotiated in good faith, and he is obstructing the president’s agenda, 85% of which is still left on the table. And in obstructing the president’s agenda, he is obstructing the people’s agenda.” Pressley was asked if Build Back Better might be split into smaller bills, to attract moderate Republicans. She said: “I remain focused on keeping the pressure on Senator Manchin, the White House using the full weight of this presidency to lean on this senator to show solidarity with this Democratic party and with the American people and to stop obstructing the president’s agenda, which is the people’s agenda. “This is a mammoth bill to address. Let’s get it done.”As a Yorkshireman living in Australia, can I implore you to help recall the English cricket team? The Tufnellesque fielding, the elderly bowling attack and having about two competent batsmen is humiliating (Lightning strikes give England Ashes respite as Australia take control again, 17 December). After emerging from the longest lockdown in the world, I have no choice but to go back into hiding. Prof Rob Willis Melbourne, Victoria • I have just looked at the Christmas Day evening TV schedule on BBC One. Michael McIntyre’s Christmas Wheel, the Blankety Blank Christmas special and Mrs Brown’s Boys Christmas special. I thought the government wanted us to stay indoors? David Gerrard Hove, East Sussex • My, how the other half live! In her recipe for leftover roast veg and harissa spiral pie, Meera Sodha asks us to “Clear and clean a 2m-long space on a kitchen counter.” The only 2m space I could find was on my living room floor. Gillian Peall Macclesfield, Cheshire • In my grammar school in 1960s Liverpool, my teacher translated the Sound of Music into Latin (Letters, 17 December). Singing Edelweiss in Latin has been one of the most useful things I did at school. It’s still my party piece. Brenda Grant London • My dad’s line was: “Would you like a sherry before you go?” It never failed (Letters, 16 December). Pauline Farrar Oxford • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The universal delight that has greeted Rose Ayling-Ellis’s achievement on Strictly Come Dancing is one of the few glimmers of light in a dark year, as is the accompanying interest in signing for the 100,000 or so people that use it as their first language (‘Why can’t I give it a go?’: How Rose Ayling-Ellis’ Strictly success is inspiring deaf youngsters, 18 December). While we’re thinking about how important such inclusion is, especially for the young, it’s worth remembering the rest of the UK’s deaf, deafened and hard-of-hearing population is a hundred times bigger (about 11 million), doesn’t sign and relies heavily on live captions and subtitling, along with clear sound in theatres, cinema, streaming, radio and TV. And because about half of that is age-related loss, if it doesn’t already, it may well include you, soon. Those services are not to be taken for granted, so a seasonal best to everyone who’s in the business of, literally, making every word count. Richard Lee Leigh-on-Sea, Essex • Your editorial on diversity in British TV (The Guardian view on British TV drama: a new golden age?, 15 December) reminded me of this year’s semi-finalists on Strictly. Two contenders were a man and a woman of colour from ordinary backgrounds. The third was a gay man taking part with a male partner and the fourth was a woman with profound hearing problems. All four reached the semi-final because they were the best dancers left in the competition. Collectively they served up probably the highest standard of any semi-final since the show started. They were judged on merit. David Nove Duffield, Derbyshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I feel sorry for Boris Johnson (North Shropshire: PM in ‘last chance saloon’, 18 December). Coming from a long-standing member of the Labour party, this may sound odd. I should add that I also come from a family that sent boys to Eton – girls were, and still are, spared such a fate – so I have intimate knowledge of the damage that such a “good education” can do. Puzzled readers have only to refer to Richard Beard’s Sad Little Men, as recommended by John Harris (Boris Johnson’s crises boil down to one thing: contempt for the rest of us, 12 December). That book makes clear how tearing boys away from their families from the age of seven, isolating them from the real world for months on end and subjecting them to a regime of bullying conformity – with the promise that one day they will lead the country – creates men who find emotional connection and empathy a real challenge, to put it mildly. Whatever one thinks about the current predicament of Johnson, this is not the sort of education to which the young people of our country should aspire. Henrietta Heald London • The offices of bailiff of the manor of Northstead and steward of the Chiltern Hundreds are effectively resignation vehicles for MPs. I would like to suggest a third office: governor of Peppa Pig World – for which there is now an obvious candidate. Frank Learner Barry, Vale of Glamorgan • In appointing Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, to investigate parties at No 10, Boris Johnson should have heeded Inspector Truscott’s maxim in Joe Orton’s Loot: “Never search your own back yard – you may find what you’re looking for” (No 10 party inquiry head steps down over claims he also broke rules, 17 December). John Bailey St Albans, Hertfordshire • Simon Case, henceforth to be known as the drinks cabinet secretary. Colin Jones West Norwood, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I agree with Martha Spurrier that this government is constructing for itself a legislative armoury that is intended to be a “rewriting of the rules so only the government can win” (Who will stop human rights abuses if the government puts itself above the law?, 14 December). There is, though, a flaw in the European convention on human rights. The right to liberty and security (article 5), the right to a fair trial (article 6), the right to respect for private and family life (article 8), freedom of thought, conscience and religion (article 9), freedom of expression (article 10), and freedom of assembly and association (article 11) are all conditional rights. Variously, these are all – to a greater or lesser extent – subject to exceptions that are “necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic wellbeing of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.” The universalism invoked in the name of human rights is empty as manifested in the ECHR and the Human Rights Act 1998, insofar as those rights associated with free association, freedom of conscience etc are not absolute rights, but gifts of the state. The lesson to be drawn is that we only get what we fight for, and the struggle to defend and extend our rights has to be conducted on the streets, as well as in parliament and the courts. The urgency of the situation and the agenda of this government are apparent from the consultation document, Human Rights Act Reform: A Modern Bill of Rights, at paragraph 112: “we propose to leave in place those aspects of the Human Rights Act that have not proved problematic in practice”. Any aspect of human rights law that inconveniences this government is at risk. Nick Moss London • Let’s not pussyfoot around this. Sacha Deshmukh, chief executive of Amnesty International, is wrong to say that government ministers “risk aligning themselves” with authoritarian regimes if their overhaul of the Human Rights Act is successful (Raab’s human rights proposals condemned as ‘blatant power grab’, 14 December). If the government succeeds in its ambitions, it will become a de facto authoritarian regime. Boris Johnson, an ardent admirer and student of that narcissistic, power-hungry, anti-democratic former president on the other side of the Atlantic, has form in this matter. He wants revenge on those wishy washy, democratic, law-supporting judges who dared to criticise and stand against him when he illegally tried to prorogue parliament. While he’s at it, he may as well sort out all the little people who have the effrontery to protest on the streets. Let’s be quite clear about this, we aren’t discussing fine-tuning of the Human Rights Act, we are facing an existential attack on our democracy. Dominic Raab is right to say that the proposed changes would “sharpen” the separation of powers, but not in the way he suggests. The sharpening would sever the ability of the people and the courts to hold the government to account. John Robinson Lichfield, Staffordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.She has been described as “probably the most remarkable and the most distinguished of English prose writers who never wrote a line for the general public”; many have also argued that she directly influenced the course of English poetry. Dorothy Wordsworth, born 250 years ago on Christmas Day, was not an obvious candidate for such accolades, being the third of five children, orphaned then farmed out to relatives – “squandered abroad”, as she later said, quoting The Merchant of Venice. When she met her brothers again, she found in William a soulmate; they would live together for the rest of their lives. Her journals of their days, of the household (which she ran), and especially of landscape and seasons, were mined by her brother and sometimes by his friends for images, ideas, phrases. Strikingly, it was Dorothy who noted a wide belt of daffodils along a lake that “tossed and reeled and danced”, but this is only one small, albeit famous, instance of their collaboration; “Dorothy stored the mood in prose, and later William came and bathed in it and made it into poetry,” as Virginia Woolf would later put it. The poet-scholar Lucy Newlyn has argued that they were equal partners in writing, and William was always openly grateful: “She, in the midst of it all, preserved me still / A Poet, made me seek beneath that name, / My office upon earth” (The Prelude, 1805). “She has left her benign influence upon all later Romantic poets,” wrote Arthur Quiller-Couch. “She gave them eyes, she gave them ears.” But she was far more than a skilled collaborator. Woolf wrote of how the quality of Dorothy’s noticing, and her utter commitment to accuracy in recording that noticing, gave rise to a particular beauty of prose, and even “the gift of the poet”; other critics have seen how in the journals certain lines lift free into poetry. She wrote discrete poems, too, and, having a complex relationship with publicity, published a few anonymously. Generations of readers of her Grasmere journals acknowledge Dorothy as a first-rank nature writer; in her assumption of humans as “Companions of Nature” (rather than overlords) she is arguably also an early environmentalist, deeply aware and celebratory of the balance of nature. She is a major figure in the growing history of women walking – in defiance of social expectation, she walked for miles in the Lake District, Scotland and, later, mainland Europe, of which travels she also kept journals. Finally, a new book by poet-critic Polly Atkin argues for Dorothy’s place in the writing of illness, mentions of which began to appear early but are especially evident in less well-known late journals, kept when she was increasingly bedbound and troubled but refused to give up on things that brought her intellectual stimulation and joy. Eventually, the outdoors was brought in, in the form of growing plants and flowers, and even a pet robin, which “cheared [sic] my bed-room with its slender subdued piping”. A narrowing world, she reminds us, need not lead to a narrowing of the self.An already illiberal police and crime bill threatens to become even more so, if 18 pages of amendments added to it by the government in the House of Lords last month are accepted. A new criminal offence of obstructing major transport works, the expansion of stop and search powers and a new power for police to ban named people from demonstrations are clearly intended to strangle off what ministers are worried could be a new line in disruptive climate protests, after two months of roadblocks organised by the direct-action group Insulate Britain – and a decision by the supreme court earlier this year reaffirming the right of protesters to cause disruption. Emboldened by the angry response to Insulate Britain from some members of the public, and criticism from paramedics about delays to ambulances, the home secretary, Priti Patel, and her colleagues have calculated that they can risk bypassing the scrutiny by MPs that is an essential part of our parliamentary process. In January, the Lords will have the opportunity to prove them wrong by rejecting these tacked-on, kneejerk measures. The police, crime, sentencing and courts bill was bad enough before, as was vividly illustrated by criticism of it from David Blunkett and Theresa May – neither of whom remotely resembles the stereotype of the out-of-touch-with-public-opinion, human-rights-obsessed liberal that some on the right love to hate. The bill, wrote Lord Blunkett earlier this year, would make Britain “more like Putin’s Russia”. More than 600,000 people signed a petition objecting to it. There are several grounds for this. One is new laws against stopping on private and public land without authorisation, with penalties including the confiscation of vehicles. This would have the effect of criminalising the way of life of Gypsy, Roma and Traveller people. Such extreme restrictions placed on nomadic lifestyles are wrong, and risk stoking prejudice against communities and individuals who already face serious disadvantages. The current backdrop of severe social housing shortages and widespread homelessness makes such a clampdown particularly ill-judged and repressive. The Alliance for Youth Justice is concerned about the disproportionate impact that strengthened police powers would have on black and minority ethnic young people. Plans to increase the custodial sentences of older teenagers would undermine their rights as children – part of a disturbing pattern from a government that has recently denied entitlements to 16- and 17-year-olds in the care system. What makes the whole package all the more unpalatable is the double standard with which the governing party approaches the subject of individual freedoms, and the role of government in balancing these with the wider public interest. It is hard not to wonder if the recent outrage on the Tory right over Covid passes, and even mask-wearing, is at some level intended to distract and mislead people. Ms Patel’s zeal for increasing police powers, and her own, is nothing new: it is the dominant theme of her cabinet career. There is a reasonable discussion to be had about the cost of policing occupation-style protests. Longer sentences for some violent crimes will be supported by many voters. But the explicitly anti-protest measures contained in the new amendments, combined with other legislation such as the power to remove citizenship in the nationality and borders bill, and attacks on the Human Rights Act, signal an alarming lurch away from liberal democratic norms and towards an authoritarian form of government. Britain has a long and proud tradition of political protest, which is as important to democracy as a free press and elections. The latest amendments to the police bill mark a concerted attempt to roll back these rights. Labour should oppose them loudly and clearly. So should the House of Lords, when it gets the chance next month.Boris Johnson has been pictured with wine and cheese alongside his wife and up to 17 staff in the Downing Street garden during lockdown, raising questions over No 10’s insistence a “work meeting” was taking place. The photograph was shared with the Guardian following No 10’s denial last week that there was a social event on Friday 15 May 2020 including wine, spirits and pizza inside and outside the building. Johnson’s spokesman said Downing Street staff were working in the garden in the afternoon and evening. However, the picture raises questions over that assertion. Bottles of wine are in evidence, there is a lack of social distancing and 19 people are gathered in groups across the Downing Street terrace and lawn. At the time social mixing between households was limited to two people, who could only meet outdoors and at a distance of at least 2 metres. In workplaces, guidance said in-person meetings should only take place if “absolutely necessary”. Angela Rayner, the deputy leader of the Labour party, described the picture as “a slap in the face of the British public”, adding: “The prime minister consistently shows us he has no regard for the rules he puts in place for the rest of us. Alleged drinking and partying late into the evening [at No 10] when the rest of us were only recently getting one daily walk.” The prime minister has faced a string of allegations of partying and socialising in No 10 while Covid restrictions were in place. He was forced to order a civil service inquiry, though its head stepped down on Friday over allegations of his own Christmas party. The past week has been described as the worst of the prime minister’s premiership, with a major rebellion by Conservative MPs over Covid regulations followed by a historic byelection defeat and the shock departure of the Brexit minister, David Frost. In the new image shared with the Guardian, Boris Johnson and Carrie, who appears to be holding their newborn baby, are seen sitting around a table with a cheeseboard and wine, along with two people believed to be a civil servant and an aide. Last week No 10 said Johnson was working in the garden before retiring to his flat at 7pm. On that day Matt Hancock, then health secretary, had given a 5pm press conference urging people to stick to the rules and not take advantage of the good weather over the May weekend to socialise in groups. At the time schools were still shut and pubs and restaurants were closed, with strict controls on social mixing. More people had been allowed to return to their workplaces, but guidance said social distancing of 2 metres should be followed at all times and “only absolutely necessary participants should attend meetings and should maintain 2-metre separation throughout”. The Guardian reported last week, as part of a joint investigation with the Independent, that Johnson had been present for an alleged social gathering in Downing Street on 15 May 2020. Sources said the prime minister had spent about 15 minutes with staff, telling an aide inside No 10 that they deserved a drink for “beating back” coronavirus. Insiders claimed about 20 staff drank wine and spirits and ate pizza following a press conference on that day, some in offices inside No 10 and others going into the garden. Some staff stayed drinking until late into the evening, they alleged. The sources described the event as having a “celebratory” feel given the initial loosening of some restrictions and the good weather in London that day. In response, No 10 said Johnson and staff had been working in the garden and made no reference to the allegations of drinking alcohol and socialising. The prime minister’s official spokesperson said last week: “In the summer months Downing Street staff regularly use the garden for some meetings. On 15 May 2020 the prime minister held a series of meetings throughout the afternoon, including briefly with the then health and care secretary and his team in the garden following a press conference. “The prime minister went to his residence shortly after 7pm. A small number of staff required to be in work remained in the Downing Street garden for part of the afternoon and evening.” Hancock, who was health secretary before he had to resign after breaking social distancing rules with his aide, Gina Coladangelo, said it was “not true” that he was involved in a social gathering. “After the press conference, which finished at approximately 5.53pm, Matt debriefed his own team, then went to the Downing Street garden to debrief the prime minister. He left Downing Street at 6.32pm and went back to the Department for Health and Social Care,” Hancock’s spokesperson said. There is no suggestion he was drinking or stayed late. In light of the new picture, it is understood No 10 maintains that people drinking at work was not against regulations at the time. A Downing Street spokesperson said on Sunday: “As we said last week, work meetings often take place in the Downing Street garden in the summer months. On this occasion there were staff meetings after a No 10 press conference. “Downing Street is the prime minister’s home as well as his workplace. The prime minister’s wife lives in No 10 and therefore also legitimately uses the garden.” There have been a string of accusations that Downing Street staff broke rules by having Christmas parties, with the prime minister presiding over a Zoom quiz and giving a speech at a leaving do. Johnson ordered an investigation after a video was leaked to ITV showing aides laughing about a Christmas party with wine and cheese, and suggesting passing it off as a business meeting. Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, stepped down from leading that investigation after it emerged his own office had held a Christmas party, and has been replaced by another senior civil servant, Sue Gray. Rayner said: “This picture is utterly heartbreaking to see for the people that spent the first wave of the pandemic on the frontline of our health service, desperately missing their loved ones, enduring loneliness, missing funerals … Every day that passes seems to add another event to Sue Gray’s growing list of investigations into alleged unlawful gatherings in Downing Street.” “Boris Johnson’s government is run with the attitude that it is one rule for them, and another for everyone else. He is totally unfit to lead our country.”At first glance, it has all the hallmarks of a laid-back post-work social gathering on an uncommonly warm British spring evening. There are 19 people present, sitting or standing in four distinct groups, each one of which appears to have drinks. There are bottles of red wine and a cheeseboard. The event, on Friday 15 May 2020, took place in the garden behind Nos 10 and 11 Downing Street, a mix of terrace, lawn and formal planting that is used variously for formal entertainment, domestic leisure and work. Across England, people were still banned from meeting more than one adult from another household socially – and then it had to be outdoors and at a 2-metre distance. On the terrace in the foreground, sitting at a rectangular garden table surrounded by rattan-style chairs, Boris Johnson chats to his then fiancee, Carrie Symonds, who is cradling what appears to be the couple’s newborn son, Wilfred. On the same table, at which a civil servant and an aide are chatting to each other, is a half-empty bottle of wine, a wine glass and a wooden board with bread and cheese. There are two other small groups – another terrace table of four people, also with wine, and a man and a woman sitting on the grass behind them. There is also a congregation of eight men and one woman standing around an apparently bottle-laden table, also on the lawn. Even if you did not know this was the Downing Street garden, it might be evident these are work colleagues, with most wearing formal office clothes. But the sense of the occasion, as portrayed in the photo, seems very much social. These are, it would seem, people who had been working – in this instance, the then health secretary, Matt Hancock, had fronted a televised Covid press conference in Downing Street at 5pm – but were now winding down afterwards. The presence of Carrie next to her partner, the prime minister, reinforces that sense. Attenders’ body language is relaxed and there are no laptops, files or notepads to take minutes on show. Reports about the evening in question, passed to the Guardian before the photo emerged this weekend, said about 20 staff drank wine and spirits and ate pizza, both in offices inside No 10 and in the garden on 15 May 2020, with some people allegedly staying drinking until late into the night. Presented with the photograph, Downing Street said it showed colleagues having work meetings, which, given the hours involved, sometimes included drinks, and were not against the then regulations. The event took place amid the first lockdown, at which point specific rules against workplace socialising had yet to be set out – but only because people were only supposed to be in work if absolutely necessary. Downing Street staff were permitted to do this, as key workers, but the guidelines on in-person meetings were very clear: these should only take place if absolutely necessary, and then with everyone distanced at least 2 metres. That is very much not happening in the photograph. Ultimately, it will come down to the watching public looking at the photograph, reading the No 10 explanation, and being asked to accept that this was purely a work event. For many, this could feel like quite a leap of faith.Amid the mass postponements and the fear and uncertainty over the inexorable spread of the latest Covid variant a football match broke out and it was one to remind us all why this crazy game has us in thrall. There was drama from start to finish, contentious decisions, with the big one coming on 20 minutes when Harry Kane stretched into a bad tackle on Andy Robertson. Jürgen Klopp, the Liverpool manager, felt it was a potential leg-breaker but the Tottenham striker got away with a booking. Liverpool would be the team to finish with 10 men, Robertson being dismissed in the 76th minute for a wild hack at Emerson Royal. There were goals, including a long overdue one for Kane – only his second of the Premier League season – and a catalogue of misses, with Kane surely the biggest culprit. He ought to have departed with the match ball. There were outstanding performers – chief among them Son Heung-min for Spurs; Trent Alexander-Arnold for Liverpool – and there were glaring errors, most notably the one by Alisson that let in Son to equalise for 2-2, Liverpool having got themselves in front thanks to headers from Diogo Jota and Robertson. Previously Alisson had made vital saves, none better than that with his fingertips to deny Dele Alli for 2-0 on the half-hour. Alli’s display was a plus point for Spurs, as were those of Ryan Sessegnon at left wing-back and Harry Winks in front of the defence. And, at the end of it all, there was the sight of Klopp remonstrating with the referee, Paul Tierney, who had also angered him by overlooking a strong Jota penalty claim in the 37th minute for a barge by Emerson. Klopp was a volcanic presence, his anger at Tierney having boiled over shortly after the Jota penalty incident, leading to him being shown a yellow card. The referee would dish out eight of them to players from both sides, together with Robertson’s red. The point felt better for Spurs, even if they were up against 10 men in the closing stages – the evidence mounting that Antonio Conte is building something in north London. The manager remains unbeaten after five league matches, winning 11 points and, after the Covid-scarred fortnight he and the club have experienced – which led to three postponements – this was hugely impressive. Liverpool had watched the leaders, Manchester City, win at Newcastle and they now trail them by three points. They had plenty of regrets, mainly involving Tierney, but the draw was not a bad one, particularly not with Klopp missing his first-choice midfield. Thiago Alcãntara had returned a positive Covid test on Sunday morning to join Fabinho and Curtis Jones in isolation while Jordan Henderson was a late withdrawal with illness. Virgil van Dijk was another Covid positive absentee. The game crackled to life at the outset, with Kane drawing first blood. Tanguy Ndombele spotted his run off Ibrahima Konaté and the pass was curved and weighted to perfection. Once Kane had the far corner in his sights there was no doubt as to the outcome. Kane had earlier been denied by a Konaté block and Spurs had golden chances for 2-0, not least when Kane broke and crossed for Son. There was just too much on the ball from him and Son skewed wide. Alli’s opportunity would follow a lovely Son pass on the counter, with Liverpool’s defenders having followed the run of Kane. Spurs repeatedly threatened to play or run through the Liverpool backline, which was riskily high and not always well protected. Liverpool had started the brighter, with Robertson fluffing a gilt-edged header and Alexander-Arnold extending Hugo Lloris with a left-footed first-timer from outside the box. Klopp complained that Kane had been out of control when he lunged in on Robertson and he certainly got nothing of the ball, which was lifted away from him by the Liverpool left-back. Where was VAR, Klopp wanted to know, after Kane had crashed into Robertson’s shin? Liverpool’s equaliser came when Robertson watched Ben Davies take a heavy touch and then nicked the ball from him and sprinted to the byline to cross. Jota’s headed finish was clinical. The visitors could also point to a Lloris save from Naby Keïta in the 26th minute and an ever better one to keep out an Alexander-Arnold half-volley on half-time. Conte, who had some players not fit enough to start after Covid infections and no Pierre-Emile Højbjerg, watched his team play largely on the break in a 5-3-2 system and Kane twice blew the chance to put Spurs back in front. After Jota had looped a header wide, Eric Dier picked out Alli beyond a static Liverpool backline. His touch inside for Kane was slightly undercooked, which allowed Alisson to get out to close the space. Kane’s attempted dink was blocked by the goalkeeper. Kane could then not react in time to head home after a corner broke for him and Liverpool scored again moments after Alli had wanted a penalty for a shove by Alexander-Arnold. It would have been soft. Lloris scooped away from Mohamed Salah, who looked to have handled, and Robertson glanced home after Alexander-Arnold had thrashed across goal. Back came Spurs, with Alisson inexplicably missing a sliding clearance, which allowed Son to equalise. Strangely Tierney would need VAR to advise him on the Robertson dismissal – initially he had reached for yellow – and Conte would have mixed feelings at the end. “When you create so many chances, you have to kill your opponent,” he said.David Hytner’s match report has landed, so I’ll leave you with that. Thanks for your company and emails, today and throughout the year. Merry Christmas! A note on Robertson’s goal - the law has changed, so Salah’s accidental handball in the build up is irrelevant. The only thing Spurs might have argued was that they should have had a penalty at the other end for a push by Alexander-Arnold on Alli. It wasn’t a foul, though, and it was notable that one of the few Spurs players who didn’t appeal was Alli. The thoughts of Harold Kane “It was a great game to be involved in, and I’m sure it was to watch as well. Plenty of chances at both ends. We had some clear chances that we have to do better with, to be honest. It was a tough battle against a very good side. It was nice to score – it’s been a while – but on another day I might have had a hat-trick. “[Did you think you might be sent off for the tackle on Andy Robertson?] No, not at all. I thought it was a strong tackle, but I thought I won the ball [err…], obviously I haven’t seen it back. When you’re playing against top sides and you’re fighting for points, sometimes there will be strong tackles. When you slow stuff down it makes it look worse. That’s what VAR is there for – it stayed as a yellow card and we got on with the game. “There’s definitely progress [under Conte]. Today was our toughest game so far but I thought we did well – we created a lot of chances and showed a lot of character to equalise so soon after going behind. We’ve waited a couple of weeks with the games being cancelled. It was nice to get out there and feel that buzz again.” Here’s the updated Premier League table. Liverpool are three points behind Manchester City, though I don’t think that will worry them too much. If it gets to five or six points, maybe. For now I think they’ll be frustrated but partially relieved to have - it was such a wild game and they could easily have lost. Okay, it wasn’t the best game ever, but it was a uniquely entertaining one. There were four goals, a million missed opportunities, a red card for Andy Robertson, a yellow card for Harry Kane that should have been a red, at least one penalty that should have been given, an extended meltdown from Jurgen Klopp (to be fair to Klopp, he’s now laughing and joking with Son-Heung min), Dele Alli’s most encouraging performance in years, and so much else besides. It was just wonderful. Best game ever man. 90+5 min Tsimikas is booked for timewasting. 90+4 min Alisson - Alisson! - plays an outrageous crossfield pass to release Tsimikas on the left. His low cross towards Salah is crucially intercepted at the near post by the sliding Salah. 90+3 min Alisson makes a terrific, point-blake save from Son! It wouldn’t have counted because the flag subsequently went up against Kane, though Alisson didn’t know that. 90+2 min Finally a touch of pragmatism: Joe Gomez replaces Diogo Jota, who scored a marvellous equaliser a couple of lifetimes ago. 90+1 min At the other end, Winks’ pass over the defence is too heavy for Son. Spurs have exposed Liverpool all day with balls over the top. 90 min Milner’s clip into the area is just too high for Jota. There will be six big ones of added time. Can’t they make it six hours? 89 min “This game, beautifully bonkers though it is, still needs one thing,” says Matt Dony. “A late, late Alisson goal.” 88 min Liverpool are still pushing for a victory which, in the circumstances, would send their already stratospheric self-belief into another galaxy. 87 min Sergio Reguilon replaces Ryan Sessegnon, who had a fine game and kept Mo Salah very quiet. 85 min Ben Davies’s low cross is kicked desperately over his own bar by Konate. I think Davies was offside, but because he wasn’t flagged Spurs get the corner. Happily for Jurgen Klopp’s blood pressure, nothing comes of it. 85 min Konate is booked for taking a shortcut through Harry Winks (I think). 84 min Keita is booked for dissent. He was fouled by Sessegnon and asked Paul Tierney, not entirely politely, to produce a yellow card. And he did. 83 min After a promising break involving Kane and Lucas Moura (I think), Emerson Royal crosses behind three Spurs players. 82 min Virgil van Dijk has had an outstanding game today. 81 min Kostas Tsimikias comes on for Sadio Mane, which means a switch to 4-2-3. Firmino left, Jota right, Salah down the middle. 80 min Lucas Moura replaces Dele Alli, who is warmly applauded by the Spurs fans after a flawed but genuinely encouraging performance. Let’s hope, in years to come, we’ll reflect on how a Covid outbreak unwittingly revitalised Dele Alli’s career. 79 min Milner has gone to left-back, and Liverpool are now playing 4-1-4. Naby Keita is as alone in midfield as Steven Gerrard was against Arsenal 20 years ago. 78 min It’s the right decision, whatever happened previously. Robertson kicked straight through Emerson Royal’s leg as he shielded the ball, as if he was an old sock. A disgraceful tackle in truth. Jurgen Klopp is complaining, probably more about Kane’s reprieve in the first half. He kicked Emerson Royal straight up in the air, a scandalous challenge really (though no worse than Kane’s on him). VAR CHECK! Robertson is going to be sent off. 76 min Robertson is booked for a wild challenge on Emerson Royal. He should have been sent off as well. 76 min It’s all kicking off! Winks played a one-two with Davies and shaped an excellent pass around Matip towards Son. Alisson charged to the edge of the area to beat Son to the ball, but he made a mess of his clearance and ended up sliding past the ball. Son ran onto the loose ball and gleefully slid it into the empty net. THIS IS THE BEST GAME I’VE SEEN IN YEARS! 73 min Spurs will argue, not unreasonably I think, that Lloris had to leave his line to deal with the consequences of Salah’s (accidental) handball, so he was out of the game when Alexander-Arnold found Robertson. I think Spurs are a bit unfortunate there, though I do understand the logic behind the goal being given. GOAL GIVEN! Spurs 1-2 Liverpool It must count as a different phase of play because the ball was subsequently touched by a Spurs player. You can argue it either way I suppose. You can argue it’s a different phase of play I suppose. A deflected cross hit Salah’s arm and was scooped away desperately by Lloris. Alexander-Arnold followed up and smashed a cross that was headed in from close range by Robertson. VAR CHECK! Hang on, I think this will disallowed for handball against Salah in the build up. Liverpool have taken the lead and Spurs are fuming about the challenge on Alli! 69 min Another Spurs penalty appeal! Sanchez sprays a fine pass over the defence to Alli, who controls it on the chest and then goes down under challenge from Alexander-Arnold. It didn’t look like a foul, in truth, though we haven’t seen a replay. 68 min We haven’t had a clear chance for 12 minutes. 65 min Fatigue is going to be a problem for Spurs, who have barely trained, never mind played, in the last two weeks. They were always likely to fade in a normal game, never mind one played at such a furious pace throughout. 64 min A change for Spurs: Oliver Skipp replaces Tanguy Ndombele, who has faded slightly after an outstanding start to the game. There is a world-class player in there, and you’d back Antonio Conte to find him. 63 min Liverpool have switched to 4-2-4, though at times it’s more like 2-4-4 or even 2-2-6. Salah and Firmino are now playing up front, with Jota on the right and Mane on the left. 62 min “Totally agree with your observation on Dele’s contributions,” says Martin Gamage. “Maybe he hasn’t got the final pass away but this is his best game for at least two years. Glimpses of his former self.” Yeah, I’d be much more encouraged by the good bits, especially the energy, intent and off-the-ball runs, than worried about the imperfections. It’s been like watching a slightly out-of-form version of the 2015-18 Alli. 60 min Liverpool make their first change: Roberto Firmino replaces Tyler Morton, who started well but had a difficult time once the game hit top gear. We’ll soon see what that means tactically. 59 min “I reckon Conte fabricated the entire Covid outbreak so he could get extra time to coach the team,” says Richard Parkison. “Cressida Dick should investigate, if it’s not too far in the past.” Haha, and as we speak Ralf Rangnick is putting McFred through their fifth training session of the day. 58 min Davies is booked for pulling back Salah, who has actually been extremely quiet. So far. 56 min A Spurs corner ricochets across the area to Kane, who heads onto the roof of the net for four yards! It was a sharp chance, with minimal reaction time, but he probably should have scored. 55 min: What a chance for Spurs! Dier curls a marvellous pass over the defence to put Alli through on goal. He draws Alisson and then squares the ball to give Kane an open goal - but the pass is underhit and that allows Alisson to scramble across and block Kane’s shot. It was brilliant goalkeeping though. 54 min Matip charges all the way into the Spurs are and reverses a through pass to Jota, who is crowded out by Davies and Dier. Spurs break and Kane tries to release Son, who is expertly tracked by Robertson. 54 min Replays show that it was a foul by Matip, though it may have been just outside the area. 52 min Now Spurs appeal for a penalty when Winks goes down after a shove from behind by Matip. It was clumsy, possibly a foul, but certainly not as clear as the one on Jota in the first half. VAR aren’t interested. 51 min “Looking at Kane’s full studs up challenge on Robertson again, there is absolutely no excuse for him to get away with just a yellow,” says Keith Sanderson. “Only one more look for VAR should have confirmed that. Yes, we want 11 v 11 but that was abysmal from the officials.” Agreed. It looks worse every time you see it. Robertson saw it coming and lifted his leg a split-second before Kane made contact; good job he did. 49 min Kane has a shot from the edge of the area that is blocked by Konate, and then Ndombele bounces Keita to the canvas near the halfway line. Liverpool wanted a yellow card; Paul Tierney did not oblige them. 48 min Alexander-Arnold moves infield to receive possession and whips a cross towards the penalty spot, where Jota beats two defenders and loops a header just wide of the far post. He is outrageously good in the air, the antonym of a GTFABM. 47 min Winks is booked for pulling back Jota. 47 min There was no time to talk about Dele Alli’s first-half performance. Pretty good, I’d say, and noticeably more energetic than some of his displays in the last couple of years. 47 min “Hello Rob,” says Kári Tulinius. “If Covid chaos leads to such fun games of football, then maybe once the pandemic’s over, the Premier League could institute a pre-game lottery where a random starting player on each team gets a one-match ban and the manager has to rejig the tactics on the fly. Hopefully the second half is as fun as the first.” You jest, but after last weekend’s F1 decider, all bets are off. 46 min Peep peep! Liverpool begin the second half. “Hello from Pittsburgh, Rob!” says Eric Peterson. “I think it would be wise to open space in the Premier League schedule by taking selected rounds and rescheduling them for after May 22, when the Premier League is currently set to finish. There’s no summer World Cup to complicate a later end to the season, and we could use that extra downtime right now, for both health considerations and the generally more haphazard quality of football we’re seeing. “My recommendations for rounds to be moved would be: the midweek round coming up between Boxing Day and New Year’s Day, and the midweek round of February 8-10 (virtually all of the PL will have a 4th round FA Cup tie the following weekend anyway, and those days would prove useful to make up postponed matches).” I was all for having a break, but after that first half I think they should be made to go again tomorrow. “Save for the last 10 minutes, it was quite fun and we should be ahead by a goal if not two,” says Yash Gupta. “Conte has really changed this team. I don’t remember Winks having this good game in a long time.” We’re seeing a few replays of Kane’s goal. Ndombele’s pass is phenomenal - it’s basically a straight pass, between Robertson and Konate, but he shapes it like a bowling ball so that it curves around Kane and then into his path. Had it been gunbarrel straight it would have been much harder for Kane to take, and would probably have allowed Konate to make a challenge. “Boring to moan about the ref,” says Luke Smith, “but he has been pretty shocking today to be fair.” I wouldn’t be so harsh on yourself. The Guardian is funded by readers like you. We are entirely independent – there is no billionaire owner or proprietor who can censor what we write about. We are also free from a paywall, and everything we publish is open and available for all, regardless of means or status. But we rely on contributions from readers like you to power our journalism. If you’d like to support our work, from as little as £1, you can do so here. There is so much to dislike about modern football, all the greed and hype and narcissism and bullshit. And then you watch 45 minutes like that, and you’re 12 years old again. It was astonishing stuff, a basketball contest disguised as a football game, and it’s no exaggeration to say the score could be 5-5. 45+4 min Sessegnon beats Alexander-Arnold on the left of the area and picks out Kane, who makes a mess of a brilliant chance! He couldn’t sort his feet out and the ball bobbled away from goal. 45+3 min Winks clips a clever first-time pass in behind, but Son can’t control the bouncing ball on the run. Had he taken it in his stride, and he probably should have done, he would have been one on one. 45 min Three minutes of added time. 44 min Alexander-Arnold’s free-kick is headed across goal and wide by Jota. I think he was helping it on rather than going for a goal, and the stretching Mane wasn’t far away from reaching it. Incidentally we’ve just seen a replay of Alli’s chance earlier in the half - his shot was going in, right in the corner in fact, and Alisson made one of the saves of the season. 43 min: Fine save from Lloris! Honestly, this is the most glorious game of football. Mane runs at SOMEBODY, I HAVE NO IDEA and lifts a cross to the far post. Alexander-Arnold watches the ball drop, lasers in his peepers, and rifles a half-volley that is kicked away by Lloris. 42 min Mane’s deflected cross loops onto the roof of the net. Liverpool’s attacking play, against what is effectively an eight-man defence a lot of the time, has been spectacularly good. 40 min It looked like Jota was shoved in the back by Emerson Royal in the 37th minute. I think it was him, but it’s been such a frantic first half that I barely know my own name, never mind anyone else’s. I’d like to see it again to be sure, but there’s no time for replays at the moment. 39 min Klopp is booked for giving Paul Tierney a mouthful. He bows sarcastically, and then has a full and frank exchange with Tierney. Klopp’s noggin has completely gone, which is adding to the already enormous entertainment. 38 min A Spurs corner is punched away unconvincingly by Alisson. Actually it hit Matip’s head first and then Alisson’s arm, before dropping favourably for Liverpool in the six-yard box. That could easily have fallen to a Spurs striker, or even been an own goal by Alisson. 37 min Mane released Jota in the area with an angled pass. He goes down under challenge from a couple of defenders, but Paul Tierney isn’t interested. There’s no time to digest that - at least not yet, it might go to VAR - because seconds later Alisson almost gives the ball straight to Kane. I think that’s a foul on Jota you know. Mane’s cross was cut out by Davies, but Robertson marauded onto the scene to pick up the loose ball just inside the area. He charged away from Davies and stood up a cross towards Jota, who tensed his neck muscles to guide a header past Lloris from 10 yards. Brilliant, carpe-diem play from Robertson, a brilliant header from Jota, and a glorious game of association football. Moments after getting a blast from Jurgen Klopp, Andy Robertson makes the equaliser! 34 min Jurgen Klopp has just given Andy Robertson a mouthful on the touchline. And then... 34 min Another chance for Spurs on the break! Kane broeke down the right but then, with Son in space at the far post, crossed too close to Alisson. With the right weight of pass - and it wasn’t that difficult a ball for Kane to play - it would have been 2-0. 32 min This has been such an enjoyable game. In the circumstances, Spurs’ performance has been phenomenal. 30 min: What a save from Alisson! Another devastating counter-attack from Spurs. Winks belted a long clearance towards Son, who held the ball up and waited for support. Kane made an outstanding off-the-ball run from left to right to take Konate out of the game and clear the space for Alli, charging the length of the field in support. Son used Kane by not using him and then guided a perfect angled pass into the path of Alli. He took the shot first time, on the run, and the ball flashed this far wide of the right-hand post. At first it looked like a miss, but replays showed that it brushed the fingertips of Alisson as he dived to his left. There’s a chance Alli’s shot was going wide anyway; either way, it was magnificent goalkeeping. 29 min Robertson’s chipped free-kick is headed wide by Mane, backpedalling beyond the far post. It wasn’t an easy chance, especially as there was no pace on the ball, but he’ll be annoyed he didn’t work Lloris. 27 min Milner is fouled by Alli on the right wing. Alexander-Bruyne’s free-kick is headed away by Winks, but Liverpool keep the ball and Mane is fouled by Emerson Royal on the other side. Royal is booked. 23 min Mane’s shot is crucially blocked by Dier, and then Keita’s follow-up from the edge of the area is shovelled unconvincingly round the post by Lloris. Actually, replays show Keita’s shot took a slight deflection off Davies, which is why Lloris’s save was scruffy. More importantly, it was effective, and in the end he did pretty well. 23 min Morton is booked for a foul on Winks, who was about to launch another Spurs counter-attack. This has been a pulsating start to the match. 22 min It was a one-footed lunge from Kane, but he caught Robertson on the ankle. His reputation may have saved him from being sent off. 19 min Kane is booked for an overexcited, studs-up lunge at Robertson. That wasn’t far from a red-card offence, and Jurgen Klopp is fuming. 18 min Son misses a one-on-one, though he was almost certainly offside. Antonio Conte’s switch to a front two has been inspired, with Son’s speed and movement causing all sorts of problems for Liverpool’s van Dijkless defence. 16 min: Son almost makes it 2-0! Spurs are killing Liverpool on the break. Kane won a 50/50 with Morton just inside his own half, and suddenly Spurs had a two-on-one. Kane charged down the inside-right channel and crossed to Son, who slid the ball wide on the stretch. Kane’s cross/pass was slightly too far in front of Son. 15 min Kane had a chance just before the goal as well, when a close-range shot was superbly blocked by Konate. Ndombele, who has started quite brilliantly, found a bit of space 35 yards from goal and slid a lovely straight pass between Robertson and Konate. Kane got to it first, a fraction ahead of Konate, and sidefooted a precise shot into the far corner. It’s his first Premier League goal at home this season, and he took it superbly. Harry Kane gives Spurs the lead! 11 min Alexander-Arnold, 22 yards from goal, whistles a sweet shot with his left foot (yep) that is punched away to his left by the diving Lloris. It looked dramatic but was ultimately a pretty comfortably save. 10 min Son beats Matip on the edge of the area, only for Keita to make an important lunging tackle. Spurs look dangerous on the break, and Liverpool look dangerous every time they have the ball. 7 min Morton is playing the Fabinho role, with Milner to his left and Keita to the right, and has already played two or three eyecatching passes. 6 min Morton’s ambitious long pass just evades Salah, who would have been through on goal. 5 min “Greetings from LA,” says Ian Copestake, “where the nest wave of misery is yet to fully hit home (I saw a crowded subway train full of Santas yesterday!). Perhaps given football’s top negotiators’ penchant for ethical deals it is time to meet with Covid and talk cash.” 4 min Dier drives a long, angled pass behind Alexander-Arnold for the pacy Sessegnon. He heads the ball into the area and is about to cross to the unmarked Kane when the recovering Alexander-Arnold pokes the ball behind for a corner. 2 min Milner’s long-range shot is held by Lloris, sprawling to his right. Liverpool have made a flying start. 1 min: Chance for Robertson! Liverpool should be ahead after 59 seconds. Alexander-Arnold moves infield from the right and kisses a chip into the area, where Robertson stoops to head wide from 12 yards. He should have scored. 1 min Spurs’ system is a 3-3-2-2 (or 5-1-2-2), with Winks playing slightly deeper than Alli and Ndombele in midfield. Son and Kane are up front. 1 min Peep peep! Spurs, in white, kick off from left to right. Antonio Conte speaks “It’s not easy, because we had two very difficult weeks. We haven’t been able to train and the last game was two weeks ago. It’s not simple to try to prepare the game. We have to be safe, and for that reason the Premier League has to make the best decision.” Jurgen Klopp speaks “Thiago has tested positive and we sent Hendo home. He is the only one with proper symptoms but no Covid - he has a cold. I’m happy to play but of course the situation is really strange. You prepare a team and you have no idea if [somebody will test positive] the next day. We did lateral flow tests in the hotel this morning: all negative, so let’s go. “We all fly together, all this kind of thing... it’s not really cool, but I think we have to fight through this. But again, if we lose another player and another player and another player, and we have to play on the 26th and the 28th, it’s not possible. It’s really hard for the players at the moment. We’re talking abot human beings. I’m happy playing football as much as we can, but we need help.” I doubt we’ve heard the last of that Chelsea result. They were angry about the game being played even before they dropped two points. This, as you’d expect from Scott Murray, is a tremendous read The two early games have just finished. If you don’t want to know the scores, DON’T LOOK DOWN. Wolves 0-0 Chelsea Newcastle 0-4 Man City Plenty of notable team news, as you’d expect in these peculiar times. Dele Alli gets a rare start, one of five changes from the 3-0 win over Norwich a fortnight ago. Ryan Sessegnon, Tanguy Ndombele, Emerson Royal and Harry Winks also come in, with Japhet Tanganga, Sergio Reguilon, Lucas Moura, Oliver Skipp and Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg left out. All bar Hojbjerg are on the bench. We’re not sure where Ndombele and Alli will line up; Antonio Conte may have switched to 5-3-2 to give more protection in midfield. Liverpool are without their entire first-choice midfield, so the teenager Tyler Morton gets his first Premier League start. He was born on 31 October 2002, ten days before James Milner, who also starts today, made his Premier League debut. The three changes in midfield - Morton, Milner and Naby Keita for Jordan Henderson, Thiago Alcantara and Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain - are the only ones made by Jurgen Klopp. Spurs (possible 5-3-2) Lloris; Royal, Sanchez, Dier, Davies, Sessegnon; Ndombele, Winks, Alli; Kane, Son. Substitutes: Austin, Rodon, Tanganga, Doherty, Reguilon, Skipp, Lo Celso, Bergwijn, Lucas. Liverpool (4-3-3) Alisson; Alexander-Arnold, Matip, Konate, Robertson; Keita, Morton, Milner; Salah, Jota, Mane. Substitutes: Kelleher, Firmino, Gomez, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Minamino, Tsimikas, Gordon, N Williams, Quansah. Referee Paul Tierney. Go on then, let’s have one last blowout. Tottenham v Liverpool is the final Premier League game before Christmas, maybe even for the forseeable future. Spurs’ home form has been immaculate since Antonio Conte took over, with four wins out of four, but the difficulty level is about to rise. Liverpool are bang in form, with eight wins from eight since the international break. They’re also battle-hardened, whereas Spurs haven’t played for a fortnight because of Covid. We’ll find out which players have recovered when the teams are announced in the next couple of minutes. Spurs will start the game in seventh or eighth, depending on the result at Molineux, though they have between two and four games in hand on the teams in front of them. Liverpool are second, four points behind Manchester City with this match to spare. It’s starting to look like a two-horse race for the title. The way City are playing, Liverpool have little margin for error. Kick off 4.30pm.Whole households should cancel gatherings and visits to events if a single member tests positive for Covid, because others are probably infected too, according to government scientific advisers. The highly transmissible Omicron variant spreads so fast that even if only one person in a house or a close-knit work team tests positive on a lateral flow device, there is a “significant chance that others are already infected”, the scientists warn. Under current advice in England, close contacts who are double-jabbed do not have to self-isolate, but they are urged to take lateral flow tests for the next seven days. The latest advice released on Saturday by the environmental modelling and behavioural science groups that feed in to the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), suggests that policy needs strengthening to help reduce the spread of the new variant. The document argues that Omicron spreads so quickly among close contacts, such as those sharing a house, that extra precaution is needed to prevent it from spreading more widely. “If one person in a close-knit group, for example [a] household [or] work team, tests positive, there is a significant chance that others are already infected,” the scientists write. “If one person from a group tests positive prior to an event or gathering then none should attend,” the experts add. “This is especially important in the festive season when family events may increase the risk of infecting the elderly or vulnerable.” Analysis by the UK Health Security Agency shows that 18% of Omicron index cases pass the virus on to others in their households, with a transmission rate three times higher than that seen with Delta. The increased transmissibility means there is a greater risk of super-spreader events in the home, workplaces, hospitals and care homes, the advisers warn. Instead of urging close contacts of confirmed cases to take lateral flow tests for a week, the scientists argue that self-isolation is likely to be more effective at preventing more cases, and would also reduce demand for lateral flow tests if supply is limited. The experts say the high transmissibility of Omicron means that it may spread more easily through the air and further than the 2 metres typically regarded as safe for social distancing. Beyond the risk to households, the experts warn that extra protection, along with more frequent testing, is “urgent and essential” in high-risk places such as hospitals, care homes, prisons and homeless shelters. • This article was amended on 13 January 2022 to make clear that the “current advice” for close contacts of people who test positive relates specifically to England.Adam Kinzinger, one of two Republicans on the House committee investigating the deadly 6 January Capitol attack incited by Donald Trump, said on Sunday he was not “yet” ready to declare the former president guilty of a crime – but that the panel was investigating the likelihood that he is. “Nobody is above the law,” the Illinois congressman told CNN’s State of the Union. “And if the president knowingly allowed what happened on 6 January to happen, and, in fact, was giddy about it, and that violates a criminal statute, he needs to be held accountable for that.” The committee has been picking up pace in recent weeks with dozens of subpoenas issued, some to close Trump aides. The waters lapped at the doors of Trump’s Oval Office this week when his fourth and final chief of staff, Mark Meadows, became a focus of the investigation over tweets he received on and around the day of the insurrection. The committee voted unanimously to refer Meadows for criminal prosecution for contempt of Congress, after he withdrew his cooperation. Kinzinger, who alongside fellow Republican Liz Cheney has drawn the ire of Trump allies for serving on the committee, said he had no qualms about scrutinising how Trump incited supporters to try to overturn his election defeat by Joe Biden, which he says was the result of massive electoral fraud, which it was not. “He’s not a king,” Kinzinger said, “Former presidents, they aren’t former kings.” Kinzinger added that he feared the events of 6 January were “trial run” for Trump and his allies to attempt another coup. “We will get every bit of detail that we can possibly get on that, so that’s important for the president’s role,” he said. “I want to hold the people guilty accountable but I want to make sure this never happens again. “Otherwise, 6 January will have been, yes, a failed trial run, but, sometimes, a failed trial run is the best practice to get one that succeeds, a coup that would succeed in toppling our government.” Kinzinger’s comments are the strongest to date about the depth of the inquiry into Trump’s role. At a “Stop the Steal” rally near the White House on 6 January, the then-president urged supporters to march on the Capitol and “fight like hell [or] you’re not going to have a country any more”. He was impeached a second time for inciting the insurrection that followed, but though Kinzinger, and nine other House Republicans and seven GOP senators voted with Democrats, Trump was acquitted in his Senate trial and remains free to run for office again. Pressed on whether he thought Trump was guilty of a crime, Kinzinger said: “I don’t want to go there yet, to say, ‘Do I believe he has’. But I sure tell you I have a lot of questions about what the president was up to.” Earlier this month at a sentencing hearing for one of the rioters, a district court judge, Amy Berman Jackson, said she believed Trump stoked the riot and should be held accountable. Jackson was one of a growing number of federal judges to speak out. Trump is also in legal jeopardy from investigations of his business affairs, with authorities in New York looking at tax issues in particular. Trump spoke to Fox News’s Sunday Morning Futures but was not asked about the 6 January inquiry, instead riffing on subjects including the Taliban’s hatred of dogs and how Biden’s chief medical adviser, Dr Anthony Fauci, struggles to pitch a baseball. Trump also weighed in on a conspiracy theory popular on Fox News which says Biden is not running the country, based on an apparent gaffe in which he called his vice-president, Kamala Harris, “president” in a university commencement speech this week. On CNN, Kinzinger acknowledged the 6 January committee was working to complete its work before next year’s midterm elections, in which Republicans are likely to take back control and thereby kill the investigation. The Ohio congressman Jim Jordan, a Trump loyalist whose text messages were included in those released this week, was one of the Republicans rejected by the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, for a place on the 6 January panel. Regardless, Jordan has been tipped as a possible judiciary committee chair – who would therefore act to close the investigation of the Capitol attack. “He could not credibly head the [judiciary] committee,” Kinzinger said. “But he certainly could head the committee.”Even before David Frost’s departure from the government this weekend, Boris Johnson’s authority had for weeks been relentlessly battered by unforced errors and scandal. However, the resignation of the man regarded by Tory rightwingers as the guarantor of a “clean Brexit” is a devastating blow for the prime minister’s authority – as well as depriving him of a trusted friend and adviser. Lord Frost’s allies insist that his resignation has nothing to do with Brexit, and instead relates to Johnson’s domestic policy agenda, including the 1.5 percentage point increase in national insurance contributions coming in April, and the commitment to achieving net zero emissions. “He’s very disillusioned with the policy direction of the government at the moment,” said one source close to Frost. “It’s the No 10, high-tax, high-spend economic philosophy.” Nevertheless, hardline Brexiters, many of whom were already in open revolt over Covid restrictions, now fear that without Frost around the cabinet table, No 10 may force through a deal with Brussels over the Northern Ireland protocol that they would regard as an unacceptable capitulation. Handing Frost’s portfolio to Liz Truss, alongside her wider responsibilities as foreign secretary, is viewed with trepidation among this group, because while they admire her free-market principles, they regard the Foreign Office as deeply suspect on all things Brexit. Meanwhile, Frost’s complaints about Johnson’s tax-and-spend approach crystallised some MPs’ mounting concerns about the direction of travel in Downing Street – as well as chiming with the views of potential leadership contenders Truss and Rishi Sunak. Sunak has let it be known that he would not have gone ahead with the national insurance increase without Johnson’s urging, and Truss is known to have been sceptical about the “plan B” Covid measures that prompted last week’s Tory revolt. One senior Tory MP suggested Johnson may have deliberately given Truss the knotty job of resolving the impasse over Northern Ireland as a means of undermining her, joking: “Bang go her leadership prospects.” Backbenchers’ fury about Frost’s resignation burst into the open in a furious WhatsApp exchange leaked to Sky News on Saturday evening. The MP Marcus Fysh described Frost as a “hero” who was “100% right”, while his outspoken colleague Andrew Bridgen claimed that “most” Tory backbenchers shared Frost’s concerns about government policy. When the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, stepped in to defend the prime minister, in a WhatsApp group called Clean Global Brexit, the MP Steve Baker responded by removing her from the group, saying, “Enough is enough.” Despite the febrile mood, a leadership challenge to Johnson appears unlikely while the country is in the grip of the Omicron crisis. While some MPs have already put in their letters to Sir Graham Brady, the chair of the backbench 1922 Committee, to demand a vote of no confidence, few believe the number is currently anywhere near the 54 required. More than half of Johnson’s MPs – a minimum of 181 – would have to vote against him for a leadership race to be triggered (in which Johnson could not then take part). While the prime minister may be safe in the immediate term, however, he must now navigate through an intensely difficult period. The Whitehall ethics guru Sue Gray is investigating lockdown-busting parties in Downing Street; ministers must decide whether to defy Tory rebels and impose Covid restrictions before Christmas; and the local elections in May appear highly likely to provide voters with another opportunity to kick the government, after last week’s extraordinary byelection result in North Shropshire. Any or all of these events could lead to a handful more letters (or emails) of no confidence being penned, while any potential leadership contender who felt they had a secure head start could urge their followers to submit more en masse. Meanwhile, Johnson is described by Downing Street insiders as disconsolate and isolated – and his performance in a post-byelection interview on Friday appeared to suggest his only response to partygate is to attempt to change the subject. One senior Tory described Frost’s departure as “devastating”. “The two men who basically set his ideological and policy position, on Brexit and certainly on the domestic issues, were David Frost and Dominic Cummings. And now he’s lost them both, it’s a bit like the Wizard of Oz,” they said. “Now the people who were actually doing a lot of the behind the scenes work for him have gone, and you look behind the curtain, and it’s not what we thought. And I think the Tory party’s increasingly come round to that Wizard of Oz view of Boris.”Thomas Tuchel reacted furiously after the Premier League rejected Chelsea’s request to postpone their game against Wolves because of a Covid-19 outbreak. Chelsea asked for the game to be called off on Saturday morning after Jorginho, Kai Havertz and Ruben Loftus-Cheek became the latest players to go into isolation. Timo Werner, Ben Chilwell, Callum Hudson-Odoi and Romelu Lukaku had already tested positive last week. The Premier League board denied Chelsea’s request, however, deeming they had enough players available and the fixture did not meet the criteria for postponement. That drew an angry response from Tuchel, whose depleted side fell six points below Manchester City at the top of the league after Wolves held them to a goalless draw at Molineux. “We were struggling with the preparation because we had several consecutive days with positive Covid tests and then we travelled together for three hours with the team, we had dinner together we had another positive test with Jorginho,” Chelsea’s manager told the BBC. “People are worried because they were on the same bus and had the same dinner. “Obviously it was not enough to postpone the match and we had to play but you cannot demand 100% focus. It was everything else but calm. Today in the morning at 8.30am they knock on the door and have another test nobody knew about, so do we wake players up who want to sleep a bit longer?” Six other Premier League games were called off this weekend, with the league set to hold emergency meetings with club owners and team managers on Monday to discuss the escalating disruption. Tuchel, however, was not concerned about questions of integrity and his anger centred on health concerns. “I can’t compare to other games, it is just our situation,” he said. “It is not safe. We talk about protecting players and a safe environment but it is not safe. I would be not surprised if the next test shows up and we have more positives. How should it stop if we sit in the bus and have dinners and just stay together like nothing happened?” Chelsea, who only had six players on the bench, have won three of their past eight games and fell further off the pace after City won at Newcastle. “City’s win today was predictable,” Tuchel said. “The points we dropped today are not the point. The points we lost at home to Manchester United, Burnley and Everton are the points that hurt.” Chelsea, who lost Trevoh Chalobah and Hakim Ziyech to injury, are scheduled to visit Brentford in the last eight of the Carabao Cup on Wednesday and Aston Villa on Boxing Day. It remains to be seen if either game goes ahead.The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, is to take over responsibility for the UK’s relationship with the EU after the Brexit minister David Frost’s resignation, Downing Street has said. She will be adding ministerial responsibility to her foreign portfolio with immediate effect. This means taking over Lord Frost’s key positions on all the post-Brexit committees, including as co-chair of the partnership council and the joint committee that oversees the implementation and enforcement of both the withdrawal agreement of 2020 and the trade and cooperation deal clinched last December. Her appointment will be seen as a steadying move after Frost’s resignation dealt a body blow to an already weakened prime minister, reeling from sleaze scandals and the loss of the byelection in North Shropshire on Friday. Frost, who has led negotiations with the EU, handed in his resignation letter to Boris Johnson last week and had been persuaded to stay on until January – until the news was leaked on Sunday. In his letter of resignation, Frost said it was the introduction of plan B coronavirus measures, including the implementation of Covid passes, that prompted his decision. He also said he had become disillusioned by tax rises and the cost of net zero policies. Her immediate task will be to decide whether this is a reset moment for the UK’s severely strained relationship with the EU or whether she will continue with Frost’s approach over the Northern Ireland protocol, something that has put the UK on a collision course with Brussels and Washington. Speculation was rife that Frost resigned after a briefing organised by the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office nine days ago in which European journalists were told that the UK was retreating from its hardline approach. While fiercely loyal to Johnson, Truss is considered a frontrunner along with the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, to succeed him in a future leadership challenge. She also commands the support of the hardline Eurosceptics, known as the “spartans” in the party, famed for her libertarian views and her war on “woke” culture. In a recent poll by Conservative Home she ranked No 1 in popularity in “satisfaction ratings”, ahead of the defence secretary, Ben Wallace, Frost, Jacob Rees-Mogg and Sunak. A major speech a week ago underlined the former remainer’s Brexit credentials, extolling the virtues of a post-Brexit “confident, outward-looking, patriotic and positive” Britain. Allies of Sunak have long been suspicious of No 10’s treatment of Truss, suspecting that she was set up as a rival to the chancellor in order to clip his wings. “Clearly she plans to bash her way to the final two [in a leadership contest] then allow a Trumpian base to carry her into No 10,” one supporter told the Observer recently. Her new role as the lead negotiator will be a test of her political abilities on a well-lit domestic stage. The complexity of the relationship with the EU and the fragility of Northern Ireland will be demanding, seen as opportunities but also potential booby traps. Unlike Frost, Truss is an elected member of cabinet and has served under prime ministers David Cameron, Theresa May and Johnson, as a minister of state for environment, food and rural affairs, chief secretary to the Treasury, international trade secretary and foreign secretary after the recent cabinet reshuffle, replacing Dominic Raab. Simon Coveney, Ireland’s foreign minister, welcomed the appointment, saying: “I’ve worked well with Liz previously in agriculture and more recently in foreign affairs. “I look forward to working with her now on Brexit. Much work ahead but progress is achievable in the new year.” Downing Street also announced that Chris Heaton-Harris would become minister of state for Europe and would deputise for the foreign secretary as necessary on Brexit and the protocol. Moving the role of Brexit negotiator to the Foreign Office will be seen as a wise move by some critics of Frost who felt too much power was held in one individual’s hands. “This will need more than simply replacing Frost. Johnson should take this opportunity to end the anomaly that the minister responsible for relations with our nearest neighbours operates as a lone ranger in the Cabinet Office,” the crossbench peer Lord Ricketts, a former undersecretary at the Foreign Office and ambassador to France, said on Sunday. “He should give the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office responsibility for EU policy, where it can be properly integrated into wider foreign policy under a senior minister for Europe.”Shoppers have pulled back from UK high streets in the crucial final weekend of shopping before Christmas, figures reveal, as the retail and hospitality sectors continue to struggle amid fears over the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant. The latest data from retail intelligence firm Springboard showed that visits to retailers around the UK on Saturday and Sunday were up just 0.8% and down 1.8%, respectively, compared with a week earlier, reversing the usual trend for footfall to soar ahead of the big day. Hopes of a bumper December to compensate for losses over the pandemic have been thoroughly dashed, with the number of overall visits 25.2% lower across all retail sites on Sunday compared with 2019, while for shopping centres they plunged by 32.9%. Saturday’s visits were down 18.1% and 25.2%, respectively. “Shoppers are clearly cautious about venturing out and are self-censoring,” Springboard’s insights director, Diane Wehrle, said. “All of this drop has been driven by fewer trips being made to high streets and shopping centres, with high streets particularly hard hit.” Pubs and restaurants have also been suffering since England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, urged the public to keep socialising to a minimum, prompting a swathe of cancellations. The world-renowned chef and restaurateur Michel Roux Jr said the sector was now facing its worst drop-off in bookings since the start of the pandemic. “This is as bad as March in 2020, the first lockdown,” he told Sky’s Trevor Phillips on Sunday. “The biggest issue for me is the lack of communication from the government, we have been told one thing, the public has been told one thing … it means what should be our most prosperous month as restaurateurs and hoteliers and publicans, is now turning into a loss because people are not turning up.” The bleak figures will add to pressure on the government, which has been accused of bringing in a “lockdown by stealth” without providing the accompanying financial assistance. Rishi Sunak, who jetted back to the UK from California on Friday, is under intense pressure to intervene. Roux warned this lack of support could not only affect the nearly 3 million people employed across the hospitality sector, but the wider “ecosystem” of security, cleaners, refuse collectors and suppliers. According to Springboard, total high street footfall was flat on Saturday and down 5.9% on Sunday, with shoppers in particular avoiding trips to London, where local authorities declared a major incident on Saturday linked to the surge in Omicron cases. It came after Britain reported the largest 24-hour increase in the number of new cases since the pandemic began on Friday. On the Saturday before Christmas – usually the climax of the entire festive season – footfall was down 0.3% compared with a week earlier and just 1% higher than on 4 December, according to a separate measure by Sensormatic Solutions. Central London suffered a 13.6% week-on-week drop in visits on Sunday, according to Springboard, while footfall in outer London fell 8.6%. In total, visits to city centres outside the capital dropped by 13.4% in the same period, though smaller high streets benefited from the pullback, with market towns experiencing a 3% increase compared with last weekend. Open-air retail parks were among the few destinations where visits increased, up 4.8%. Overall footfall on Saturday was 23% higher compared with 2020, while Sunday’s figure was 33.2% higher. That reflects last year’s disastrous festive season with tier 3 Covid restrictions in place across much of the country, and soaring cases, which eventually led to the south-east and east England being put into the strictest tier 4 just days before Christmas. Meanwhile pub and restaurant bosses are warning that thousands of hospitality firms could go bust by January without financial support. “We don’t know whether we are coming or going in our industry, we are losing business, we are losing livelihoods,” Roux said. Jeff Galvin, co-owner of Galvin Restaurants, a group of five upmarket venues in London, described the situation for cancellations as “pretty devastating”, telling Associated Press: “For private hires, bigger tables of say eight to 16 people, those have pretty much disappeared. These are the bread and butter for restaurants at Christmastime.”Good morning. The Omicron variant continues to pose a threat ahead of the festive season as governments around the world take different approaches to restrict its spread. Australia looks to be in the clear and will avoid lockdowns ahead of summer holidays. And Sydney’s northern beaches begins cleanup efforts after yesterday’s storm. A woman has died and three people have been injured when a tree fell in a car park during a storm on Sydney’s northern beaches. Police, NSW ambulance paramedics, Fire and Rescue NSW, and rescue helicopters responded to the incident at a car park on Ocean Street Narrabeen after reports a tree and powerlines had come down. A woman believed to be aged in her 70s died at the scene. Emergency services received multiple reports of storm damage across the area from 3.30pm on Sunday, with trees and powerlines down across suburbs from Mona Vale to Forestville. Health minister Greg Hunt says it is unlikely Australia will follow the Netherlands and impose significant lockdowns to suppress surging Omicron infections, saying the circumstances in Europe are quite different to Australia. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet has ruled out reintroducing mask mandates or other restrictions, saying it is a matter of “personal responsibility”, despite the state setting another record for daily Covid infections. The Omicron variant of Covid-19 has “extraordinary spreading capabilities” and promises to bring a bleak winter in the northern hemisphere as it continues “raging through the world”, says Dr Anthony Fauci. Many nations are debating increasing restrictions and lockdown measures similar to those introduced in the Netherlands as infection rates continue to soar. The UK saw a 72% jump in a week, with 82,886 new Covid cases on Sunday, and health secretary, Sajid Javid, said tougher Covid restrictions could be imposed in England before Christmas. Germany’s health minister ruled out a Christmas lockdown but said mandatory vaccination was the only way to stop the pandemic. Australia is six wickets away from winning the second Test against England. At the end of day four, England were 83 for four, having been set 468 to win or, more realistically but scarcely more likely, 130 overs to survive. Despite being knocked behind for 24, England’s captain Joe Root has been praised for playing through the pain after his day was bookended by blows to his groin. Australia The Morrison government has been warned an interference campaign through social media is a serious risk to the looming federal election. It is “naive” to believe Australia is immune to incursions and the country lacks some of the tools necessary to respond, a committee has found. An 11-year-old boy has died in hospital and become the sixth fatality of Devonport’s Hillcrest primary school tragedy. Tasmania’s top police officer said the investigation into the incident was ongoing and would be for some time. Two men and two children have died after a light plane crashed into mangroves off the Queensland coast on Sunday morning. The world The French government has called on Boris Johnson to use David Frost’s resignation as Brexit minister to “rebuild trust” with the EU, as UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has been named as Frost’s replacement. More than 30,000 people have been evacuated from their homes in Malaysia as the country battles some of its worst flooding in years. Downpours since Friday have caused rivers to overflow, submerging many urban areas and cutting off main roads. Joe Biden’s $1.75tn Build Back Better domestic spending plan has been hit with a huge blow after West Virginia senator Joe Manchin voted “no” to the plan. Hong Kong’s first “patriots only” legislative election on Sunday was marked by what could be a record low turnout – reflecting what critics said was widespread disapproval of recent changes to the electoral system and the wider national security crackdown in the city. Recommended reads 2021 has been a great year in Australian music, and our critics have named their favourite albums of the year. They include Genesis Owusu’s Aria-sweeping debut album Smiling With No Teeth, “one of the year’s most inventive, indelible hip-hop records”, according to Shaad d’Souza. Brigid Delaney says the title track from Nick Cave and Warren Ellis’ Carnage “is hands down the most beautiful song of the year ... It’s the work of musicians at the height of their powers and peak of their wisdom.” And Michael Sun rates Banoffee’s Tear Tracks among his top picks – “both a primal scream on the dancefloor and a 4am heart-to-heart”. “There was always going to be an outbreak [though]; you can only build a net, it’s never a wall, and eventually something will get through there,” says Dr Michael Novy, emergency department specialist at Parklea correctional centre in Sydney. Novy is one of the health workers to share their story with Guardian Australia who work with at-risk communities hidden from public view during the pandemic. “It was really interesting trying to deliver care through a metal door which was locked. A flap would open up, a finger would come out and you’d do a set of observations, you’d do a temperature [check] and make sure they were OK at least once or two times a day.” Sara loved her baby. So why was she caught up in guilt, anxiety and resentment? Clinical psychologist Dr Barbara Rysenbry explores the many challenges faced by new mums, including the “iceberg” of unrealistically high expectations. “In her gathering of knowledge and preparation around becoming a parent, Sara had not seen there was a looming “iceberg” of unrealistic expectations that she would quickly bounce back physically and emotionally and resume her pre-baby life. Sara, like countless other new parents, had sailed straight into it.” Listen Breakthroughs in computing have changed how high-level chess is played, making draws all too common. The first five games in this year’s world championship in Dubai – which all ended in “perfect” draws. But Magnus Carlsen’s stunning performance in Dubai provided a symbolic win for humans over machines. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai has denied that she had accused a former senior official of having sexually assaulted her. The claim apparently contradicted a social media post in November, in which Peng accused the former vice premier Zhang Gaoli of having coerced her into sex. The comments came as fresh footage of Peng emerged online on Sunday. Media roundup Families wanting to be reunited after two years of border closures face a longer wait as visitor visa-processing times have blown out, according to the Sydney Morning Herald. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet has revealed a major cabinet reshuffle, with nine first-time ministers, reports the ABC. Coming up Federal government aviation recovery framework will be announced. Firefighters will give decommissioned fire hoses to a zoo. And if you’ve read this far … An American mother has given birth in the front seat of an electric smart car while it was driving on autopilot. Yiran Sherry’s waters broke while the family was stuck in traffic, leading to what is believed to be the world’s first “Tesla baby”. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Sajid Javid has made clear that fresh Covid restrictions could be imposed before Christmas to slow the spread of the Omicron variant, with ministers set to make a decision in days. Government insiders expect an announcement to be made early next week about whether social mixing will be curtailed before the festive period – potentially including a cap on the number of families that can meet, or even hospitality closures. “We are assessing the situation; it’s very fast-moving,” the health secretary said on Sunday, when asked about whether new curbs could be implemented before Christmas. Pressure on the government over Covid curbs has been intensified by the shock resignation on Saturday night of the Brexit minister, David Frost, who made clear that his objection to the plan B measures put in place last week was one of the reasons for his departure. Any additional restrictions would be likely to spark a furious backlash from Tory MPs, with sceptics adamant there is not enough information yet to make a decision. But Javid took that argument head on, suggesting ministers may have to act before they have the full picture, given the time lag between infection and hospitalisation. “There’s a lot of uncertainty, there are gaps in the data, but we must work with the data we’ve got, we mustn’t let perfection be the enemy of the good,” he said. One cabinet minister suggested Javid and the government’s scientific advisers appeared to be preparing the ground for an announcement in the coming days, saying, “I think we are all being warmed up for it”. The health secretary’s blunt intervention came after government advisers warned that without tougher measures, hospitalisations across England could be set to peak at between 3,000 and 10,000 a day, and deaths at between 600 and 6,000 a day. Minutes from a meeting of the Scientific Advisory Committee on Emergencies (Sage), held last Thursday, showed the experts urging the government to implement “more stringent measures … very soon”. They suggested a return to step one or two of the roadmap out of lockdown earlier this year. Even at step two, household mixing was only allowed outdoors, with a maximum of six people or two households. Pubs were only allowed to serve customers outside. “The timing of such measures is crucial. Delaying until 2022 would greatly reduce the effectiveness of such interventions and make it less likely that these would prevent considerable pressure on health and care settings,” the scientists warned. Pressed about Sage’s advice, Javid said: “It’s a very sobering analysis, we take it very seriously.” He said he and his colleagues would be assessing the advice, but also had to take into account the wider effect of potential measures, including their economic effects. Scientific advisers see doing nothing as a major gamble: a lot would have to go right for the NHS to weather the storm, such as the disease being milder, and boosters holding up well. In nearly all of the modelling considered by Sage on 8 December, it will take an intervention as effective as January’s lockdown to keep hospitalisations below previous peaks. Speaking in a personal capacity, Mark Woolhouse, a member of the Sage modelling subgroup and professor of infectious disease epidemiology at the University of Edinburgh, said the government had to juggle protecting the NHS, saving Christmas and avoiding a lockdown, while heading off such a huge absentee rate due to illness and self-isolation that it disrupted essential services. “The critical point is that decisions need to be made very urgently indeed – that is the implication of two-day doubling time – without having perfect information, most importantly on the severity of Omicron and the effectiveness of boosters against it,” he said. “My view is that the maxim ‘early intervention can be less drastic intervention’ still holds, but the door is closing very fast. We don’t want to reach the point where whatever we do is damage limitation.” A No 10 source played down the chances of an imminent announcement, saying: “You never can rule anything out, but plan B was only implemented a week ago, and we’re getting huge numbers coming forward for their boosters.” Javid hailed the fact that a record 906,656 booster jabs were delivered in England alone on Saturday. In an indication of the response any new measures would be likely to meet with from MPs, the chair of the backbench Covid recovery group, Mark Harper, said “lockdowns, of any kind, should not become the default policy choice”, adding that “holding out is often the right decision and often the hardest”. Echoing the message of England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, earlier this week, the health secretary also called on the public to be careful about socialising in the run-up to Christmas. “It’s time to be more cautious. We know this thing is spreading rapidly,” he said. It is understood ministers are monitoring hospitalisations in London particularly closely. The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, declared a major incident in the capital on Saturday amid concerns about mass absences in the NHS and other public services, and rocketing cases. Khan said more curbs were inevitable. “If we don’t bring in new restrictions sooner rather than later, you’re going to see even more positive cases, and potentially public services like the NHS on the verge of collapse, if not collapsing,” he told the BBC. But he suggested the right moment to move might be after Christmas, given the importance for people’s mental health of meeting up with their families. Some cabinet ministers are known to be very wary of more restrictions, with Liz Truss and Rishi Sunak among those counselling caution. An ally of Sunak said he was “working through the data” before making a final decision. On Sunday, the UK government announced it was doubling the amount of additional funding available for the governments in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland to tackle Covid from £430m to £860m. Sunak confirmed the increased funding after discussions with the devolved administrations. A spokesperson for Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said she was seeking urgent clarity as it appeared the money was not additional funding, but “simply a form of ‘advance’ on funding that would have come to Scotland anyway”. Sunak is understood to be awaiting a final decision on what curbs will be imposed, before announcing any financial support package for industries already hit by mass cancellations. The chancellor flew back early from a work trip to California last Friday amid intense pressure from businesses in the hospitality and culture sectors. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said the public needed to hear “practical steps” from the government, claiming Boris Johnson had been “asleep at the wheel”. “The public want to know the government has got a grip but, tragically, Boris Johnson is so distracted by his own internal party pressures that he’s unable to provide the leadership this country needs,” he said.Emma Raducanu is the BBC’s Sports Personality of the Year for 2021, capping a year of unprecedented sporting success for the tennis star who told the show she was simply “a 19-year-old from Bromley … that’s who she is, nothing else to it.” The US Open champion received the award in quarantine in Abu Dhabi, where she is recovering from Covid-19. She beat Tom Daley and Adam Peaty into second and third place, while England’s men’s footballers were named team of the year and Gareth Southgate the coach, as a triumphant period for British sport across the board was commemorated at a ceremony in Salford. Collecting her prize remotely, Raducanu wheeled the camera-shaped trophy from beneath her Zoom screen in celebration. “It’s such an honour just to be amongst these nominees, to win … it’s pretty amazing to me. I watched this growing up, so I’m really happy to join the past winners and I’m really happy for British tennis too. This past year has been absolutely insane.” Raducanu was strong favourite for the award from the moment she emerged from qualifying to storm through to the latter stages of competition at Flushing Meadow in September. Winning the US Open title in a thrilling final against fellow teenager Leylah Fernandez only cemented the prospect. It was the kind of sporting fairytale that comes around once in a generation. In any other year, many of the shortlist of contenders would have been staunch favourites to win the prize. Raheem Sterling was England’s leading scorer as the men’s football team made it to their first international final since 1966. More than that, he had grown up in the shadow of Wembley and overcome family trauma – and attacks from some sections of the media – to find success. Tom Daley won gold for the first time at his fourth Olympics in Tokyo, after using his figurative platform to stand up for LGBTQ+ equality. Dame Sarah Storey became the most successful Paralympian of all time in Tokyo, Adam Peaty Britain’s most successful swimmer, and Tyson Fury rounded out the shortlist, after his trilogy fight with Deontay Wilder went down as one of the greatest title bouts of all time. While there were loud rounds of applause inside the Salford Media City studio, the ceremony was completed without a studio audience, after BBC producers took the decision to impose Covid precautions a week before. There was access for 50 special guests, including the families of the shortlisted stars, and red carpet duties were still performed beforehand. But inside there was a more intimate sense to the occasion. While Sports Personality of the Year celebrates superhuman sporting achievement first and foremost, it has become expert at telling human stories. Just as with the BBC’s other sequin-dotted success, Strictly Come Dancing – the show is expert at drawing universal themes from individual experience. It happens almost incidentally at times, as with the moment Daley’s husband, Dustin Lance Black, observed the power of connection between the athlete and his father, Robert, who died when Daley was 17. “I think Tom was going to stay strong until he had achieved what he and his father had dreamed of,” Black said. “That gold medal.” Storey talked of the “intrinsic motivation” that she gained from her early years in training and making the right cup of tea to entice her parents out of bed to give her a lift; Peaty of the transformative effect of becoming a father; and the inspirational story of Arsenal’s Jen Beattie, who took home the Helen Rollason award as a result of her advocacy for sufferers of breast cancer, which she was diagnosed with in 2020. The most moving moment came with the award of the Unsung Hero prize to Sam Barlow of Hull for her leadership of the movement FitMums. She spoke of the death of her husband from cancer in 2020, a man who “would walk if he couldn’t run, and coach if he couldn’t walk”. She paid tribute to her organisation’s volunteers and insisted that “whatever happens, have hope”. Yet more than her ability to find light in darkness, it was the uproarious celebration that exploded in her sitting room when she was announced as the winner that will linger in the memory. Spoty can do laughs as well as tears.• A feature (‘He thought if you were young and fit, you’d be fine’, 30 November, G2, p4) should have said the Covid mortality rate for 40-year-olds with no underlying health conditions was about one in every 28,500 people infected, not one in every 1,490 people infected, which was the rate for all 40-year-olds. • An editing error saw Leeds railway station misnamed as “Leeds Central” station (Passenger levels fall as working from home returns, 14 December, p13). • Other recently amended articles include: What the interest rate rise means for your mortgage, debt and savings As a women’s rights lawyer, here’s my manifesto for fixing Britain’s broken system David Lasley obituary Goldman Sachs starts trading floor apprenticeship scheme to boost diversity ‘An artist in search of good material’: being a receptionist at an Auckland massage parlour Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.Jürgen Klopp said Harry Kane should have been dismissed for a foul that could have broken Andy Robertson’s leg and Liverpool should later have been awarded a penalty as he seethed at referee Paul Tierney’s handling of a thrilling 2-2 draw at Tottenham. The Liverpool manager confronted Tierney on the pitch after the game and was caught on camera shouting: “I have no problems with any referees, only you. You have never played football.” Klopp’s anger centred on Tierney’s decision to only book Kane for a dangerous tackle on Robertson and the refusal of VAR official Chris Kavanagh to consider a possible red card offence. The Liverpool left-back was later sent off himself when his yellow card was upgraded to red after VAR advised Tierney to check Robertson’s wild foul on Emerson Royal on the pitch-side monitor. The referee’s refusal to award a penalty when Emerson barged into Diogo Jota was another sore point. “The result was fine but the game would have been completely different with two decisions in the first half,” said Klopp, whose side now trail Manchester City by three points after their 4-0 win over Newcastle. “Let’s start with Robbo. We saw it back and yes you can give a red card there. It’s not the harshest ever but not the smartest as well and he knows that. He lost it a little bit. “This red card you can give but this was proof that VAR was there today because before that we thought he might not be in his office. I think we all agree that Harry Kane should have seen a red card, and he didn’t. “The penalty situation: Mr Tierney told me he thought Diogo Jota stopped on purpose, he wanted to get hit. That’s a very exclusive view. It’s really difficult to do these things that quick. It was a very quick decision from him. It’s a clear penalty but he thought it’s clearly not a penalty – wow. That’s obviously two wrong decisions from him, one right, and all three against us.” On Tierney, Klopp added: “What is his problem with me?” However he skirted over the possibility that Kane’s status as England captain afforded him leniency from match officials. “I have no idea. You have to ask VAR,” he said. “It’s a clear, absolutely 100% red card. If Andy Robertson’s foot is on the ground his leg is broken. Luckily for both it was in the air, but it’s still a red card. The ref saw it different.” Tottenham head coach Antonio Conte, by contrast, insisted it was wrong to berate the referee following an absorbing contest, although questioned the decision to allow Liverpool’s second goal after a handball in the buildup by Mohamed Salah. Conte said: “I haven’t seen the Robertson situation or the Harry Kane situation or the possibility of a penalty [for Dele Alli]. My staff said it was incredible that the second goal was not disallowed because it was a clear handball by Salah. The game was very exciting with great emotion and I don’t think it’s good for anyone to speak about the referee after a game like that. “I said this to my players: on the one hand we had a good performance against one of the best teams in the world, not only in Europe. On the other hand, when you create many, many chances you have to kill your opponent to get three points. For this reason we have to be a bit disappointed.”It’s all over! The BBC have already moved on to their Sunday evening drama “about a woman who is given the chance to move into a beautiful, ultra-minimalist house designed by an enigmatic architect”, and it’s time for me too to move on to the next phase of my evening. Congratulations to all the brilliant and inspiring athletes nominated for tonight’s awards. Bye! Let’s see what our champion has to say on the socials, and ... oh. And that is it! One more video montage - there has been some next-level montage action this evening - and it’s all over. Here’s our news story: Emma Raducanu speaks! To win is really pretty amazing to me. I’m really happy with this of course. I’ve watched Spoty growing up so I’m really happy to join the amazing list of past winners. Thanks for all the support I’ve received, it’s been absolutely insane, especially the energy I felt at Wimbledon, playing in front of my home crowd. That was something I’ve never felt before. Thanks to my team and to everyone else’s teams as well, because it’s definitely a team effort. The favourite has won it! She’s back on video link with a bashful wave, and a replica trophy to lift. In second place, it’s the equally conveniently studio-based diving legend and all-round good egg Tom Daley! In third place, it’s breaststroke monster Adam Peaty! Time, then, to announce the winner of the big one. Time to open the big golden envelope, and here are Jason and Laura Kenny to do it! Time is short, and there is only one award still to present. First, though, a reminder of some of the sporting personalities we have lost this year. Here’s Geoff Hurst on one of them, Jimmy Greaves: Next up is the coach of the year, and the expert panel voted unanimously to give the award to ... Gareth Southgate! “Gareth’s brilliant quality is more the man management,” says Bellingham. “The way he makes you feel as part of the squad. You always feel loved and you feel like there’s people in place to support you.” Southgate turns the humility dial up to 11 and says: “I’m very fortunate I work with good people and they make it a lot easier for me.” “I’m conscious the other teams won trophies,” admits Gareth Southgate, “but what appealed to people I think was that this team really pulled together through the whole summer and I think they represented the summer brilliantly on and off the pitch.” The team of the year is ... the England men’s football team! This is particularly good news for Jude Bellingham, whose journey now appears a bit more worthwhile. Three gongs to go, starting with the team of the year which is coming right up. “It’s unbelievable,” Rachel Blackmore says. “I really feel so many people at home voted or got someone in the UK to vote. The support has been incredible. I got such a kick out of being on that list of nominees. I only got to log on five minutes ago and ... Simone Biles just won an award! It’s overwhelming just to think that I’m getting an award next.” The World Sport Star of the Year is announced and it is ... Rachel Blackmore! What are the odds? The Grand National-winning jockey Rachel Blackmore, who is wearing her Spoty frock and is apparently at Manchester airport, is interviewed over the interweb. It’s not clear what has stopped her from leaving Manchester airport and completing the 20-minute drive - probably not much longer on horseback, at least for her, to Salford Media City. “I feel privileged to have had the year I’ve had,” she says. The Lifetime Achievement award is officially presented to Simone Biles. She’s only 24, so this seems a little bit much in the fast-forward world of gymnastics, but then again there doesn’t seem any point in needlessly waiting a few decades before giving it to her. She sends a recorded message, standing in front of a fireplace adorned with seven Christmas stockings, as yet unfilled. “I will keep on fighting for sport to be a safer place for young people to grow and flourish, and I will continue to speak out about mental health,” she promises. The Unsung Hero Award goes to Sam Barlow, founder of Fitmums &amp; Friends, who makes a fantastic astonished face when her name is read out. Fitmums’ website appears to have crashed. All the shortlisted athletes for the Emma Raducanu of the Year award have now been introduced, so the voting phone lines are open, and we now have 45 minutes of padding and filler while we wait for voted to be cast and counted. Raheem Sterling, who played and scored for Manchester City in Newcastle this afternoon, hasn’t got back to the city in time to make it to Salford. But he did have a chat with Gary Lineker from St James’ Park: The one thing that we do have as a collective, the belief within the team. We’ve got some players playing at the highest level. You could see against Germany, the belief that we had there, with everyone behind us. The environment that we have within the national team at the moment, each tournament we get better. The World Cup will be no different. We got to a final. We had people congratulating us but as a group we were disappointed. Now another opportunity, another time to get together and try to do the nation proud. We want to win it, and we’ll be ready. Gareth Southgate is in the studio for a chat about Euro 2020: An amazing journey. Of course you spend the months afterwards thinking about what might have been, then you reflect on the incredible job the players did. We took the whole country with us for a number of weeks. They did a brilliant job. We’ve got that nice moment as a team where we know we’re progressing. They’ve seen what’s possible and got close enough for that to fuel their hunger, but they haven’t got there yet. We’re in the mix [for next year’s World Cup], but we’ve got to be at our best. The competition’s really tight, but we can. The Helen Rollason award, given each year “for outstanding achievement in the face of adversity”, is presented to Arsenal’s Jen Beattie, who has come through breast cancer over the last year. Next up, Tom Daley. He has buttoned up his blouse since the red carpet. I’ve never met him, but I do think he seems a genuinely exceptional character, must be an inspiration to many, and would be a deserving winner of tonight’s big prize. Here’s some of what he had to say: To win the gold this year with Matty was a dream come true and something I thought was never going to happen to me. It’s been a long journey but it’s one I’m very proud of. Matty’s one of my best friends. It’s one of these amazing things, to go through the Olympic journey with someone else. I was a blubbering mess on the podium. I literally couldn’t even breathe. To be able to share that moment with one of your best friends is pretty special. To be able to say that I’m a gay man who was able to compete in the Olympic Games and was comfortable to do that ... For me, I think there’s been so many inspiring people this year. Females in sport, Sky Brown for little kids, and for me and other LGBT sportspeople I think it’s really important we make sport inclusive to everyone. Raducanu says 2022 “will be my first actual year on the tour”, a reminder of just how ludicrous her US Open win was. Further reading: Emma Raducanu, who is self-isolating in an Abu Dhabi hotel after testing positive for covid, joins us by videolink. She seems well. It’s pretty surreal. I’ve always watched Sports Personality and just to be nominated is a real honour. I feel the same and everyone near me is definitely the same and keeping me in my place, 100%. Nothing’s really changed. My parents never make a big deal out of anything I do that’s good. They’ve been normal, nothing too big, nothing too low, that’s the way they’ve brought me up. Tyson Fury is the first competitor for the evening’s main involved who is not present for the ceremony. Fury is of course a noted Spoty-sceptic: “It means nothing to me and I don’t need it or want it,” he said last year. “In fact, they will hear from my solicitors if they do put me on the list. Give it to someone who needs it. I don’t. We know who the sports personality of the year is anyway - it’s me. I am the sports personality.” Jude Bellingham at least got to see his family, so that’s something. Brown seems overcome. Bellingham seems to be wondering if he really had to travel all the way from Dortmund for a 30-second interview and an attempt to look dignified in defeat. The winner says: I want to inspire the world, especially little girls, and teach them that skateboarding is for everyone. And I want to get two gold medals from Paris for Great Britain! Matty Lee, who won gold with Tom Daley in the Olympic diving, announces the winner. And it’s Sky Brown! Award incoming! The three finalists for the Young Sportsperson of the Year award are in he stadio: Jude Bellingham of Borussia Dortmund and England, Paralympic swimmer Ellie Challis and13-year-old Olympic bronze medal-winning skateboarder Sky Brown. Sarah Storey is next in. A genuinely brilliant athlete and mother - here’s what she says of her kids deciding what she should do in Tokyo: We’ve always had them hugely involved with what I do. They come to all of my races, when we’re in the UK we’re in the motorhome, they help get things ready. They’ve been hugely involved. So when it came to that choice of whether I go for all three events or just the road race, they had to be involved. They didn’t realise how long I’d be away, but I’m never doing that again and I’ve made them that promise. If you want to read more, Donald McRae interviewed her earlier this month: Adam Peaty is, however, present in person. He has a chat with Gary Lineker and Gabby Logan, and very impressive he is too. Here he is on lockdown: Probably one of the toughest moments of my life, which is why I get emotional seeing moments like [his Olympics success]. Getting to those lane ropes was almost closing a chapter. The investment of time, love, energy, sport takes everything from you and I give everything. It was so tough, so tough. With no in-studio audience, a number of sportspeople are virtually attending on a big Zoom-style screen thing. It’s not ideal, but it’s better than nothing. Six minutes in, time for another video montage. This one’s an Olympic special. The ceremony has officially begun, as it will (probably) end - with a slow-motion video montage. Quite a good one, I must admit. Some early-evening reading: The Emma Raducanu of the Year award is not the only honour on offer this evening. Tonight’s other awards are: Young Emma Raducanu of the Year Helen Rollason award Unsung Hero Lifetime Achievement (Simone Biles is getting this one) World Sport Star of the Year (shortlist: Saul Alvarez, Rachael Blackmore, Tom Brady, Novak Djokovic, Elaine Thompson-Herah, Max Verstappen) Team of the Year Coach of the Year We kid, obviously. There are other contenders for the Emma Raducanu of the Year award, and they are: Tom Daley Tom Daley is nominated for completely Raducanuing the synchronised 10m platform diving, along side Matty Lee, at the Tokyo Olympics, before shedding hot, salty tears of joy at the medal ceremony. And also for knitting. Tyson Fury Tyson Fury Raducanued the WBC heavyweight title in Las Vegas in October by fighting Deontay Wilder for the third time and beating him for the second, twice clambering off the canvas before dropping his opponent in the 11th round. Adam Peaty Adam Peaty overcame a suspicious moustache to win two gold medals and a bonus silver at the Tokyo Olympics, continuing his ludicrous domination of the 100m breaststroke in the process. Raheem Sterling Raheem Sterling was one of England’s outstanding players as they reached the final of 2021’s Euro 2020, scoring three goals in the process, before the team lost on penalties to Italy at Wembley. Sarah Storey Storey expanded her ludicrously outsized collection of Paralympic gold medals to 17 - seventeen - with another three in Tokyo, and took her overall medal count to 28 in the process. Are any of them more deserving of the award than Emma Raducanu? Time alone will tell! Greetings and welcome to the Guardian’s live coverage of the BBC Emma Raducanu of the Year awards! Who could possibly win this hotly-contested prize? Let’s look at the shortlist: Emma Raducanu of the Year contender No1: Emma Raducanu Emma Raducanu became the first British woman to win a grand slam title since Virginia Wade in 1977, and the first qualifier, when she won the US Open in ludicrously classy style in September. So, there’s your full list of contenders for the evening’s main prize. Who could possibly win? Don’t miss the next couple of hours of guaranteed uncertainty and drama!Who are you exactly? And what have you done with Tottenham Hotspur? At the end of a week menaced by illness, schedule horror and lurking event anxiety, something unexpected happened in north London, as the players of Spurs and Liverpool dished up a glorious, ragged, startlingly carefree game of football. Both teams might have scored four or five, or none at all, although in the end a 2-2 draw felt fair enough. Both managers had complained in advance about a lack of planning time. Antonio Conte was forced to train with a set of static mannequins, a state of affairs that presents so many punchlines, not to mention an entire self-contained Eric Dier section, that it demands its own dedicated two-hour Spurs stand-up special. But as the ball was zinged about between the white and red shirts, the players running wildly, with no breaks or breaths, this felt like a glimpse of a more agreeably anarchic sporting world. Mainly it felt like a shift of gear for Spurs, perhaps even a moment of ignition for the manager. Conte has a very distinct, even rather hammy kind of persona: the inspirationalist, the magnetic personality, the man who simply demands better air, purer human material. A lot of this is bound up in theatre and show. But why not? Football is theatre and show. As Conte whirled and crouched in his rectangle – as he turned to sprint and howl, eyes boggling, at each Tottenham goal, as though, he, Antonio Conte, had just personally zinged the ball into the Liverpool net – there was a sense of something stirring; and, by the end, of a first genuine fork of lightning shot through this bolted-together collection of human parts. English football loves to talk about systems, and about “Philosophy”. We are all Philosophers now. I have a Philosophy, you have a Philosophy, Aidy Boothroyd has a Philosophy. But this often breaks down into something more basic: energy, emotion, feelings. Conte’s starting flat back five gave a powerful basic structure. But the real change was textural, as this hurled-together Spurs team produced a kind of anger-football, something spiky and a little uncontrolled. Perhaps the most significant note of transformation was in Harry Kane, who had sleepwalked through the autumn but produced a performance here that was both precise and scattergun, urgently alive and caked with sleep dust, lethal early on but bafflingly wonky the rest of the time. Kane and Conte: this is, as ever, the key relationship in this setup. And with better timing and better finishing Spurs’ captain could have scored pretty much the same goal three or four times. With six minutes gone he drew a wonderful block in front of goal from Ibrahima Konaté, when he really should have scored. Moments later he was in again, haring into the same inside-right channel, released by a fine pass from Tanguy Ndombele. Suddenly Kane had nothing but grass, goal, netting, the mustard yellow styling of Alisson in front of him. He clipped the ball low into the corner, his first goal in this stadium since August, his first league goal here since May, two managers ago. In those early exchanges Liverpool played a ridiculously high defensive line. With the pressure eased by a rejigged midfield, Spurs always seemed one pass away from setting Heung-min Son off in a foot race with the Liverpool centre-backs – a foot race that, frankly, Son wins on one leg carrying a small Chesterfield sofa on his back, while also taking a detour via Seven Sisters Sunday fruit market. And Son was magnificent here, the outstanding player on the pitch, looking refreshed, Conte-ised, and sharp in front of goal for his late equaliser. Which was a good thing too, because Kane kept missing chances. He should have scored from Dele Alli’s cut-back but tried something cute as the ball declined to run on. He might have flicked in a snap header from six yards out. He had shots blocked that really should have been shots on target. He also might have been sent off for a sliding lunge through Andy Robertson that required a jump plus forward flip in order to avoid mangled shins. Red cards are given for less reckless and less dangerous acts than this. By half-time eight different Liverpool players had taken a total of 12 shots at goal. Jürgen Klopp’s depleted team had equalised with a fine header from Diogo Jota, then took the lead through Robertson who was later (keep up) deservedly sent off. And yes, it is just a point, against a 10-man Liverpool team. It is just one game in the middle of a Covid-shadowed muddle. But it felt like something astringent and purging too, to see Harry Winks charging into tackles, Son and Kane once again like two men roped together on a mountain. Perhaps it was even a kind of exorcism after the deathly presence of José Mourinho, the muteness of Nuno Espírito Santo, who carried all the emotional presence of a damp V-neck sweater rigged up on the touchline between two broom handles. What is certain is Spurs are still unbeaten in the Premier League under Conte. And that coming here will now present an obstacle, an energy to be resisted. Show, theatre, plus a little simple structure. Seasons have turned on less.New Orleans’ defense gave Tom Brady fits again, shutting down Tampa Bay’s high-powered offense Sunday night as the Saints put the Buccaneers’ division-title celebration plans on hold with a 9-0 victory over the reigning Super Bowl champions. Despite playing without coach Sean Payton on the sideline, the Saints (7-7) beat the Bucs (10-4) for the seventh straight time during the regular season – fourth since Brady left New England for Tampa Bay in 2020. The victory gave New Orleans a sweep of the season series between the NFC South rivals and boosted the Saints into playoff position. It also forced Tampa Bay to wait at least one another week to clinch its first division crown since 2007. The Bucs, who did win a playoff game at New Orleans last January en route to winning the Super Bowl, lead the division by three games with three weeks remaining in the regular season. With defensive coordinator Dennis Allen standing in for Payton, who missed the game after testing positive for Covid-19, the Saints stymied the NFL’s No 1 passing and scoring offense and ended Brady’s streak of 255 consecutive starts without being shut out. Brady leads the NFL in completions, attempts, yards passing and touchdown passes, but was just 26 of 48 for 213 yards and one interception – the eighth he’s thrown in four regular-season games against the Saints, who didn’t have any turnovers Sunday night. Taysom Hill, meanwhile, was 13 of 27 for 154 yards and no interceptions for New Orleans, which also got field goals of 39, 35 and 42 yards from Brett Maher. The Saints have won the NFC South every year since 2017, and despite losing star quarterback Drew Brees to retirement and his successor, Jameis Winston, to a season-ending knee injury, they’re not relinquishing the crown without a fight. Trevor Siemian came off the bench to replace Winston and lead New Orleans to a 36-27 victory in the first meeting between the fierce rivals on 31 October. Brady threw for 375 yards and two TDs in that one, but also lost a fumble and had one of his two interceptions returned for a touchdown in the loss. This time, the Saints defense sacked Brady four times, forced a fumble by the 44-year-old quarterback that ruined Tampa Bay’s best scoring opportunity in the second half, and also intercepted the seven-time Super Bowl winner once. Arizona Cardinals 12-30 Detroit Lions Kyler Murray had a shaky performance and that helped the Detroit Lions stun the Arizona Cardinals 30-12 on Sunday. The Cardinals (10-4) started the day tied for the NFL’s best record and were undefeated on the road. While the Lions (2-11-1) were mired at the bottom of the league standings before the first snap. Arizona, coming off a loss on Monday night to the NFC West-rival Los Angeles Rams, missed their chance to get in the playoffs for the first time since 2015 with a win over a team it was favored to beat by nearly two touchdowns. The Cardinals can still earn a postseason berth during Week 15, but they’ll need some other playoff contenders to lose. And in any scenario, Murray will have to play better. The third-year quarterback was 23 of 41 for 257 yards with a touchdown and an interception, adding up to a 72.9 passer rating. The third-year pro has had a slightly lower rating twice this season, and the Cardinals lost both games to the Rams and Green Bay. Murray couldn’t get away from the scrappy Lions when he tried to run, and finished with three yards rushing on four carries. By the time Murray threw a touchdown pass, there was 4:40 left in the game and Arizona trailed by 15 points. Detroit kicked a field goal on the ensuing drive, essentially sealing the win, and coach Kliff Kingsbury put Colt McCoy in the game in place of Murray. Houston Texans 30-16 Jacksonville Jaguars Tremon Smith returned a kickoff 98 yards for a touchdown, ending the longest drought in the NFL, and the Houston Texans beat woeful Jacksonville 30-16 on Sunday to end a three-game skid and extend their dominance in the series. Smith somehow escaped five defenders near the 30-yard line – Jaguars safety Rayshawn Jenkins broke his right ankle trying to make the tackle – before coasting the rest of the way. It was Houston’s first kickoff return for a score since 4 October 2009. Every other NFL team had enjoyed at least one since. Rookie quarterback Davis Mills won for the first time in eight starts. He connected with Brandin Cooks twice for touchdowns, once early and again late. The second one was a 43-yarder that sealed yet another Houston victory against Jacksonville. The Texans (3-11) won their eighth straight against the Jaguars (2-12), sweeping their rivals for the ninth time in the last 11 years. The latest one capped a tumultuous week for Jacksonville, who fired Urban Meyer early Thursday to end one of the worst coaching tenures in NFL history. Instead, the lowly Texans rolled – again. Dallas Cowboys 21-6 New York Giants Defensive end DeMarcus Lawrence forced a fumble and made two other big plays that led to 15 points and the NFL-East leading Dallas Cowboys inched closer to their first playoff berth since 2018 with a 21-6 win over the error-plagued New York Giants Sunday. Dak Prescott threw touchdown, Ezekiel Elliott scored on a 13-yard run and the defense forced four turnovers, including Trevon Diggs’ NFL-leading 10th interception. The Cowboys (10-4) won their third straight. Greg Zuerlein added three field goals. Dallas would clinch a playoff berth later Sunday with a loss or tie by New Orleans or a loss by San Francisco. Graham Gano kicked field goals of 35 and 42 yards as the Giants (4-10) lost their third straight game with backup Mike Glennon starting for the injured Daniel Jones (neck). This game was not as close as the score. Dallas has four takeaways in three straight games for the ninth time in team history, and the first since 1994. The Cowboys never trailed and the Giants never looked threatening against a defense that also got interceptions from Jourdan Lewis and Malik Hooker. New York Jets 24-31 Miami Dolphins DeVante Parker caught an 11-yard touchdown pass from Tua Tagovailoa with 3:37 left, Duke Johnson rushed for two scores and the Miami Dolphins extended their winning streak to six games by topping the New York Jets 31-24 on Sunday. Johnson – basically the go-to back for Miami as a last resort because of virus-related issues throughout the week – finished with 107 yards on 22 carries for the Dolphins (7-7), who rallied from an early 10-0 deficit. It was the first two-rushing-TD game of Johnson’s NFL career and the first 100-yard game from a Miami rusher this season. Defensive lineman Christian Wilkins caught a touchdown pass early in the fourth quarter for Miami, juggling the ball before controlling it and then letting loose with a wild celebration. The 6ft 4in, 310lb defensive lineman leaped into the stands, then did “the worm” in the end zone as teammates danced around him. Brandin Echols had a 20-yard interception return for a touchdown midway through the fourth for the Jets. Zach Wilson and Braxton Berrios rushed for scores for New York; Wilson completed 13 of 23 passes for 170 yards for the Jets. The Dolphins became the second team in NFL history to get to 7-7 after starting a season 1-7. The other team on that list – the Jets, in 1974. The season was only 14 weeks back then, so that’s where the Jets’ turnaround ended and did so without a playoff berth. Tennessee Titans 13-19 Pittsburgh Steelers Ben Roethlisberger ran for his first touchdown in three years, Chris Boswell kicked four field goals and the Pittsburgh Steelers kept their playoff hopes alive with a 19-13 win over Tennessee on Sunday. The Steelers (7-6-1) forced the Titans (9-5) into four turnovers and needed every one of them to win for the second time in three games. Despite the miscues, Tennessee drove deep into Pittsburgh territory in the final moments, but wide receiver Nick Westbrook-Ikhine was tackled inches short of the first down at the Steelers 11 with 27 seconds to go. Pittsburgh remained in the mix in the muddled AFC North despite managing just 168 yards of total offense. Roethlisberger threw for 148 yards to move past Philip Rivers into fifth on the NFL’s career yards passing list, but it was his legs – and Pittsburgh’s resilient defense – that provided the difference. Ten days after getting gashed in a loss to Minnesota, the Steelers responded by picking off Ryan Tannehill once and recovering three Tennessee fumbles. Each turnover led to field goals by Boswell, the final one a 48-yard kick with 4:34 to go. The Titans ran for 202 yards, including 108 by D’Onta Foreman. Yet Tannehill struggled to find any rhythm in the passing game. He needed 23 completions to throw for 153 yards and was sacked four times, including one and a half by Pittsburgh linebacker TJ Watt, giving him 17 and a half on the season, a franchise record. While Tennessee remains in control of the AFC South with three games remaining, the Titans missed a chance to move into AFC’s top seed. Carolina Panthers 14-31 Buffalo Bills Josh Allen threw three touchdown passes, Devin Singletary ran for a season-high 86 yards with his quarterback mostly kept in the pocket by a sprained left foot and the Buffalo Bills beat the offensively challenged Carolina Panthers 31-14 Sunday. Allen finished 19 of 34 for 210 yards while Singletary kept Buffalo moving on the ground and opened the scoring on a 16-yard run. The Bills limited Allen’s mobility a week after the fourth-year starter was hurt in a 33-27 overtime loss at Tampa Bay. Allen was sacked a season-high four times for 17 yards. He scrambled once for 26 yards in the third quarter. Gabriel Davis scored twice, including a 20-yard catch on a post route for a 24-8 lead with six minutes left in the third quarter – Davis had several steps on defender Rashaan Melvin on that one. Davis also scored on a 14-yard catch in the fourth quarter, and Stefon Diggs had an 11-yard TD grab in a game the Bills never trailed. Buffalo (8-6) were at risk of its first three-game skid in three years. The Bills have won four of nine games and kept a hold of at least a wild-card spot. They can still repeat as AFC East champions, too, with a key showdown against first-place New England (9-5) next Sunday. Atlanta Falcons 13-31 San Francisco 49ers Jimmy Garoppolo threw for 235 yards and a TD, San Francisco ran for three more scores and the 49ers won for the fifth time in six games, beating the Atlanta Falcons 31-13 on Sunday. The Niners (8-6) scored touchdowns on four straight drives to make easy work of the Falcons (6-8) to remain in wild-card position as the sixth-place team in the NFC. Atlanta got stopped at the goal line on its first possession of the game and lost a fumble on a strip sack by Nick Bosa on the opening drive of the second half. That helped the Niners take control as they took advantage of the good field position to drive 38 yards to take a 24-10 lead on Jeff Wilson Jr’s 5-yard run. The Falcons settled for a field goal in the red zone on their next possession when pressure by Arden Key forced Matt Ryan into an incomplete pass on third-and-goal from the 4. San Francisco responded with a 75-yard drive capped by Garoppolo’s 4-yard TD pass to Jauan Jennings. Kyle Juszczyk and and Deebo Samuel scored on San Francisco’s other TD runs in the first half. Ryan threw for 236 yards with a 20-yard TD to Russell Gage in the first half, but was under relentless pressure most of the game. Green Bay Packers 31-30 Baltimore Ravens Aaron Rodgers threw three touchdown passes – tying Brett Favre on Green Bay’s career list – and the Packers became the first team this season to clinch a division title, wrapping up the NFC North with a 31-30 win over Baltimore. The Ravens missed another big two-point conversion in the final minute. With Lamar Jackson out with a sprained ankle, Tyler Huntley nearly led Baltimore (8-6) all the way back from a 31-17 deficit. His 8-yard touchdown run with 42 seconds left pulled the Ravens within one, but Huntley’s two-point conversion pass was incomplete. It was the third consecutive loss for Baltimore, which also fell to Pittsburgh two weekends ago on a missed two-point conversion in the final seconds. The Ravens fell into a first-place tie in the AFC North with Cincinnati. Ravaged this season by injuries – especially in the secondary – Baltimore faced a difficult task trying to stop Rodgers and the Green Bay receivers. The Ravens mounted enough time-consuming drive of their own to keep the game close, but the Packers had the ball first after a 14-14 halftime tie and took advantage. Baltimore appeared to have Green Bay (11-3) stopped on a third-down incompletion, but minimal contact by Kevon Seymour was enough for a pass interference flag. Rodgers found Aaron Jones for a nine-yard touchdown on the next play. The Ravens drove into Green Bay territory before another devastating penalty. With Baltimore running the ball effectively and preparing to go on fourth-and-1 in the red zone, Ben Cleveland committed a false start. The Ravens settled for a field goal, and Green Bay drove 88 yards, taking an 11-point lead on an 11-yard pass from Rodgers to Marquez Valdes-Scantling. That was Rodgers’ 442nd touchdown pass, pulling him even with Favre. He went 23 of 31 for 268 yards. Rodgers has thrown for 13 touchdowns without an interception over his last four games and didn’t appear the slightest bit limited by his toe injury. Cincinnati Bengals 15-10 Denver Broncos Khalid Kareem snatched the ball from backup quarterback Drew Lock on second-and-goal early in the fourth quarter and the Cincinnati Bengals stayed in the thick of the logjammed AFC playoff race with a 15-10 win over the Denver Broncos on Sunday. The Bengals (8-6) won despite star rookie receiver Ja’Marr Chase being held to a single catch for three yards and Tee Higgins managing only 23 yards on two catches. The Broncos (7-7) saw their postseason hopes whittled with their fourth home loss of the season. Lock was in for Teddy Bridgewater, who was taken to the hospital in the third quarter for further evaluation of a head injury after he was carted off the field following a scary collision that also sent Bengals linebacker Joe Bachie from the game with a leg injury. Bridgewater had movement in his extremities and coach Vic Fangio said he’d be held overnight for observation but was expected to be OK. With the Bengals’ dynamic duo of Chase and Higgins bottled up, Tyler Boyd caught five passes for 96 yards, including a 56-yard touchdown throw from Joe Burrow moments after Denver had taken a 10-9 lead late in the third quarter. Boyd also caught a critical 19-yard pass to set up a last-second field goal just before halftime and he hauled in a 15-yard pass on third-and-10 from the Cincinnati 22 with about three minutes left that allowed the Bengals to chew up another two minutes before punting the ball back to the Broncos at the Denver 15 with 64 seconds left. Lock couldn’t get them out of the shadow of their own end zone as the Bengals ended their two-game skid.JP Delaney (one of the pseudonyms used by the prolific author Tony Strong) writes well-paced thrillers with a great hook. Like Salman Rushdie and Fay Weldon, Strong was originally an ad man at Ogilvy &amp; Mather and his books are the kind you can read with half your brain somewhere else (in an airport lounge, hospital waiting room or booster queue) with no harm done. The Girl Before (BBC One) is the first of his Delaney books to be brought to the screen, and it has neither gained nor lost anything in translation. This is not a complaint. Solid storytelling is a great and needed skill, especially at this exhausting time of year and at the end of this particularly exhausting year or two (or three, four or five … ). I mean merely to manage your expectations, so you match material to mood and have as good a time as possible. The story comprises two alternating timelines. The first (chronologically speaking) involves a young couple, Emma (Jessica Plummer) and Simon (Ben Hardy), who move into One Folgate Street, a beautiful ultra-minimalist, fully automated house, designed and built by owner-landlord and enigmatic architect Edward Monkford (David Oyelowo, unerringly treading the fine line between self-possessed and creepy), in the wake of a traumatic burglary of their own home. All potential candidates are vetted by a questionnaire (sample queries: what are your only truly essential possessions; would you sacrifice yourself to save 10 innocent people; is your spider-sense tingling yet; why don’t you just play it safe and head over to Rightmove now?) and then interviewed by Edward. Despite Simon not wanting to live there because they are naturally messy and Emma promptly proving this by spilling her coffee over the blueprints on Edward’s desk, Edward (who seems – and I think we’ll formally capitalise this to make it as clear as it is in the book and on screen – Strangely Drawn to Emma) nevertheless accepts them as tenants. They have to sign a special contract that precludes, among other things, children, pets, rugs, ornaments, books, anything being left on the bed or floors or any new plants in the garden, and which allows inspections to make sure the 200 rules are being followed. Sure, you reason, as Emma crams the single wardrobe provided with every garment she owns and they immediately get a coke-fuelled, wine-spilling, candle-wax-dripping housewarming party underway, nothing can go wrong here. The second timeline involves a new tenant, Jane (Gugu Mbatha-Raw), who has also agreed to the exacting house rules, having made Edward’s grade. She is the first, the agent tells her, to do so in the three years since the last lot left and is also moving in the wake of a trauma. She also looks almost exactly like Emma, but surely this is just a massive coinkydink, yes? No. But again, no harm done. It’s the red flags that make it fun. Jane is savvier than Emma and Simon, and interrogates her landlord about the hows, whys and wherefores of her extremely affordable rent and his decision not to live in his own house. He explains that the electronic housekeeper system gathers information on “the user experience” – that’s you, Jane. Here, take this red flag. Don’t plant it in the garden, you’re not allowed, but take it please – and the data (“Almost nothing that Google or Facebook don’t know about you”) is in place of market rent. Oh, and he doesn’t live there because his wife and baby were killed by a collapsing wall on a site visit during the build. Anyway, sign here. Bouquets of flowers are left on her doorstep in the days after she moves in. Eventually, she catches the man leaving them. It is Simon. Why the flowers, bucko? Why, to mark the third anniversary of his wife’s death. Didn’t Jane know the previous tenant died there? For some reason, Simon does not remark upon the unmistakable resemblance between Jane and Emma, but fortunately the interest of Jane’s colleague is struck by the death-in-situ news and pulls up a picture of her online. Jane and friend agree they look very similar indeed. Anyway, sleep well in your rugless, bookless, clutter-free bedroom, subject to inspection at any time, Jane. Edward, who we see in his office moving a little Jane figure round a scale model of the house on his desk as he talks to her on the phone, asks her out later. She says no, then yes. By this point the red flags are floating in a pool of the brain matter that has peacefully deliquesced over the last hour and leaked gently out of your ears. That too is part of the fun.During vulnerable times, it’s not always easy to seek support. We can feel alienated, isolated, or ashamed, and turn away from those who might be able to help us. From providing support when people leave prison to empowering at-risk youth through education and music, these social enterprises are finding innovative new ways to offer their services, connect with the community and give people the tools they need to change their lives. Helping young people connect through their passions Mark Robertson has plenty of strings to his bow. As well as being the founder of One Vision Productions and MPOWER, he’s a hip-hop artist, filmmaker and secondary school teacher. After growing up living on the streets, Robertson now helps young people find connection and community for lasting change. Engaging teenagers in mental health support is tricky, he says: “A lot of kids don’t know how to access mental health, and then when they do, they feel alienated by the system because it’s not innovative.” Robertson created One Vision Productions, a mental health organisation that uses music and film to empower youth. “For over a decade, we’ve been doing workshops, using culture, music, circle environments, making songs and film clips to give youth a platform for their passion,” he says. From there, he and his team created MPOWER, a digital toolkit designed specifically for the mental health needs of young people. “It’s a massive online platform,” he says. MPOWER offers about 250 videos, made by everyone from famous artists to Indigenous knowledge keepers to mental health specialists to pioneers in music and dance. “Really, it’s to support the kids’ passions and teach them how to connect.” There is also an accompanying school curriculum, which Robertson says gives power to teachers in a school system that offers limited mental health education. Now, with support from Westpac Foundation, MPOWER is creating an app that will take the connections even further. “The kids will be able to rap or sing on it, they’ll be able to challenge their friends,” Robertson says. “It’s geared towards their passions, and the artists and people they look up to, while at the same time offering guidance and connectivity to support their mental health. “We want to use innovation so kids can connect and talk freely about what’s going on. And we want them to learn these skills as early as possible.” Helping women find safety and happiness On the NSW-Victoria border, there’s an organisation that offers comprehensive help for women experiencing domestic violence, sexual assault and mental illness. With general manager Marge Nichol at the helm, the Women’s Centre for Health and Wellbeing Albury-Wodonga helps more than 3,000 women every year – and its support is expanding. During Covid-19, social distancing forced some of the centre’s services online. For Nichol, this was an opportunity to offer a new type of support to women. “We’ve got Zoom and face-to-face counselling,” she says. “If they can’t make it into our centre, they know there will be someone on video or phone to talk to them. Our service has been able to reach a lot more women, and more regularly.” The foundation believes supporting innovation in small community organisations is a critical part of tackling disadvantage and unemployment. With these online services now familiar to many of its clients, the centre plans to expand its offering, incorporating new programs based on feedback it had not previously been able to gather. “In the next year or so, we’re looking at things like, what is mindfulness? What is depression? We’re looking at the needs of these women and improving what we offer so we’re actually meeting more of them down the track.” As it looks to the future, the centre plans to build more partner relationships and community connections to provide even more of the services most needed at the border. “It makes a difference to know that you can do it and you can make a difference,” Nichol says. “You can see women start to feel good about themselves, even if just to be a mum or a friend again. We see them be who they want to be, not who they’ve been told to be.” Creating new futures for people leaving prison Australia’s prison recidivism rates are growing. According to the most recent figures, almost half of NSW prisoners returned to jail within two years of their release. It’s a figure made even more confronting by the fact that Australia also has one of the highest per prisoner annual costs in the world: a total of more than $4.6bn a year. Prisoners Aid NSW was established in 1901 with the goal of providing practical help to inmates, ex-inmates and their families. Tim Laporte is chair of both the organisation and its recently created social enterprise, Mates on the Move. The latter provides work experience and training pathways for people who have come out of prison, through commercial waste collection and recycling. Mates On The Move provides work experience and training. While Prisoners Aid is one of Australia’s oldest nonprofits, Mates on the Move is proud to innovate. One of its current projects is transforming its IT systems to create an interconnected, centralised and scalable platform to run operations and training programs. “My vision is to build the IT system we need for our team to become much more productive and allow interactive and responsive learning,” Laporte says. “This will allow our managers to spend less time on admin and focus on what they are good at: social work, caring for and supporting people. “Our new training program, Mates for Life, is designed to seamlessly engage with people leaving prison so they can develop the life skills they need for when they re-enter society, and ultimately lower the stigma that comes with serving time in prison.” Westpac Foundation Community Grants make social innovation possible Each of these organisations has achieved goals with backing from Westpac Foundation Community Grants, and they all say the support goes far beyond financial. “Westpac has been amazing,” Laporte says. “We had a very successful gala fundraising dinner with the Premier and lots of well-known people, and they hosted it for us.” Nichol agrees. “The grant has enabled our job readiness program, and through that … women achieve their goals,” she says. Robertson says the foundation’s support has been vital in the development of MPOWER. “It’s enabled us to get an app and take this to the next level,” he says. “Without that support, the next part of this crucial process just would not be able to happen.” The foundation believes supporting innovation in small community organisations is a critical part of tackling disadvantage and unemployment. Ross Miller, chief customer engagement officer at Westpac, says: “Westpac Foundation supports local communities across Australia by partnering with small organisations and social enterprises doing important work that has a big impact. “Employment can be a powerful pathway out of disadvantage and helps to build stronger, more inclusive communities – so we want to do everything we can to support these organisations.” Find out more about Westpac Foundation and the social enterprises and community organisations it supports.