Like many modern idioms, the phenomenon of “being in the hot seat” carries a diverse, and not altogether pleasant, etymology. Modern usage of the phrase, though, holds a more benign meaning: to indicate that an individual or entity is the subject of intense scrutiny for poor performance. Or to provide a real-world example, the current position of Western Sydney’s Carl Robinson. The Wanderers coach and his players were booed by their own supporters following 2-0 defeat to Macarthur FC on Saturday, after Robinson was snookered by the rope-a-dope tactics of counterpart Ante Miličić that afforded the hosts two-thirds of the ball in anticipation that the opposition would be devoid of inspiration in the final third. It came after a mid-week defeat to semi-professional and out-of-season NPL NSW side APIA Leichhardt that put the Wanderers out of the FFA Cup. Robinson, just days after declaring it a fixture “we’ve got to take seriously” and discounting “wholesale changes” sent out a lethargic, second-string side and was promptly made to pay for what was either a deliberate strategy of load management – ostensibly for the Macarthur game – or hubris. If there was any doubt beforehand, smoke is now billowing from beneath his perch in the dugout. “Supporters have got every right to be disappointed. I’m disappointed, the players are disappointed,” Robinson said after Saturday’s loss. “Don’t blame the players, if you want to blame anyone, blame me. I am thick-skinned enough to do that. I understand football is a results-driven business.” Given the apoplectic mood amongst the Wanderers faithful (#RobinsonOut got a good workout across social media over the past week), it was the right thing to say in that situation. Australian football is not an environment that readily welcomes toxic blame-shifting à la José Mourinho – generally, excuses are given in a more subtle manner. But even if it was, the Welshman simply lacks a legacy of success that would afford him licence to go full scorched earth. Given that no ALM coach has been given stronger backing or a wider remit to recruit, taking aim at his players would also have effectively replaced one rod in his back for another – if the players aren’t good enough then that’s on him as well. That Robinson found the right tone should not be surprising though, given one of the defining characteristics since his arrival in Parramatta has been his ability to find the right words – He had instilled hope the club would ascend to become the biggest club in the land and, when reality bit, shifted the conversation elsewhere or forwards. The problem in Sydney’s west, though, is that this ability to dazzle off the pitch is in stark contrast to a continued inability to get things right on it – or even hint at an overarching approach that could eventually deliver the club to the promised land. Fourteen months into the latest attempt to find success in the post-Tony Popovic era, the Wanderers lack a discernible identity in their play and continue to be placed behind the eight-ball when their opposition makes the decision to simply let them have the ball. To provide some contrast, it has taken just four games for Arthur Papas to instil a clear – albeit madcap – direction at the Newcastle Jets. Despite having what on paper is possibly the strongest team in ALM, the Wanderers have looked second best in every game this season and the officiating in their lone win was of sufficient quality to reportedly earn the vanquished Wellington Phoenix an apology from Football Australia. Given the institutional advantages the club holds, it should be an unacceptable predicament. Admittedly, being on the hot-seat early on in the season doesn’t have to spell disaster. Patrick Kisnorbo cut a strained figure early on in 2020-21 only for Melbourne City to promptly find their feet and run away with the league. And until the axe falls, there is always a chance for a turnaround – and this squad is talented enough to compete. But when ambitious ownership meets an uncertain direction, things can also move quickly, as Marco Kurz found out after 11 games at Melbourne Victory in 2019-20. The issue that then arises, as Victory found out, is what comes next.This revival of John Kander and Fred Ebb’s 1966 musical might as well come with its own distinctive Kit Kat Club drumroll: one of the hottest – and more expensive – tickets of the year, its high concept staging extends across the venue, turning the foyers and the facade into the Weimar-era Berlin cabaret club in which its drama is set. There is also the drum-roll hype of Eddie Redmayne’s casting as the club’s impish Emcee. Appearing on a London stage for the first time in a decade, he has a long way to fall in a part whose songs, interspersed through the show, are central to its shifting tone, from the permissiveness and bonhomie of the late 1920s to the rise of the Third Reich. But from the moment we are “Willkommened” by Redmayne, it is clear he is in control of his material and electric in his part. As the soiled soul of Berlin, Redmayne’s Emcee mirrors the movement from light to dark; he is a comically twisted Rumpelstiltskin at the start, uncoiling to a figure resembling a terrible evil fairy or angel of death by the end. There are several moments at which we catch our breath, one coming in “If You Could See Her” in which he pushes the comic absurdism of singing a soppy love song to a gorilla and then chills us with the last, antiSemitic line, spat out like snake venom rather than whispered like Joel Grey’s comic aside in the 1972 film. It does not matter that Redmayne’s voice is drowned out by the orchestra at times. He gives an immense, physicalised performance, both muscular and delicate, from his curled limbs to his tautly expressive fingertips. Rebecca Frecknall’s production on the whole lives up to its hype, magnetising us with flamboyant camp and then delivering menace that feels freshly charged. Jessie Buckley, as Sally Bowles, first emerges as a glassy-eyed, underage sex-bomb – an obscene Shirley Temple in a frou-frou dress. Buckley plays her as the opposite of Liza Minnelli’s fun-loving chanteuse. Here she is a plummy-voiced Sloane who is emphatically unsexy with an edge of severity. But she sings with astonishing command, and there is an especially breath-taking version of “Cabaret” which is full of zombie-like darkness that sucks all of Minnelli’s froth out of it. Omari Douglas brings a gentle sweetness to his part as the bisexual American novelist, Clifford Bradshaw, but seems hemmed in by the role, as muted as his beige suit, though there is one flaring moment of passion when he kisses another man. Together, they do not spark romantic chemistry as the central couple. Their scenes together feel static and are side-lined by the passion of the show’s older couple: the boarding house landlady, Fraulein Schneider (Liza Sadovy), and the Jewish grocer, Herr Schultz (Elliot Levey). They become this production’s heart, first surprised to have found love so late and then broken when Nazi fervour drives them apart. “What Would You Do?” sings the Fraulein, and we feel her caught between the immovable forces of fascism, survival, and love. Together, they are magnificently tender and tragic. Tom Scutt’s stage design is expressionistic and imaginative: a train journey is represented by a model train revolving around the outer part of the three-tiered, circular stage. “Tomorrow Belongs to Me” has miniature model men standing to attention on the revolve, replaced by real men in its reprise, which is infused with ominous, stomping movements and a martial drum beat, prefiguring the terror to come. The auditorium is re-arranged with tables and chairs which creates the intimacy of a cabaret club, accompanied by Isabella Byrd’s cleanly sensational spot-lighting. Some of the early scenes seem like discrete warm-up acts, filled with romp, burlesque and transgressive naughtiness. The minor characters are beautifully realised too: Cliff’s friend, Ernst (Stewart Clarke), never loses his affability even after he reveals himself a Nazi. The Kit Kat Club’s dancers are by turns vulgar, comical and sexy with a thrilling blend of genders, and the musical comedy tickles with cartoonish charm, especially as Fraulein Kost (Anna-Jane Casey) smuggles her night trade of sailors into the boarding house. “Two Ladies” looks like a hazy theatrical wet dream, staged amid an orgy of tangled bodies – one character masturbates to Mein Kampf and another makes luridly suggestive moves on a sink plunger. Occasionally, it verges on outre overload. In the far shorter and overly sinister second half, Julia Cheng’s sinewy and soaring choreography is key to the tip from hedonism to hate: high-kicks start to resemble goose-steps and street violence is conveyed in a dance of outstretched limbs and a jacket balled in the fists of the performers. Redmayne creeps around the fringes of the stage when he is not performing, watching scenes from afar. If this show is sold on his star turn, we get more than our money’s worth with his blinding performance – in this blinder of a show. Cabaret is at the Playhouse theatre, London, until 1 October 2022.The UK’s housing market is likely to return to more normal levels of activity in 2022 but will still be busy, with strong buyer demand carrying forward into next year and a rebound in the number of homeowners apparently getting ready to sell, according to Rightmove. The property website said that following a “frenzied” 18 months, the market was heading for a “less frenetic” period, with a more even balance between buyers and sellers as more homes are put up for sale and higher interest rates take some of the heat out of buyer demand. It said one sign of a return to more traditional conditions was its finding that the market had experienced its usual “December dip”, with the average asking price of a home falling by 0.7% – or £2,234 – over the past month. However, this UK-wide figure disguises regional variations: in London and Scotland typical asking prices have fallen by more than that – by 1.6% and 3.5% respectively – but in other regions such as the East and West Midlands, they rose by up to 1.6% over the past month. Separately, UK Finance, the bank trade body, said a strong year for sales would make 2021 a record year for mortgage lending. It predicted that gross mortgage lending would peak this year at £316bn – up 31% on 2020 – then fall back to £281bn in 2022 before increasing to £313bn in 2023. However, it added that mortgage arrears were expected to be 26% higher in 2022 than this year, hitting 102,000, compared with an estimated 80,800 in 2021, while home repossessions were forecast to climb by 267% to reach 7,700 in 2022, compared with an estimated 2,100 this year. Its data follows a string of surveys that have depicted a property market that is continuing to defy many expert forecasts. Last week, the Halifax issued figures showing that average UK house prices rose by 3.4% in the three months to the end of November, the highest quarterly rate since late 2006. Rival lender Nationwide said prices continued to climb in November and were now 10% higher than a year earlier. Rightmove said it was predicting a “closer to normal” market during 2022, though that did not mean it believed the sector was heading for a dramatic slowdown: it has already predicted that house prices will rise by 5% next year on a national level. However, it believes that “some of the edge will be taken off sellers’ pricing power” by increasingly stretched buyer affordability and a better choice of properties for sale. The website, which claims to advertise 95% of all properties for sale, said requests from homeowners to estate agents to have their home valued were up 19% on this time a year ago. This suggested that “more people will be making a new year resolution to move”. It added that buyer demand and market momentum “remain strong going into 2022”, with November’s data showing buyer numbers up by 41% on 2019, and 3% up on 2020. Tim Bannister, Rightmove’s director of property data, said that an interest rate rise was likely next year, and that while a rate rise was often regarded as unhelpful to the market, “a slowing of the fast pace of sales, and associated pace of price rises, will help the return to more normality that will suit many movers”. The stamp duty holiday announced by the government in July 2020 has been credited with fuelling a boom in the property market and pushing up prices. Alongside the stamp duty holiday – which ended on 30 September in England and Northern Ireland – the market has also been boosted by a range of factors including government guarantees for mortgages and a pandemic-fuelled desire for a new lifestyle that has led many buyers to prioritise properties with bigger gardens and more room for working from home. Rightmove said the average asking price of a UK home was now £340,167 compared with £342,401 a month ago, with the annual rate of price growth unchanged at 6.3%.A third of UK small businesses are planning to make staff redundant over the next few months, rising to more than four in 10 in London, according to a new survey. In a clear sign of the financial stress felt by many owner-run businesses as they head into a potentially difficult new year period, many also said they would be forced to raise prices, with Britain’s supply chain meltdown being cited as the main reason – adding further to inflationary pressures. The poll of 442 businesses found many were struggling with repaying the debts they racked up to get them through the pandemic as well as grappling with other challenges from supply chain disruption to shortages of key staff such as drivers and chefs, and high energy costs. A separate study by the accountants EY, which reveals a clear divide between the winners and losers in the pandemic, found that thousands of firms, mostly major corporate entities, paid down existing debt far faster than predicted in 2021. It said UK businesses would repay £1.6bn over 2021 after borrowing £35bn in 2020, an amount driven by firms that have fared well over the past 20 months. Recently introduced rules relating to the new Omicron variant, which have dealt a blow to many city centre outlets reliant on commuters and made life harder for hospitality businesses such as nightclubs, coupled with the end of the furlough scheme in September, could turn the screw further on many small firms. Accountancy firm Moore UK said its latest quarterly survey of owner-managed businesses found that 33% were planning to make redundancies over the next six months now that the safety net of furlough had been removed. Businesses in London were more likely than those in any other part of the UK to be planning redundancies, with 42% considering laying off staff. This is likely to reflect the effects of the pandemic on the finances of the hospitality sector – restaurants, pubs, hotels and so on – which makes up a significant part of the capital’s economy. Those UK small businesses planning to make redundancies were, on average, considering shedding 45% of their staff over the next six months. Maureen Penfold, the chair of Moore UK, said that while a wave of redundancies did not materialise when the furlough scheme ended, many businesses were now waiting to see whether layoffs became necessary over the coming months. “It’s surprising to see so many businesses are considering reducing staffing numbers so substantially. Policymakers should be careful not to assume that the economy is back in rude health – especially taking into account how the new restrictions just implemented may further impact businesses,” she added. They survey also shows that 49% of those questioned said they expected to have to increase the prices they charged over the next six months. The majority cited disruption to their supply chains as the main reason. “Price increases are the only response they have,” said Penfold. About 38% of businesses said increased staffing costs were the main contributor to them looking to increase prices. Some firms, including a number of restaurants and clubs, have said they are being forced to offer hefty sign-on bonuses of £1,000 or more to attract key staff as shortages intensify.That’s all for today’s Covid blog and thanks for joining us. Please follow along for the latest developments on our latest live blog here. Here is a snapshot of the latest Covid developments: The WHO says the Omicron variant is more transmissible than the Delta strain and reduces vaccine efficacy but causes less severe symptoms according to early data. British prime minister Boris Johnson launched an “Omicron emergency booster national mission” to protect the NHS and patients, ramping up vaccinations and rolling out 1m booster jabs a day. The UK recorded 48,854 new Covid cases and 52 additional deaths, raising the Covid alert level from 3 to 4. The UK also confirmed an additional 1,239 Omicron cases, marking the biggest daily rise to date with the total number of confirmed cases 3,137. America’s top infectious disease expert, Dr Anthony Fauci, said that Omicron “clearly has a transmission advantage” over previous Covid strains and stepped up calls for Americans to get booster shots as the new variant spread to at least 25 states. Austria has ended lockdown restrictions for vaccinated people across most of the country, three weeks after it was imposed. However, more than 25,000 demonstrators turned out in several cities to protest against the country’s compulsory vaccination plan, forcing citizens to be jabbed or face fines from February. Vaccinated people who are identified as a contact of somebody who has tested positive for Covid-19 should take an NHS rapid lateral flow test every day for a week, the UK government announced. Russia’s registered Covid cases passed the 10 million mark today, after nearly 30,000 cases were reported in the last 24 hours. Scotland aims to offer booster jabs to all eligible adults by the end of the year. The US government’s leading infectious diseases official, Anthony Fauci, has stepped up calls for Americans to get a Covid-19 booster shot, as the US approaches 800,000 lives lost to coronavirus since the start of the pandemic. Fauci warned that the Omicron variant appeared to be able to “evade” the protection of two initial doses of the mRNA-type Covid vaccines – Pfizer/BioNTech’s and Moderna’s – as well as post-infection therapies such as monoclonal antibodies and convalescent plasma. Omicron is spurring new fears as US infections begin to surge again, with infections currently still led by the highly-transmissable Delta variant that has dominated since the summer. Fauci said an extra vaccine shot provides “optimal” protection against Omicron, even though the government’s official designation of “fully vaccinated” remained at two doses of Pfizer or Moderna, or one of Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccine, which was developed by another method. Read the full story here. Hello it’s Samantha Lock here taking over from my colleague Jedidajah Otte. As I’m reporting to you from Sydney, here are some Covid stats out of Australia. The state of Victoria recorded 1,290 new Covid cases and two deaths, while NSW recorded 536 new Covid-19 cases and no deaths over the past 24 hours. After two years of border closures, the WA premier, Mark McGowan, is today due to announce when the state’s borders will reopen to domestic and international travellers, after reaching the 80% vaccination milestone at the weekend. And “tens of thousands” of people are expected to cross into Queensland after its borders reopen at 1am on Monday. It will be the first time in 229 days people will not need to quarantine on arrival, provided they are fully vaccinated. A person in New South Wales has been admitted to hospital infected with the Omicron variant of Covid-19, the first Omicron patient to be hospitalised since it arrived in Australia last month. The NHS is facing a “huge” challenge in its fight against Omicron, NHS Providers said. The organisation for the NHS hospital, mental health, community and ambulance services said the announcement on Sunday that the target to get every UK adult vaccinated has been brought forward by a month is a “critical moment”. It added that the NHS needs public support “now as much as ever” as the health service is “already under enormous pressure”. An NHS Providers spokesperson said: It is important that the prime minister recognises that this is an emergency. The threat from Omicron is becoming clearer, but there is an opportunity - through an accelerated booster campaign - to contain its impact. The NHS is already under enormous pressure, and scaling up in this way will be a huge challenge. But we have seen over the last 18 months, when it’s been tested as never before, how resilient and resourceful the health service and its staff can be. They added that “we will need to reprioritise” as the NHS is “already beyond full stretch”. The spokesperson said: As more hospital staff become involved in the vaccination campaign this is likely to impact on planned care, causing some additional delays. Patients will be prioritised according to clinical need, but trust leaders are only too aware of the impact of these difficult decisions. Macmillan Cancer Support reacted to the news that other NHS services may be delayed and said “the government also must not fail to ensure NHS cancer services are prioritised and protected this winter to ensure that nobody faces long waits and disruption in vital cancer care”. Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said the NHS will do “everything it can to get even more vaccines into people’s arms so that the public has the maximum possible level of protection” but “while the NHS will remain open for business, this enhanced focus on vaccinations could lead to disruption elsewhere in the service”. Taylor added: There are significant vacancies across the NHS, frontline staff are exhausted, and they are working in a very pressured environment. They expect continued honesty and ongoing support from the government, as well as for all parliamentarians to make sure the new interventions pass next week given how tough winter is expecting to be and the devastating impact coronavirus can have on people’s lives. The public also has a vital role to play in how they go about their daily lives and use local health services. Here some more detail from AFP on the news that South African president Cyril Ramaphosa has tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday: Ramaphosa, who is fully vaccinated, began feeling unwell after leaving a state memorial service for former deputy president F W de Klerk in Cape Town earlier in the day but was in good spirits and being monitored by doctors, [the presidency] said. [...] On a recent visit to four West African states, the president and the entire South African delegation were tested for Covid-19 in all countries, the statement said. The president and the delegation returned to South Africa from the Republic of Senegal on Wednesday, 8 December 2021, after obtaining negative test results. The president also tested negative on his return to Johannesburg on 8 December. The statement quoted Ramaphosa as saying that his own infection served as a warning to all citizens of the importance of getting vaccinated and remaining vigilant against exposure. “Vaccination remains the best protection against severe illness and hospitalisation,” the statement said. “People who have had contact with the president today are advised to watch for symptoms or to have themselves tested,” it added. Cases of coronavirus in Africa nearly doubled over a week as Omicron spread, but hospitalisations in South Africa remain low, the UN added on Thursday. In a weekly online press briefing, the World Health Organization’s Africa branch said the continent had recorded 107,000 extra cases in the week to last Sunday, compared with 55,000 in the previous week. Omicron “is reaching more countries in Africa”, it said, adding that research was being stepped up to see whether the new variant was specifically behind the sharp rise. The biggest surge in numbers - 140 percent on average - was in the south of the continent. On Sunday, South Africa logged 37,875 daily new infections, data from the National Institute for Communicable Diseases showed - the highest daily tally yet, exceeding the previous record of 26,485 set during the peak of the third wave in July, Bloomberg reports. This from the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg on Boris Johnson’s announcements tonight: The public should put aside their “justifiable anger” about recent rule-breaking allegations surrounding Downing Street and Boris Johnson and get their booster vaccination, the Labour MP Wes Streeting has urged. The shadow health secretary told broadcasters: We know that the vaccine and the booster in particular is the most powerful tool we have in our fight against Covid-19, and against this variant in particular. We’ve warned the government they hadn’t been doing enough to get the booster rollout under way. And so tonight’s announcement is one that we can very much get behind. This has got to be a big national effort. All of us have got a part to play and it’s crucial that, despite people’s justifiable anger and frustration with the Prime Minister, we put that to one side in the effort to get the vaccine booster rolled out and to make it a success. Streeting, who had previously called for all adults to be allowed to book their jabs before Johnson’s announced acceleration, said he is booked in to get his top-up jab on Thursday. He stressed that the NHS would need to be achieving one million boosters a day in order to achieve the new year target. Professor Christina Pagel, of University College London, welcomed prime minister Boris Johnson’s announcement of an “emergency booster national mission”, but voiced doubts about whether this would prevent further restrictions before Christmas. “Boosting all adults by the end of the month is really important. We do know that two doses is just not enough,” she said. However, she said that some current policies appeared contradictory, including allowing vaccinated people to take lateral flow tests instead of isolating after contact with a Covid case. She said: Don’t go to work but go to parties. Get a booster, but it’s fine not to isolate if you’re vaccinated. It’s not consistent. This idea that kids can go to school if someone in their house has Covid is just stupid. We should be saying no parties, no gatherings bigger than ten people, say. We need to think about moving back down the roadmap and restricting contact. I expect whatever they announce today they’ll announce more in a few days. I don’t necessarily have a problem with that. I just don’t think they can say ‘this is it’ until Christmas when things are so uncertain. Paul Hunter, professor in medicine at the University of East Anglia, said that delivering boosters to all adults in the UK would be a huge challenge, but if achieved it would be the most effective means to reduce severe disease and pressure on the NHS. Hunter said: We now know that two doses are not that effective or not at all effective at preventing infection from omicron, but we still don’t know how effective the two dose vaccine will be at preventing severe disease from omicron. It is not a forlorn hope that two doses will fare better against severe disease from omicron than they do against infection. But it is a pretty safe conclusion that the booster will be even more effective against severe disease than against infection. If we achieve this target then this will go a huge way towards helping the UK and the NHS get through the expected wave of Omicron in January intact. Adam Finn, professor of paediatrics at the University of Bristol and a member of JCVI, said that the ambition to offer boosters to all adults “makes sense if it’s achievable”. He said: It’s not really my place to pronounce on what regulations should be put in place, that’s really for the politicians. But I’d strongly encourage people to do everything they can to minimise transmission while we get the booster programme done. The leader of the British Labour party, Sir Keir Starmer, said the government had Labour’s support to accelerate the booster programme, as he urged the public to “protect our families, friends and the NHS” by getting a top-up jab amid fears over the Omicron variant. Starmer said: The arrival of the worrying new variant is a reminder that the pandemic is not over. And vaccines are the best weapon in our fight. The vaccine is safe and effective. It protects us and those around us. We will always support the NHS and act in the public interest. Therefore the government has our support in the effort to accelerate the booster programme. It’s also vital that we use the Christmas holidays to get the vaccine out to eligible children. I urge everyone to get boosted as soon as you can - and if you haven’t had your first or second jab yet, now is the time to come forward. We have come so far since those darkest of days at the start of the pandemic. So much has been asked of the British people, and time and again you have risen to the challenge. So let’s keep our foot on the pedal and get Britain boosted to protect our families, friends and NHS. Scotland aims to offer booster jabs to all eligible adults by the end of the year, but more Covid-19 restrictions may still be needed to combat Omicron, Nicola Sturgeon has said. In a statement following prime minister Boris Johnson’s address to the nation, Scotland’s first minister said urgent work is under way to “further accelerate rollout of the booster vaccination programme in Scotland”, PA reports. She said her government’s aim is to offer a “booster jag appointment to all eligible adults by the end of this year if possible”, with 30-39 year olds able to book from 10am on Monday and 18-29 year olds from later in the week. Sturgeon added: Given the expected volume of cases in the weeks ahead, however, it is also possible that further, proportionate protective measures or advice will be necessary. This is true even if Omicron proves to be slightly less severe than Delta. The number of cases will still put significant pressure on the NHS and the economy. The government will therefore consider the latest data tomorrow ahead of a Cabinet meeting on Tuesday and I will set out any decisions to parliament later that day. The NHS website to book booster jabs has been experiencing technical difficulties, shortly after British prime minister Boris Johnson’s televised address, in which he urged eligible people to “get boosted now”. A statement on the website said: “The NHS website is currently experiencing technical difficulties. We are working to resolve these issues. Thank you for your patience.” South African president Cyril Ramaphosa tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday, but was showing mild symptoms, the presidency said. “The President started feeling unwell after leaving the State Memorial Service in honour of former Deputy President FW de Klerk in Cape Town earlier today,” the statement said. “The President, who is fully vaccinated, is in self-isolation in Cape Town and has delegated all responsibilities to Deputy President David Mabuza for the next week,” it added. My colleagues Jessica Elgot, Aubrey Allegretti and Haroon Siddique have a story on Boris Johnson’s gamble on an unprecedented ramping up of vaccinations, rolling out 1m booster jabs a day to stem an incoming “tidal wave of Omicron” and avoid imposing further restrictions. The government will support the NHS in this emergency booster rollout by “deploying 42 military planning teams across every health region, standing up additional vaccine sites and mobile units, extending opening hours so clinics are open seven days a week with more appointments early in the morning, in the evening and at weekends, and training 1000s more volunteer vaccinators”, Johnson said. Further steps will be set out in the days ahead, he added. On Covid restrictions, the prime minister said: It’s because of the threat from Omicron that I announced on Wednesday that we will move to Plan B in England. You must wear a face covering in indoor public spaces from tomorrow. Work from home if you can. And from Wednesday, subject to a vote in parliament, you will need to show a negative lateral flow test to get into nightclubs and some large events if you’re not double vaccinated. In a final plea, Johnson added: These measures will help slow the spread of Omicron but we must go further and get boosted now. If you haven’t yet had the vaccine at all, then please get yourself at least some protection with a jab as quickly as possible. If you’ve already had your booster, encourage your friends and family to do the same. We’re a great country. We have the vaccines to protect our people. So, let’s do it. Let’s get boosted now, get boosted now for yourself, for your friends and your family, get boosted now to protect jobs and livelihoods across this country, get boosted now to protect our NHS, our freedoms and our way of life. Get boosted now. Thank you. Boris Johnson has announced that every person aged 18 and over in England will be able to get the booster jab before the New Year. At this point, Johnson said, the country’s scientists cannot say whether the Omicron variant is less severe than previous ones. He said: And even if that proved to be true, we already know it is so much more transmissible that a wave of Omicron through a population that was not boosted would risk a level of hospitalisation that could overwhelm our NHS and lead, sadly, to very many deaths. So we must act now. Today, we’re launching the Omicron emergency booster national mission, unlike anything we’ve done before in the vaccination programme. [...] A fortnight ago I said we would offer every eligible adult a booster by the end of January. Today, in light of this Omicron emergency, I’m bringing that target forward by a whole month. Everyone eligible aged 18 and over in England will have a chance to get the booster before the New Year. And we’ve spoken today to the devolved administrations to confirm the UK government will provide additional support to accelerate vaccinations in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. To hit the pace we need, we’ll need to match the NHS’s best vaccination day so far, and then beat that day after day. This will require an extraordinary effort. And as we focus on boosters and make this new target achievable, it will mean some other appointments will need to be postponed until the new year. But if we don’t do this now, the wave of Omicron could be so big that cancellations and disruptions like the loss of cancer appointments would be even greater next year. And I know the pressures on everyone in our NHS, from our GPS doctors, nurses to our porters, all of whom have worked incredibly hard and I thank you, I thank them, for all the amazing work that they’ve done. But I say directly to those of you on the frontline: I must ask you to make another extraordinary effort now. So we can protect you and your colleagues and above all, protect your patients from even greater pressures next year. From Monday, he said, every adult in England who has had a second dose of the vaccine at least three months ago will be eligible for a booster jab. “The NHS booking system will be open for these younger age groups from Wednesday. And that’s the best way to guarantee your slot. But in some places you can walk in from tomorrow,” Johnson added. Boris Johnson has urged Britons to “get boosted now” and protect the NHS, and warned the population to not underestimate the dangers of the new Omicron variant. Johnson said the UK’s four chief medical officers had raised the Covid threat level to its second highest level “because of the evidence that Omicron is doubling here in the UK every two to three days.” Johnson said: I need to speak to you this evening, because I am afraid we are now facing an emergency in our battle with the new variant, Omicron, and we must urgently reinforce our wall of vaccine protection to keep our friends and loved ones safe. [...] We know from bitter experience how these exponential curves develop. No one should be in any doubt. There is a tidal wave of Omicron coming, and I’m afraid it is now clear that two doses of vaccine are simply not enough to give a good level of protection. But the good news is that our scientists are confident that with a third dose, a booster dose, we can all bring our level of protection back up. “I know there will be some people watching who will be asking whether Omicron is less severe than previous variants, and whether we really need to go out and get that booster. And the answer is yes, we do. Do not make the mistake of thinking Omicron can’t hurt you. It can make you and your loved ones seriously ill. We’ve already seen hospitalisations doubling in a week in South Africa. And we have patients with Omicron in hospital here in the UK right now. A pre-recorded address to the nation by British prime minister Boris Johnson is expected to begin at 8pm GMT. People have demonstrated in several German cities against the country’s Covid measures this weekend, with protesters clashing with police. 14 police officers were injured in protests in Greiz, Thuringia, where up to 1000 people gathered there on Saturday, the police said on Sunday. Police used pepper spray on protesters trying to break a police chain, the German press agency dpa reported. Around 1,500 people took part in a rally in Reutlingen, Baden-Württemberg on Saturday and marched “For freedom, truth and self-determination”. Requests to wear a mask were ignored, police said. As a result, the rally was dissolved. When police tried to stop one breakaway group, police said that participants violently broke the officers’ chain and used pepper spray and batons. According to the police, two police officers were slightly injured on Sunday morning during a small rally in Bennewitz near Leipzig. Almost 100 people took part in an illegal demonstration in Frankfurt, Hesse on Saturday, which was disbanded by police. The police also stopped an unregistered protest march of the “lateral thinkers” movement against Covid measures with 550 people at times in Hamm, North Rhine-Westphalia. Coronavirus booster vaccines are to be made available to people aged 30-39 in Scotland from Monday and to 18-29-year-olds from later in the week, health secretary Humza Yousaf has said. Writing on Twitter, Yousaf said: From tomorrow (Mon 13th) you can book your Booster if you’re aged 30-39. We intend on opening portal to 18-29yr olds later in the week, details to follow. We know just how important a tool vaccination, and in particular the Booster is in our fight against the virus. A reminder, to be eligible 12 weeks must have elapsed between your 2nd dose and Booster. The move follows UK government’s decision to make booster doses available to people aged 30-39 in England. New Covid restrictions are “likely” to be introduced in Wales as the country faces an impending “tsunami” from the Omicron variant, the health minister has said. Eluned Morgan said the Welsh government wanted “to act proportionately” as there were only around 15 cases of the new strain but that was likely to “change very quickly in a very short space of time”. Morgan told BBC Politics Wales: We’ve got over 500 cases per 100,000 which means that Delta is still alive and well within our communities. At the same time as we’re facing this likely tsunami that is going to hit us fairly soon. Morgan said that “no decisions” had been made yet on what future restrictions could look like. Future restrictions would be measured against the health, social and economic impact but Morgan said it would be “much more difficult” if there was no furlough scheme. Morgan said the Welsh government wanted to “act proportionately” and would not impose new measures “unless they are necessary”. She said: I think if we’re honest, that is likely to change in the next few weeks. But we are still learning about this new variant. The last thing we want to do is to impose the kind of restrictions that we saw last Christmas unless we absolutely have to. We know that last Christmas was really disappointing for so many people. That’s not where we want to be, but we will always act in the best interests of the people of Wales. In last Friday’s three-week review, First Minister Mark Drakeford announced reviews would now take place weekly due to the threat posed by the Omicron variant. Morgan told the programme it was “very commendable” that health boards had been urging people not to attend Christmas parties to limit the pressure on the NHS but stressed that the Welsh government was not yet officially advising people to cancel plans and urging people to take lateral flow tests before going out instead. “I think there will come a point where that may be likely to happen,” she said. She also urged people to get their booster jab as two doses of the vaccine “simply won’t cut it” with the Omicron variant. She said: We’re ramping up the programme as quickly as we possibly can and we’ve got an army of helpers to roll it out. I would appeal to the Welsh public to step forward when they’re called. We cannot afford to wait, the wave is coming towards us and it’s coming towards us at a very, very fast rate. Israel on Sunday announced it was adding the UK, Denmark and Belgium to its “red” list of countries that Israelis are forbidden to visit, citing concern over the spread of the Omicron variant. The travel restrictions for the three countries will go into effect on Wednesday, a senior Israeli health official told a news conference. Israel has already declared around 50 countries, mainly in Africa, as “red” since the discovery of the Omicron variant, and has already banned the entry of foreigners to try to stem infection rates, Reuters reports. Israeli health officials said there have been 55 confirmed cases of Omicron infection in Israel, which has been trying to accelerate its vaccination programme while weighing stricter enforcement of mask mandates. UK prime minister Boris Johnson is to address the nation at 8pm GMT on Covid booster vaccines, amid growing concern about the highly-infectious Omicron variant. Johnson is not expected to announce any new Covid restrictions. My colleague Aubrey Allegretti has more. The UK Covid Alert Level has been increased from Level 3 to Level 4 “in light of the rapid increase in Omicron cases”, the four UK chief medical officers have said in a joint statement. Level 4 means “transmission is high and direct Covid-19 pressure on healthcare services is widespread and substantial or rising.” In the statement, the four UK chief medical officers and the NHS England national medical director said the emergence of Omicron “adds additional and rapidly increasing risk to the public and healthcare services”. The statement said: Early evidence shows that Omicron is spreading much faster than Delta and that vaccine protection against symptomatic disease from Omicron is reduced. Data on severity will become clearer over the coming weeks but hospitalisations from Omicron are already occurring and these are likely to increase rapidly. The NHS is currently under pressure mainly driven by non-Covid pressures. With a variant spreading with increased transmissibility and reduced vaccine effectiveness, we are likely to see this pressure rise soon. It is extremely important that if you are eligible, you get your Covid vaccination now - whether this be your first, second or booster dose. People should continue take sensible precautions including ventilating rooms, using face coverings, testing regularly and isolating when symptomatic. Italy reported 66 coronavirus-related deaths on Sunday, compared with 96 the day before, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of new infections fell to 19,215 from 21,042. A week ago, the country had reported 43 deaths from the virus, and 15,010 fresh cases. Italy’s infections have been increasing steadily since mid-October, and has recently seen an increase in the number of first vaccine doses administered. On Monday, the country introduced tighter restrictions on the unvaccinated in the form of a “super green pass”, which will stay in place until at least 15 January. Hello, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be taking over for the next few hours. As ever, feel free to get in touch if you have anything to flag you think we should be covering, you can reach me on Twitter @JedySays or you can email me. The UK recorded 48,854 new Covid cases today and 52 additional deaths. In the last week, 360,480 cases were confirmed, marking an 11.9% increase on the previous seven days. There were 834 deaths in the last week, an increase of 0.5%. The UK has confirmed an additional 1,239 Omicron cases, marking the biggest daily rise to date. The new figures, published by the UK Health Security Agency, brings the total number of confirmed Omicron cases in the UK to 3,137. Nigeria is to ban flights from the UK, Argentina, Canada and Saudi Arabia in response to being added to red lists in those countries due to Omicron. The country’s aviation minister, Hadi Sirika, said today said he had recommended that the four countries be placed on Nigeria’s red list to ban flights. America’s top infectious disease expert, Dr Anthony Fauci, said that Omicron “clearly has a transmission advantage” over previous Covid strains as the new variant spread to at least half of US states. It comes as Omicron has spread to at least 25 states as the US approaches 800,000 Covid-related deaths. Austria has ended lockdown restrictions for vaccinated people across most of the country, three weeks after it was imposed. Rules vary by region but generally the change means theatres, museums and other cultural and entertainment venues will be allowed to reopen today and shops will follow tomorrow. Vaccinated people who are identified as a contact of somebody who has tested positive for Covid-19 should take an NHS rapid lateral flow test every day for a week, the UK government announced today. The new guidance, which starts on Tuesday, aims to identify asymptomatic cases among the vaccinated without forcing them to isolate. NHS doctors working on the pandemic frontline are furious at being treated as “Covid cannon fodder” rather than heroes, according to new research. In a first of its kind study, researchers from the universities of Bath and Bristol, UWE and the Royal College of Emergency Medicine collected the views of more than 1,300 doctors in the UK and Ireland since early 2020. Russia’s registered Covid cases passed the 10 million mark today, after nearly 30,000 cases were reported in the last 24 hours. It comes as Russia recorded 29,929 new cases today - its lowest single-day case total since 13 October - bringing the official total since the start of the pandemic to 10,016,896. Dr Susan Hopkins, the chief medical adviser for the UK Health Security Agency has said that the UK is facing an “inevitable” large wave of infections caused by Omicron, with more Covid measures likely to be needed. She also warned that “very difficult” decisions lie ahead for the government and that more Covid measures may be needed. Labour leader Keir Starmer claims UK prime minister Boris Johnson is “unfit for office” and has breached public trust. He told the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show that that the prime minister’s alleged actions have “broken” trust which will result in many people deciding to stop follow coronavirus rules. He also said that Johnson appeared to have broken the law with an alleged Christmas quiz and that he must have known there were other groups taking part in other rooms. Nadhim Zahawi, the UK education secretary and former vaccines minister, has defended allegations against Boris Johnson that he breached Covid rules to hold a Christmas quiz last year - insisting it was “virtual” and dismissing criticism about parties as “hype”. Zahawi told Trevor Phillips on Sunday on Sky News that the picture shows a “prime minister on a virtual quiz night for 10-15 minutes to thank his staff” who he said had no choice but to come into work. That’s it from me for today. Handing over to my colleague Jedidajah Otte. Thanks for reading. The UK recorded 48,854 new Covid cases today and 52 additional deaths. In the last week, 360,480 cases were confirmed, marking an 11.9% increase on the previous seven days. There were 834 deaths in the last week, an increase of 0.5%. Yesterday the UK recorded 54,073 cases and 132 deaths. The UK has confirmed an additional 1,239 Omicron cases, marking the biggest daily rise to date. The new figures, published by the UK Health Security Agency, brings the total number of confirmed Omicron cases in the UK to 3,137. Of the new cases, 1,196 were in England, 28 in Scotland, 5 in Northern Ireland and 0 in Wales. Nigeria is to ban flights from the UK, Argentina, Canada and Saudi Arabia in response to being added to red lists in those countries due to Omicron. The country’s aviation minister, Hadi Sirika, said today said he had recommended that the four countries be placed on Nigeria’s red list to ban flights. “We have given our input as aviation that it is not acceptable by us and we recommend that those countries, Canada, UK, Saudi Arabia and Argentina be also put on red list, just like they did similarly to us,” he said. “So, I am very sure between now and Monday or perhaps Tuesday maximum, all those countries will be put on the red list. Once they are on the red list, which means they are banned, their airlines will also be banned.” More from top US infectious disease expert, Dr Fauci (see also 15:06), who says that three doses of a Covid-19 vaccine is “optimal care”. “For official requirements, it’s still two shots of the mRNA [Pfizer/BioNTech or Moderna] and one shot of the J&amp;J for the official determination of what’s required or not. But I think if you look at the data, the more and more it becomes clear that if you want to be optimally protected you really should get a booster,” he told ABC News. America’s top infectious disease expert, Dr Anthony Fauci, said that Omicron “clearly has a transmission advantage” over previous Covid strains as the new variant spread to at least half of US states. President Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser told ABC News that Omicron “appears to be able to evade some of the immune protection”. But in “encouraging news”, he said boosters raise protection high enough that it does “do well” against Omicron. He said they are getting anecdotal information that the level of severity appears to be a bit less than it was for Delta, but that it might be due to underlying protection in community due to prior infections. It comes as Omicron has spread to at least 25 states as the US approaches 800,000 Covid-related deaths. The British public has been advised to keep their social interactions to a minimum to avoid getting Covid and missing Christmas with their families. Dr Susan Hopkins, chief medical adviser for the UK Health Security Agency, said people need to take individual responsibility to avoid transmission. She told Times Radio: We’ve spent two years, almost two years now living with this virus. We know how it transmits. It transmits when we’re with other people. And therefore when we are coming up to a time where we will have engagements that we want to make, family that we want to see, then ensuring that we have less contacts before those is important so that we don’t transmit to others. Asked whether it is advisable for people to avoid going out if they want to spend Christmas with family members, she said: People know how transmission is prevented. I know how transmission is prevented. It’s prevented by reducing your social contacts. But sometimes you need to see your friends and you need to see your work colleagues or you need to go to that Christmas party for your mental health and wellbeing. If you’re going to do that, then take a lateral flow, go and get your vaccine, get boosted as soon as possible. Those are actions that you can take. If you want to make sure that you are not going to get infected, then keep your contacts to a minimum. Austria has ended lockdown restrictions for vaccinated people across most of the country, three weeks after it was imposed. Rules vary by region but generally the change means theatres, museums and other cultural and entertainment venues will be allowed to reopen today and shops will follow tomorrow. Here’s footage from UK Labour leader Keir Starmer’s comments this morning (see also 09:51): Vaccinated people who are identified as a contact of somebody who has tested positive for Covid-19 should take an NHS rapid lateral flow test every day for a week, the UK government announced today. The new guidance, which starts on Tuesday, aims to identify asymptomatic cases among the vaccinated without forcing them to isolate. One in three people do not show symptoms, the department of health said. They said anyone whose rapid test comes back positive or develops symptoms should self-isolate and take a PCR test to verify the result. If the PCR test comes back positive, they must self-isolate for 10 days. If it comes back negative, contacts can stop self-isolating but should continue to take rapid tests for the remainder of the seven days. However, unvaccinated adults will not be eligible for the new daily testing policy. Instead they must self-isolate for 10 days if they are a contact of somebody who tests positive, unless they are eligible for existing workplace daily contact testing. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said: The Omicron variant is quickly gaining ground in the UK and is expected to become the dominant strain by mid-December. We are taking this proportionate and more practical measure to limit the impact on people’s day to day lives while helping to reduce the spread of Omicron. Vaccines remain our best defence and I urge anyone yet to get a first and second jab to come forward and those eligible for a booster to get boosted as soon as possible. Dr Jenny Harries, CEO of the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said: If you are identified as a contact of someone with Covid-19, taking a rapid daily test - and only needing to isolate if it is positive - will help reduce the spread of the virus and minimise its impact on our everyday lives over the coming weeks and months. Rapid tests are freely available in pharmacies and online. Our latest analysis shows that boosters provide the best protection against the Omicron variant, please go forward when you are called. If you haven’t had any vaccine, a first and second dose still gives you protection against becoming seriously unwell. Don’t worry about stepping forwards now – you will be warmly welcomed by our vaccination staff and I would strongly advise you to get vaccinated as soon as possible. New “plan b” Covid restrictions are expected to become law in England after Labour leader Keir Starmer confirmed that his party will be supporting Boris Johnson’s government in Tuesday’s vote. But the prime minister could face the largest rebellion of his premiership, with more than 60 Conservative MPs expected to be against the new restrictions. Among them is Matt Vickers, the Conservative MP for Stockton South, who today said he will be voting against the government. Vickers, who is one of the 2019 intake representing a so-called former Labour “red wall” constituency, told Times Radio: I do not believe we should be going down the plan b route. We talked about learning to live with it, we promised people they will get these boosters in their arms and the world will come back to normal, kids will be able to go to school properly without masks on, we promised them the economy would be free, we’d be free to get things going, and that’s exactly what we need to do. Asked whether he would be voting for plan b measures, he said: “I am not, no. You’ve heard it here first.” Asked how many might be joining him, he said: “I wouldn’t like to guess the number. In real terms, it is not a vote we’re probably likely to overturn the Government on anyway, so I think the numbers might be irrelevant - it is about people doing what they think is right.” Starmer told the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show earlier today that he will vote with the government, but that he will do so in support of the NHS rather than the prime minister. He said: “If you look at the science in relation to Omicron, the new variant, there is a real concern that we could be in a situation where the number of cases is doubling in a shorter period of two days. Now, I understand people say that that hasn’t led to higher hospitalisations and deaths yet, but the sheer volume of cases is very, very worrying.” He added: “So, I’m not supporting the prime minister on Tuesday, I’m supporting our NHS, and I’m supporting the public in relation to this pandemic.” NHS doctors working on the pandemic frontline are furious at being treated as “Covid cannon fodder” rather than heroes, according to new research. In a first of its kind study, researchers from the universities of Bath and Bristol, UWE and the Royal College of Emergency Medicine collected the views of more than 1,300 doctors in the UK and Ireland since early 2020. It found that doctors lacked the support they needed - including not having enough places to rest, food to eat or sufficient psychological support amid relentless shift patterns. They said they were also frustrated at those not following public health advice and a lack of support from the government. One senior doctor said: I feel, at times, that I am considered totally expendable and that, if I die or become ill, not only will it have been preventable with political will, I will simply be an inconvenient statistic. I’m not a Covid hero, I’m Covid cannon fodder. A junior doctor said: Knowing the government was failing in so many ways to support us... failed Test and Trace, failed PPE procurement, weak messaging, permitted non-compliance with mask-wearing and distancing, set a poor example (Barnard Castle, etc). We as healthcare providers were alone and utterly unsupported, apart from the weekly round of applause that was a pointless gesture and felt like a kick in the teeth. Dr Jo Daniels, the study’s lead researcher and a clinical psychologist at the University of Bath, said some of the stories were “truly devastating”. Last moments spent trying to set up an iPad in time for a young mother to say goodbye to her children; wrestling to intubate agitated patients; family members watching loved ones die remotely via video-link. Added to this is the scale - the sheer number of frontline workers for whom these experiences have just become normalised - these results are truly shocking. We are seeing increasing levels of staff attrition, absenteeism, poor psychological health, and loss of life, yet frontline doctors are expected to just carry on. Here’s more on UK Omicron hospitalisations from science correspondent Hannah Devlin: Russia’s registered Covid cases passed the 10 million mark today, after nearly 30,000 cases were reported in the last 24 hours. It comes as Russia recorded 29,929 new cases today - its lowest single-day case total since 13 October - bringing the official total since the start of the pandemic to 10,016,896. The country also reported 1,132 deaths today, its lowest count since late October, reports Reuters. UK prime minister Boris Johnson is facing the most testing week of his troubled premiership as a mounting Tory rebellion over new Covid-19 restrictions threatens his authority in parliament and a supposedly safe Conservative seat appears on a knife-edge ahead of a byelection on Thursday, writes the Observer’s political editor Toby Helm. Prof Hayward (see also 11:20) also said that the UK’s hospital system is already “on its knees” and faces a “big problem” ahead. It was put to Prof Hayward that people may think ministers feel they have to put extra restrictions in place “based on modelling and theories”. He told LBC: We’re talking about a hospital system that is already pretty much on its knees with the current level of activity, and that level of activity is going to go up dramatically and much worse than a normal winter. So you know, there is going to be a big problem. The question is how much we’re prepared to do to stop that as a society. Prof Andrew Hayward, a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) from University College London, said Omicron is “much more infectious” than Delta and all previous Covid strains. “Maybe somewhere between twice and possibly three times as infectious,” he told LBC. “What we can also see is that the vaccine, two doses of the vaccine, has relatively little impact on stopping that transmission. “So putting those two together, and the fact that it’s already increasing, doubling every two or three days, what we can be pretty sure of is a very, very large wave of infections, bigger than the waves of infections that we’ve had before, so really the uncertainty is in how that’s going to translate into hospitalisations and deaths.” Dr Susan Hopkins, the chief medical adviser for the UK Health Security Agency has said that the UK is facing an “inevitable” large wave of infections caused by Omicron, with more Covid measures likely to be needed (see also 10am). Hopkins confirmed that the UK has seen its first Omicron hospitalisations in recent days and that she expects those numbers to rise. She told BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show: We’re also seeing hospitals diagnose more and more people coming through their emergency departments, and we expect to see increases in that number. I have not had a report of death yet. But it’s really important to remember it is just over two weeks since we first detected the cases in the United Kingdom, and that hospitalisations start to be seen in about two weeks and deaths usually at three to four weeks. I think it’s too early to make any assumptions at this point in time. She added: It’s inevitable that we’re going to see a big wave of infections. What we are not yet clear on, and which is what we are basically making sure people go out and get their vaccination for, is how much that will affect hospitals. In the UK, Conservative voters share their doubts about the prime minister in pro-Brexit Thanet. James Tapper reports: Questioned about “mutinous MPs” and “disarray” in Downing Street at a G7 summit in Liverpool, UK foreign secretary Liz Truss said: On the first subject, the cabinet secretary is conducting a thorough investigation of those events that took place. You will appreciate that my focus has been on the very serious issues that we face globally. Namely, the specific issue that you raise of Russian aggression. And how that is countered. She added: In terms of this government, we have delivered Brexit. We were one of the most successful vaccine rollouts. We’re rolling out a booster programme and we’re working to make sure we deliver for people across Britain. ITV’s UK editor, Paul Brand, writes on Twitter: Prof Barry Schoub, a Covid-19 adviser to the South African government, has advised against the UK “trivialising” Omicron’s impact and said it should be treated as seriously as Delta. He told Sky News’ Trevor Phillips On Sunday programme: “I think we need to. I think we must avoid trivialising it. At this stage, we’re still gathering information.” He added: “So at the moment, we do need to treat it as seriously as Delta, with all the kind of precautions that we took for Delta. We can’t let up on that at the moment.” Nadhim Zahawi, the UK education secretary, also told the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show that “99%” of schools are open and that nativities should continue to take place. When asked whether he could guarantee that schools would be open in January, he said: “I will do everything in my power”. Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, has insisted the government is not introducing a “vaccine passport”. He told the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show: People talk about vaccine passports. This is not a vaccine passport. These are high-risk events where we ask people either to take a free lateral flow test or to be vaccinated to attend. Asked whether people are coming forward in sufficient numbers for booster vaccines, he said: We saw some queues yesterday at walk-in centres, and I have to say people on the whole have been behaving well. We’ve had a couple of incidents that were in the East Midlands, one incident specifically where someone was very aggressive and that should not happen to anybody who is administering a life-saving vaccine, but we’ve seen some amazing examples. A school in east London vaccinating students and teachers and parents who have never had a vaccine. Nadhim Zahawi, the UK education secretary and former vaccines minister, has again defended the prime minister’s alleged Christmas quiz (see also 8:58), saying there’s no rule against “recognising Christmas with tinsel or a hat”. He told the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show that his inbox is full of people thinking Boris Johnson is having parties with guests, but that now the public can “make their mind up when they see this picture of the prime minister on a virtual screen, on a Zoom, thanking his team who are in the building because they have to respond to a national emergency.” He said they were colleagues, there was no drink and that there is no rule against “recognising Christmas with tinsel or a hat”. Dr Susan Hopkins, chief medical adviser for the UK Health Security Agency, has warned that “very difficult” decisions lie ahead for the government and that more Covid measures may be needed. She told the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show: I think that the restrictions that the government have announced are sensible. I think that we may need to go beyond them. But we’ll need to watch carefully what happens with hospitalisations. She added: The challenge we have and the challenge government has is trying to balance the risks and benefits to the society, to people, to the population, to the economy, and to health, and they have very difficult decisions ahead of them. Restrictions that might have to come, she said, include reducing social contacts and reducing activities in social environments. “People have their own decisions to make about their Christmas parties,” she added. Starmer also pledged that there were no Labour Christmas parties last year. “We were following the rules,” he told the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show. Labour leader Keir Starmer claims UK prime minister Boris Johnson is “unfit for office” and has breached public trust. He told the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show that that the prime minister’s alleged actions have “broken” trust which will result in many people deciding to stop follow coronavirus rules. He said: He [Johnson] is a threat to public health...The critical question is ‘will the public follow the rules?’. And they have been following the rules, but now that trust is broken and many people are now saying ‘Well, if the prime minister is going to allow breaking of the rules, parties, quizzes going on in downing street when we’re being asked not to see our loved ones, well why should i follow the rules?’ He added: There’s this basic question of trust and that is broken with the prime minister and that’s why he is unfit for office. Labour leader Keir Starmer has said that UK prime minister Boris Johnson appeared to have broken the law with an alleged Christmas quiz and that he must have known there were other groups taking part in other rooms. Asked on the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show whether he was breaking the rules, Starmer said: Well it looks as though he was. And he must have known those other groups were in other rooms in his own building. And this is very important because he’s damaged his authority, he’s now so weak, his party’s so divided, he can’t deliver the leadership this country needs. He added: “He’s the worst possible leader at the worst possible time.” He declined to call on the prime minister to resign, but said: “We need to look at the allegation... but it is very very serious for the prime minister.” He added: “Trust in the prime minister is at an all time low.” He said the new allegation is “very serious” because at the time the prime minister was asking people not to see their loved ones, which is why it’s created “such fury”. He said it was “only Wednesday” that Boris Johnson “stood up in parliament and said he was furious that he’d just found out that there may have been breaches of the rules in Downing Street...now we learn this morning that three days earlier he was involved, he was leading a quiz in Downing Street which, if the reports are accurate, involved groups of people...involving themselves in a social event. “And so he’ll be doubly serious now he finds out that he himself has been involved in something which may have breached the rules.” Labour party leader Keir Starmer says his party will not be joining a threatened Conservative rebellion in Tuesday’s vote on Covid restrictions. He told the BBC’s Andrew Marr show: “We’re not going to be tempted into playing party politics here”. In the UK, Alison Phillips, editor of the Daily Mirror, which broke the Christmas quiz story, tells the BBC’s Andrew Marr show that their source told them that nobody was working at the quiz, “it was purely a social event”. Phillips says it was “a Christmas quiz outside of the rules” and a part of a “culture of rulebreaking”. Meanwhile, Conservative MP Dehenna Davison says her inbox has been “flooded” with people concerned about vaccine passports. More from the UK: On BBC, Andrew Marr opens his show to say that in 40 years of covering politics he does not remember newspapers being “this hostile” to a prime minister. Nadhim Zahawi, the UK education secretary and former vaccines minister, has defended allegations against Boris Johnson that he breached Covid rules to hold a Christmas quiz last year - insisting it was “virtual” and dismissing criticism about parties as “hype”. Zahawi told Trevor Phillips on Sunday on Sky News that the picture shows a “prime minister on a virtual quiz night for 10-15 minutes to thank his staff” who he said had no choice but to come into work. He said they the prime minister was “respecting the lockdown rules” and that the other people pictured in the quiz were in his office people who “work with him”. “I think the nation will understand that [that it was virtual],” he said. He said the investigation into Downing Street parties will investigate all allegations at that it will move “rapidly”. Defending Johnson, he said he “works literally all works to make sure we get through this pandemic” and Zahawi said he is “confident” that the Conservatives will will win Thursday’s by-election in North Shropshire. Nadhim Zahawi, the UK education secretary and former vaccines minister, has said that there are Omicron cases in hospital as he warned that the country is now in a “race” between the booster and the new variant. Speaking on Sky News, he said the UK has “seen this movie before” with previous variants and warned that “very quickly” Omicron will be the UK’s dominant variant, with a third of infections in London are now Omicron. Even if Omicron is less severe than previous variants, he said it is “highly infectious” and that if the UK gets to one million cases by the end of the month, three days later it will be two million. He said it is going to be a “national endeavour” to get British people vaccinated with the third jab. “It’s now a race between the booster and that protection and the omicron variant,” he said. The British prime minister is under further pressure today over Downing Street’s alleged Christmas celebrations after he was accused of breaking Covid laws by hosting a festive quiz last year. Boris Johnson was pictured sitting underneath a portrait of Margaret Thatcher as he read out questions in No 10 on 15 December - when London was under tier 2 restrictions, and three days before an alleged Downing Street Christmas party under investigation - the Mirror reports. The newspaper reports that many staff gathered around computers, discussed questions and drank alcohol from Tesco Metro, and that in one office there were four teams, each formed of six people. Dozens of staff reportedly signed up to take part in the quiz online but at 6.30pm many decided to instead join from No 10. At the time people in London were banned from any social mixing between households, while official guidance said: “You must not have a work Christmas lunch or party, where that is a primarily social activity and is not otherwise permitted by the rules in your tier.” In response to the latest allegations, a No 10 spokesperson said: “This was a virtual quiz. Downing Street staff were often required to be in the office to work on the pandemic response so those who were in the office for work may have attended virtually from their desks. “The prime minister briefly took part virtually in a quiz to thank staff for their hard work throughout the year.” I’ll be looking after the blog for the next few hours covering the latest UK and global Covid news. Please get in touch with any tips or suggestions: miranda.bryant@guardian.co.ukAccording to a friend of mine, when I talk about feeling embarrassed, ashamed or misunderstood, my hands become claws and I run them down my face with exaggerated angst. I hadn’t realised I did that but as soon as she said it I knew it was true. While still performing that move, we identified another: reeling in rope, cast too far out, at frantic speed. Both feature often when I talk about my writing – about the risk of sharing words I might regret. If I want to write about what I think, what I really think, this is a risk I must accept. Sometimes my thoughts will go against the grain, will prove unpopular, will make me feel unpopular. And sometimes I’ll look back on an opinion I expressed and realised it has changed. I’ll want to pull it back. Those gestures came to mind when I heard a celebrated US writer had bought back the rights to his first two books – for about 10 times what he was paid to write them – so he could revise and reissue them. In the process, he cut some essays completely. I wondered why. My first thought was that what he said then didn’t align with popular opinion now. But in a New York Times interview, Kiese Laymon sounded less concerned about how those essays might now be perceived than he was about how his own perceptions had changed since writing them. Laymon said he’s always revising his work, and himself. He sees revision as an ongoing commitment to honesty; a perpetual process of “assessment” tied to the very act of living. He said the reason he removed essays from his book was that he could no longer “stand by” them. He also said the times he’s been most “ethical” and “tender”, whether in a piece of art or a relationship, had been the times he’s looked back with a willingness to see if a kind of “harm” was done. Reflecting like this can come at a price. There’s a risk we will see something we don’t want to see, in our words or in ourselves, that calls for change. We can’t go back and unsay what was said, but if we see we were mistaken, and it matters, we can be the first to speak. The way Laymon speaks of revision reminds me of the way George Saunders speaks of redrafting short stories. In his latest work, A Swim in a Pond in the Rain, Saunders discusses the power of careful, sentence-by-sentence revision in a way that makes editing a draft sound more important than writing one. A work of art “has to surprise its audience, which it can only do if it has legitimately surprised its creator,” he says. And, through repeated redrafting, it just might. Like Laymon, Saunders takes this further: the unintended effect of trying, “per one’s taste, over and over”, to make better sentences might even be characterised as “moral-ethical”. Saunders illustrates his point by comparing the sentence “Bob was an asshole” with one that instead describes Bob behaving like an asshole and explains why. The person who wrote the revised sentence “feels like a better guy, somehow” than the person who wrote “Bob was an asshole”, he says. “I find this happening all the time. I like the person I am in my stories better than I like the real me. That person is smarter, wittier, more patient, funnier – his view of the world is wiser.” I’m no famous writer. Mostly, I relay the opinions of others, not my own. But I also pen the odd freelance piece. Through redrafting and revision I refine my words – and thoughts – until I can “stand by” an argument. Rejection is disheartening, but acceptance is frightening. To have a piece purchased and published means it is no longer mine. Will a line, a word, be taken the wrong way? Have I missed, or misunderstood, a vital point? Will I one day claw my face and pull imaginary rope in vain? Indeed I might. But if we let courting approval and avoiding disdain dictate our words, nobody wins. If we daren’t speak with honesty – be vulnerable, take risks – the public square will be a dismal place indeed. Motives matter. Sometimes I’m tempted to revise for the wrong reasons – not out of a desire to write better or more truthfully, but out of a desire to please, to play it safe. This is not “honest assessment”, this is cowardice. A revision that denies the past is too. Writer or not, this is relevant to you: technology makes authors of us all, and who has never wanted to retrieve, revise, an email, text or post? If we are human, we will make mistakes. There should be no shame in making an admission, in changing a stance, if a fault-line’s been exposed – a nuance understood, a truth revealed. But sometimes we behave as if there is. One thing is certain: we will never have all the answers. It’s a fact we very easily forget; a fact that means staying alert to different ways of thinking is something we must cultivate, not fear. We have so much to learn; we will always have so much to learn. We should expect to make mistakes. We should be willing to be honest when we see we’re in the wrong and, when others do the same, we should be willing to respond to them with grace. • Emma Wilkins is a Tasmanian journalist and freelance writerWith a federal election on the horizon, Australia can soon expect media wonks to comb the language patterns of party communications, parsing the signs, slogans and subliminal messages for revelatory insights into our leaders. Even though, as Richard Flanagan writes, “words are mostly used to keep us asleep, not to wake us”, this work usually tells us something about how campaigns and their leaders like to be seen. If the specialists ran Pat Cummins’ words through the software, one word would stand above all else: “calm”. It was the first word he used to describe himself after becoming captain. Speaking about Cummins a week earlier, teammate James Pattinson used the same word. Explaining his response to Joe Root and Dawid Malan’s threatening partnership last week, Cummins said the team was “calm…[with] no panic”. Nathan Lyon twice said Cummins was calm through the first Test. So did Mike Hussey, noting the “calm feel around the team.” Coach Justin Langer called out his calmness, too. The theme for Cummins’ leadership style is clear. It looks diametrically opposed to life under intense, pre-intervention Langer. And, unlike many of our elected leaders, the first Test provided signs that Cummins is able to deliver on the promise. Possibly forgotten amid the runs, the wickets and the routing was the distinct lack of carry-on. In the past, splaying stumps on the first ball of the series at a frothing Gabba might have resulted in a barking cordon. Some overzealous hair ruffling between friends was as aggressive as it got. Later in the Test, with frustration lengthening in proportion to the shadows as Joe Root and Dawid Malan batted on, we heard no drivel from under Marnus Labuschagne’s lid, forced “wit” from behind the stumps or mic’s coincidentally turned up to capture both. Instead we had debutant Alex Carey, whose presence imbued the sort of assuredness and maturity a parent might hope for when meeting a debut babysitter. Eight catches showed substance to support the optic. Carey just seems to be an adult. Travis Head was bombing all-comers before he was beamed, and accepted Mark Wood’s apology in good faith. Earlier, Cameron Green apologised to his skipper for over-celebrating his first wicket. It all has the whiff of, dare we say it, actual humility. We’ll need more evidence to trust it. Where was the niggle? Where were the barbs? Where were the small hold-ups in play while the opponents sighed, waiting for the chat to stop? Each example above is only a small thing and perhaps it’s selective – the broadcast was victim to the Covid border wars, after all. Even so, though Cummins is firmly in the honeymoon throes of his captaincy, this looked a little bit like winning without the carry-on. Tougher tests await, et cetera. Does Cummins actually believe that he can both win and let cricket do the talking? If so, he’s rejecting decades of accepted national wisdom that he must sledge to succeed. Cue many of the former generation on first Test media duties, who flew that doctrinal flag with typical gusto last week. The latest and most egregious chapter in Shane Warne’s tedious vendetta against Mitchell Starc has been well covered. Elsewhere, one of Ian Chappell’s immediate responses to Travis Head’s scintillating and unexpected match-winning hundred was to note he still didn’t trust him. In a match preview, Ian Healy unironically asked where James Vince was, and whether or not he had retired. English reaction to their Australian broadcast was both eye-opening and unsurprising. But ultimately Langer himself stole the show with his dig-by-inference at Jack Leach. It came a day after Australia had played the England spinner out of the match, denting both him and England for the series. Leach suffered blow-after-predictable-blow before Root stopped him, because he was already dead. The cricket had done the talking, the effect self-evident, the comment unnecessary. How did Cummins – who last week said, “I don’t think you need to go out and pick fights…I’m a big believer in concentrating on our own game” – feel about it? Viewed from distance, there is value to each of their comments, it’s just that they’re so regularly delivered with one part insight, three parts scorn. There isn’t a hashtag for it, but it’s not all ex-players. Adam Gilchrist underlined his class, humility and gravitas when presenting Alex Carey with his baggy green. Ricky Ponting provides the sharpest eye and preternatural ability to call the future. Others like Trent Copeland and Chris Rogers explain the game soberly, marrying their own playing expertise with knowledge and research both current and communicable. Professional antagonism isn’t in the repertoire. It looks like this is how Cummins wants to do it, too. His manner has echoes of the ex-Wallabies captain, John Eales – both unblemished physical specimens whose specialist skill made them unlikely captains, but somehow inevitable ones. Last week headlines rang to the tune of “Perfect Pat”. John Eales was simply known as “Nobody”, because Nobody’s Perfect. Eales was composed, unflustered. In partnership with coach Rod Macqueen, they eschewed the conventional understanding of concepts like passion; Macqueen said that “passion is often an excuse for those who haven’t done their preparation…teams often know they are lacking in some way but believe by trying harder and being aggressive they will somehow win the game.” Cummins has already made clear he isn’t perfect, but Australia will be well-served by a captain more attuned to this way of thinking than the prevailing philosophy of his predecessors.Experts have warned that the next variant of Covid-19 to sweep the world could emerge on Australia’s doorstep, due to incredibly low rates of vaccination rates in Papua New Guinea. Papua New Guinea is Australia’s closest neighbour, and at its nearest point is just 4km from Australian territory in the Torres Strait. At various points in the pandemic there have been fears that travellers from PNG could bring the virus to Australia. “I’m worried that PNG is the next place where a new variant emerges,” said Adrian Prouse, head of international humanitarian programs at the Australian Red Cross. “In PNG less than 5% [of the adult population is vaccinated], in Indonesia, just under one-third. Two countries right on our doorstep with significant challenges in getting vaccines into arms.” Stefanie Vaccher, an epidemiologist with the Burnet Institute who has been based in PNG since last year, echoed this concern. “In populations that have low rates of vaccination coverage, there are more opportunities for the virus to spread and mutate. In PNG, where less than 4% of the population are vaccinated, there are a lot of opportunities for the virus to mutate and spread.” Vaccher said the Australian government and people should care about the spread of Covid-19 in PNG not just for what it might mean for Australia. “I don’t think it should matter which country a variant emerges in for the world to care. Countries have a responsibility to think globally and the pandemic has revealed how interconnected we are … It’s important not just because it’s a potential risk for their populations, who might lose hard-fought grounds, or people have struggled through lockdowns. These are people suffering in any country and their lives are equally as important as anyone else.” Papua New Guinea has been dealing with a devastating outbreak of Covid-19 throughout 2021. The official death toll from the virus is 573, with about 35,000 cases, but the true scale of the outbreak is hard to define due to low testing rates and stigma about having the disease. Reports suggest people ask doctors not to put Covid-19 as the cause of death on death certificates of their loved ones. Vaccher said a study conducted in PNG around March 2021 – before the big wave of the virus – showing that 24% of healthcare workers at Port Moresby general hospital already had antibodies to Covid-19 pointed to how widespread and undetected Covid transmission had been. Covid has also crippled Papua New Guinea’s already stretched and under-resourced health system. “Right now PNG is dealing with a surge in Delta,” Prouse said. “When you overlay a surge of Delta with a really fragile healthcare system, high rates of illness, poor rates of access to sanitation, clean water, you see a rise in hospitalisation and death. “We’ve seen the major hospitals in PNG scale down their medical services. The worrying thing, from a much longer-term perspective, we’re starting to see a rise in issues around malaria, TB, other illnesses, poor maternal health and infant health.” “Another devastating fact is that maternal mortality has doubled in the last year,” Vaccher said. “Covid would play into that a bit – Covid does affect pregnant women. But it is also due to the fact that hospitals have shut down, doctors and nurses are off work with Covid, people are too afraid to come to the hospital for appointments.” Prouse said that while vaccine supply to PNG had been adequate, and he praised the Australian government for doing “a really good job on getting vaccines to our Pacific neighbours”, the issues in PNG were about “getting arms to vaccines”, with problems around cold storage, health messaging and especially vaccine hesitancy. Both experts said Australia’s messaging around AstraZeneca early in the year did not help people in PNG to have confidence in the vaccine’s safety. The Australian government donated tens of thousands of doses of AstraZeneca to PNG, at the same time as it was recommending Australians under 60 not get that vaccine due to the very small risk of blood clots. “There are serious issues with vaccine hesitancy in PNG – people just not willing to get vaccinated for multitudes of reasons: concerns around the vaccine, concerns around sorcery, concerns around being stigmatised,” Prouse said. “These are issues that are really putting Australia at risk of the next variant being on our doorstep. “This is not a hand-out-a-pamphlet-and-walk-away situation. You’ve got to win hearts and minds over, you have to convince people [the vaccine] is not something to be feared and it’s actually going to save their life,” he said. “I think the best thing is the Australian government funding the local organisations who have the reach into communities and trust of communities to go in.”Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba Group Holding has dismissed a female employee who accused a former co-worker of sexual assault earlier this year, the government-backed newspaper Dahe Daily has reported. Dahe Daily interviewed the employee, saying she had received notification of termination at the end of November, and published a copy of what she said was her termination letter. The letter said the employee had spread false information about being assaulted and about the company not handling the case. It added this “caused strong social concern and had a bad impact on the company”. The newspaper report at the weekend quoted the employee as saying in the interview: “I have not made any mistakes and certainly will not accept this result, and in the future will use legal means to protect my rights and interests.” Alibaba did not respond to a request for comment outside working hours. A lawyer for the employee did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Alibaba, China’s largest e-commerce firm, was rocked by the sexual assault allegation in August after the female employee published an account on the company’s intranet stating that she was assaulted by her co-worker and a client during a business trip. Alibaba fired the co-worker accused of assault, but also dismissed 10 other employees for publicising the incident. Alibaba has previously said in a statement that it has a “zero-tolerance policy against sexual misconduct.” Alibaba chief executive officer Daniel Zhang, has previously been reported as saying he was “shocked, furious, and ashamed” about the misconduct case. Chinese prosecutors later dropped the case against the employee’s co-worker, stating that he committed forcible indecency but not a crime, but approved the arrest of the client in early September. In China, issues of sexual harassment and assault were rarely brought up in the public sphere until the #MeToo movement took off in 2018, when a Beijing college student publicly accused her professor of sexual harassment. The country is in the spotlight over its handling of allegations by tennis star Peng Shuai, who claimed in a Weibo post that she was sexually assaulted by a former senior government official. The post disappeared quickly and Peng was not seen for almost three weeks, prompting an international campaign calling for information on her whereabouts and wellbeing. The Women’s Tennis Association (WTA) has announced the suspension of all tournaments in China amid concerns about her safety. Reuters contributed to this reportAs domestic border rules eased on Monday, Covid-19 infections continued to grow, with Victoria reporting 1,290 new cases and two deaths, while New South Wales recorded 536 new cases, amid increasing numbers of the Omicron variant. Health authorities in NSW are battling to contain several large transmission events, including cases of the rapidly spreading Omicron variant – with 64 cases of the new strain now recorded in the state. Of the 536 new cases announced in the state on Monday, nine were confirmed to have the Omicron variant, with NSW Health saying “more are expected as results of genomic testing are confirmed”. The number of cases linked to an outbreak at Newcastle’s Argyle House nightclub spiked from 24 to 84 overnight and “a number of these cases are likely to be the Omicron variant”, the health department said. Four people who partied at the club on Wednesday had Covid-19, with the cases linked to the outbreak stemming from a Sydney harbour cruise of 140 people on 3 December. All 680 people who checked into the Newcastle nightclub with a QR code between 9pm on Wednesday and 3am on Thursday are close contacts and must immediately get tested and isolate for seven days. NSW’s double-dose vaccination rate of those aged 16 and older remains at 93.1%, while 94.8% per cent of people have had their first jab. There are 171 people in NSW hospitals with the virus, 24 of them in intensive care. In Victoria, the 1290 new infections and two deaths came as medical researchers discovered that three people from a Melbourne household had contracted Covid-19 for a second time, one year after first becoming infected. They tested positive for the virus in July 2020, with two of the three showing mild symptoms and the third reporting no symptoms, according to a study published in the Medical Journal of Australia on Monday. The variant they contracted was not of concern. Then all three contracted the Delta strain of Covid-19 in July this year, but only experienced mild symptoms. While less than 1% of people are believed to get second infections, the researchers are urging people who have contracted the virus to still get vaccinated. “Just because you’ve had Covid-19 and recovered from it doesn’t make you immune,’’ said Monash University epidemiologist Mohana Baptista. “You’re still at risk of getting Covid-19. Our only protection at the moment is the vaccination.’’ Victoria is now managing 11,649 active cases, despite 92% of residents aged 12 and older having had two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine. There are 323 patients in hospitals in Victoria, 77 of whom are actively infected with the virus in intensive care and 40 needing ventilation. There are three Omicron cases in Victoria – a returned traveller from the Netherlands who is in hotel quarantine and two people who sat together in the same row on a flight from Dubai to Melbourne on 30 November. Victoria has lowered quarantine requirements for travellers from several countries of concern. Double-vaccinated travellers from South Africa, Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia and Zimbabwe are no longer required to undertake 14 days in hotel quarantine upon arrival. They must instead self-quarantine for 72 hours, and get tested within 24 hours of arrival and again between days five and seven, like other international travellers. Meanwhile, the wait time to receive a Covid-19 booster shot has been reduced from six months to five to help tackle the new strain. Epidemiologist Raina MacIntyre from the University of NSW’s Kirby Institute says adults need to start thinking about three shots of a Covid-19 vaccination as being the number required to be fully vaccinated. “Thinking you’re fine with two doses, if Omicron is going to spread in Australia, is a false sense of security,” she told ABC radio on Monday. Early data indicated that, even after three doses, antibody levels “start to wane pretty quickly as well”. “So it may well be that we need another, fourth dose within less than a year,” MacIntyre said.Jo Dyer, the arts administrator and prominent advocate of Christian Porter’s accuser, will run for the marginal South Australian seat of Boothby as an independent. Dyer is the endorsed candidate of Voices for Boothby, a grassroots group seeking to replicate the playbook that has helped elect independents including Helen Haines and Zali Steggall. Boothby is held by the retiring Liberal MP Nicolle Flint on a margin of 1.4%, making it the third most marginal seat in the country. In 2016 the Nick Xenophon Team attracted 20% of the vote in Boothby, suggesting there is potential for a non-major party challenger in the outer metropolitan seat stretching from Glenelg to the Adelaide Hills. The seat is being contested by the chief executive of St Vincent de Paul Society SA, Louise Miller Frost, for Labor, and the health consultant Rachel Swift, for the Liberal party. Dyer is one of a new wave of liberal progressive independents campaigning in traditionally blue-ribbon seats, including Zoe Daniel in Goldstein and Allegra Spender in Wentworth, who tend to emphasise the fight against climate change, support for a strong federal integrity commission and gender equality as their key demands. Dyer confirmed her candidacy on Monday, promising to “reset the toxic mess of our current politics”. In a video message Dyer said citizens had been “let down by our government” because it is “captive of sectional interests” and “hasn’t been governing for the greater good”. Dyer cited the “existential crisis [of] climate change” which had been reduced to “another tranche in the culture wars”. Dyer noted she had “been involved in a campaign for women’s justice” and said she had “experienced first hand the way this government has treated that broad sweeping campaign as just another political problem preferably to be ignored, and if not ignored, managed”. Dyer is a former chief executive of the Sydney writers’ festival and the outgoing director of Adelaide writers’ week who shot to national prominence after Porter revealed in March that he was the cabinet minister who was the subject of an ABC story revealing that a dossier had been circulated to a number of politicians. It detailed claims by a woman that he had raped her when they were debating teammates in January 1988, when she was 16 and he was 17. Porter strenuously denied the allegation and that he had any sexual contact with the alleged victim, who took her life in mid-2020 after withdrawing from the New South Wales police investigation. Dyer became the public spokesperson for a group of the deceased woman’s friends lobbying for an inquiry into the allegation and Porter’s fitness to be a minister. When Porter sued the ABC for defamation for reporting on the dossier, Dyer obtained court orders against his barrister Sue Chrysanthou, forcing her off the case on the basis Chrysanthou had received confidential information potentially relevant to the case when she met Dyer in November 2020, before she had been briefed by Porter, to discuss a separate matter. In May Porter agreed to discontinue the case against the ABC in return for an editor’s note being added to the story stating the public broadcaster “regretted” that some readers had “misinterpreted” the article “as an accusation of guilt against Mr Porter”. After leaving the attorney general’s portfolio to pursue the case, Porter revealed in a declaration of interests in September he had part-funded it with money from undisclosed sources from what he described as a blind trust. The minister denied breaching disclosure rules and was later cleared by the privileges committee but quit the cabinet in September because the issue had become a “distraction” for the government. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In December Porter announced he would not recontest his Western Australian seat of Pearce, citing the “harshness” of politics and claiming: “There appears to be no limit to what some will say or allege or do to gain an advantage over a perceived enemy.” He has appealed against the federal court decision removing Chrysanthou, in which Porter and the barrister were ordered to pay Dyer’s costs, likely to amount to hundreds of thousands of dollars. The appeal is to be heard in April. In May Dyer told the federal court she wanted the allegation against Porter made public in an attempt to stop him ever becoming prime minister. Dyer became friends with the woman during their time as high school debaters in the 1980s. Dyer has argued that women have been let down by political leaders, citing Chanel Contos’s “devastating spreadsheet of teenage girls allegedly assaulted by their ostensible friends from the country’s most ‘elite’ schools”, and Scott Morrison’s claim he supported women’s rise but not “on the basis of others doing worse”.Australians in major cities look set to be mostly spared La Niña rains on what is likely to be a mild Christmas Day, according to weather forecasters. AccuWeather forecasts clear skies for Melbourne and Hobart on 25 December, while clouds are expected to linger across the rest of the country into the evening. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Bureau of Meteorology has predicted a mixed outlook for rainfall from 20 December to the start of the new year, with wetter-than-average patches across the east coast and drier-than-average conditions elsewhere. Maximum temperatures were also expected to be below average for the southern half of Australia. Ahead of the release on Saturday of the BoM’s official forecast for the week of Christmas, AccuWeather has predicted possible showers in Queensland and the Northern Territory on Christmas Day, with temperatures hitting the high 20s in most major cities. Sydney Sydney is set to be a mild 23C with sunshine and clouds throughout the day, according to AccuWeather. There’s no chance of rain until the evening, which will cool to 19C and may see a shower or two late. During the day, expect winds of up to 32km/h. From Boxing Day, Sydney will enjoy a string of sunny days in the lead-up to New Year’s Eve. Canberra Canberra is shaping up for a warm Christmas Day with a high of 25C and no rainfall. There’ll be a mix of clouds and sunshine until the evening, which will be partly cloudy and cool to 14C, according to AccuWeather. Winds of up to 30km/h are expected, with temperatures in the high 20s for the following week. Melbourne Melbourne is set for a beautiful sunny day with clear skies and no rain if AccuWeather’s forecasts are accurate. With a high of 29C, there is just a 9% chance of cloud cover, with winds of 19km/h expected into the afternoon. Come evening, the temperature will hit a low of 19C. The days surrounding Christmas will also be in the high 20s. Perth AccuWeather is forecasting a cloudy day in Perth, with a high of 29C and winds of up to 43km/h. There’s no rain forecast, but clouds are expected to linger until the evening when it will mostly clear up, with a low of 17C. Brisbane The Christmas lunch may have to be served indoors in Brisbane, with some rain forecast to hit in the afternoon and evening. Otherwise, it will be a muggy, cloudy day of 28C, according to AccuWeather. Winds of up to 44km/h are possible, with showers clearing in the week following Christmas. Adelaide Adelaide can expect a warm, dry Christmas Day with a high of 29C. Clouds are expected to linger until the evening, with winds of up to 46km/h possible. Following Christmas, the city will be blessed with a string of days in the 30s and sunshine. Darwin Of Australia’s capital cities, Darwin will have the hottest Christmas Day with a forecast high of 34C. With a couple of thunderstorms likely in the afternoon and evening, it will also be a muggy and cloudy day. Winds of up to 32km/h expected. The thunderstorms are expected to continue for the rest of the week, according to AccuWeather. Hobart Hobart will enjoy a clear and sunny day if AccuWeather forecasts hold up. It is currently predicted to reach 22C in Hobart, with just a 10% chance of cloud cover and no rain on the radar. Winds of up to 33km/h are expected, with clear skies in the evening and a low of 13C.Australia’s international border will open to more travellers on Wednesday, as the prime minister confirmed that his government would end the “pause” triggered by the emergence of the Omicron Covid variant. Scott Morrison, welcoming the South Korean president, Moon Jae-in, to Canberra on Monday, said Australia would open to travellers from South Korea and Japan and also international students and skilled workers more broadly. While pandemic recovery was on the agenda for the talks at Parliament House, the leaders also heralded closer defence ties as they witnessed the signing of a previously announced $1bn military equipment contract with a South Korean firm. Moon said he respected the Australian government’s “sovereign” decision to strike the Aukus deal with the US and the UK – an arrangement that China has claimed poses a threat to regional stability, amid worsening tensions between Beijing and Canberra. But the South Korean leader also voiced a desire to maintain a harmonious relationship with China, which he said was important to securing North Korea’s denuclearisation. He ruled out joining Australia, the US and other countries in a diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics. The Australian government announced in late November that it was delaying the plan to reopen Australia to international skilled workers and students, as well as humanitarian, working holidaymaker and provisional family visa holders, from 1 December until 15 December. The two-week “pause” also applied to reopening to travellers from Japan and South Korea. That meant the only travel was for fully vaccinated Australian citizens, permanent residents and immediate family, as well as fully vaccinated green lane travellers from New Zealand and Singapore. Although Morrison signalled last week that he wanted to avoid any further delay to reopening, the government was not definitive about the matter, prompting students and other travellers to be worried about a further disruption to their plans. During a joint media conference with Moon on Monday, Morrison said: “On Wednesday of this week, we will move again forward. The borders will be reopened both to Korea and to Japan and for skilled migration and for students as we conclude the pause that we announced several weeks ago.” The prime minister also welcomed Queensland’s reopening on Monday, describing it as the borders “tumbling down” and an “encouraging” sign of “Australians coming together as we get to the end of this year”. “I know the more than 123,000 Australians of Korean ancestry will be looking forward to seeing their friends, their family and them being able to join together and that has been made possible because of the outstanding achievements in Korea in managing Covid,” Morrison said. Moon said he appreciated the government’s decision to reopen to fully vaccinated people from South Korea, hoping this would “lead to more active exchanges and economic revitalisation”. Moon, who is due to complete his single term as president in May, is visiting Canberra and Sydney to mark the 60th anniversary of diplomatic relations between Australia and South Korea, and will also meet with the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese. The Australian government trumpeted the awarding of a $1bn weapons contract to South Korean firm Hanwha Defense Australia, stemming from a commitment first made in May 2019. The deal includes 30 self-propelled howitzers – a type of artillery, 15 armoured ammunition resupply vehicles, and weapon-locating radars that help find enemy artillery. They will be built in Geelong and supplied to the Australian army. The then defence minister, Linda Reynolds, announced in September last year that Hanwha Defense Australia had been chosen to build 30 self-propelled howitzers in the Geelong region. Reynolds’s successor as defence minister, Peter Dutton, who was in attendance at Monday’s signing ceremony, said the project would “mean a significant increase in the level of firepower and security for Australian artillery capability”. The contract was one of four documents signed on Monday, with the two countries also adding more details to a previous agreement to work together on “low- and zero-emissions technology”. Moon said Australia and South Korea had also agreed to strengthen cooperation on stable supply chains for critical minerals, saying it was “important not only for the two countries, but also for the global economy”. “Australia, the world’s richest country in mineral resources, and Korea, a major producer of batteries and electric vehicles, play an important role in the global supply chain,” Moon said. Asked about a diplomatic boycott of the Winter Olympics, Moon said: “We have not received a request from any other country including the United States to participate in the diplomatic boycott. We are not considering a boycott measure.” Moon said South Korea and Australia were “like-minded” on geopolitical developments, as they were both US allies that had economic relationships with China. “However, Korea has another factor to take into account and that has to do with the peace and security on the Korean Peninsula and also denuclearisation of DPRK [North Korea],” Moon said. “We need the constructive efforts of China to enable denuclearisation of DPRK.” The South Korean president declined to comment directly on Dutton’s recent forthright comments about Australia’s potential involvement in a future war to defend Taiwan, but stressed the importance of dialogue “to enable a peaceful management of the cross-strait issues”. Morrison said he had assured Moon that Aukus and the Quad – an increasingly prominent grouping among Australia, the US, India and Japan – were “about ensuring that Australia can be a stronger partner for so many others”. The Australian prime minister strongly welcomed South Korea’s interest in joining the big regional trade deal known as the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership – which the UK, China and Taiwan are also seeking to join. In a clear swipe at China – which has rolled out a series of trade actions against Australia over the past 18 months – Morrison said the CPTPP “sets a high bar for countries that understand the importance of the rule of law in trade, that deal with partners fairly and consistently”. He said South Korea had “already achieved those marks”.It was back in September at dusk, a time of uncertain light, that I thought I saw a white bird. In that fine autumn, there followed other evenings of gardening late, but it was several weeks before I saw it again. A barn owl flying low across the field, working the ground with efficiency as it quartered the long grass; I hadn’t imagined it. The variety of habitats in the valley makes for good hunting, a mixture of wood pasture, tufty grasses and marsh. This rough land provides cover for small mammals and in particular field voles, a barn owl’s main diet. Since that first time, the owl has become a regular, recorded in my notebook morning and evening, a pale floating shape, backlit as dawn comes over the hill, wings tinged apricot as the sun sets. Barn owls are crepuscular birds, so the short winter days give a greater chance of seeing one. Their soft, silent feathers have little waterproofing and they rely on hearing to locate their prey; on wet, windy nights they go hungry. One ear set higher than the other enables them to pinpoint sound. The owl hovered low, feathered legs dangling, claws folded, before dropping into the long grass by the river. It lifted off again, gripping a vole, and took it to a half hidden spot in the lee of a conifer wood. Mantling its prey, it tugged for five minutes before peering round with a ruffle of feathers and flying into the dark trees. One morning there were two barn owls circling each other, hinting at possibilities for next year. I looked for the owl the day after Storm Arwen. All around the valley, roads were blocked by fallen trees and many people had no electricity or water. Gales of nearly 100mph had been recorded in Northumberland. I hoped it had hunkered down in some barn or hollow tree. A relief, then, to see it glide over a field patchy with snow, its cream and golden-buff wings matching a landscape now white with straw-coloured grasses. I stood under the crook of a hawthorn watching. The barn owl had survived the first major storm of winter. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe national rollout of an app to help Australians better sort their recycling has received a lukewarm reception as critics warn it won’t help solve fundamental problems with the industry. Recycle Mate is a free to access app by developer DreamWalk that has been available in an earlier form in New South Wales since 2019. The app uses artificial intelligence and photo recognition so a person can take a photo of an item with their phone to find out whether it can be recycled, wherever they are. The environment minister, Sussan Ley, said in a statement the $2m app will help drive down the amount of plastic that goes to landfill. “Every time a photo is uploaded to the app, it recognises more and gets smarter, meaning less confusion for users,” Ley said. “The beauty of this app lies in its simplicity – anyone can use it – but ultimately the outcome will be less contamination of recyclable products in recycling bins, a larger volume of recoverable items heading to resource recovery centres and less waste in landfill.” Jeff Angel, director at recycling coalition Boomerang Alliance, said the app would help “get the right products into the right bin”, but that this focus on educating consumers misunderstood the recycling problem. “The traditional approach of government and industry has been to put all the obligation on the consumer,” Angel said. “But without government and industry being obliged to use that material for recycled content for new products, they are largely escaping their responsibilities.” A recent progress report from the Australian Packaging Covenant Organisation (Apco) found Australia was failing to meet its own plastic reduction targets, with just 16% of plastic packaging being recycled in 2020, despite more than half of it being easily recyclable. Australia has set a target for 70% of plastic packaging to be recycled or composted by 2025, and for unnecessary single-use plastic packaging to be phased out. But the Apco report found that with the current recycling upgrades in place, Australia will only be able to recycle 36% of plastics annually by 2025. The Australian Marine Conservation society plastics expert Shane Cucow said “people are rightfully frustrated” because despite them doing the right thing Australia’s recycling industry was “never capable of dealing with the plastic packaging that’s being pushed on people”. “Unless we deal with the root cause here, which is too much plastic packaging being produced and not enough facilities to process it, people’s recycling efforts are never going to be enough,” Cucow said. Some critics also raised questions about the Recycle Mate app’s privacy policy. Justin Warren, chair of internet user protection group Electronic Frontiers Australia, said the app’s privacy policy “links to a fairly generic website privacy policy that doesn’t mention how your personal data, like your location, is handled”. “What happens to the images you take is buried in the terms and conditions on the app and I doubt most people will bother to read them,” Warren said. “Depending on what people take photos of, and what might be in the background, there are some risks there.”Companies that received taxpayer-backed loans to help them survive the pandemic continued to donate tens of thousands of pounds to the Conservative party, the Guardian can disclose. While there is no evidence the low-interest loans were used to fund donations directly, critics say there was no justification for companies requesting taxpayer help during the pandemic and then continuing to make political contributions. One campaign group said it “smells like state funding of a political party” and called on businesses that made donations to compensate the Treasury. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, launched the coronavirus business interruption loan scheme (CBILS) in March 2020, offering emergency loans of up to £5m to small businesses hit by Covid-19. Loans have been made to more than 100,000 firms. While the loans are arranged and made by banks, the government guarantees them and also pays the first year’s interest and loan fees. These elements of the £27bn CBILS scheme constitute state aid, according to the government and the European Commission. Analysis by the Guardian of the state aid disclosures published by the commission shows that several firms that were already Conservative donors continued contributing to the party after receiving taxpayer-backed loans. Dow Investments, a property firm founded by the Scottish entrepreneur and philanthropist Robert Kilgour, received a CBILS loan of £1m in August 2020, of which the state aid element amounted to £106,798. After receiving the loan, the company continued making monthly payments to the Conservatives, with a combined value of £37,494. Kilgour sits on the advisory council of the TaxPayers’ Alliance, an influential rightwing thinktank that rose to prominence campaigning for cuts in public sector spending. Approached for comment, he said the loan was “fully secured against its property assets as an extra financial reserve against the slings and arrows of the very severe business effects of the pandemic”. Calling it a “very prudent move”, he added: “Dow Investments currently plans to repay the full CBILS loan in early 2022.” Kilgour said Dow’s subsidiary Renaissance Care, a nursing home business, was a private company providing a predominantly public service, because 67% of its elderly residents were local authority clients. The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) also guaranteed a loan of £1.5m to the aerospace parts business Orange Aero, of which £162,425 was classified as state aid. After receiving the loan in August 2020, Orange Aero donated £50,000 to the Conservative party in October of the same year. Orange Aero’s managing director, Simon Jeffs, said there was no link between the loans it received and the company’s subsequent political donation. “Our business has been decimated and we have had to be extremely agile and reinvent ourselves to focus on other areas of the aerospace business,” he said. “The CBILS loan was outstanding support but we also had an outstanding year in 2018 and retained in the business the profits we made.” He said the loans were made by banks and would be fully repaid, adding that the company’s political donations were “modest”. The Norwich-based construction company Bateman Groundworks took a loan of £1.8m in August 2020, including a state aid portion worth £186,120. That same month it donated £4,500 to the local MP Brandon Lewis, followed by donations of £6,000 and £12,000. Its managing director, Richard Bateman, said the loan was “fully guaranteed and secured against both company and personal assets” and said this meant it was “not a taxpayer-backed loan”. “The loan was in no way used to fund the Conservative party generally or any individual member of the party,” he said. Another company that received a CBILS loan was Stonehaven Campaigns, a public relations and consultancy business set up by the former Scottish Conservatives rising star Peter Lyburn. The company received a £500,000 loan in April 2020, with the state aid component reaching £47,100. It has donated £1,250 to the Conservative party every month since then, to a value of £15,000. Stonehaven Campaigns declined to comment on the record, but the company made clear any loans it received did not fund outgoings on donations. Tom Brake, the director of the pressure group Unlock Democracy, said: “There can be no justification for a business, in receipt of financial support during the Covid pandemic, to continue donating to party funds. “To suggest that somehow donations are completely separate from a company’s overall income is disingenuous. This looks and smells like state funding of a political party – something you’d expect the government to oppose ideologically. The government should be requesting that these businesses repay an equivalent amount to the Treasury.” A government spokesperson said the loans “provided a lifeline to millions of businesses across the UK – helping them survive the pandemic and protecting millions of jobs. We have always been clear that these are loans, not grants. In every case, lending decisions were made by lenders in a process that is completely separate from government and there are strict guidelines which set out how the funds from these loans should be used.” While the decision to lend under the scheme rests with banks, the government guarantees the loan, with 8% of its value deemed to be state aid. The taxpayer also picks up the cost of interest and loan fees for the first year. Asked if taxpayer money had been indirectly used to fund the Conservative party, the party did not return requests for comment.Campaigners fear the roads agency is pushing ahead with plans to destroy or fill with concrete more than a dozen Victorian bridges in England and Scotland despite a government pause after an outcry over “cultural vandalism”. When National Highways poured 1,000 tonnes of concrete and aggregate under a bridge at Great Musgrave in Cumbria, there was a backlash that forced ministers to halt the programme in July. Documents released under the Freedom of Information Act show that despite the pause, the agency has spent tens of thousands of pounds on the sites for the infill or demolition of 14 bridges from Kent to East Lothian. The agency says the work is part of routine maintenance but campaigners say it has the hallmarks of preparing for filling in or demolition. In one email concerning plans to demolish a former railway bridge near Bridport in Dorset, a National Highways civil engineer said the agency was continuing to work on the scheme. In the email, sent in August to Dorset council, the engineer said: “The government has halted all demolition and infill works for an indefinite period,” and added: “We are proceeding with all of background works as if it [the demolition] were continuing.” Demolition would scupper plans to reopen the Maiden Newton to Bridport branch rail line as a heritage attraction. The HRE Group, an alliance of engineers and sustainable transport advocates campaigning to reuse the historical railway network, obtained the documents. Graeme Bickerdike, a member of the group, said: “The awarding of these contracts demonstrates a clear direction of travel and undermines the ministers’ intervention. The so-called pause is just a smoke and mirrors.” A spokesperson for National Highways said its previous plans to demolish nine historical bridges and fill in a further 69 remained on pause. She said: “We cannot risk a delay to any safety critical work so we must be ready to proceed with any agreed work once the pause is lifted.” Hélène Rossiter, the head of its historical railways estate programme, said: “We have continued with vegetation and ecology work on a number of structures. This is good practice and will keep structures safe. This work will be required irrespective of any decisions regarding the future of these structures.” The documents show that between 21 September and 25 October the agency spent £192,000 on works around 13 of the 69 bridges earmarked for filling in before the pause and one of the nine bridges set for demolition. The work includes clearing vegetation around a bridge near Winchester that if filled in would block a planned 27-mile walking route; more than £55,000 of drainage works on two Gloucestershire bridges that are part of a proposed cycle route; filling cracks on a bridge in Barcombe, East Sussex, to stop bats roosting in the bridge’s brickwork; tree felling on the former Hull and Barnsley railway line at Little Smeaton, North Yorkshire; and drainage works at an ornate cast-iron bridge near Wakefield. Bickerdike said such work was inconsistent with routine maintenance. He said: “You don’t fell mature trees 15 metres from a bridge if you’re not intending to infill it and form embankments. You don’t spend tens of thousands of pounds on drainage work under a bridge unless you intend to carry out a bigger scheme. And you don’t block up cracks to prevent bats roosting in a structure unless you intend to undertake works imminently.” He pointed out that National Highways spent £14,000 on works to the bridge at Barcombe after it awarded a £246,000 contract to fill in the bridge. He said the demolition or blocking of Victorian bridges ran counter to the government’s strategy to promote walking and cycling in part by encouraging the use of disused railway lines. The strategy set out in July in a document called Gear Change acknowledged: “There has been concern about the fate of a small proportion of the 3,250 railway structures managed by Highways England [since renamed National Highways].” It promised to review plans if there was a realistic prospect of disused lines being used for walking, cycle routes or heritage railway lines, and to consult local people. It added: “Until then, any infilling or demolition on these structures will be paused unless there is an immediate need to act on grounds of public safety.” Meanwhile, National Highways is preparing to submit retrospective planning permission for filling in the bridge at Great Musgrave after it was decried as “cultural vandalism” during a debate in the House of Lords. If planning is refused, the concrete will have to be removed.The family of the murdered private detective Daniel Morgan are to sue the Metropolitan police for damages, alleging that a decades-long cover-up of corruption is continuing. An official inquiry in June found that the Met commissioner, Cressida Dick, obstructed the panel appointed by the government to investigate claims that corruption blighted the hunt for Morgan’s killers and that the Met had failed to root it out. Morgan was found with an axe in his head in a south London pub car park in 1987. He and his business partner, Jonathan Rees, ran an agency called Southern Investigations, which carried out extensive work for the News of the World. No one has been convicted of his murder and the Met has previously accepted that corrupt officers shielded the killers. The Morgan family has decided to sue in part in frustration at what they see as a continuing cover-up. Despite the inquiry’s stark findings against Dick, the Mayor’s Office for Policing and Crime (Mopac), the body that oversees the Met, decided she would not face disciplinary action. The Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) is still to make a decision in relation to Dick and other Met officers past and present. The Morgan family’s solicitor, Raju Bhatt, said the civil claim alleged misfeasance in public office as well as breaches of the Human Rights Act. Dick would be named as a defendant, with the lawsuit alleging widespread wrongdoing as identified by the report. Bhatt said: “The claim alleges deliberate abuse or bad faith in the exercise of powers by any officer of the crown with knowledge or reckless indifference to the consequences of such conduct.” The claim dates back to 1987 and alleged wrongdoing immediately after the killing, when one suspect worked on the murder investigation, running through to recent years. Bhatt said: “The repeated failure over decades to confront … corruption includes the obstruction of the independent panel’s work and the response of the Met to that panel’s findings.” The Met rejected the findings of the panel, insisting it was not institutionally corrupt and that it had not obstructed its work. The panel blamed obstruction for its inquiry taking eight years as it fought for documents. Morgan’s brother Alastair has fought for more than 30 years and is exasperated that the inquiry findings have led to no action. In a statement, the Morgan family said: “The present commissioner, Cressida Dick, felt able to simply reject the panel’s key finding of institutional corruption within the Metropolitan police. Her role in obstructing the panel’s work – as detailed in their report – appears to have met with indifference and worse at the IOPC and Mopac where those charged with bringing her to answer for her role in this sorry state of affairs have shown themselves unable or unwilling to do so. “And, in their wisdom, the home secretary and the London mayor deemed it fit to extend her term in office before the ink had dried on the panel’s report. “We consider we have been left with no option but to bring a civil claim against the Metropolitan police in order to achieve some semblance of accountability. To that end, our solicitors have sent a letter of claim to the Metropolitan police directorate of legal services, and we await their response with interest.” The Met said it received notice of being sued last Tuesday. It said: “Since the Daniel Morgan independent panel published its report six months ago, a dedicated team within the Met has been established and is progressing its response to those recommendations specific to the Met, while engaging with other lead organisations named in the report. We remain committed to this work and expect to fully report our progress to the home secretary and mayoral office in spring 2022.” The IOPC said: “We are undertaking our own assessment to determine whether there are any conduct matters identified within the report for any named police officer, including the Metropolitan Police Service commissioner and former commissioners, that may require a referral to us.”When the comic actor Slink Johnson was growing up in Arkansas, he had a specific image of Jesus Christ in his mind. “He was a white man with clean-ass robes,” he says. “Never a hair out of place. You had to be nice to him or his father’s gonna throw you in a lake of fire, you know what I mean?” Speaking over Zoom from his home in Los Angeles, where heavenly sunlight is streaming through the blinds behind him, he adds: “He was always holding his hands like this.” And he turns his palms upwards. None of which describes the version of the Son of God played by Johnson in the sitcom Black Jesus, which ran for three seasons between 2014 and 2019. Johnson’s Christ is an African American stoner chilling in his robes, sandals and crown of thorns in modern-day Compton. Despite a penchant for weed, he really is the Messiah, not a very naughty boy. He may scoff at requests for next week’s lottery numbers but he will happily use his divine power to help you find your keys (“Living room, couch, right pillow”). Anyone unhappy with their lot in life is reminded of the big man upstairs: “I told y’all, Pop’s got a plan.” It may be one of the most unorthodox portrayals of Jesus but it is also among the sweetest. Vital to that is Johnson’s loving performance. “I wanna think he represents the best of me, minus some of my more worldly ways,” he says. Any controversy aroused by Black Jesus was mild, and could scarcely survive in the face of the show’s good-natured humour and optimism. “I think people were expecting it to be edgy or overly urban or ghetto,” says Johnson. “But it has this heartfelt warmth.” Then again, attitudes toward depictions of Christianity have softened since the furore surrounding Monty Python’s Life of Brian in 1979. Or, for that matter, Jesus Christ Superstar. Though that show is now accepted as a pillar of the musical theatre canon, its UK premiere in London in 1972 was greeted by protests, as its star Paul Nicholas remembers. “There were people outside the Palace theatre with placards,” he says. “To call something Jesus Christ Superstar was a bit dangerous. Things were quite touchy. It also had this radical, rocky score. Of course, once people saw the show, they could see it was all treated with great care.” The same is true of another interpretation of Jesus that caused even greater uproar: the one created and performed by the playwright Jo Clifford in The Gospel According to Jesus, Queen of Heaven. “I read the gospels and was incredibly moved by the figure of Jesus,” Clifford tells me. “Much to my surprise, I really admired him. I thought of the piece I was writing as an act of devotion. I imagined it wouldn’t attract the slightest bit of attention.” When she turned up in Glasgow in 2009 to perform her play, which takes the form of a sermon, she was faced instead with protesters objecting vociferously to a transgender woman playing the Son of God as a Daughter. Clifford’s play was informed partly by the hostility she had encountered since starting to live as a woman. “Every time I went out, people were laughing and pointing and shouting abuse. If you read the gospels, you see that Jesus is continually reaching out to people who are oppressed and suffering prejudice. The reason these demonstrators got so angry is that they believed I wanted to attack and defame Christian religion but that’s the opposite of where I was coming from.” In fact, her personal Jesus has created a fair few believers. “I’ve had people say, ‘If only church services had been like this when I was a child.’ Someone else said, ‘You never bloody told me you were going to make me a Christian!’” Among the converts was Clifford herself. “I wasn’t really a Christian before. My faith has come about through reading the gospels, making a play out of them and then, year after year, performing it.” How did she build Jesus as a character? “I couldn’t really tell you,” she laughs. “My children sometimes say, ‘You’re doing your Jesus voice!’ So I must have a Jesus voice, whatever that is. All I do on stage is say the words as truthfully as I can and with as much presence as possible.” Whether Jesus is portrayed as a stoner, a singer or a trans woman, there is a unifying Christ-like demeanour. That’s the view of James Burke-Dunsmore, who has played Jesus on hundreds of occasions, most notably as the star of the two-hour Passion play staged annually in Trafalgar Square. “It’s not about appearance,” he says. “I’ve directed other Jesuses, and they’ve been all sorts of shapes and sizes. But there’s a quality that comes from delivering the text without constantly forcing a point. The most successful Jesuses tend to hand over a teaching or a judgment expecting it to come back at them in a kind of to-and-fro. People want to receive the text unhindered by an actor’s ego or selfishness.” For Greg Barnett, who played the lead in the 2019 History Channel drama-documentary Jesus: His Life, becoming the Messiah entailed thinking of him purely as a man. “If I looked at the enormity of him being Jesus, it would have freaked me out,” he says. “I did get a review which described me as ‘physically unremarkable’, and at first I thought: ‘That hurts.’ But it was kind of what I was aiming for. I wanted to find that normality in him: just being a normal chap, with the human pain he went through.” With the exception of Black Jesus, humour in this context is often conspicuous by its absence, though Paul Nicholas did manage to amuse himself occasionally during his 10-month stint in Jesus Christ Superstar. “Doing it eight times a week, it does start to become a bit routine,” he admits. “And I could be a bit naughty sometimes. One night, I was waiting in the darkness to go on at the start of Act Two when a man in the audience sneezed. I whispered, ‘Bless you, my son.’ Very quietly, though, so that only the front row could hear!” Though the original 1972 production wasn’t filmed, a brief glimpse can be seen in that year’s Christmas special of the BBC sitcom Till Death Us Do Part, when Alf Garnett takes his family to see the show before accosting Nicholas in the bar afterwards to discuss the crucifixion. “Does it ’urt up there?” he asks, to which the actor replies: “Well, I’m glad when I get down.” Even for a non-believer like Nicholas, the crucifixion scene took its toll emotionally. “I would go below the stage and they would attach me to this very thin frame so that when I was raised up it looked like I was hanging in the air. The audience was very moved by that. All you could hear was the odd person sobbing. I was so overcome some nights that the tears started to flow. I felt so vulnerable up there, so exposed. It was a religious experience, in a sense, without me being religious. It affected me quite deeply.” Barnett felt the same while shooting his crucifixion scene in Morocco. “It was the most intense, insane experience to be hanging on the cross looking out at the Atlas Mountains, which were covered in snow,” he recalls. “It’s something I will never forget. I was on the cross for three days in total. On the last day, the sun was going down behind the mountains as they were lowering me, and I started sobbing uncontrollably. Everything was very peaceful; there was a real serenity on set. Afterwards it took me a good 45 minutes or so to decompress. It wasn’t negative in any way – it was weirdly cathartic.” For Nicholas, the role was ultimately still a job. “It’s always about acting and pretending,” he says. “I would leave Jesus at the stage door as I left each night.” But for Barnett, the part spilled over into his life. “I definitely had more time and love to give to other people. You’re living and breathing your character, so when it’s Jesus you can’t help but find yourself behaving like that.” Of course, it also looks good on the CV. “Absolutely. My mum loved it when I told her I’d got the part. We’d be out and she would say, ‘Ooh, can I introduce you to my son, Jesus?’ I’d be like, ‘All right, mother!’” As Johnson sees it, the lessons an actor takes away from the role are timeless. “It’s about everything we learned in kindergarten,” he says. “All the things we disregarded along the way: treat others how you wanna be treated, keep your hands to yourself, and be nice.”The usually reliable and prolific Geminid meteor shower reaches its peak tonight. In the early hours of 14 December, one hundred or more meteors are expected to flash across the sky. Visibility this year is hampered by a waxing gibbous moon that is just four days away from being full. Yet, despite the moonlight, bright meteors should still be visible to the patient watcher. From the UK, the moon sets around 0230 GMT, which is just in time for the expected peak of meteor shower activity. The chart shows the view looking high into the south western sky at 0300 GMT. The Geminids appear to radiate from a point close to the star Castor, which is next to Pollux in the constellation of Gemini, the twins. To stand the best chance of seeing meteors, look slightly away from the radiant and keep an eye open for their colour. While most will burn white, some shine yellow, red, green or blue. The shower is special because it originates from an asteroid rather than a comet. Most meteors are dust grains that were once part of a comet’s tail but the Geminids come from asteroid 3200 Phaethon. The meteor shower is also visible from the southern hemisphere.It can be a bit jarring when you catch yourself hooting at Alma’s Not Normal. A woman recalling a grim childhood she describes as being spent like “the baby in Trainspotting, if she’d lived” shouldn’t be funny … right? But creator Sophie Willan, who won a Bafta for the pilot of this show based on her own upbringing, has a razor-sharp wit – one that can find a punchline in any shitstorm. This unabashed sense of humour, along with authentic storytelling, is an invitation to acknowledge life’s lemons and laugh in the face of them. And that is how a series about a thirtysomething woman in Bolton brought up in care unravelled to be one of the most joyous comedy dramas of the year. When we meet Alma – dressed in a bright faux-fur coat like a pink flamingo – her toxic boyfriend has just left her, she is desperate for work and she is navigating relationships with her addict mum Lin and her Tinder-swiping, Spam-loving grandma Joan (played to absolute perfection by Siobhan Finneran and Lorraine Ashbourne respectively). Luckily, Alma has a brilliant friend by her side: Leanne (Jayde Adams), who has “the mannerisms of a truck driver and the rock’n’roll sex appeal of Debbie Harry”. After they spend a night on the booze with kebabs and karaoke mics, it’s time for Alma to get her act together once and for all. The six-episode series saw her journey from getting a job as a sandwich artist to being offered a place on a local theatre tour, and making money as a sex worker in between. One week she was drinking champagne with “fabulous” client Phil, the next she was running away from a house with a stolen dog after a group of punters threaten her. And then there’s the heavy breathing client who is “like a pug that’s been on a long walk” during sex. “Why do people always psychoanalyse sex workers and question how empowered they are?” she asks Leanne, perhaps also challenging the viewer. “You don’t go to a telesales office and go: ‘Oh, Sue on the phones – is she empowered or is she loudly selling carpets because she was an only child?’” It’s a brilliant way of comically confronting life’s grey areas from a place of truth. As Alma works on rebuilding herself, she also examines her foundations, attempting to reconcile with her difficult childhood. This came to a head in the penultimate, and standout, episode in which she is sent a box of administrative records that were kept while she grew up in care. Her devastation over what is detailed in them comes out by shouting at an assistant in a 99p shop over a spatula that costs £1.29: “I’m being fucked, again!” But by the end of the episode, she’d turned it around, using her experience in care to help her bag an acting role. “You’re going to be more than fine; you’re going to be fucking fabulous, love,” she tells the little girl in her records, and yes – that is a tear in your eye. More serious ground is covered – observations on the welfare system, the reality of living with addiction – and it is mainly Alma’s fragile mum who threaded these issues throughout. After spending the whole series trying her hardest to rehouse Lin and ensure she doesn’t relapse, Alma spends the last episode deliberating whether she should put her stage dreams on hold. “Don’t give up now,” she tells her mother through the letterbox. “Crack and smack are not normal ways of blowing off steam, Mum.” It was heartbreaking, ugly, funny and real – an appropriately bittersweet finale of a brave series that celebrated the fabulously flawed.Succession 9pm, Sky Atlantic As Shiv stirred the pot around his predilection for sending nude pics to Gerri, it seemed that Roman was having the worst week of all the Roy siblings. Kendall wasn’t faring too well either, with Logan having reneged on his earlier offer to end their civil war and let him cash out. Then came the end of episode eight, and the moment of tragedy viewers had been both dreading and anticipating all season (and could it really be?). With all the bickering, backstabbing and Lukas Matsson’s tech bro twaddle suddenly rendered utterly trivial, prepare yourself for a devastating, revelatory end to this masterful third series. Hannah J Davies David Baddiel: Social Media, Anger and Us 9pm, BBC Two Part polemic, part appeal for common sense, this documentary sees Twitter addict Baddiel explore the grim synergy between new communications technology and dysfunctional movements ranging from rightwing populism to “cancel culture”. It’s understandably light on plausible solutions but, at the very least, it’s a thoughtful acknowledgment that, collectively, we have a big problem that isn’t going away any time soon. Phil Harrison Guy’s Garage 9pm, Channel 4 More mechanical tinkering from Guy Martin – in this episode, prepare for the slowest and least glamorous race of his career. Underpowered, functional and basic in every sense, the Trabant was a symbol of pre-glasnost East Germany. Guy prepares for a race at Brands Hatch in which these dowdy vehicles are pushed to their limits. PH A League of Their Own: Christmas Special 2021 9pm, Sky Max Romesh Ranganathan is in charge of the banter-fuelled panel show’s festive fun this year and he’s dragging Freddie Flintoff and Jamie Redknapp to Center Parcs for physical challenges with a variety of special guests. Ranganathan also likes to get his mum involved – tonight, she’s helping him serve a Sri Lankan Christmas meal. PH Two Doors Down 10pm, BBC Two All flu-ridden Beth (Arabella Weir) wants is a hot water bottle, so every neighbour in town is popping in to give advice, soup and anecdotes about legendary colds they’ve had. The action reaches a climax when tact vacuum Cathy (the fabulous Doon Mackichan) turns up to bring her unique brand of entertainment and tough love. Hannah Verdier The Cockfields Christmas Special 10pm, Gold Christmas with the Cockfields rings in festive drama. Simon has made time out from his busy work schedule to visit his mother two days after the 25th only to find friction with his stepfather. Tensions rise but can a trip to the pub bring peace? HV Live sport Championship football: Sheffield United v Queens Park Rangers Mon, 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. From Bramall Lane.Polystyrene snow, MDF grottos, stomach-churning rides and Santas with scratchy fake beards: as Christmas nears, ’tis the season for winter wonderlands. At their best, these immersive Christmas markets and fairgrounds delight visitors of all ages, while providing a reliable source of income for their owners. Britain’s biggest winter wonderland, in Hyde Park, London, has pulled in more than 14 million people since it launched in 2005, with entry starting at £5 and attractions ranging from £5 to £15. But visitors to lesser attractions often complain of poorly thought-out productions and inexperienced organisers. Well-documented holiday horrors include Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen’s Birmingham attraction, which in 2014 was forced to shut down after a day following hundreds of complaints about cheap toys and long queues, and a New Forest Lapland whose owners were sentenced to 13 months in jail for misleading the public in 2008. “You told consumers that it would light up those who most loved Christmas,” the judge told them in his summing up. “You said you would go through the magical tunnel of light coming out in a winter wonderland. What you actually provided was something that looked like an averagely managed summer car boot sale.” Punters may bear the full, wallet-emptying force of disappointment, but those working behind the scenes are often affected by poor conditions, low morale and inadequate or unpaid wages. We spoke to people who have worked at winter wonderlands over the years about their experiences and why many of them would never set foot in one again. Whether due to trauma or a lingering sense of guilt, almost all asked us not to use their real names ‘We only saw misery’: the elves Jack: I graduated in 2002 and, with no idea what to do next, I decided to stick around and look for temp work. I laughed very hard when I realised an agency was taking applications to be one of Santa’s elves and applied half-seriously. After a short phone interview, I got the job – I really could have been anyone off the street. The wonderland was at a massive conference centre, which seemed very impersonal. My main job was to welcome people in groups of 20 to 30, along with another elf. We had to act as if we were on a jet liner taking visitors to Lapland, with projected images of clouds behind us. We gave the families a speech to try to get the kids excited and then pretended the room was airborne. The whole thing was pretty embarrassing and ended after a few minutes with the “landing” and rows of blank faces staring back at us. Lucy: For a couple of years, while I was a student and needed the money, I worked as an elf at a winter wonderland in a shopping centre. It was horrendous – we were essentially employed just to make sure that people didn’t jump the queue or try to sneak in for free. Christmas is meant to be a time for happiness, but we only saw misery – exhausted parents, insane children and short tempers all round. We had to endure everything from being shouted at to being made fun of – once a colleague even had a drink thrown on them. The Santas had it great, though – they were paid more than us to endure a few minutes at a time dealing with excitable kids, before we ushered them all outside again to unwrap their disappointing presents. The whole thing was bleak. Jack: Sometimes I would also chaperone the kids to see Santa. But there were so many kids that we had 10 different Santas lined up together – if any of them still thought Santa was real, this made sure the fantasy fell apart. The whole experience was like being in a sausage factory, with a bell ringing every three minutes to bring a new group through. It was so dispiriting and fake and I was horrified to think how much families with four or five kids were spending. After a few weeks I realised I couldn’t be part of it any more and quit. I never made it to Christmas. ‘The kids were already crying’: the Santas Matt: If you are a man of a certain size and not averse to putting on a costume, Santa work is decent money each year. I’ve put in more than a decade doing stints and I really enjoy what I do; usually it brings the kids real excitement and it earns their parents some goodwill. But sometimes you have a nightmare job and it makes you question your life choices. A few years ago, I was booked by a pretty large winter wonderland just outside London. It was a couple of weeks of solid work and even though it was a new event, it seemed too good to pass up. As soon as I arrived, things started to go wrong. It was a few rides and a tent with a chair in the corner for me to sit on and see the kids, surrounded by a few reindeer that looked unhappy. Families began pouring in and there weren’t enough staff to deal with the chaos – the elves were struggling to keep the groups in line, while parents kept wandering off to find managers to shout at. It was such a tense atmosphere that a lot of the kids were coming to me already crying and there was no way we could make it any better for them – the illusion was ruined. After that first day, the person running the show was nowhere to be found. I never went back. I don’t think the place lasted a week and I was never paid. Tony: My business was hired to erect a tent for a winter wonderland at the Great Yorkshire Showground in Harrogate in 2014. It was a miserable operation – just half a fairground with a few reindeers. It was very tacky. Straightaway, people were complaining that they had been ripped off and, after two days, it was shut down for a “revamp”. We didn’t think it would reopen, so we went back to take the tent down and suddenly the fire doors to the grotto burst open and Santa came out in his full regalia, ripping off his white beard and shouting: “Fuck this – I’m not taking any more of youse! I’m off!” It was very funny and surreal. I don’t think the organiser was a crook – he was just totally out of his depth. A lot of these events are just fairgrounds with a bit of sparkle on the machines, but it takes a huge amount of effort to put on something good. Putting tinsel on your dodgems isn’t quite enough. ‘I never even got my skates on’: the performer Katie: I used to be a pretty good figure skater and the group I trained with would often get booked for Christmas performances. We would usually do a stint of themed winter wonderland gigs in full costume, which was welcome cash for the Christmas season. They would generally be pretty depressing shows, though, performing to half-empty tents on fake ice where we could often see members of the crowd walking out. One year, we were set to do a series of shows at a winter wonderland up north – we had our transport and accommodation booked and headed to the venue. When we got there, there was no one at the site – it was just a tent in a field. We called the organisers but they never picked up and we weren’t sure if we had got the dates or the place wrong. It was only when we searched on Facebook that we saw all the angry comments from customers saying it had been cancelled without any notice. They hadn’t even bothered to tell us, so we went straight home without even getting our skates on. ‘I spent the day hiding’: the stately-home worker Sarah: I was between jobs five years ago and decided to do some temping before I found something more permanent. That is how I ended up working at a historic house largely staffed by volunteers who all had a very strange attachment to the place. They treated it as if it was theirs to run and, as a consequence, they hated the manager whose job it was to actually look after it. One year, an events planner convinced the manager to put on a winter wonderland. The problem was, it is a centuries-old property and so can’t hold fairgrounds or attractions. The person who put on the event neglected to mention that to customers, though, and they were inevitably furious and disappointed. All they had were sweets and a few people dressed up – supposedly as Frozen characters, but the costumes were so cheap you couldn’t tell who they were. The volunteers also kept egging on the customers to complain so the manager would get into trouble. There had always been rumours that the place was haunted and I spent that day hiding from angry visitors with an old volunteer who was dressed up as Father Christmas. He used to say the spirits of the house spoke through him and when I went to lock up at night once everyone had left, I could swear the doorstops were moving in the dark. I didn’t last long after that – the volunteers would secretly hold seances, too, and it used to creep me out. ‘It’s worse than some clubs’: the bouncer Dan: I’ve worked security for years at all sorts of events and little compares to the experience of being at a winter wonderland with an alcohol licence. The combo of Christmas parties, pints and rides usually means that fights break out, as well as people throwing up and needing to be taken home. Once I saw a group of parents fighting because they thought one of the kids had pushed in front of the others in a queue. It is ridiculous – worse than some nightclubs. I just wish people had a bit more self-control. ‘Never again’: the organiser Rob: I’ve thrown many successful events in my career but none have been harder, or gone worse, than the winter wonderland I agreed to put on with an ex-friend of mine a few years ago. He had an agreement to put on a fair with a grotto and all the trimmings for a couple of weeks and called me in to help as a business partner. I don’t have many contacts in that area, so I called around and right from the off it was a total mess. Lots of the contractors we had agreed to use would either cancel at the last minute because they had better offers, or they would turn up and do a half-arsed job. Meanwhile, the tickets were selling very well. It was clear we weren’t going to be ready to open on the advertised date but greed got the better of my mate and so he let people arrive – inevitably bringing on an onslaught of complaints. We had no choice but to shut down a few days later because local papers were picking up the story and everyone was demanding their money back. Needless to say, it ruined our friendship and we made no money from the whole thing. I’ll never do an event like it again. Some names have been changed.Roff Smith’s photographs show a solitary cyclist – Smith himself – in a painterly landscape. His wheels appear to turn briskly, but really the bike moves as slowly as it can without a wobble. As a writer and photographer for National Geographic magazine, Smith, 63, visited more than 100 countries, but now he has squeezed the brakes and shrunk his world. His photographs are all taken within a 10-mile radius of his home, and yet travel has never felt so rich to him as it does now. Before the pandemic, he had already begun to feel jaded: air travel made “the world everywhere look the same”. Then in March 2020 he returned from an assignment in Ecuador to St Leonards-on-Sea, East Sussex, to join his wife and two children, who are 18 and 20. The world shut its doors behind him. Madrid went into lockdown hours after he passed through; England soon after he arrived. After decades of flights, “There was nowhere to go.” Instead, during lockdown, Smith took his camera, tripod and timer on bike rides locally. A distinctive style evolved in which he would ride slowly into his own frame, usually in “the blue hour” that precedes dawn. The images look serene, but making them was not. Smith had to master “the right body language, the bicycle language”, pick his outfits and time his entrance. “You can’t have your head disappearing in shadows. You’ve got to find yourself,” he says. It sounds like a spur to self-discovery, this practice of looking at an empty frame and imagining the space he would occupy. Does he see himself differently? “You become aware of how many shots have this sense of introspection, solitude,” he says. Smith has been a keen cyclist for as long as he can remember. Momentous rides have acted as milestones in his life. His father died when he was nine and he was raised by his mother. He was often alone for whole days, cycling from the family house in White Mountains in New Hampshire “to Bearcamp river, a fabulous distance away” at 12 miles, with its beaver ponds, forests and swamps. He was a voracious reader of books about explorers, and fancied himself on adventures too. “Even a bend in the road took on the quality of a chapter in a book. I thought, travelling the world is going to be as exciting as this.” National Geographic, to which he subscribed, thrilled him – especially a story of a bike trip along the Alaskan highway, which led him to write to the magazine, offering his services. He was only 17; they politely declined. At 22, he emigrated to Australia. He wanted to go “far, far, far away”. Was there something he wanted to escape? “I just felt like I needed to strike out on my own,” he says. As the mining reporter for the Sydney Morning Herald, he jetted around the gold mines of Australia. It wasn’t till he was 37 and recently divorced that Smith set off on his own epic ride “around Australia – a 10,000-mile solo trip”. It took him nine months, in the course of which he sold a series of his travels to National Geographic – “literally a childhood dream” – and, at a youth hostel in Perth, met his future wife. Although they moved to the UK and made a base together in St Leonards-on-Sea, Smith “jumped around a lot”, on assignment and also visiting his children from his first marriage in Australia. Although his movements have shrunk since the pandemic hit, his world has expanded. Just like those early trips to the Bearcamp river, “miles mean something” again. He cycles home “with a feeling that I have been places. I’ve seen the sun rise, listened to the aquatic life in the marsh or wildlife in the trees. I’ve got more of a sense of travel than if I were to hop on a plane.” He has not flown in nearly two years, and has no plans to do so. “It’s nice to be home,” he says. “But in a way it’s unsettling because you think, do I live here? In Europe?” He has American and Australian citizenship, but is really a citizen of his own two wheels: “I think I’m starting to identify with just being on my bike.” Tell us: has your life taken a new direction after the age of 60?A stone’s throw from the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields, in the National Gallery, you can see what the old Flemish painters made of the story of the holy family’s flight into Egypt, Here, with John Eliot Gardiner’s Monteverdi Choir and Orchestre Révolutionnaire et Romantique giving their first concert in their new home venue, you could hear Berlioz’s take on it. The forces had already performed it in Zurich and in Ely Cathedral, and have a single date in Barcelona this week, which presumably counts as a European tour post-Brexit. L’Enfance du Christ is full of Berlioz’s characteristic mood swings and grand, colourful gestures: it’s an oratorio that sounds as though it desperately wants to be an opera, perfect for the characterful period winds and brass of Gardiner’s orchestra and for the top-flight cast of soloists he had assembled here. Michael Spyres’s glowing Narrator, Ann Hallenberg’s beatific Mary and Lionel Lhote’s desperate yet noble Joseph – it would have been good to hear more of all three, but Berlioz doesn’t put the spotlight squarely on any one soloist. The smaller roles were taken by singers from the choir; Alexander Ashworth made especially vivid work of the Ishmaelite who takes the family in. Only William Thomas’s Herod came across as less than authoritative, looking a little wooden as he sang Herod’s wakeful monologue, however cavernous and velvety his voice. But perhaps that’s not so inappropriate for the troubled ruler Berlioz paints so keenly in the orchestra. The violins imitated the phrases of his aria so fervently that you almost felt sorry for him. The way the choir sang the Shepherds’ Farewell made it feel almost like a shared oration in this church setting, and angels, sung by the Trinity Boys Choir from somewhere beyond the balcony, made their spine-tingling effect. When it came to the musical entertainment that’s laid on for the holy family at their new home, Gardiner sat down and just let the trio get on with it – and it was beautifully, energetically played by flautists Gareth Davies and David Westcombe and harpist Gwyneth Wentink. The concert was being filmed, which was unobtrusive until near the end, when on a couple of occasions Gardiner restarted sections immediately after a smudged entry. Was it to get these perfect for the final edit? It was barely noticeable – but how are we to experience a performance entirely in the moment if the conductor demonstrably isn’t doing so? • The concert will be available on for DG Stage (£) from 22 to 29 December.After the murder of Sarah Everard by a serving police officer earlier this year, a dam burst. Women came out on to the streets of Britain to protest against male violence, only to be met with police violence. That dam is still flooding: at least 133 women in the UK have died at the hands of a man in 2021 so far. Countless more will have taken their own lives as a consequence of male violence. Women are tired of reading the names of the women killed by femicide each year, they are tired of reading about the increase in the reports of sexual violence and domestic violence, and they are tired of the failure of the criminal justice system to tackle the problem – as the virtual collapse of rape prosecutions over the past three years shows. But perhaps for the first time in living memory, tackling the pandemic of violence against women and girls (VAWG) is high on the political agenda. I have been working in this area since the 1990s – as a lawyer and founder of the Centre for Women’s Justice (CWJ), which aims to change the structural disadvantage women and girls face across the criminal justice system. In the past five years alone, I have represented survivors of the serial rapist John Worboys in their action against the Metropolitan police, which failed to investigate him; represented Sally Challen and other women who killed abusive partners; and am currently involved in a super complaint about the failure to address police-perpetrated domestic abuse. However, in my experience, the attitudes of prosecutors and judges towards women are as bad as ever. While initial announcements from the government were kneejerk and ill thought through – such as undercover police officers in nightclubs or apps to track women’s routes home – there may be substantial changes coming. This month, the government announced legislation that will put a new legal duty on local public bodies to tackle domestic abuse and sexual offences and has just announced plans for a new victim’s law. Meanwhile, there is growing pressure to make VAWG part of the strategic policing requirement – which would bring it in line with other serious crimes such as organised crime and terrorism. Increasing the resources of police and other criminal justice agencies and making the tackling of VAWG a national strategic priority would certainly go some way to reversing the impact of austerity. A decade of underfunding has brought the criminal court system to its knees, with fewer specialist policing units, a dismantled probation service, fewer support services for women, and significant reductions in legal aid. However, the comparison with the policing of terrorism may strike a chilling chord for black, Asian and minority women and men who have been adversely affected by the government’s Prevent strategy, aimed at identifying and disrupting potential recruits to terrorism, which has helped mainstream discrimination against them. Such cynicism about government intentions is further embedded by the discriminatory exclusion of migrant women from the protections offered in the recent domestic abuse bill, the attack on the right to public protest in the police, crime and sentencing bill, and the curtailing of routes to refugee status for women fleeing abuse under the nationality and borders bill. In October the home secretary, Priti Patel, announced a public inquiry into “issues raised by the conviction of Wayne Couzens”. This could be an opportunity to undertake a deep, searching analysis of institutionalised misogyny within policing. However, the government’s resistance to putting the inquiry on a statutory footing suggests the prime minister’s promise to “fix” things in the wake of Everard’s murder is not a serious one. So I am working with the backing of more than 21 national women’s organisations to formally bring judicial review proceedings against the home secretary, to ensure this inquiry is the robust investigation into police-perpetrated abuse and violence against women that is so desperately needed. So what does need to change if we are to begin to tackle the spectacular failings not only in policing, but across the criminal justice system? It is a question I am asked frequently. Instead of waiting for a public inquiry to provide answers, the CWJ has set out its own manifesto for change. The central principle of this manifesto is that women have a right to live free from the fear of male violence, which curtails our liberty and undermines our full participation in society. We do not propose new laws in our manifesto, but rather we ask for the urgent and effective implementation of the laws that already exist. We ask that those investigating and prosecuting crimes of violence against women, those who judge and sentence, and those who manage the risk of individuals convicted act with the united aim and understanding of how to prevent further violence. We want radical transformation of the investigation and prosecution of crimes of VAWG, an end to victim blaming, police-perpetrated abuse tackled, and an understanding of who represents risk, to ensure criminal justice interventions are directed at the perpetrators and not the victim. How might this work? Take the example of Effie (not her real name), a migrant woman we are advising, whose British partner – who had been physically and psychologically abusive towards her for months – called the police to their home, alleging she had physically injured him during an argument. At the time of this call, safeguarding concerns had already been raised by agencies, who recognised she was at high risk of harm from her partner. Yet instead of investigating who the “primary” perpetrator in the relationship was, the police arrested Effie and imposed strict bail conditions, which rendered her homeless and separated her from her breastfeeding child. She was convicted of assault, which we successfully appealed. In another example, a parole board considering the release of a man widely reported to have drugged and sexually assaulted more than 100 women might ask itself whether to accept his account that he no longer represented a threat. This is exactly what happened with the case of Worboys. His release after just 10 years in prison was only stopped after I submitted a judicial review challenge on behalf of two of his victims. Then there is the case of Sophie Moss, a vulnerable mother of two who died as a result of “prolonged” pressure to the neck at the hands of Sam Pybus. He was given just four years and eight months after the Crown Prosecution Service accepted his plea of manslaughter. Pybus claimed she “enjoyed erotic asphyxiation” (more commonly known as the “rough sex defence”, which is creeping in to murder cases). Under our manifesto, a prosecutor may have questioned the idea that Moss “enjoyed” being strangled during sex on the say so of the man who killed her and another man who had had sex with her; and should have put other evidence before a jury, for example from the father of Moss’s children, which disputed the assertion she liked to be strangled. Our manifesto recognises that all of this must happen within the framework of cultural change. As Mina Smallman – the mother of the two murdered sisters, Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman, whose bodies were photographed and shared on a police WhatsApp group – said this week: “Those police officers felt so safe, so untouchable, that they felt they would take photographs with our murdered daughters.” She added: “There is more work to be done … we are part of the change that’s going to come in the culture of the police force.” Only when there is an understanding of the structural inequalities between men and women, and the intersecting forms of discrimination that make some groups of women more vulnerable based on race, class and disability, will real change occur. In the meantime, we will keep fighting. • This article was amended on 16 December 2021 to clarify a reference to the Sophie Moss case. An earlier version said Sam Pybus “was given just four years and eight months for manslaughter after the CPS accepted his explanation that she ‘enjoyed erotic asphyxiation’.” The CPS says it did not accept the defendant’s account but brought a manslaughter charge due to insufficient evidence of intent to harm or kill. Harriet Wistrich is a solicitor and the director of the Centre for Women’s JusticeLang Lang comes as a package deal. Even after a lay-off due to an arm problem he still has his wondrous piano technique. He always offers himself as a wholly serious musician. He is certainly an important one – an inspiration to millions. But he is also one of the most mannered maulers of the repertoire you are ever likely to encounter. This Barbican recital showcased all of it. No pianist playing Bach’s Goldberg Variations – they were prefaced by Schumann’s Op 18 Arabesque – is trying to take the public’s money for old rope. One or two tiptoed exits during the Goldbergs suggested some were not getting what they had expected. Be clear, too, that there were moments of dazzlingly appropriate Bach playing, as in the lightning fast skips and shadings of the 14th variation, where Lang’s quicksilver touch was a delight. Too often, though, Lang seemed intent on smothering the music with love, in little details as well as the big picture. When he plays fast, he is very fast; when he is slow, he is funereal. The opening aria was pulled about with such elongated exaggeration that its role as the heartbeat of the 30 variations that follow was lost. The celebrated 25th variation, whose stillness and chromaticism are the emotional crux of the work, was stretched beyond belief and almost came to a halt. Some Lang idiosyncrasies worked, like his habit of suddenly spotlighting a previously unnoticed jaunty rhythmic figure. He was alive, too, to articulating the ground bass that holds the structure together. At other times, though, the quirkiness becomes perverse. The mannered dynamics that Lang imposed on the last Quodlibet variation, one of the most sociable moments in the Goldbergs, meant that the following return of the opening aria felt like an add-on rather than a reflective return from a long musical journey. Andras Schiff once said he always hopes audiences will leave without applause after the Goldbergs. No chance of that here. The fans were on their feet immediately. It’s all part of the deal.In 2010, Tyler, the Creator tweeted that he wanted a Gangsta Grillz tape, the prolific DJ Drama mixtape series which informed much of the best hip-hop of the 2000s. Tyler has lived out a lot of his dreams in the intervening years. After his collective Odd Future changed the game in the early 2010s, their hellraising gave way to radical art from members Frank Ocean, Earl Sweatshirt, Syd and Tyler, who became one of the most respected rappers and producers around. He’s collaborated with many of the artists he obsessed over back then. He’s written music scores and scripted TV shows; he won a Grammy; he runs a revered fashion line and a successful festival. His sixth album, Call Me If You Get Lost, finds the artist reaching 30 and reflecting on his life so far: the joys and luxuries (“It’s opulence, baby!”), his growth from the shock-rap days in the context of contemporary social media “activism” (“Internet bringin’ old lyrics up like I hide the shit”), and the sacrifices along the way (“Everyone I ever loved had to be loved in the shadows”). Between tracks, DJ Drama “hosts” the record, offering wry tags and playful stories from their global travels (like how in Switzerland, “a young lady just fed me French vanilla ice-cream!”). Gangsta Grillz tapes have fallen off the mainstream radar in recent years: for Tyler to breathe new life into the format in 2021 is a testament not only to his ambition and vision, but his ability to fulfil them. Call Me If You Get Lost is decadent and luxurious, wielding samples curated with the expertise of a true crate-digger. There’s the bass clarinet that swims through opener Sir Baudelaire (lifted from Billy Cobham via Westside Gunn), the humid meandering flute on Hot Wind Blows; the mesmerising, shiny Houston R&amp;B on Wusyaname, and the deliciously wobbly, heated quasi-Lovers Rock of Sweet/I Thought You Wanted to Dance. Features from the likes of Lil Wayne, Pharrell and even Tyler’s mum enhance and embellish without detracting. Compositionally, CMIYGL is a showcase of Tyler’s reverence and nostalgia for what came before, channelled into his own present and future. Of course, also central to this album’s beauty is the fact that Tyler can rap, crafting engaging tales out of deft, intentional flow. He has always been a romantic, but here he bears a softer side than ever, forced to recognise that love, so often, is about timing. It might seem like it’s all coming together for him, but look between the cracks of the polished veneer and wanderlust and there is caustic frustration and yearning. During the eight minutes of Wilshire, he recounts in raw detail “the only thing missing” in his life, falling for the partner of a friend, and the heavy guilt as he tries to figure out what to do. He continues that he has to keep his loved ones “safe from the commentary and spotlight and thoughts / ’Cause it’s just a story for the people outside of it / But I guess you’re just another chapter in the book”. For all that he can brag about his successes and achievements (though, in the interest of being humble, he notes on Blessed that he still can’t get his hair to grow), they have obstructed his ability to live a normal life. (Yet in telling this muddy story, he has given way to speculation on who the friend and would-be lover are, arguably predestining them to the same.) “Come get lost with me,” Tyler offers on Blessed. It’s a tender invitation that comes late into an album that has already guided the listener through a bright, expansive and occasionally sentimental world drawn together seamlessly, with the tracks – in true mixtape fashion – melding into one another. So often, we focus on beginnings and endings. On Call Me If You Get Lost, Tyler, the Creator masterfully reminds us that life is all about the journey, growth, confusion, pain and magic in between.The big story of the start of the year was Nomadland, Chloé Zhao’s soulful follow-up to 2017 breakout The Rider. That film received a belated UK release in May, a month after Nomadland swept the board at the Oscars, taking best picture, director and actress. Both films see the Chinese director immersing herself in a rural American subculture so seamlessly that one would assume she’s always been there, an outsider who chooses to listen first with patience and grace. A loose adaptation of Jessica Bruder’s non-fiction book, it follows Fern (played by Frances McDormand), a widow whose home town has died, one of the many industrial fatalities of the 2008 recession. She’s been displaced (her town’s zip code was discontinued in 2011) and so decides to pack up, take her most important belongings with her in a van and go on the road. The “houseless but not homeless” community that Fern encounters and slowly becomes a part of is one that, for many, will be fascinatingly new and in her process of revealing this under-reported world to us, Zhao employs real nomads to tell their stories alongside McDormand. Their involvement, and their words, help to ground the film, often making it feel like we’re switching between a documentary and a narrative feature (the breathtaking cinematography from Zhao’s three-times collaborator Joshua James Richards reminds us it’s the former). Coming straight from Three Billboards, outsider art in all of the wrong ways, McDormand is remarkable, deftly ingratiating herself with those around her without ever seeming like an Oscar winner slumming it with normies, a turn as sensitive and as unpatronising as the film surrounding her. Her emotions are restrained but her predicament, told gradually and in fragments, is at first devastating and ultimately liberating, speaking not only to those who have been left gutted by corporate culture but also those who are single or childless or over 60 or seen in any way as “other”. It’s a film about regaining power after feeling powerless, not by taking on the system but by removing one’s self from it entirely (scenes of her briefly returning to “normal” society have us as anxious as she is for a return to the safety of her van and the freedom of the road). Without overstating its themes, Nomadland subtly captures profound snapshot of America. The confines of a cruel economic infrastructure might limit the space for some people to exist yet the sheer expanse of the country allows them to find their own space instead.Insect DNA has been gathered from the air and for the first time used to detect 85 insect species, according to scientists from Lund University in Sweden. Bees, moths, flies, beetles, wasps and ants have been identified in a study which raises hopes that airborne environmental DNA (eDNA) could become a useful tool in monitoring insect abundance and declines in biodiversity. The study, which sampled air from three sites in Sweden, also detected evidence of plants, algae, fungi and vertebrates, including a woodpigeon, fieldfare, hedgehog, red squirrel and short-tailed field vole, alongside the presence of domesticated animals – chickens, cows and dogs. The results, which have yet to be peer-reviewed, are this week presented at the British Ecological Society’s Ecology Across Borders conference by the lead author, Fabian Roger. “In the face of the biodiversity crisis, we desperately need better information on the status and distribution of species,” said Roger. “Our study is a proof of concept that shows that we can detect DNA from insects and vertebrates from air collected under natural conditions. This opens many exciting possibilities for species monitoring and detection, which could allow us to comprehensively monitor biodiversity at large spatial and temporal scales.” Sampling of eDNA has so far focused on aquatic ecosystems, and is undertaken by ecological consultants surveying for great crested newts. In this study, researchers compared airborne eDNA sampling with traditional insect surveys, including moth light traps and transect walks, which usually only pick up larger insect species. While traditional light traps detected 48 species of moth, just nine moth species were detected with eDNA, although five of these were missed by the traditional traps. Of the 36 species of butterfly and bee identified by a transect walk, eDNA sampling detected five species. The eDNA sampling was more successful at picking up a wider range of arthropod species, finding a total of 67 species at the light trap and 20 at the transect site. According to Roger, developing airborne eDNA sampling to complement traditional methods will require increasing the sensitivity of the sampling to achieve more reliable detection and developing a greater understanding of how airborne eDNA is generated, transported and how it degrades. “We are at the very beginning of exploring airborne environmental DNA for anything other than bacteria, pollen or spores – and even there we have only scratched the surface,” he said. “Just because it doesn’t work perfectly out of the box doesn’t mean it won’t work ever, and the potential is huge.”Top story: ‘Tidal wave of Omicron’ on the way Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories to start the week. Boris Johnson has launched an unprecedented “national mission” to supercharge the Covid vaccination programme so that 1m booster jabs can be delivered every day in order to stem the incoming “tidal wave of Omicron” and avoid imposing further restrictions. The army will be deployed across the country to help rapidly accelerate the vaccine programme from current daily levels of around 530,000, and GPs will be told to cancel appointments to dedicate resources to offering vaccines to every UK adult by the end of the month. In a televised address to the nation last night, the prime minister said he was “afraid we are now facing an emergency in our battle with the new variant”. The UK record for daily jabs is 844,000 in March. Here’s an explainer on the new booster strategy and how to get your booster, and analysis on what makes a booster shot so important in fighting Omicron. Authorities in New Zealand, meanwhile, are investigating claims that a man received 10 Covid jabs in one day after being paid by anti-vaxxers to take the shot for them. You can read more about this and other developments in the pandemic at our live blog here. * * * Tory rebellion – The expansion of the booster scheme is seen as a gamble on short-term pain for long-term gain by Johnson, who is also facing open warfare in the Tory party over the move to plan-B restrictions which include working from home where possible from today. Up to 100 MPs could oppose the changes on Tuesday as he battles on multiple fronts to contain the damage from reports of a series of parties in Downing Street last year, which have left MPs openly discussing a vote of no confidence. Although the measures will pass because Labour supports the government on Covid passports for large venues and more mask wearing, the opposition senses Johnson’s vulnerability to attack on the parties affair and has accused him of potentially misleading parliament. * * * Met sued – The family of the murdered private detective Daniel Morgan are to sue the Metropolitan police for damages, alleging that a decades-long cover-up of corruption is continuing. An inquiry in June found that the Met commissioner, Cressida Dick, obstructed the panel appointed to investigate claims that corruption blighted the hunt for Morgan’s killers and that the Met had failed to root it out. The Met rejected the findings. Morgan was found with an axe in his head in south London in 1987. * * * Tornado ‘disaster’ – Joe Biden has declared a major federal disaster in Kentucky after a swarm of deadly tornadoes hit the state on Friday. The US president’s decision paves the way for additional aid, as thousands face housing, food, water and power shortages. Kentucky governor Andy Beshear had initially said the death toll could exceed 100 – many of them in a flattened candle factory – after the twisters tore through the US midwest and south. But he said last night that the death toll might be as low as 50. One worker who survived the carnage at the candle factory has spoken of an agonising wait to see if her boyfriend can be found alive in the wreckage. Biden has asked the US environmental protection agency to investigate what role the climate crisis might have played in the freak weather events. * * * Body found – Police have found the body of a woman in Camberwell, south London, after days of appeals for information to trace missing NHS worker Petra Srncova, who was last seen in the area on 28 November. The body is awaiting formal identification, but police said Srncova’s family have been informed of this development. The 32-year-old Czech, a senior nurse assistant at Evelina London children’s hospital in Westminster, is thought to have disappeared while travelling home to Camberwell. * * * ‘Cultural vandalism’ – Campaigners fear the roads agency in England is pushing ahead with plans to destroy or fill with concrete more than a dozen Victorian bridges despite a government pause after an outcry over “cultural vandalism”. Documents released under the Freedom of Information Act show that the agency has spent tens of thousands of pounds on the sites and activists fear it presages more filling in or demolition. Today in Focus podcast Breakthroughs in computing have changed how high-level chess is played, making stalemates all too common. But the Norwegian champion’s stunning performance in Dubai wrests the game back from the grip of the supercomputers, says our US deputy sport editor Bryan Graham Lunchtime read: The misery of Britain’s winter wonderlands Starting with the Lapland New Forest fiasco 13 years ago, not-very-wonderful winter wonderlands have become something of a seasonal fixture. We’ve talked to people who worked at some of them, from underpaid elves to grumpy Santas. As one worker put it: “Christmas is meant to be a time for happiness, but we only saw misery – exhausted parents, insane children and short tempers all round.” Sport Max Verstappen celebrated winning his first Formula One world championship with victory over Lewis Hamilton at the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix, but only after huge controversy that still leaves his title in some doubt. Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad are “fit and ready to go” for the pink-ball Ashes Test starting on Thursday in Adelaide, while Australian fast bowler Josh Hazlewood has been ruled out due to a side strain and is in a race to be fit for Boxing Day. Tuesday’s Premier League match between Brentford and Manchester United has been placed in doubt after a number of Ralf Rangnick’s squad tested positive for Covid-19. James Maddison scored once and had a hand in two other goals as Leicester outclassed a shambolic Newcastle 4-0, while Conor Gallagher scored twice for Crystal Palace in a 3-1 win against Everton and defiant defending by Burnley earned them a 0-0 draw against West Ham at Turf Moor. Paul Struthers, the chief executive of the Professional Jockeys’ Association, has accepted that Bryony Frost was bullied by fellow rider Robbie Dunne, and that the organisation was wrong to say she only “felt” bullied in previous statements. Covid-hit Munster took advantage of a first-half red card for Wasps’ Brad Shields to win 35-14 in the Champions Cup, while Sale produced an archetypal game of two halves in their 21-13 win over the Ospreys. Manchester United won for the first time in five games in the WSL when they comfortably defeated Hope Powell’s Brighton 2-0. And goals from Karim Benzema and Marco Asensio fired Real Madrid to victory over their city rivals Atlético to go eight points clear in La Liga. Business A third of UK small businesses are planning to make staff redundant over the next few months, rising to more than four in 10 in London, according to a survey of more than 400 firms. Many also said they would be forced to raise prices because of Britain’s supply chain problems. The UK’s housing market is likely to return to more normal levels of activity in 2022 but will still be busy, according to Rightmove, as the industry braces for a possible interest rate rise on Thursday. The FTSE100 is poised to climb 0.3% at the opening bell, while the pound is on $1.326 and €1.172. The papers Almost every paper leads with the ramping up of the Covid booster programme. “PM bets on 1m jabs a day to halt ‘tidal wave’ of Omicron” is the main story in the Guardian, while the Telegraph goes with “One million jabs a day in race to avoid new year lockdown”. The Mail has “Boris’s million jabs a day booster rocket” and the Express headline reads “Emergency! Race for all to get boosters”. The Mirror says “Get your booster now”, the i has “Get booster to beat Omicron ‘tidal wave’”, and the Times line is “Booster jab for every adult by end of month”. The Northern Echo has “This is an emergency” and the Sun puns with “OMIGAWD!”. Only the Financial Times diverges from the Covid story, preferring: “Ukraine blames Germany for blocking Nato weapons supply”. Sign up The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.A primary school in Hong Kong has apologised after students as young as six were left in tears last week after teachers showed them unsettling video footage of the Nanjing massacre ahead of its 84th anniversary on Monday. The incident came after the Education Bureau called on local schools to run activities commemorating the massacre in a directive last month. The Po Leung Kuk Hong Kong Taoist Association Yuen Yuen primary school showed footage of executions and corpses during the Nanjing massacre to its youngest pupils during a class on moral and civic education, according to local media reports. The five-minute clip, pulled from an RTHK documentary on the massacre, showed Japanese soldiers executing civilians, and piles of corpses, including babies. The clip was included in the Education Bureau’s suggested teaching materials for commemorating the massacre. The Nanjing massacre, which lasted from December 1937 to January 1938, saw the mass murder and rape of hundreds of thousands of residents in Nanjing by Imperial Japanese troops for a period of six weeks during the second Sino-Japanese war. Beijing frequently references the massacre to drum up nationalistic outrage against Japan. The school later “expressed regret” over the incident in response to complaints from concerned parents. “We have learned that some children felt disturbed,” an email from last Friday read. “Our school from now on will be much more cautious, carefully consider children’s feelings, and adjust the teaching materials according to each grade.” The school added that it would continue to consider students’ feelings as it implemented national identity and civic responsibility education. The Guardian has reached out to the school for comment. Hong Kong’s education authorities sought to distance themselves from the incident. A spokesperson told the Guardian on Monday that there was no requirement for schools to show the provided material to its entire cohort. The bureau added that teachers should use their professional judgement and provide proper guidance when teaching students about war. “After reading the information provided by the Education Bureau, teachers can choose appropriate textbooks or select appropriate passages according to the age and mental development of the students,” the bureau said in an emailed statement. It added that the video was publicly available, and contained warnings that the images may be disturbing for some viewers. The incident also comes amid a wider push by authorities to foster a sense of Chinese identity and love of the motherland among students after Beijing’s imposition of a national security law last summer. Earlier this month, the Education Bureau issued a comprehensive new national education curriculum and guidelines for all local schools.The night sky is set to be illuminated across Australia this week, as the annual Geminid meteor shower begins peaking on Tuesday morning. The meteor shower is expected to be at its most visible between 3am and 4am in every major city, and although the meteor shower runs until Monday 20 December, it is expected to peak on Tuesday and Wednesday mornings. Those patient enough to stay awake or set the alarm should be rewarded, with the Geminids considered one of the most spectacular meteor showers of the year. What are the Geminids? Each year, Earth passes through debris from an asteroid called 3200 Phaethon. Bits of it are constantly breaking off, burning up in the atmosphere and streaking across the night sky. “This asteroid goes around the sun, bits of rock fall off of it as it goes and it kind of leaves like a wake like a boat, just going through the water,” astronomer Dr Brad Tucker from the Australian National University said. “When we say there’s an annual meteor shower, we know that we’ll cross the same point, about this same location about the same time, but there’s some small variations that really change how many we can see. “And the Geminids are always one of the more dependable ones, because we pass at a time when we see generally quite a few good ones of them.” The Geminids get their name from the radiant – the point in the sky they appear from – which is in the Gemini constellation, above the north-east horizon. What can you expect to see? Major cities should see “a couple dozen an hour,” during the peak, Tucker says, with conditions looking good for getting a clear view. “Clouds, moon and city lights are always the big three, and you can always get away from city lights. Astronomically, the moon is convenient this year, and then the cloud cover is always weather dependent. “Which is why I think it’s always nice that this meteor shower kind of provides good rates over a few days. People were seeing some last night, and tonight and tomorrow morning should be really good.” “Even in the major cities, you should be able to still see a couple of dozen per hour. We always feel lucky to see one shooting star, so seeing a couple of dozen per hour is pretty cool.” When and where is the best time to look? Timing is essential to seeing as much of the meteor shower as possible. Tucker says the shower is most vibrant once the moon sets. “The best viewing is 3-4am across Australia. But when the moon sets will depend on your location, but pretty much by 2am local, the moon has set all over the country. “That’s kind of the best chance to really start seeing it because you want that moon to be out of the way and the area of the sky to be as high as possible. So if you go outside and see the moon, it’s too early. “If you go outside and it’s gone, you’re in business.” He says the further north you are, the better the view will be, and that the shower will be visible to the naked eye, and that residents should try and find a dark spot to observe from. Tucker also advises heading to a nearby park or oval to watch the meteor shower, anywhere with an unobstructed view of the sky, and to continue looking north. Keen meteor watchers will need to be patient, and allow time for their eyes to adjust to the darkness, which could take up to 30 minutes. “Having a nice clear view and as dark as possible, even in the cities, can mean that you’ll get a couple of dozen. And obviously, the darker [the spot], the better.” Although the best show will come in the early hours of the morning, there are also some “Earth-grazing” meteors that will be visible earlier in the night. You can see them at the following local times: Brisbane – 9pm Darwin – 9.30pm Perth – 10pm Sydney – 10.30pm Canberra – 10:45pm Adelaide – 11:00pm Melbourne – 11:00pm Hobart – 11.30pmBoris Johnson faces the biggest rebellion of his premiership on Tuesday over new Covid restrictions amid warnings he has galvanised previously loyal MPs against him. Critics have warned that up to 100 MPs could oppose plan B changes across a series of Commons votes, forcing the government to rely heavily on Labour for them to pass. Dozens of backbenchers – and some junior ministerial aides – have expressed opposition to requiring people attending large events to prove their vaccine status or a recent negative test result. Some are poised to rebel or abstain despite never having voted against restrictions before. Relations between No 10 and many Conservative MPs have soured in the wake of scandals over Owen Paterson, undeclared donations to fund the Downing Street flat refurbishment and parties that appeared to contravene Covid rules last Christmas. While a backlash by some cabinet ministers led to the plans for vaccine passports being watered down so that proof of a negative test result would be allowed, too, that has not done enough to assuage concerns voiced by Steve Baker, deputy chair of the Covid Recovery Group, that the UK is drifting towards authoritarianism. The documents will be required for indoor venues of more than 500 people or outdoor settings of 10,000 people. Keir Starmer confirmed on Sunday that Labour would support all plan B measures. However several backbenchers who have never voted against Covid measures told the Guardian they would probably do so. One said the prime minister’s behaviour after recent scandals had “galvanised more of us to no longer blindly follow the orders cooked up by whips”. A frontbencher also said: “If they go overboard with the whipping on this, it’s going to hasten Boris’ departure – and it’s already been hastened quite a lot.” Simon Fell, a member of the 2019 intake who has not voted against Covid restrictions before, said while he had “no doubt about just how serious this new variant could be”, he would not support Covid passports. He said: “We are not a ‘papers please’ society, and such passports would be an unethical and discriminatory step. I will not be supporting their introduction.” Tom Randall and Alicia Kearns, both new Tory MPs and members of the 1922 Committee executive, are set to stage their first rebellion over Covid restrictions. Randall said “the case for certification had not been made”. And Kearns said Covid passports were “being proposed before we receive a detailed assessment of the severity of the Omicron variant”, adding: “I cannot justify introduction of Covid-19 passports just in case and without the data, and given that evidence from other countries is that vaccine passports don’t work.” Among those sceptical of the Covid passports plan are about six parliamentary private secretaries (PPSs) – MPs who act as aides to ministers and are expected to vote in line with the government. Jacob Young, a PPS to Michael Gove, is believed to be among them. In a bid to curb the number who would be forced to resign if they abstain or vote against the measure, Sajid Javid, the health secretary, had a meeting with some PPSs on Saturday. William Wragg, who sits on the executive of the 1922 Committee of backbench Tory MPs and heckled Javid in the Commons chamber last week, urging him to resign, said he felt “immense frustration that the government should be pursuing this policy, which on previous occasions they tried to reassure us that they wouldn’t be doing”. Wragg said plan B was “jumping the gun” and “going too fast”, taking aim at any attempt to “coerce” people to get vaccinated by introducing Covid passports. A frustrated minister predicted a “big rebellion” and said Johnson would probably be “wounded” by it for having to rely on Labour votes to pass such an important motion. The minister told the Guardian that many Tories would not vote for Covid passports because Labour’s backing meant there was no chance the government would be defeated, but hit out at the “righteous indignity” of some colleagues. The minister added Johnson still seemed “clueless” on how to tackle Covid through the winter and there was a “genuine level of uncertainty” about whether more restrictions would follow, but insisted: “A proportionate, precautionary response is not unreasonable. This doesn’t pass the test of people’s liberty being fatally withdrawn.” The previous biggest vote where Conservative MPs voted against the government was over changes to the tier system in December 2020, with 55 opposing the measures and 16 abstaining. Other rebellions have included more than 60 Tories opposing the 10pm curfew for hospitality venues enforced last autumn and pushing back the final stage of the reopening roadmap in June 2021. Nikki da Costa, a former senior adviser in No 10, noted: “Whips’ rule of thumb is rebellion breeds rebellion – it’s easier ‘next time’.” Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, tried to reassure people the Covid passports would only be temporary, as they have a sunset clause and will be reviewed on 5 January. He said it was only for “high risk events” that either a lateral flow test or vaccine status certificate would be required. “That is, I think, proportionate as we see where we hopefully arrive at with the booster, because the boosters are to protect the most vulnerable,” Zahawi told the BBC’s Andrew Marr show.The Home Office is facing demands for an inquiry after it was claimed that pregnant refugees are not being fed or examined by doctors or midwives after arriving in the UK. A first-time mother who was 38 weeks pregnant was not seen by a doctor for several weeks after crossing the Channel, it is alleged. After the Iraqi Kurdish woman was examined, it emerged that she had a pathological fear of pregnancy, and the baby had a breech presentation. Other allegations include that expectant mothers are being offered water instead of food and are not being given privacy from security guards while being examined. The claims come as the government plans to force councils to take unaccompanied children who have arrived in the UK via small boats. It is believed that more than 100 children are living in hotels because of a shortage of places in children’s homes. Last month 27 people, including three children and a pregnant woman, drowned when their boat sank off the coast of France, in the single biggest loss of life of the Channel crisis so far. Peter Kyle, the shadow Northern Ireland secretary and the MP for Hove and Portslade, has written to the Home Office asking it to investigate the treatment of at least five women at a hotel in his constituency. In a letter sent this month, he wrote: “A community midwife has been into the hotel as there was a pregnant woman who required booking for her antenatal care. When she arrived she discovered that the woman was already 38 weeks pregnant and had not been seen by a doctor/GP since arrival in the UK. This woman has primary tokophobia and has a possible breech presentation.” According to the letter, the midwife discovered there were another four women who required antenatal care. “She was required to attend to these women in a communal area and was unable to assess their other living conditions,” Kyle wrote. Another letter of complaint, written by a health official, said guards were allegedly withholding food. “Sometimes the pregnant women were only given water,” the official claimed. Three hotels in Hove have been taken over by the Home Office to house recent arrivals. A Refugee Council report in April on the use of hotels to accommodate people arriving by boats claimed that some people had been left unable to access even basic healthcare despite many having complex health needs. It found that they had received no assistance to register with a GP. Physical health needs had often been overlooked, such as people with mobility problems being placed on higher floors of hotels with no lifts. The Home Office said it worked “closely with service providers to ensure the highest possible standards in our accommodation and takes the welfare of women very seriously. All accommodation follows safety standards and Covid-19 regulations.” A Home Office spokesperson said they could not comment on individual cases. “Asylum seekers in our care have access to medical support if they need it. All asylum seekers who would otherwise be destitute are provided with free, fully furnished accommodation and we also cover their utility costs. They are provided with a choice of three meals a day in line with NHS nutrition guidelines, as well as constant access to drinking water,” the spokesperson said.We’ve seen an increase in the number of people coming into my hospital trust over recent days. And we are sequencing them to check whether there’s Omicron there. It’s a slight increase, which you’d expect at this time of year. But we’re ready to activate well-established plans for a surge in Covid cases if that happens. For example, we’ve got a standing order of the wards we use for Covid cases and the services we close to deal with a Covid surge. But I think this winter will be worse – it will be harder – than last year. The challenge is bigger because we’re tackling the backlog of care, our A&amp;E is incredibly busy, and also because of staffing problems. This isn’t just Covid, though Covid is a factor. And this isn’t just about people’s difficulties accessing primary care. It’s partly because people coming into hospital are much more severely ill than before. Our stroke team say they’re seeing people coming in who haven’t been accessing some of the preventive interventions that might have stopped them getting so ill. And our gastro-intestinal specialists are seeing far more people with stage 3 or stage 4 cancers than previously. So there are things that haven’t been picked up. That has a consequential impact on hospitals because patients’ length of stay and recovery period are greater. The strain on hospitals is very visible and quite visceral – you can see ambulances queueing outside and people sleeping on chairs because you can’t get them into cubicles to be seen because too many sick people are waiting for beds. But what we can’t necessarily see is what’s happening to all the people who are at home getting sicker. That’s a very large, invisible problem. Many of the people in our hospital are very old and very frail. They don’t necessarily need to be in an acute hospital but they need to be in a bed somewhere, with someone looking after them round the clock. Social care is a massive, massive concern; not being able to get these people who are medically fit to be discharged out and home is what blocks up the “front door”, our A&amp;E. We’re going great guns at treating people on the waiting list. And this winter we’re doing more than ever to protect that, as well as dealing with all the other pressures we have. We are holding beds for people on the waiting list who are having surgery. But that raises really difficult ethical dilemmas. Do you hold an intensive care bed for someone with an aneurysm that could kill them at any minute, or bring in someone who’s just arrived through A&amp;E and needs surgery? Is there a bed for someone who comes in and needs a thrombectomy, a potentially life-saving operation after a stroke? You can imagine how some of our staff feel about unvaccinated people with Covid eating into our supply of ICU beds when you’re making these decisions, about whether someone with stage 4 cancer or an aneurysm can have an operation. Workforce is a real problem. We’re struggling to get enough healthcare assistants. We’ve lost 25% of our stroke care pathway because it’s lost its community rehabilitation capacity that we just can’t staff. And several very experienced consultants have said “I’m going to give you one more winter and then I’m off. I’ve realised through the pandemic that when I’m on my deathbed I’ll remember the time I spent with my family and not the Saturday nights I spent doing an extra shift.” Our staff are resolute and they’re still delivering absolutely fantastic care. But after the last 20 months they’re pretty weary. It’s mile 23 of a marathon, really – that’s what it feels like – but the problem is that the finish line keeps getting a bit further away. Staff are pretty worn out. And they’re quite frightened about being redeployed into Covid wards again. The first time it was “once more unto the breach”. But now, when it’s like fifth time unto the breach, people are sick of the bloody breach. They don’t want to go there again. A lot of staff are saying “I’m not going back into Covid wards”. So that’s going to be tough. Staff will keep going and keep giving, because that’s their values. But I worry about the public starting to lose confidence in us and losing faith in us because of their experience of this as well. It’s a tough and frustrating situation. And there are no quick answers. As told to Denis Campbell“Drinks, nibbles, games”: three words delivered in a studiously measured tone that have added to serious stress headaches at the heart of government and sparked nagging rumours of the prime minister’s exit. The BBC’s Ros Atkins, who delivered the deadpan words in a video explainer of the “partygate” scandal that went viral, has become an unlikely star of the festive saga. Admirers from across the political divide – from Piers Morgan to James O’Brien – have praised his commitment to the cold, hard presentation of facts, while he has been credited with creating a “whole new genre of reporting”. In a series of short explainers, the BBC News Channel’s Outside Source presenter has repeatedly skewered the Boris Johnson administration, while never coming within striking distance of seeming to have an opinion. “Forensic, measured, factual, brilliant,” wrote veteran broadcaster Andrew Neil after Atkins’ explainer on 6 December. Two days later Morgan tweeted: “Ros once again brilliantly illustrating that the best journalism is often the simplest: just damn people with cool, calm, collected &amp; utterly irrefutable facts.” The first video on the Christmas parties was posted on 2 December, two days after the story broke, and two more have followed. In nine days the 3-4 minute clips – long for viral videos – have been watched over 11m times, far more than any other digital news series, with insiders in the BBC admitting that their popularity has confounded expectations about the desires of online news consumers. The 47-year-old is no hotshot newcomer. He has been at the BBC for 20 years, joining the corporation weeks after 9/11. He started out as a producer on Simon Mayo’s 5 live show, before becoming a presenter on the BBC World Service in 2004. Atkins, a former DJ who ran a club night in Brixton in the 2000s and performed at Womad, was part of the team that launched Outside Source, a daily show that curates news from wires, video feeds and social media on the News Channel and BBC World News, in 2014. His explainers started with coverage of the Australia bush fires in late 2019, and earlier this year the BBC launched Ros Atkins On, promising 10 minutes of his “straight-talking style of analysis and explanation” on the biggest issues of the day on iPlayer, BBC Breakfast and the BBC’s news website. His films, covering the heatwaves in the States and the Belarus migrant crisis as well as domestic political issues, “explain the background and context to current events in a scrupulously impartial, accessible way”, said Jamie Angus, senior controller, news output and commissioning, at BBC News. “He’s made this type of explainer his own, and it’s proved wildly popular with audiences across the world, and very shareable on social media,” he said. The explainers, very much seen as Atkins’ baby, were created in an attempt to make live TV also work as an on-demand digital product, with one former BBC news executive describing their style as “assertive impartiality”. “Ros is just brilliant at this,” the executive said. “If you look at what he’s done, it’s stripped down ‘this is what happened’ in three minutes flat – there’s no florid tedious language, there’s no self indulgence to it.” Atkins’ unflinching presentation manages to get the viewer to raise an eyebrow through facts alone, said the former executive. “I think sometimes the BBC mistakes impartiality for sucking the life out of something. But Ros is human and has a personality, while never making it about him, or leaving himself open to accusations of bias.” Colleagues say Atkins, who is married with two teenagers, is dedicated, rehearsing lines and tweaking scripts until he is sure they will have the greatest impact. One former colleague compared his approach to news to his love of squash. “He makes things look effortless but they’re not effortless. Just like being a very good squash player takes years of practice, being a really good TV craftsman takes a long time too – he works bloody hard to make it spot on.”Ever since childhood, I have wanted to be trained in the sword. But I have always believed one had to be born a musketeer for this to happen, or have a death to avenge, plus access to castle steps. But here I am at the London Fencing Club in Old Street, which is easier. It’s a few weeks before omicron takes off, and the government is pooh-poohing any talk of tightening Covid restrictions. I’m learning épée, the thin, pointy blade that most resembles a classic swashbuckling sword. My Russian-born coach, Anna Anstal, loves fencing épée. The opponent’s entire body is a target, and there are no “right of way” rules governing who can score at a given moment. “You must think about the zombie apocalypse,” she says. “Rules are no use with a zombie. The ability to strike first is all that matters.” It’s unexpected advice, her heavy accent giving it even more edge. I’m quite scared. “Have you held a pistol before?” Anstal asks. I think we had different upbringings, I say. The “pistol grip” is the most common in fencing: blade gripped between thumb and forefinger, other fingers curled under, with surprising delicacy. The legs work far harder. We start with footwork drills, advancing up and down the 14-metre piste, front foot leading forwards, back foot for retreats. “Fast, fast!” shouts Anstal. It’s hard to keep my heels in line, so I quite literally veer off piste. I learn straight thrusts, lunges, an explosive flèche attack. I already feel like Arya Stark. We move to a padded pillar, to practise thrusts. I learn to gauge distance, never moving closer than I need to be. Fencing is about intelligence, Anstal explains. Something close to chess, or a conversation. “‘I’m going to hit your leg!’ ‘Not if I parry …’ ‘That was a joke – I’m actually hitting your mask!’” she illustrates. Her idea of a conversation is terrifying, but I’m picking up technique faster than I thought possible. I loved swordfighting as a boy, I reminisce. “All children do,” she confirms. “Then they come here, realise it’s all footwork drills, and say: ‘Mummy, I want to go home.’” Luckily, the school specialises in beginners’ courses for adults. The class around me is doing an intense warmup: shuttle runs, shuffle reps, squat running – anything that murders the legs. I’m sweating, too, having idiotically worn a polo neck for extra protection. “Listen – my favourite sound,” remarks Anstal with a far-off look. It’s the sound of exhaustion, a faint, fatigued wheezing that fills the room. Odd. There’s an alien appeal to fencing: those insectoid masks, stinging spines, the scrape and clash of metal. Yet with its elegant, all-white jackets and breeches, it’s also a sport of high tradition. Scores were originally tallied via soot on the blades, which marked the white clothes. (Although I suppose, even more originally, scores were settled by killing your opponent.) Now facing a mirror, sword pointed at my own chest, I learn parrying positions. Anstal divides my torso into numbered sections, like a butcher. Quarte, sixte, septième, octave – if I had known there was going to be so much French, I’d have dusted off my GCSE Tricolore textbook. Anstal masks up, and teaches me to disengage, ie feint around an opponent’s parry with a tiny circular motion. I’m not striking hard enough, she says. It’s hard enough to remember technicalities of arm line and footwork, and like most beginners, I lack killer instinct. “Everyone starts out very nice,” smiles Tim Gadaski, manager of the club. “Then they get hit a few times, and things change.” “I am in your country now, and I love democracy. So tell me what you want to do,” jokes Anstal, after an hour. Maybe practice more parries? She looks bored. “I think you should fight someone.” Huh? I’m not ready for that. But she is plugging a thin cable into my blade’s hand guard, threading it through an arm protector. At least I get to wear the natty white jacket. The class is setting up parallel pistes across the room. They face off with wires extending behind them, a marionette theatre of war. My opponent, confusingly also called Anna, salutes. My mask drops down. “En garde!” shouts Gadaski, stepping in to referee. Suddenly, I’m fencing for real. Anna and I test each other, nudging blades. “Too defensive. You’re not doing anything,” shouts Gadaski. Anna thrusts. I instinctively deflect, then again. I can defend myself! It’s thrilling. “You’re wasting your parries,” coaches Gadaski. “You need to counter.” I try, though technique has disappeared. The winner is the first to 10 points and Anna is leading 6-4. She’s attacking at will, but I’m scoring off her attacks, too, machines bleeping on both sides. Being hit doesn’t hurt, but I’m tiring fast. The entire room sounds like a video game. Anna overtakes me. 8-7! I hadn’t realised I was in the lead before. How? We both score. I steel myself, and concentrate. Maybe I’m Zatoichi, blind to my own abilities. I circle her blade, trying to stay on target. 9-9. We both lunge but I angle away, and have the reach. I’ve won! My inner child is jubilant. Fencing is a feeling like nothing else. Anna congratulates me, Anstal flashes a Slavic grin, acknowledging I have crushed my inner weakness. There must be something on those blades, because I feel the rush of adventure in my bloodstream, and leave on a swashbuckling high. I can legitimately declare myself trained in the sword. Zombies, you have been warned! Just let me consult my Tricolore first. Would I go back? To be stabbed with swords, and worked to exhaustion? Arya Stark raving mad? Maybe, as I definitely would. Smugness Points Yépée! 4/5 Want to suggest an activity for Rhik to try? Tell us about it here.Jonathan Liew, sports writer Writing about racism is tiring and – if we’re going to be honest – not all that much fun. By definition, it’s an exploration of pain and suffering. We saw that when Azeem Rafiq spoke in parliament about the racism he had encountered in Yorkshire cricket. It entails spending a good deal of time with the very worst impulses of humanity. It requires trying to understand the mindset of people who have no interest in understanding you. We see that every time a rightwing politician or media outlet tries to justify racism under the deceitful banner of “anti-wokeness”. This is doubly true in the case of sport, which for the most part is a place where we go to feel uplifted, perhaps even seek temporary refuge from the world and its complex, maddening problems. And so often in this job it’s impossible not to feel a little churlish. You know that thing you love? That you’ve loved ever since you were a child? That source of simple, happy, incorruptible memories? Turns out it’s actually morally bankrupt beyond measure! Then there are the days when you feel like you might just be getting somewhere. An article that changes a few minds. A revelation or news story that forces the powerful to reflect. Or occasionally a moment that simply knocks you sideways. Perhaps one of the most quietly moving episodes of the sporting year came in an otherwise entirely forgettable pre-season friendly at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium in August, when Bukayo Saka was introduced by Arsenal as a substitute. As you will probably be aware, Saka missed the crucial penalty for England in the Euro 2020 final against Italy at Wembley, and in the days afterwards was subjected to a vicious and sustained wave of racist abuse. Now, as he stepped on to enemy turf at the home of his club’s biggest rivals, the Tottenham fans cheered his every step: a show of solidarity and kinship across tribal lines that felt shocking in its defiance. It was a gesture that said: actually, fuck the rivalry for a moment. Some things mean more. And you need to know that we know that. Every so often there are days when it feels like nobody is listening and nobody is learning, when there is precious little left to cling to. Well, cling to that. Barney Ronay, chief sports writer English cricket is never short of stories. The Ashes will dominate the sports news cycle either side of Christmas. This year’s T20 World Cup is a prelude to the joys of next year’s T20 World Cup, and to the 50-over World Cup the year after that. In the current rush to balance schedules, to gorge on stored-up TV rights deals, every year is World Cup year right now, every couple of months another step on the franchise carousel. These are the headlines. But the real story of English cricket is, as so often, elsewhere. In the last few weeks, Rafiq’s refusal to walk away from his experience of institutionalised racist abuse at Yorkshire County Cricket Club has gone from a noise off on the sports pages to questions in parliament, reputation management in the Nike boardroom and a state of emergency at English cricket’s grandest county. This story is just beginning. But we can promise that with the help and the input of readers we will continue to tell it in the pages of Guardian Sport, and to keep trying to push it forward to the next step. Rafiq is a hero. His bravery lies not just in telling his story, but in being willing to tell it until people listen, and doing so even as his character is smeared and his motives questioned. In the face of massed public pressure, there has been a sudden willingness to listen in high places. But one thing is certain. This isn’t even close to being over, or solved or packaged away, no matter how many reports or statements the England and Wales Cricket Board might throw at it, no matter how many layers of Yorkshire’s management are peeled away. We still see entire sections of society underrepresented in the professional game, starved of opportunity, excluded by habit and structures, and often more or less invisible at management level. If Rafiq’s courage tells us one thing, it is that those with an investment in the status quo will respond only to public pressure. That is hopefully where Guardian journalism can have an impact. Jacob Steinberg, football reporter I was at the London Stadium to watch West Ham host Tottenham in the Premier League a few weeks ago. It can be a difficult fixture for a Jew to attend. Tottenham have often been the target of antisemitic taunts and I wasn’t particularly surprised when I heard a nearby West Ham fan launch into a chant of: “We’ll be running round Tottenham with our willies hanging out, singing I’ve got a foreskin, haven’t you …” It was a jarring moment, a reminder that discrimination in football remains an issue despite repeated efforts to kick it out: and there was more to come when West Ham travelled to face Genk in the Europa League last month. The footage of supporters taunting a Jewish man on a plane to Belgium was another punch in the stomach. Unfortunately, these incidents remain all too common, and 2021 has become something of a watershed for sport and racism. Last year, Kick It Out, football’s anti-discrimination charity, warned that a “shocking” increase in reports of racist and homophobic abuse in professional football was just the tip of the iceberg, and sadly it has become a part of our job as football reporters to ensure that the issue is covered properly, sensitively and extensively. We have all experienced that sinking feeling while sitting in a press box – the moment when we realise that a section of supporters in the ground are aiming racial abuse at a young black footballer. It happened when England went to Budapest to face Hungary, but it is crucial to note that racism is not merely a problem in foreign countries: it was deflating for Gareth Southgate to have to devote part of his debrief with the media after the Euro 2020 final to talking about racism. But we have to talk about it. At the Guardian, it is a topic we continue to cover rigorously. In 2019 we published a wide-ranging report into the rise of racism in football, at grassroots level and in the professional game, and we explored the problem again earlier this year. In 2021, our columnists have written again and again about an issue that, far from going away, appears to becoming more entrenched. We built up to England’s opening game at Euro 2020 against Croatia by interviewing Labour leader Keir Starmer about racism in football and we have heard from several figures inside and outside the game about discrimination, among them former players Lilian Thuram and Anton Ferdinand, and poet Benjamin Zephaniah. Chris Hughton spoke to us about the challenges faced by black managers and our award-winning podcast, Football Weekly, recently broadcast an interview with the former Liverpool and England winger John Barnes about his experiences of racism. The hope is that persistent reporting will have a positive effect; that it will change attitudes in the stands and increase diversity at the top of the game. It is our duty to put pressure on authorities who have often seemed blase about the issue. It is no longer merely important that we keep talking and writing about racism in football. It is a moral obligation.‘This, for me, is the most beautiful place on Earth,” Paolo Sorrentino told Filippo Scotti, the actor playing the director’s younger self in his latest film, as their 1980s Squalo speedboat chopped the waves of the Bay of Naples. Their view stretched from the precipitous peninsula of Sorrento all the way west towards Posillipo. The two promontories flank the sprawling port city, offering a warm embrace to all those who disembark there. Sorrentino’s new film, the Hand of God, opens with that same view: the sun-mottled bay, whose peace is disturbed by the sound of four tobacco smuggling boats speeding towards the shore. The film is both a love letter to, and a portal into, Paolo Sorrentino’s Naples. In cinemas now and on Netflix this week, The Hand of God sees the Academy award-winning director return to his home city for the first time since One Man Up, his 2001 debut. Sorrentino tells the story of his own coming of age, up to the moment when his life is shattered by the death of his parents in a tragic accident. Sorrentino’s story is a tale of great grief, loss and perseverance, set in a middle-class part of Naples, a far cry from the impoverished neighbourhoods shown in the city’s other recent portraits: Elena Ferrante’s My Brilliant Friend or the mafia-focused Gomorrah series. Following the teenage life of Fabietto Schisa, a teenage Sorrentino-esque figure, the director maps out a rarely seen Naples, and his film serves as a refreshing guide to the city. Unlike the historic centre, with its ancient, working-class character, the Vomero neighbourhood feels more genteel and modern. Perched high above the city, it’s rarely visited by tourists. Nicknamed la città alta (the high city), most of Vomero comprises residential neighbourhoods built in the late 1960s and 70s. Low-rise housing blocks, such as those along Via San Domenico where Sorrentino grew up, envelop the craggy hill as it rises steeply above the sea. At the heart of Vomero, however, is the Liberty-era Piazza Vanvitelli, an elegant octagonal square lined with cafes. Here the Fabiettos of today spill out of the nearby Istituto Salesiano secondary school Salesian Institute – Sorrentino’s alma mater – gossiping and smoking Camel Blues on benches. Leading off the piazza are wide avenues lined with department stores, bookshops and independent cinemas. In the cross streets are restaurants such as the historic La Gorizia 1916, a Vomero institution that opened during the first world war to help feed the famished neighbourhood, serves a quintessentially Neapolitan menu. Dishes are a step above some of the trattorias in the historic centre, which have begun to lose their way with the influx of tourists. Inhabitants of the lower city make an occasion of going “up” to Vomero, climbing the steep Pedamentina staircase and enjoying the views of the bay from Castel Sant’Elmo at the top. Viewed from a distance of two decades, Sorrentino’s Naples – as portrayed in the film – is pricked with both melancholy and a rose-tinted nostalgia. From his youth he remembers the Amalfi coast, the vine-laced foothills of the Mount Vesuvius and the Apennines on the city’s doorstep. An early scene in The Hand of God sees the extended Schisa family enjoy a long family meal in Massa Lubrense, on the Sorrentine Peninsula – a locals’ favourite, often missed by tourists making a beeline for Positano. The lunch captures that charming and comedic Neapolitan spirit. An uncle of Fabietto’s produces a watermelon given to him as a thank-you for “a favour” and describes it as special “because it comes directly from Cava de’ Terreni”, while his grandmother – milk dripping down her chin – gorges on a vast bulbous mozzarella, which is no doubt made in one of the reputable dairies in nearby Agerola. In the afternoon, they head out for a jaunt on a wooden gozzo boat, bobbing about between the mainland and the Faraglioni rocks of Capri, while the women stay home to make passata, from a crop of Vesuvian tomatoes. The quintessential Italian scenes of lazy lunches with eccentric family is just one seasonal facet of Vomero. Another is zipping off to the mountains in nearby Abruzzo for winter weekends or the settimana bianca – a half-term holiday in February traditionally spent skiing by the middle classes. In The Hand of God the Schisas have just acquired a small chalet in the fashionable Roccaraso resort, a couple of hours’ drive from Naples. It would have served as a welcome respite from the monotony of the working week, the smog and the chaos of a city in social and economic turmoil if it hadn’t been for the tragic accident: a gas leak, that took the lives of Fabietto’s (and Sorrentino’s) parents so abruptly. It was a fate that awaited Sorrentino too, had he not begged to go to an away game in Empoli to watch Maradona play for his beloved Napoli football club. If “the hand of god” saved Sorrentino’s life, it also saved Naples. After Maradona’s unexpected arrival in 1984, he twice led the club to their first ever victories of the Italian league. In doing so, he united a socially fragmented city devastated by the 1980s earthquake, the rising power of the Camorra clans and a heroin epidemic. Maradona showed Neapolitans that they, too, could be exceptional. And so Sunday afternoons have ever since been defined by trips to the stadium in the westerly neighbourhood of Fuorigrotta, where Neapolitans from all corners of the city come to worship Maradona’s legacy. If the Neapolitans were searching for a miracle, in Maradona they found their saint. His icon, along with San Gennaro, is seen in shrines on every street corner of the historic centre, framed in flickering neon and fake flowers, ever expected to deliver the beleaguered city yet another miracle. Woven through the film are hints of Naples’ esoteric and occult impulses, exemplified by the significance of the film’s title and the opening scene where Fabietto’s aunt has a surreal encounter with benevolent figures from Neapolitan folklore. The blurring of paganism and Catholicism is nowhere better seen in Naples, however, than in the Cimitero delle Fontanelle, a former tufo stone quarry housing eight million bones, tucked away deep in La Sanità district. Here, for centuries, Neapolitans have gone to “adopt skulls”, dusting them off and leaving them offerings. They believe that by caring for the skulls, they free their souls from purgatory, sending them to heaven where they can finally return their earthly custodian a wish – commonly a husband. Still frequented today, the cemetery speaks to the city’s unique relationship with the sacred and the profane – a fascination of Sorrentino’s – where football stars can become saints, saints can save your life, and small hooded monks (seen at the beginning and end of the film) can make you fertile, rich and a successful film director. Sorrentino often says that Maradona’s skills were his first encounter with art before he discovered cinema. Yet it was cinema that finally led Sorrentino beyond the comfortable confines of his neighbourhood down to the lower city to the theatre in the city’s Quartieri Spagnoli, or to watch films being made in Galleria Toledo. Back up in Vomero, ambitious teenagers have long since piled into the legendary Acacia cinema to glimpse a world beyond their own and to dream of leaving the city for a more prosperous future. Sorrentino left too, for Rome, only returning to Naples last summer to finally make his paean. While filming, he stayed in an apartment by the sea on the Posillipo peninsula. His view looked out at the crumbling palazzos, the crystalline water, Vesuvius and those wide embracing arms. If it was the hand of god that saved his life, it was surely the bay of Naples, that most beautiful place on Earth, that brought him home. Sophia Seymour is a Naples-based documentary maker, writer and the founder of Looking for Lila, which uses film and novels as a frame to explore the city * The piece was amended on 15 December as the boats mentioned in the opening paragraph are ‘Squalo’ speedboats not ‘Riva’ as previously statedSolar parks could provide habitats for wildlife – and particularly bumblebees – to flourish, if managed in the right way, benefiting farmers and nature, new research suggests. There are already 14,000 hectares (35,000 acres) of solar parks in the UK, in which arrays of solar panels are installed over a large area, and an estimated 90,000 hectares will be needed. Yet the parks have attracted controversy over claims they are ugly, blight productive land and harm nature. If solar park owners were encouraged to use the land to sow wildflowers alongside the solar panels, they could become valuable habitats for pollinators, research from Lancaster University has found. Managing them in this way would boost bumblebee numbers beyond the borders of the parks, to about 1km (0.6 miles) away, benefiting farmers who rely on bees to pollinate their crops. One simulation run by the study group found four times as many bees in a solar park managed as a wildflower meadow than in one based on turf grass. Hollie Blaydes, a researcher at Lancaster University who will present the findings at a conference, said: “Our research suggests that the management of vegetation within the solar parks is really important. Solar parks managed as a meadow act as bumblebee habitat that is rich in flowering plants. Management to create floral-rich bumblebee habitat could be one of the simplest ways to support bumblebees on solar parks.” Despite appearances, the large arrays of solar panels offer many advantages over other tracts of land in providing a habitat for pollinators. “The characteristics of many solar parks mean they could be ideal places to create this bumblebee habitat,” said Blaydes. “Solar parks can occupy large areas of land, and while some of this is taken up by solar panels and other infrastructure, this typically only disturbs 5% of the ground. Large areas of land are therefore available to create bumblebee habitat … and [the solar parks] are often located in agricultural habitats where much bumblebee [population] has been lost. Establishing habitat on solar parks may therefore provide bumblebees with resources where they are most needed.” Post-Brexit agricultural subsidy systems could be used to give solar park owners an incentive to use their land as meadows rather than turf, and the reduced need for cutting grass and other interventions could spell small savings in management costs. The way such parks are currently owned and managed, with the management often outsourced to external companies by the landowners on short-term contracts, typically of two years, also presents difficulties that well-designed government incentives could overcome. Blaydes said: “Our findings provide the first quantitative evidence that solar parks could be used as a conservation tool to support and boost pollinator populations. If they are managed in a way that provides resources [such as flowers], solar parks could become valuable bumblebee habitat.” The research, which is still unpublished, will be presented on Monday to at a conference held by Ecology Across Borders.The first few years of life weren’t easy for Leo*. His mother was severely dependent on drugs, as were other members of his family. There were periods of neglect, and he was taken into the care of his local authority while still a very young child. Now 16, Leo lives in semi-independent accommodation. But his difficulties haven’t evaporated. Often he has felt lonely and unwanted. On several recent occasions, Leo has been the subject of a missing persons report. When visited by caseworkers after returning, conversation has repeatedly turned to his mental health struggles. He just feels low most of the time. Leo’s story is not unique, just as the UK’s missing persons crisis is nothing new: 170,000 people are reported missing every year, at a rate of one every 90 seconds. More than 70,000 are children and the majority, like Leo, boomerang in and out of sight repeatedly, perhaps living in care or unstable households. Though it’s rarely possible to pinpoint one single cause leading to a disappearance, poor mental health is very often a significant contributing factor. One in five children subject to a return interview with the charity Missing People has disclosed information about mental health issues. This much was true long before the pandemic. But the events of the past 18 months have only accelerated existing trends. In a report published by the social business and charity Catch-22, the link between children’s mental health and missing episodes is made explicit. Its own data has shown that mental health was a factor in a third of all children’s missing incidents reported between April 2020 and April 2021. The highest figures came between October and December 2020, in the teeth of lockdown and school closures. But even after the end of restrictions, rates have remained alarmingly high. When someone returns after they have been missing, there is an invaluable chance to understand some of what led to the disappearance in the first place. And most missing people – whether adults or children – do return. The latest figures suggest that 90% of missing children are back in sight within 48 hours. Statutory guidance in England and Wales now states that every one of these returned children should be offered an independent “return home interview” (known as return discussions in Scotland). They are supposed to offer the chance of an intervention, conducted by a trusted non-police body, such as Catch-22 or Missing People. Leo’s story is one of many. Take 15-year-old Alice*. Her relationship with her parents was already fractious, and lockdown exacerbated matters. Alice had quickly become isolated and found remote learning difficult. Already living with several neurodivergent conditions, she had put herself under huge pressure to conceal her mental health struggles from her family. Even after the loosening of restrictions, arguments have persisted – mostly centred on schoolwork and seeing friends. Unable to cope at home, Alice has repeatedly gone missing and has begun to self-harm. Clearly there is something deeply broken, in a year when record numbers of children and adolescents have been referred to mental health services in England. Between 2020 and 2021, NHS data shows there were 527,339 referrals in total, up 33% from 2019. The wider UK picture is just as troubling. In early December, it was revealed that nearly 2,000 young people in Scotland had been waiting more than a year for an appointment with child and adolescent mental health services – a rise of 106% from 2020. Statistics hardly represent the lives of increasingly vulnerable young people like Leo and Alice. For one consultant child psychiatrist in Liverpool who spoke recently to the BBC, the consistent severity of self-harm is the worst they’d ever seen. In times of severe distress, the likelihood of going missing only increases. The majority of missing young people might return “safe and well”, but there are many who don’t. One in seven of those who completed return home interviews with Missing People had been sexually exploited. Crises rarely emerge fully formed overnight. They tend to build over years. Cuts to children’s mental health services are nothing new, even if the effects of the pandemic have brought things to an unignorable boiling point. It’s why one of Catch-22’s key recommendations involves timely access to professional support. After all, collating scrupulous data from returnees is one thing; turning it into action is quite another. Our society is riven by deep inequalities, and the world of missing people is no different. For children living with poor mental health, in poverty or flitting in and out of the care system, the risk of disappearance is significantly increased. These are not academic questions – the stakes could hardly be higher. This summer marked a first in the history of Catch-22’s missing services. A child with significant mental health problems had been reported missing and was later found to have taken their own life. They were just 14 years old. Francisco Garcia is a London-based writer and journalist *Names have been changed In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counsellor. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgWe are having a nightmare with Furniture Village, and, looking online, it seems there are many others in the same boat. In July we ordered a table and chairs from the store’s website, paying £1,170. At the time, we were told delivery would be in mid-October. After placing the order, we decided we wanted to buy additional chairs and bar stools. We called several times but were left on hold for an hour each time and eventually gave up. Now we are trying to get the original order delivered. The company emailed us on 19 October saying it was having problems, and the order would be delivered in mid-November. By 21 November, there was been no communication and no delivery. I requested callbacks but have had no response. Furniture Village has had £1,170 of our money for more than four-and-a-half months, and we have no product and no way of communicating with the company. CH, Walthamstow Ouch! The online reviews do not make great reading, with many reporting similarly long waits for their orders. The retailer isn’t alone – the whole furniture sector is having problems. I asked the company about your case, and it quickly looked into it and has just delivered your items. To apologise, it has refunded your delivery fee and offered a 10% discount on the extra chairs – should you still wish to buy them. “Soaring demand for raw materials and shipping containers, combined with port congestion, depleted workforces and reduced factory capacity, is creating a perfect logistical storm, which has resulted in delays to a number of our customers’ orders,” it says. It also said it has since beefed up its customer care team to address the lack of communication you experienced. I called up this week and did get through after waiting for about 14 minutes, so maybe things are improving. In the meantime, those trying to buy furniture and other similar items may want to stick to what is actually in stock. Right now, a promise that a bed or sofa will be delivered on time appears to be a bit of a guess, and probably should be treated as such. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsAdam McKay calls it his “freakout trilogy”. Having tackled the 2008 financial crash and warmongering US vice president Dick Cheney in his previous two movies, The Big Short and Vice, McKay goes even bigger and bleaker with his latest, Don’t Look Up, in which two astronomers (Jennifer Lawrence and Leonardo DiCaprio) discover a giant comet headed for Earth, but struggle to get anyone to listen. It is an absurd but depressingly plausible disaster satire, somewhere between Dr Strangelove, Network, Deep Impact and Idiocracy, with an unbelievably stellar cast; also on board are Meryl Streep (as the US president), Cate Blanchett, Timothée Chalamet, Tyler Perry, Mark Rylance, Jonah Hill and Ariana Grande. It has been quite the career trajectory for McKay, who started out in live improv and writing for Saturday Night Live, followed by a run of hit Will Ferrell comedies such as Anchorman, Step Brothers and The Other Guys. “The goal was to capture this moment,” says McKay of Don’t Look Up. “And this moment is a lot.” Was there a particular event that inspired Don’t Look Up? Somewhere in between The Big Short and Vice, the IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] panel and a bunch of other studies came out that just were so stark and so terrifying that I realised: “I have to do something addressing this.” So I wrote five different premises for movies, trying to find the best one. I had one that was a big, epic, kind of dystopian drama. I had another one that was a Twilight Zone/M Night [Shyamalan] sort of twisty thriller. I had a small character piece. And I was just trying to find a way into: how do we communicate how insane this moment is? So finally, I was having a conversation with my friend [journalist and Bernie Sanders adviser] David Sirota, and he offhandedly said something to the effect of: “It’s like the comet’s coming and no one cares.” And I thought: “Oh. I think that’s it.” I loved how simple it was. It’s not some layered, tricky Gordian knot of a premise. It’s a nice, big, wide open door we can all relate to. Dick Cheney, the financial crash, planetary destruction … these are not subjects most people would consider comedy material. Yeah! I don’t know how you’ve been experiencing the past five years, but when I talk to my friends the basic thrust of the conversation is: “What the holy F is going on?” And usually we swing between laughing at just how ridiculously over-the-top horrible it is and genuinely being frightened. When we were making the movie, I happened upon a fascinating book called Deep Survival. The author [Laurence Gonzales] studies why people survive insane accidents like getting lost at sea or lost in the woods, and one of the biggest things he found was that a lot of these people kept a dark sense of humour. I think there’s something really – I hate to use a woo-woo word – but, healing about that. So yeah, I think laughter has got to be a part of how we deal with this. How did you assemble such an incredible cast? I had a couple of people I wanted right from the jump. Like, I wrote the roles for Jennifer Lawrence and Rob Morgan [as a sympathetic Nasa scientist]. I sort of had Meryl Streep in mind, but you never dare to think that you’re going to get her. When she signed on, it then became just a cascading effect. And then when Leonardo DiCaprio came in, I realised there was this happy accident, where this stellar cast was actually enforcing the point of view of the movie: that we’re constantly distracted by celebrity and bright colours, and low news versus high news, and contrarian points of view. Of course, it didn’t hurt that they all happen to be brilliant actors. So yeah, it got slightly embarrassing. At one point I almost found myself apologising to my director friends. You do at least manage to make both Leonardo DiCaprio and Jennifer Lawrence look terrible. Well, thank you! I take that as a pure compliment. They had to be the opposite of the people that you’d want to chuck on the most popular talkshow in America, so, yeah, we did some hard work on that. And it’s testament to them, as big, giant movie stars, that they were willing to play into that. I even said at one point to Jennifer: “Those bangs could look a little better if you wanted to.” And she was like: “No, I like ’em.” So yeah, they were down for the cause. This is a work of fiction, but how much did you draw on real people for the characters? All the characters are kind of an amalgam. I’ve been tracking the last five or six years what’s been happening to the scientists in the States who are under political attack, and it’s sometimes kind of funny to watch because some of them aren’t made for giant PR tours. What you’ve seen are these climate scientists having to go front and centre and take on a billion-dollar industry of misinformation from fossil fuel companies and attacks from extremists and having people call for them losing their jobs. And I felt for them. It’s not what they’re built to do. Politics and big tech are in the firing line, but as with the Anchorman movies, your main target here seems to be the media. I think what happened, especially in the US, was everything became a sales exchange. Everything became a “customer is always right” interaction. And I think that goes across politics, it goes to broadcast media and, to some degree, print journalism. The only way you can stay alive is to maximise profits. And I’ll date myself, but I remember when that wasn’t entirely the case! I remember when broadcast journalism was about the esteem and doing good journalism. But it became part of the entertainment culture. So now we’re in this very dangerous place where it’s hard to tell people bad news. How does a society function when bad news is not an easy sell, and everything is about selling? We certainly see, er, a new side of Meryl Streep (no spoilers, but her character appears naked at one point). Was she up for that? She is fearless. And yes, that is a body double. But you know who had a problem with it? Leo [DiCaprio]. Leo just views Meryl as film royalty … although maybe royalty is not a compliment … but as such a special figure in the history of film. He didn’t like seeing her with the lower back tattoo, walking for a second naked. He said something to me like: “Do you really need to show that?” And I was like: “It’s President Orlean; it’s not Meryl Streep.” But she didn’t even blink. She didn’t even bring it up. Talking of politicians, did you ever get any reaction from the Cheneys over Vice? I did. I got two reactions. A friend of Christian Bale was at a party and said to Dick Cheney: “I know Christian Bale.” And Cheney looked up at them and said: “Well, you tell Christian Bale he’s a dick.” And Christian’s friend laughed, and Cheney said: “I’m not kidding.” And then the second reaction, and you’ve got to judge if this is me thinking too much of our movie, but I think it’s pretty odd that Liz Cheney just came out for gay marriage. And I do know, from seeing her timeline on social media, a lot of people gave her a hard time for betraying her sister [Mary, who is a lesbian]. For a Republican candidate in the state of Wyoming to come out publicly in support of gay marriage … there is no political advantage to doing that. I just found that very curious. You come from an improv and live comedy background. Do you still work like that? It sometimes looks as if nothing was planned in your Will Ferrell comedies. Oh, it’s definitely not planned. On the day, you just never can fully anticipate what it’s like to see a beautifully designed set and perfect wardrobe and hair. There’s just always something inspiring about that moment. So the actor, whether it’s Will or John C Reilly or Adam Scott or Paul Rudd or Kathryn Hahn, will get inspired by the moment. I get the couple of takes as written, then I’ll say: “OK, let’s start screwing around.” And I’ll throw out an idea, and they’ll take it and go somewhere else, and essentially what happens is we’re all writing together. One of my favourite lines from any movie I’ve ever done happened in Anchorman, when Paul Rudd says of his cologne, Sex Panther: “60% of the time, it works every time.” Jonah Hill is able to improvise a whole monologue. Like in this movie, [when his character is speaking at a political rally] he does a “prayer for stuff”. That was entirely Jonah, entirely improvised. You and Ferrell ended your professional partnership in 2019 after 13 years. What happened? I think it was a matter of two things. Part of it was, I really love producing. Will likes producing, but he likes to keep it kind of manageable, and I really just was all for [doing] a lot of different stuff: podcasts, documentaries, series, all different kinds of movies. And I think we got to a point where he was getting a little bit tired of driving past billboards for stuff that we had produced, and he didn’t even know we had produced it. I think also, there was a shift in the kind of comedies that Will and I had been making. They didn’t feel … you know, I wasn’t maybe as excited by those. Does it feel as if you couldn’t make comedies such as Anchorman or Step Brothers today? Yeah, I think without a doubt, it felt like that was over. Given what we’re up against. It feels a little ridiculous to make those comedies now. But I still love great comedies. So I’m trying to play with: “What is the language now?” Because the way I’m experiencing the world, it’s a ridiculous farce, but at the same time, it’s also terrifying. When the president of the United States floats the idea of ingesting bleach, and then people in the country actually ingest bleach … well, that’s beyond the biggest slapstick comedy you could ever write. So I feel like in these last three movies, I’m trying to find that blend. Can that blend exist? I’m not entirely sure it can. But that is what we’re going after. You still seem to have a lot of irons in the fire as producer, including the show of the moment, Succession. Did you know you were on to a winner with that series? Sometimes you know. And this was one of those ones where I totally knew. We put it together. We shot it. But when I really knew was when I started watching episodes, two, three, four and five, and I stopped watching them like a producer and started just enjoying them. And that’s when I started telling some people in my circle: “I think we got a good one here.” To the point where Jesse [Armstrong, the show’s creator], who is a much more restrained person than I am, was telling me: “Will you please shush up?” Getting back to Don’t Look Up and the looming apocalypse. Is there any cause for optimism? Well, the one big optimism I have is that we have the science. It’s right in front of us, for God’s sakes. We have renewables, they have some interesting carbon-capture technology, we need to be chucking trillions of dollars at this. So I do know that if we got on our horse, science could solve this. We could do it. What’s scaring me is just how scattered and all over the place and chasing-our-tails most of civilisation is right now. So I’m not optimistic in the near future. But I am optimistic in the future. Don’t Look Up is in cinemas now and on Netflix from 24 December.Q I have been trying to sell my leasehold flat in Portsmouth but I’ve had two buyers pull out because the estate agent has told them incorrect information about the lease. The flat has 85 years remaining on the lease, so it’s getting towards the point where any buyer would reasonably think about an extension. The agent has been telling them that the lease has 100 years on it. When the buyers found out the correct information from their solicitors they both pulled out of the purchase. I assumed the first time that it was simply a miscommunication, so I made a point of checking with the agent that the second buyer had the correct information. The agent assured me that the buyer knew the facts but that wasn’t true either. Is there anything I can do about their repeated lack of truthfulness causing sales to collapse? TC A There are two things that you can do. First, you can make a formal complaint about your agent, using the estate agent’s in-house complaints’ procedure, which, under the Code of Practice for Residential Estate Agents, you must be made aware of. Second, you can – and should – change agents. From what you say, it appears that your current agent is not only not complying with the industry code of practice but he or she is also breaking the law. Putting your general cynicism about estate agents aside, I would hazard a guess that most try very hard not to commit a criminal offence when going about their daily business, so finding one who doesn’t provide misleading information (in breach of the Consumer Protection from Unfair Trading Regulations) should be relatively easy. But when you do find a new agent, it would be worth checking that they will follow the guidance in the code of practice, which says that where leasehold properties are concerned, an agent “should include basic key information such as service charges, ground rent, the length of years remaining on the lease and any known special conditions”. The code also says that information given to buyers – whether in writing or orally – “must be accurate and not misleading”, so I think you can take it as read that law-abiding estate agents will do their best to provide buyers with accurate information about a property. A third thing you could do would be to alert both sets of failed buyers to the fact that they, too, can make use of the in-house complaints procedure. If they can show that they wouldn’t have put an offer in if they had known that the lease had only 85 years left on it they may be able to get compensation for costs incurred in pursuing the purchase before they found out the truth. • Want expert help finding your new mortgage? Use our new online tool to search thousands of deals from more than 80 lenders with the Guardian Mortgage Service, powered by L&amp;C.Start young The early experiences children have with money can shape their financial behaviour as adults, according to a study published by the UK government’s MoneyHelper service. By the age of seven, the University of Cambridge study found, most children are capable of grasping the value of money, delaying gratification and understanding that some choices are irreversible or will cause them problems in the future. The research suggests children who are allowed to make age-appropriate financial decisions and experience spending or saving dilemmas can form positive “habits of the mind” when it comes to money. This could lead to a lifelong improvement in their ability to plan ahead and be reflective in their thinking about money, or they may learn how to regulate their impulses and emotions in a way that promotes positive financial behaviour later in life. Juliette Collier, a national director of the charity Campaign for Learning, says it is worth giving children as young as three or four their own coins to handle, spend and save. “Once they are old enough not to put it in their mouth, then give them some money,” she says. “If, for example, they end up wanting to spend that money on sweeties, then make it clear they can’t spend the money on something else. Let them make choices, and experience the consequences.” Make it fun There are lots of free resources you can use to teach young children about money at home. Valuesmoneyandme.co.uk, a website created by the credit reference agency Experian, offers free online books and interactive quizzes aimed at primary school aged children that explore interesting ethical questions about money and real world financial dilemmas. FunKidsLive.com hosts a short money podcast aimed at children, and there are lots of free games online (see topmarks.co.uk/maths-games/5-7-years/money or natwest.mymoneysense.com). If you prefer board games, Money Match Cafe or Pop to the Shops by Orchard Toys are educational and imaginative, while Cheeky Monkeys subtly provides useful financial lessons about the consequences of avarice and risk-taking. Finally, do not underestimate the value of playing games such as “going to the shops” at home with real coins. Be sure to set a budget. Discuss the purpose of money Collier suggests taking photos of different items in your home that can then be classified into necessities and luxuries, triggering a discussion about what money is for. She also recommends talking about costs that may be hidden – such as the fact heating, electricity and water are not free – and involving children in attempts to save money. For example, you could challenge them to help you do a “no spend” day or make a recipe from the Love Food, Hate Waste website, using only ingredients you have in the cupboard. You could use these activities as a springboard for discussions about how adults need to prioritise what they spend money on and how difficult that can be if you feel tempted to buy something you cannot afford. The charity Child Poverty Action Group suggests you ask your child to imagine a child the same age as them, and talk to them about what that child might miss out on if their family doesn’t have money. Its spokesperson Kate Anstey says: “Speaking to children about poverty can help to raise awareness and understanding of poverty and inequality. It might seem like a difficult topic to broach but teachers who talk about poverty in their classrooms find that children actually cope with it very well.” Go to the shops One of the best places to teach children about money is a shop. “Being able to handle money and buy something yourself is very special: it builds up your confidence with money,” says Dr Ems Lord, the director of the NRICH maths project at the University of Cambridge. If you pay with a contactless card, explain how it works – that although you are not using coins, the money is still coming out of your bank account – and discuss the groceries you buy. Why might you choose to spend more on Fairtrade chocolate or free-range eggs? Are the more expensive products always better quality? Ask them whether they would like to do a blind taste test at home to check whether they can tell the difference between different-priced brands. Is it worth the difference in price? Be on the alert for BOGOFs (buy one, get one free offers) and complicated discounts. Teach children how to compare different deals. “It’s absolutely essential that we teach children about money in context,” says Lord, a former maths teacher. “Encouraging children to work out the cost of shopping and comparing offers so they understand the value of goods is an essential life skill.” Helping your children to master estimating is also very important, she says. “It helps children to develop a real feel for numbers so that they can easily spot when they’re being overcharged and avoid making costly mistakes.” Make your child’s investments meaningful to them Open a Junior Isa for your child and buy a few shares in a supermarket or restaurant chain you visit regularly with them, suggests John Lee, the author of Yummi Yoghurt, a book about investing aimed at teenagers. That way, when you go there, you can explain to your child that you both have a “vested interest” in supporting that business and will hopefully one day get a reward, in the form of a dividend, if the business does well. You could also talk to them about how you choose other funds for their ISAs and the impact you hope those investments might have on society or the environment. “The important thing is to involve your child and give them an awareness of the companies that you’re buying shares in,” Lee says. Take them to a charity shop Charity shops are particularly good places to take a small child to spend their weekly pocket money. They often find a bargain and you can use the opportunity to discuss the power of their pound: how does it make them feel, knowing they are supporting a good cause as well as getting something for themselves? Point out the positive impact on the environment of buying secondhand and, when you get home, look up how much the item would have cost new and talk to them about how many more weeks it would have taken to save up for it. Ask them why they think people donate to charity shops and whether they would like to do so with their old toys: how valuable will these toys be to the charity? What difference could their donation make to someone’s life?The nation’s most isolated state will fully reopen its borders on 5 February after almost two years sealed off from Covid and the world. The Western Australian premier, Mark McGowan, announced on Monday plans to allow interstate and international travellers to enter the state without quarantine from midnight on 5 February, when the state was expected to hit its 90% fully vaccinated target. But the premier warned that once the state’s hard border was eased, unvaccinated or “high-risk” arrivals will still be required to quarantine for 14 days – unless they are under 12 or exempt on medical grounds. “I’m confident that this is the right time and the right way to take this important step,” McGowan said. “West Australians have lived a normal life inside our Covid-free bubble and nearly 2 million people have done the right thing and gotten vaccinated. The announcement comes on the same day Scott Morrison said that visa-holding skilled workers and students will be allowed into Australia from Wednesday. The announcements provide light at the end of the tunnel for many businesses that have struggled to survive from a lack of seasonal workers and a long-awaited chance for families and loved ones to reunite. Travellers to WA must be double-vaccinated and return a negative PCR test 72 hours before departure. The test must then be retaken on arrival in WA. McGowan also outlined precautionary measures that will come into effect once the border reopens. From 5 February face masks will be required on public transport, taxis, at airports, on flights, and in hospitals and aged care facilities. Proof of vaccination is required for entry into larger events, with 1,000 or more patrons, such as nightclubs and Perth’s casino, and all interstate and international travellers will need a G2G travel permit and be expected to use the SafeWA app. McGowan warned that targeted lockdowns could occur if there was an outbreak and that the rules will be reviewed one month after 5 February. More than 1.7 million West Australians, or 80% of its population aged 12 years and over, are now fully vaccinated. Children aged five to 11 are expected to have access to the Pfizer vaccine in WA from 10 January. While a national plan backed states reopening at 80%, McGowan has stood firm against criticism from the prime minister to keep borders closed until WA reached a 90% double-vaccinated target for over-12s. The decision, McGowan said, was based on WA health department modelling indicating that an extra 200 lives would be saved by delaying the reopening. It is the same target set by Tasmanian’s premier, Peter Gutwein, and borders there will open on 15 December. If WA does not reach the 90% vaccination target, McGowan said unvaccinated people would be subject to further restrictions. Some parts of regional WA, including the Pilbara – WA’s mining powerhouse, the Goldfields and Kimberly, have “dramatically” lower vaccination rates compared to the rest of the state. The Pilbara, about six hours by plane north of Perth, has the worst double dose vaccination rate in the state at just over 46%, while the Kimberley is at about 61% and the Goldfields in WA’s south-east is at 65%. McGowan said that if those rates did not improve, public health measures would be enforced to require proof of vaccination to enter pubs, bars, restaurants, cafes, bottle shops, indoor entertainment venues, gyms and fitness centre. WA will remain isolated from nearly every state and territory for the festive season but will have no restrictions, such as density limits or face masks, during Christmas and the school holidays break. The state has not had a Covid case since late June. The Tourism Council WA chief executive , Evan Hall, said the industry had lost $4bn and 40,000 jobs since the borders were first closed in April 2020. “The most important thing about getting the date today is so we can now take bookings,” Hall said. “Once the border comes up, then we can send a message that we are open and we can take a booking for an Easter holiday, a major blockbuster event – we want to get Taylor Swift in and some international rugby – and you can’t do that without a date. “We can start telling the airlines that we are open.” Last week, McGowan announced that $185m would be spent reconnecting WA to the world and luring tourists and workers back to the state. WA’s economy depends on a continual stream of seasonal workers. For businesses, the history-making border closures caused some to go bust because of a lack of staff. Hall says that the first wave of people coming in will be reuniting with family and the need is for working-holiday visa-holders and international students to come in and help save tourist venues in the regions. “After that, we are interested to see how much international leisure [travel] takes off.” David Honey, leader of the junior opposition party, the Liberals, said that the state was struggling under a massive skills shortage, from doctors to teachers, and West Australians were getting restless. “There is a definite change in the community and people have been saying, ‘give us a date and time’. You can understand that the business community have been getting more agitated by the day,” Honey said. He said he was concerned not enough people were educated about the need for third vaccinations – or booster jabs. “One of the reasons we are opening up after Christmas is because we were so far behind in vaccinations compared to other states,” Honey said.The largest and most important event in the mathematical calendar will take place next July in St Petersburg. The International Congress of Mathematicians is a quadrennial gathering at which many of the subject’s most prominent thinkers give lectures and the winners of maths’ most prestigious prize, the Fields Medal, are announced. As part of the build-up to the event – which is expected to attract about 5,000 mathematicians from all over the world – the organisers earlier this year ran an online maths competition for students and the general public. Below are the first three questions from this test. Russia has long been a world leader in mathematics outreach, having pioneered the idea of maths circles (informal maths clubs where students often try to solve problems in groups) and competitive maths olympiads. Today’s three puzzles are all brilliant examples of the Russian style: they test logical reasoning rather than taught mathematical skills. The first one, in particular, is a classic. 1. Pet swap A cat is sitting on the table and a tortoise is crawling on the floor directly beneath it. The distance from the cat’s ears to the top of the tortoise’s shell is 170 cm. Alena switched her pets around. Now the distance from the cat’s ears to the top of the tortoise’s shell is 130 cm. What is the height of the table? 2. Circular thinking Volodya is running around a circular track at a constant speed. At two of the points on the track are two yellow marks. When he started his run, Volodya was closer to the first yellow mark for 2 minutes, then he was closer to the second yellow mark for 3 minutes, and then he was closer to the first yellow mark again. How long does it take Volodya to run one full circle? 3. Path of glory Olga must walk through the 3x3 grid below left, moving either horizontally or vertically from cell to cell, and not entering any cell more than once. Below right shows one possible path. If Olga writes down the digits she passes in order during this path, she would get the number 84937561. What is the largest number possible it is possible for Olga to write down during a path through the grid? I’ll be back at 5pm UK with the solutions. Meanwhile, NO SPOILERS. UPDATE: The solutions can be read here. Thanks to the ICM 2022 for letting me use the puzzles. You can find more about the event here. Sources: 1: Maths clubs folklore. 2. Moscow Mathematics Olympiad 2015 3. Math Fest 2012. I rephrased the questions for clarity. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. I also give school talks about maths and puzzles (restrictions allowing). If your school is interested please get in touch. I’m the author of several books of maths and puzzles, most recently The Language Lover’s Puzzle Book, all of which would make fantastic Christmas gifts!The amount spent making Hollywood hits such as the latest Indiana Jones film and big-budget dramas including Star Wars TV spin-off Andor in the UK this year is on track to hit a record £6bn, thanks to a pandemic-fuelled spending spree by streaming giants and broadcasters battling for supremacy in the global TV wars. The investment in making films and high-end TV shows costing at least £1m an episode in the UK this year will be more than double the £2.8bn in 2020 – when the production industry ground to a halt for months – and a staggering two-thirds more than the previous record set in pre-pandemic 2019. The figures highlight the growing intensity of the streaming wars led by Netflix, Amazon and more recently Disney that has in turn forced broadcasters such as Sky, the BBC and ITV to invest significantly more in big-budget content. Spending on high-end TV shows hit £3.3bn in the year to the end of September, according to the latest figures from the British Film Institute, well in excess of the £1.4bn so far committed to making feature films in the UK. In the previous two years, spending on UK-made films and prestige TV shows has been at almost identical levels. “We are experiencing a boom. We have seen incredible growth in the first three quarters this year,” said Ben Roberts, the chief executive of the BFI. “The streamers have been taking huge amounts of studio space in the UK. And the number of streamers making content here is expanding; for a long time it was only Netflix, which means we are seeing considerable growth in content demand.” When the spending on productions in the final quarter is revealed in the new year the total is likely to hit, or even surpass, £6bn as streamers and broadcasters race to replenish their content libraries after the production pipeline delay last year. While the UK has for many years proved extremely popular as a base – thanks to a combination of generous tax relief, a highly skilled workforce and talent base – the speed with which production was able to restart has given the country a competitive edge as a location of choice. Initiatives include the £500m government-backed insurance scheme, which has so far enabled more than 1,000 productions with budgets worth £2.6bn to be made, plus the quick introduction of Covid health and safety protocols and quarantine exemptions for essential crew and talent to fly to the UK. “I don’t think I would say we are ‘stealing’ productions from other countries,” said Roberts. “[Hollywood] studios and streamers have made the UK a major base. The UK is a natural and often first port of call for productions. There is no sign of us ‘nicking’ productions from elsewhere.” However, in August Amazon made the surprise decision to move its $1bn-plus Lord of the Rings production to the UK, having filmed just one series in New Zealand. “That was an Amazon choice, not ours,” said Roberts. The UK has been awash with almost 200 TV and film productions this year including Netflix’s The Witcher and The Sandman, Disney’s Andor, Aardman Animations’ Chicken Run 2, Wonka, Aquaman 2 and Dungeons &amp; Dragons. Last month, Netflix struck a deal to double the size of its base at Shepperton Studios, where it has made productions including the TV series Enola Holmes and the Charlize Theron film The Old Guard, and spent about $1bn this year making 60 TV shows and films in the UK. Disney has a similar large-scale deal at Pinewood Studios, where Star Wars and Marvel films are based, and Apple has secured facilities in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire. The streaming wars have sparked a response from traditional broadcasters with Sky, which is building a new large-scale complex at Elstree in Hertfordshire, with Comcast-owned stablemate Universal Studios, unveiling its biggest-ever slate of original content investing in 125 TV series and films this year.The Morrison government has urged MPs and senators to dob in the Climate 200 fund and “Voices for” independent advocacy groups under new rules that may require them to reveal their donors. The government, with Labor’s support, this month passed amendments to electoral laws that will force entities to register as “significant third parties” if they spend more than $250,000 on electoral expenditure a year. The law also expands the definition of electoral expenditure to include any spending “in relation to an election”, so that expenses like campaign staff and offices can trigger the requirement to register. The special minister of state, Ben Morton, wrote to all federal parliamentarians on Monday suggesting MPs contact the Australian Electoral Commission asking it to remind “organisations that could even slightly meet [the] criteria” of their new obligations to register. It comes as the Australia Institute launches a campaign to repeal the changes, with new polling finding 60% of Australians agree that advocating for policy change is an important part of the work that charities do, and only 15% oppose. In an email on Monday, Morton wrote the new laws will mean “activist organisations seeking to influence election outcomes will no longer be able to shroud their electoral income in secrecy, and will face tough rules that ban foreign donations from influencing Australian elections”. Morton complained that “new entities have been established with the sole or dominant purpose of acting as political fundraising vehicles”. “Many of these funding vehicles hide in the dark – they were established with the explicit goal of avoiding electoral funding disclosure,” he said. “Potentially impacted groups that you may be aware of in your local community include ‘voices of (electorate)’, ‘(electorate) independents’, ‘vote (Name) out’, ‘Climate 200’ and other organisations that are fundraising for or expending electoral expenditure.” Morton noted the bill will soon get royal assent and “many organisations” will meet the criteria “the day after”, including Voices groups, meaning they will need to register within 90 days. “If an entity is required to register as a significant third party, they will not be able to spend or fundraise for the purpose of incurring electoral expenditure until they register.” The law also includes penalties of up to $44,400 for failure to register. “These reforms strengthen the integrity of Australia’s electoral system,” Morton said. “This isn’t about stopping organisations from being able to advocate. This is about transparency for organisations trying to influence voters in an election.” The charities sector is concerned the political campaigner law will mean charities, unions, climate and environment groups will have to declare all their donors, even if their issues-based advocacy is only tangentially related to the election. Labor passed the laws as part of a deal that included the Coalition agreeing to drop the controversial voter identification bill. Labor’s Andrew Leigh has said the opposition only passed the laws for fear the crossbench could wave them through, and has committed “revisit” the framework if elected to government. The Australia Institute has called for the laws to be repealed, citing retrospectivity that will require registration for past spending, and the “vague” definition of electoral expenditure. It is concerned that organisations that spend just a fraction of their receipts on electoral expenditure will be captured, bringing more extensive reporting requirements and limits on international philanthropy. Ben Oquist, the executive director of the Australia Institute, said “advocacy is an important part of the work charities do, and our research shows the majority of Australians agree”. Oquist said the “attack on charities” was the result of “a bad process”, with late amendments and no Senate inquiry scrutiny of unintended consequences. “There has been no notice, little public explanation, no sector consultation,” he said. “We have just witnessed the biggest attack on the Australian charity sector the public has never heard of.”A real estate agency in Queensland has come under fire after it emailed tenants offering them the chance to buy a Christmas gift for their landlords. Kanik &amp; Co, located near Brisbane, sent out an email to tenants offering to facilitate the purchasing of select gifts, along with any “handwritten notes”, that would be delivered to the owner of the property. Some of the offered gifts include a $50 “white wine grazing box”, a $55 “festive sweets basket”, a $70 “self care hamper”, a $99 “foodies hamper” and a $115 gift called “all things golden”. “This year has been particularly challenging for both our tenants and property owners alike, and we understand some tenants would like to thank their property owner for everything in 2021,” the agency wrote in the email. “The choice to be involved is 100% optional and you are certainly under no obligation to do so.” The offer was criticised by some online, with Twitter user Sinéad Canning sharing a screenshot of the email saying “the time has come to lick their boots harder”. “This agency is in Logan, where the average weekly rent has increased by 30 per cent in the last 5 years and the vacancy rate is 1 per cent,” she wrote. The City of Logan released a report into housing in 2020, and found that Logan had a higher proportion of households in both mortgage and rental stress compared with the rest of south-east Queensland. “Housing affordability is a growing concern for Logan households and many families experience housing stress,” the report found. A separate report from Deloitte and the state government found that rental prices in Logan had increased by 4.1% from March 2020 – March 2021. It also found 7.3% increases in Brisbane, 9.8% increases in the Gold Coast and 16% increases in the Sunshine Coast. Director at Kanik &amp; Co, Michael Kanik, told Guardian Australia his agency apologised for any offence caused, saying a similar email was also sent to landlords wanting to send gifts to their tenants. He said it was not meant with any ill will, and that it was “just something nice”. “Each tenant and landlord is unique, and some of them wanted to thank their landlords, and wanted us to help us facilitate it.” “We can see where some of the criticism has come from, rent is obviously increasing across the board, but not all landlords are the same, some don’t want to increase prices.” “We had tenants or landlords reach out, wanting to trade Christmas gifts and cards, and wanted us to facilitate it. We just wanted to do a nice thing, that’s all.”It is funny how times change. The Guardian has obtained a letter, written in 2003 by Dr Richard Budgett, in which he discusses the consequences of trans women competing in women’s sport. Responding to a government inquiry, Budgett, then at the British Olympic Association, states: “The effect of allowing male transsexuals to compete as women would be to make competition unfair and potentially dangerous in some sports and would undermine women’s sports.” This would have been an interesting answer at the time. It is even more so now. Society has shifted. Language has changed. Budgett is now medical and scientific director at the International Olympic Committee. And his views, according to IOC sources, have evolved – particularly when it comes to finding ways to balance the need for inclusion and fairness in sport. A controversial new IOC framework, drawn up in part by Budgett, adopts a strikingly different stance. While stressing that men’s and women’s competition should be “fair and safe”, it also tells sports that, “until evidence determines otherwise”, trans athletes “should not be deemed to have an unfair or disproportionate competitive advantage”. Yet the ink had barely dried on that framework document when the US college swimmer Lia Thomas caused a fresh splash in the debate. For her first three years at the University of Pennsylvania the 22‑year‑old swam as a male competitor, making six Ivy League swimming finals though not setting the world alight. But in the past month, competing as a trans woman after taking hormone replacement therapy to lower her testosterone, she has swum the fastest 200- and 500‑yard times in the US this year. That, though, tells only half the story. Thomas’s 200‑yard time of 1:41:93 ranks as the 17th fastest of all time – less than three seconds off the five‑time Olympic medallist Missy Franklin’s US record of 1:39:10. Meanwhile her 500‑yard time of 4:34:06 puts her 21st in history and within striking distance of a record set by Katie Ledecky, who is widely regarded as the greatest female swimmer in the sport’s history. All roads now lead to the NCAA championships in March, where Thomas could become swimming’s first transgender All-American champion. It will be a significant moment for sport – and for Thomas, who last week stressed how important it was for her to swim as her “authentic self” and praised the IOC for “promoting inclusivity while keeping competition integrity going”. Others, though, are less happy. According to reports, Thomas’s teammates were “in tears” with one explaining: “They feel so discouraged because no matter how much work they put in it, they’re going to lose.” Meanwhile Swimming World magazine’s John Lohn said he was uneasy that Ledecky’s record was under threat. “Simply, she is an icon who changed what was perceived to be attainable,” he wrote. “The fact that Thomas could break the record of such a once‑in‑a‑generation athlete confirms the biological advantages she possesses, and their power,.” Thomas’s surge to the top of the rankings also poses questions of the IOC and NCAA. Remember the female category exists because the performance gap between elite men and elite women is so stark. It starts at around 10%-13% for running and swimming and rises thereafter. That is why most sports require trans women to suppress their testosterone to compete in the female category. Recent studies, though, suggest that significant strength and muscular advantages remain even after hormone therapy. Thomas’s performances appear to back that up. Before transitioning, she was not a serious challenge to male records but is now swimming only 2.6% slower than the current 200‑yard female record. It means, as the developmental biologist Dr Emma Hilton points out, Thomas has gained a significant ranking advantage from switching category. Is this unfair? In 2003 Budgett thought so. As he put it in his letter: “The BOA believes the effect of allowing transsexuals to compete in their acquired sex would be to make competition unfair for women. The physique determined by two or more decades of life as a male would not be significantly changed (in the case of male to female transsexuals) which would eradicate the concept of a level playing field.” Some will argue that sport is never truly fair, that Michael Phelps’s big wingspan gave him genetic advantages too. But male puberty provides such a categorical advantage – in terms of muscle mass, strength, lean body mass and bone density – that it far exceeds the advantage of a few centimetres in arm length. No magic bullet, no one-size-fits-all policy can satisfy all sides. The issue involves competing rights and strong emotions. Worryingly a recent UK Sports Councils Equality Group report also found that women in sport were told to keep quiet by their national governing bodies and feared abuse on social media if they voiced their opinions. Yet perhaps times are changing. At the Sport Resolutions dispute resolution service last week several experts were able to discuss openly and courteously what sports should do next. It made for fascinating listening. For David Grevemberg, of the Centre for Sport and Human Rights, inclusion mattered most. And if sport had to radically change, then it should. “Are there ways, that are not infringing on human rights, to create a level playing field?” he asked. “Are there other conditions that we can create – for example staggered starts in the 100m? Or delayed starts?” Meanwhile Joanna Harper, a visiting fellow at Loughborough University and a trans woman, argued for a similar approach to the IOC’s 2015 guidance but with trans women required to reduce their testosterone to below five nmol/L for at least 12 months. She said the advantages were “small enough that trans women and cis women can have equitable and meaningful sport”. However, for Dr Nicola Williams, a spokeswoman for Fair Play For Women, the best solution would be for men to “budge up and be more inclusive” by allowing trans women and trans men into an open or universal category, with a separate category exclusively preserved for natal females. Whatever your view, one thing is clear: this issue is not going away. And Thomas’s groundbreaking performances have only made that clearer to Richard Budgett, the IOC and the rest of us.The first song I remember hearing Because of my Welsh upbringing, it’s probably Ar Lan y Môr – the classic Welsh nursery rhyme that all kids sing in the playgrounds. Every Welsh kid knows it. The first single that I bought I think it was [a reissue of] Bat Out of Hell by Meat Loaf when I was about seven, which I bought with some Christmas money from Virgin or Our Price – if you remember those music stores – in town in Cardiff. The song that is my karaoke go-to I don’t do karaoke that often, but if I wanted to nail it, probably Mustang Sally by Wilson Pickett. I used to sing it with a soul band at school and then in a funk band called the Classic Soul Dogs, so I actually know the song really well. The best song to play at a party I Just Want to Dance by Sault is an absolute banger. If you play that to anyone, they just have to love it. The song I stream the most There’s this brilliant Cardiff band called Boy Azooga. There’s a song called Waitin’ on their debut album 1, 2 Kung Fu!, that I absolutely love. Dave, the singer, plays drums on my album. He’s super talented, and Boy Azooga are amazing. I can’t wait to hear more of their stuff. The song that I like, but tell everyone I hate I really secretly like Lay All Your Love on Me by Abba. There’s nothing wrong with liking a bit of Abba – but not in every circle. The song I can no longer listen to Growing up, Everybody (Backstreet’s Back) by the Backstreet Boys was drummed into my head. The other day, I was on the beach in west Wales, one of my mates put it on, and I was like: “What are you doing?” I was so angry. The best song to have sex to I’m not answering that in case my mum is reading! The song I wish I’d written Love Will Tear Us Apart by Joy Division. The production and structure are just perfect. The song I want played at my funeral I’ve thought long and hard about this over the years. I’d start with Highway to Hell by AC/DC, then go into for Mozart’s Requiem in D Minor. And you have to listen to the whole thing, or else I’ll come back and haunt you. Iwan Rheon stars in A Christmas Number One, available on Sky Cinema and NOW.With that, we’ll end our live coverage for today. Here’s a recap of today’s major news developments: Western Australia will ease its border rules from 5 February. Both international and domestic travellers will be able to enter the state without quarantining from that date, by which point it is expected to have vaccinated 90% of its population over 12 with two doses. All travellers will need to be vaccinated, with a very small weekly cap of hotel quarantine spots for unvaccinated international arrivals. Thousands of Queenslanders will be finally enjoying dinner in their own homes on Monday after spending months trapped across the border in New South Wales. The border between the two states reopened just after midnight Queensland time. Scott Morrison welcomed the South Korean president, Moon Jae-in, to Canberra on Monday, with the leaders heralding closer defence ties as they witnessed the signing of a previously announced $1bn military equipment contract with a South Korean firm. Australia’s international border will open to more travellers on Wednesday, as the prime minister confirmed that his government would end the “pause” triggered by the emergence of the Omicron Covid variant. Covid-19 infections are continuing to grow, with Victoria reporting 1,290 new cases and two deaths, while NSW recorded 536 new cases, amid increasing numbers of the Omicron variant. Have a great evening. We’ll be back tomorrow to do it all over again. The auditor general has just published the annual report on major defence acquisitions. It’s basically a yearly stocktake on where major projects are tracking, based on information supplied by the Department of Defence. This is the report for the 2020-21 financial year, so it is looking backwards. Grant Hehir, the auditor general, found nothing that caused him to believe any problems with the accuracy of the information supplied by Defence as part of the process. But the voluminous report notes: “Defence’s assessment indicates that some elements of capability to be delivered by projects may be ‘under threat’, but the risk is assessed as ‘manageable’.” The report said the four project offices “experiencing challenges with expected capability delivery” are the Joint Strike Fighter, MRH90 helicopters, Overlander medium/heavy vehicles, and Battlespace communications systems (land) 2B. The second project listed there – MRH90 helicopters – is also known as the Taipan. The defence minister, Peter Dutton, announced last Friday a plan to acquire up to 40 Black Hawk helicopters in order to retire the MRH90 early. Rest assured, readers, we will be going through this report in greater detail in the coming days. Paul Mercurio, the actor and dancer known for his role in Strictly Ballroom, has been preselected as the Labor candidate for the Victorian state seat of Hastings. Premier Mark McGowan has said Western Australia will not reopen its borders earlier than 5 February even if it achieves 90% double-dose vaccination coverage before that date. He said this is because businesses need to prepare for a specific date and have certainty things won’t change. Western Australia’s quarantine cap for unvaccinated international arrivals could be limited to fewer than 100 people per week. Mark McGowan said an exact number had not yet been determined, but that “it may be down at 100 or perhaps less per week”. By contrast, New South Wales’ unvaccinated arrival cap is 210 per week, while Victoria’s is 250. As McGowan explained earlier, WA will only be allowing a small number of unvaccinated travellers arriving from overseas, and they will have to go through 14 days of hotel quarantine. Domestic arrivals will need to be double-dose vaccinated. Asked if he was considering extending the option of hotel quarantine for unvaccinated domestic travellers, McGowan said: “Not at this point in time, no.” McGowan explains that his strict stance on maintaining rules for unvaccinated people and poorly vaccinated regions after 5 February is because of vulnerable people in the state. Specifically, he mentions older and Indigenous residents. “We’re just trying to save their lives. It will find the unvaccinated. You might live in the desert but it can still find you.” Premier Mark McGowan was asked if further spread of the Omicron variant in other states could delay Western Australia’s border reopening date of 5 February. McGowan didn’t go as far as ruling it out, but said it was very unlikely. “Barring some unforeseen emergency or catastrophe which we can’t predict. But that’s the nature of Covid.” He said “it’s a very safe bet” that the border will reopen on 5 February. Western Australia’s health minister Roger Cook has urged residents in his state to use the time between now and 5 February – when the state will reopen its borders – to get vaccinated. Cook addressed the fact that an already stretched health system in the state was predicted to buckle if Covid spread when its vaccination rate was low. He said nearly 500 doctors and 350 graduate doctors have joined the system this year. Cook said: Make every day count, every day must be counted between now and 5 February. We have the precious gift of time to continue to get as many people vaccinated as possible. We need to make the most of this opportunity, Make no mistake about it, Covid is coming into our state. Western Australians are going to be in for a real shock from 5 February. We are going to be living with Covid-19. But there is no easy way of living with the worst virus in 100 years. McGowan is warning that there could still be travel restrictions for certain remote communities because of lower vaccination rates. McGowan said “some regions have dramatically lower vaccination rates”, flagging the Pilbara, Goldfields and the Kimberley specifically. “These are the only regions that currently have a first dose rate below 80%,” McGowan said. He said the Pilbara is of most concern, with a double -dose vaccination rate of just 46.1%. “If individual regions do not get their vaccination rates up, then further measures will be needed to protect the community.” Mark McGowan is now explaining how Western Australia’s new border rules will work when they come into effect from 5 February. International arrivals will still be required to return a negative PCR test result within 72 hours of departure and undertake a PCR test within 48 hours of arrival in Perth, as well as six days after arriving. If the traveller is double vaccinated, there will be no quarantine requirement. For those who are not double vaccinated or have received a vaccine that is not recognised in Australia, they will have to go into a hotel or dedicated quarantine facility when it opens. McGowan said the cap of quarantine places for unvaccinated travellers will be smaller than WA’s current cap for all arrivals. Domestic arrivals must be double vaccinated unless they have a valid exemption. Domestic travellers will still be required to return a negative PCR test result within 72 hours of departure and undertake a PCR test within 48 hours of arrival in Perth If a traveller’s stay in WA is for five days or less, they will only be required to return a negative PCR test result within 72 hours of departure, and won’t need to get another test within 48 hours of landing. Premier Mark McGowan has announced that Western Australia’s hard border will ease on 5 February. It will take effect from 12:01am on that day, a Saturday. McGowan explained that he was making the announcement because WA had on Monday just reached 80% double dose vaccination coverage of residents 12 and over. By 5 February, McGowan said he expects the state to have reached 90% coverage. McGowan said: Even though Western Australians have lived a normal life inside our Covid free bubble, nearly 2 million people have done the right thing and gotten vaccinated. We followed a different model to the others. And it’s worked. I want to acknowledge each and every Western Australian for everything they’ve done over the past two years. Western Australia’s current zero Covid environment and high vaccination rate will help deliver the softest landing to minimise the impact of the virus. When it enters our state, McGowan’s announcement has defied earlier speculation on Monday that the state would ease its border rules from late January. Australia’s international border will open to more travellers on Wednesday, as the prime minister confirmed that his government would end the “pause” triggered by the emergence of the Omicron Covid variant. Scott Morrison, welcoming the South Korean president, Moon Jae-in, to Canberra on Monday, said Australia would open to travellers from South Korea and Japan and also international students and skilled workers more broadly. While pandemic recovery was on the agenda for the talks at Parliament House, the leaders also heralded closer defence ties as they witnessed the signing of a previously announced $1bn military equipment contract with a South Korean firm. Moon said he respected the Australian government’s “sovereign” decision to strike the Aukus deal with the US and the UK – an arrangement that China has claimed poses a threat to regional stability, amid worsening tensions between Beijing and Canberra. But the South Korean leader also voiced a desire to maintain a harmonious relationship with China, which he said was important to securing North Korea’s denuclearisation. He ruled out joining Australia, the US and other countries in a diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics. Read more: Australians in major cities look set to be mostly spared La Niña rains on what is likely to be a mild Christmas Day, according to weather forecasters. AccuWeather forecasts clear skies for Melbourne and Hobart on 25 December, while clouds are expected to linger across the rest of the country into the evening. Ahead of the release on Saturday of the Bureau of Meteorology’s official forecast for the week of Christmas, AccuWeather has predicted possible showers in Queensland and the Northern Territory on Christmas Day, with temperatures hitting the high 20s in most major cities. Here is the run down for every capital city: We’re expecting Mark McGowan to outline Western Australia’s border reopening date at 2pm WA time/5pm eastern daylight time. We’ll bring you that update here as it happens. Meanwhile in Victoria, the Australian Workers Union has raised concerns about the preselection process for the 2022 election amid ongoing factional turmoil in the state arising from the exit of party powerbroker Adem Somyurek. AWU branch secretary Ben Davis has written to state secretary Chris Ford calling for a halt to the preselection process that is being run by the national executive, alleging irregularities that are “potentially fraudulent”. Davis says that a number of party members have alleged that nomination forms have been filled out before a candidate has been selected, which he says is “potentially creating a false document pursuant to the Crimes Act. “As a member of the Interim Governance Committee (IGC) I hereby request that nomination forms for all contested ballots be provided to me, and if you see fit to the other members of the IGC also, before any ballots of national Executive are held,” the letter says. “Delaying the ballots in the contested seats should also occur until the party can conduct an appropriate investigation.” So far, seven sitting Labor MPs have been targeted as a result of the factional in-fighting, with one of these, upper house MP Cesar Melhem, describing the situation as “total bloodletting”. Millions of tourism dollars are expected to be injected into the Queensland economy after the state reopened its borders to fully vaccinated visitors, reports AAP. Tens of thousands of people began flooding into Queensland on Monday following the decision to drop entry and quarantine restrictions at 1am for fully jabbed travellers after hitting the 80% double vaccination target. The arrival of interstate travellers in time for the festive season is a much-needed boost for tourism, particularly in the state’s far north. Tourism Tropical North Queensland chief executive Mark Olsen said the region had been losing millions of dollars a day since early 2020. He told Nine: It’s been a really tough 21 months for the (far north) tourism industry. One third of our visitors are normally international ... and we haven’t seen them since February 2020 ... Both NSW and Victorian visitors put a million a day each into this economy so we have really been looking forward to having them back. Olsen said more than 9,000 tourism jobs in the far north had been lost since early 2020 but was confident it could bounce back after Monday’s reopening. You can read more about Queensland’s border rules easing from today in this article, filed by Jennifer King in Tweed Heads. There are 16 new cases of Covid-19 in the Northern Territory, with the government considering ramping up Covid rules for some communities. Of the new cases announced on Monday, 14 are from East Katherine, where authorities had been doing a testing “blitz”. A chief health officer directive will be issued from today requiring anyone in the NT who has been in Katherine recently to get tested. Nicole Manison, deputy chief minister of the NT, has also revealed there were only five Covid tests conducted in Tennant Creek – a town of about 5,000 – on Sunday despite positive wastewater detections of Covid. She said “frankly, that is not good enough”. Manison said it was “likely” the government would escalate Covid rules and introduce “lockouts” – where unvaccinated people are placed in lockdown – in some regional communities in the territory in coming days. South Australian premier Steven Marshall has said there are 13 new Covid-19 cases in his state for the reporting period announced on Monday. He said the majority of the cases are believed to be the Delta variant. There have so far been two confirmed cases of the Omicron variant in SA. There has been a bit more sun across New South Wales in recent days, prompting concern for people swimming in hazardous conditions at beaches in the state. Over the weekend, Surf Life Saving NSW volunteers performed more than 60 rescues, with two people requiring resuscitation. Sadly, a middle-aged man was unable to be revived at Coffs Harbour on Saturday. He was pulled from the water about 300m north of the patrol flags, semi-conscious and still breathing. NSW Ambulance inspector Charnan Kurth said “drownings can occur in seconds – we have to be constantly looking out for each other”. In the UK, Boris Johnson is gambling on an unprecedented ramping up of vaccinations, rolling out 1m booster jabs a day to stem an incoming “tidal wave of Omicron” and avoid imposing further restrictions. The army will be deployed across the country to help rapidly accelerate the vaccine program and GPs will be told to cancel appointments to dedicate resources to offering vaccines to every UK adult by the end of December. In a televised address to the nation on Sunday night, the prime minister said he was “afraid we are now facing an emergency in our battle with the new variant, Omicron, and we must urgently reinforce our wall of vaccine protection to keep our friends and loved ones safe”. Read more: The RSPCA has teamed up with two other leading animal welfare organisations to lobby both clothing brands and sheep farmers to move away from mulesing sheep. RSPCA Australia, Four Paws and Humane Society International say they will work with the wool industry to encourage the breeding of sheep that do not require mulesing. Mulesing is the process of removing folds of skin from the tail area of a sheep. It’s done to reduce flystrike and is mainly practised on sheep that have folds of skin, like merinos. It used to be the industry standard in Australia, where flystrike can be a deadly problem, but over the past two decades many wool producers have focused on breeding sheep that do not require mulesing. Some farming organisations are also changing their standards to discourage mulesing. The Victorian Farmers Federation lobbied for regulations requiring the mandatory use of pain relief when mulesing sheep, which came into effect last year. But the Australian Superfine Wool Growers Association remains in support of the practice. Four Paws’s wool expert, Rebecca Picallo Gil, said more than 3,000 Australian woolgrowers had already switched to no-mules flocks. Humane Society international’s Georgie Dolphin said: With the advanced genetics available today, it is unacceptable to continue to breed wrinkly sheep that are prone to flystrike. Our organisations want to see an end to mulesing within the next decade, a target that is easily achievable. One of the most tangible announcements from the joint presser was Scott Morrison confirming the international borders would reopen as planned this Wednesday. We reported last week this was likely, but a bunch of international students and other travellers have been anxiously messaging Guardian Australia over the weekend hoping for some certainty. This should come as a relief to them. First, a quick recap: the government announced in late November it was delaying the plan to reopen Australia to international skilled and student cohorts, as well as humanitarian, working, holidaymaker and provisional family visa holders, from 1 December until 15 December. That “pause” also included reopening to travellers from Japan and South Korea. It was to gather more information about the Omicron variant. As it stood, the Australian border was “already closed to travellers except fully vaccinated Australian citizens, permanent residents and immediate family, as well as fully vaccinated green lane travellers from New Zealand and Singapore and limited exemptions”, per the government release at the time. All arrivals to Australia also require a negative PCR test and to complete Australian traveller declaration forms detailing their vaccination status and confirming requirements to comply with state and territory public health requirements. While the government has been signalling it wanted to get on with reopening, these things are always subject to change, based on latest advice about Omicron – so many travellers were worried about whether their plans would be disrupted once again. But Morrison, standing next to South Korean president Moon Jae-in, told reporters: We also have tourism and education links that run deep – some 20,000 Korean students come and study in Australia – and we are looking forward to welcoming them back as we are the many tourists and business travellers and skilled migrants. And on Wednesday of this week, we will move again forward. The borders will be reopened both to Korea and to Japan and for skilled migration and for students as we conclude the pause that we announced several weeks ago. Morrison praised the high level of vaccination in both countries, adding: I know the more than 123,000 Australians of Korean ancestry will be looking forward to seeing their friends, their family and them being able to join together and that has been made possible because of the outstanding achievements in Korea in managing Covid and I congratulate the president on their achievements. In a sparse gym in one Sydney’s most disadvantaged areas, Mayor Chagai is not only teaching basketball but also transforming Australia. If you’re looking for a lunchtime read, check out this article from James Button, with powerful photography from Guardian Australia’s picture editor Carly Earl. With that, I shall hand you over to the amazing Elias Visontay, who will bring all the news for the rest of the afternoon. In other news, John Gerrard has now officially taken up his position as the new Queensland chief health officer after Jennette Young moves on and up to the governor role. A small word of caution on the defence announcement out of the Scott Morrison/Moon Jae-in joint presser. The Morrison government has confirmed that a $1bn defence contract for new Self-Propelled Howitzers for the Australian Army has been awarded to Hanwha Defense Australia. From Morrison’s release: “Based in Greater Geelong, the contract will procure Self-Propelled Howitzers and Armoured Ammunition Resupply Vehicles, under the LAND 8116 Phase 1 project. The government committed to this project in May 2019.” The then defence minister, Linda Reynolds, announced in September last year that Hanwha Defence Australia had been chosen to build 30 self-propelled howitzers for the ADF, to be built in the Geelong region, as you can see from this story at the time. The contract signing was witnessed by Morrison and Moon before their joint press conference in parliament house in Canberra this morning. In today’s release, the government says the initial contract “covers 30 Self-Propelled Howitzers, 15 Armoured Ammunition Resupply Vehicles, and weapon locating radars that help find enemy artillery, collectively referred to as the Huntsman family of vehicles”. The defence minister, Peter Dutton, said: “The prime ability of the new vehicles is to fire and move quickly, avoiding enemy counter-attack. This project will mean a significant increase in the level of firepower and security for Australian artillery capability.” A group of male koalas from Victoria’s Strzelecki Ranges will be brought to Adelaide as part of a new breeding program aimed at securing the survival of the species. The koalas are expected to arrive in coming weeks to join a group of disease-free male and female koalas at the Cleland Wildlife Park in the Adelaide Hills. The Cleland population, including some koalas rescued from the 2020 Kangaroo Island bushfires, is considered to be the only sanctuary-managed colony free from both chlamydia and koala retrovirus in Australia. Environment minister David Speirs says the transfer of the koalas is part of a bold conservation initiative that will help secure the survival of the species. Catastrophic events like last year’s bushfires across Australia significantly reduced koala numbers... That’s why this unique breeding program, which will include the addition of the Strzelecki koalas, will help to safeguard populations and provide opportunities for research as a priority for the species’ long-term survival. The Victorian koalas are being taken from a private forest plantation after assurances from wildlife authorities their removal was in the interests of conservation. Koala Life, an independent not-for-profit organisation set up for the conservation and research of koala diseases, said the relocation would increase the number of disease-free genetically diverse animals, which would ultimately help to protect the species from future challenges. Chief executive Chris Daniels: It’s also an important step in our scientific breeding program and significantly assists our research into the species... These koalas will form part of a breeding program that can support the long-term conservation of the species, particularly in response to natural disasters. Thousands of Queenslanders will be enjoying dinner in their own homes on Monday at last after spending months trapped across the border in New South Wales. The border between the two states reopened at 1am Queensland time. Queensland’s police commissioner, Katarina Carroll, estimated that 50,000 vehicles would be crossing in the early hours of Monday morning, with long delays expected. All vehicles were required to present a border pass that was only made available to those travelling from hotspots one hour before the border opened, leaving many already anxious travellers more worried about getting home. You can read the full report below: On the day borders reopen, Queensland has recorded one new locally acquired case, as well as two overseas-acquired cases and seven interstate-acquired cases, detected in hotel quarantine. Moon’s response, to paraphrase, was basically: “Dude, we have a rogue nation with a bunch of nukes right above us that we are technically still at war with - yeah we are going to try and be friends with as many people as possible, mate.” Moon: With regard to the question on the relationship with China, that was your question: Korea and Australia uphold the same values and our position in terms of the geopolitical situation, we are like-minded. First of all, in terms of our alliance with the US, it’s the basis of our diplomacy as well as security affairs and in terms of the economic relationship, of course, the relationship with China is important. However, Korea has another factor to take into account and that has to do with the peace and security on the Korean Peninsula and also denuclearisation of DPRK. We need the constructive efforts of China to enable the denuclearisation of [the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea]. Therefore, Korea is focused on the steadfast alliance with the US and also with China; we want a harmonised relationship. And we want to maintain such a relationship and we will be putting in the efforts to make this happen. And, of course, with regard to the relationship with China, there may be certain conflicts and there may be some issues of competition. However, if you look at climate change and the supply chain issue, and also in terms of pandemic and infectious diseases, there are global challenges and these are domains where we do need cooperation and collaboration. Morrison: I have absolutely no doubt that our only ambition between Australia and Korea is to ensure a peaceful and safe and free and open Indo-Pacific. Where all nations in the region can trade openly and well and positively, free from any coercion and have their own choices about how they move forward. Reporter: President Moon, Australia, like South Korea, has faced billions of dollars in Chinese trade sanctions as punishment for domestic policy decisions. How should countries respond to Chinese economic coercion? And to Scott Morrison: how can Australia and Korea work together to counter Chinese economic coercion? Morrison jumped in to answer first (perhaps as the question was being translated?). I might start - the question has come from the Australian side. I would say this. Australia and Korea are like-minded liberal democracies and we work together to ensure there are economic choices in the region. There is a strengthening of our capabilities both from defence security point of view and not just in the traditional, but also in the new areas of cyber and new technologies that occurs in a security space, but also occurs in an economic space. The fact that we’re working together on critical minerals supply chains and rare earths, these are the critical minerals and rare earths that power and support a new energy economy. And so ensuring that there are trusted supply chains between like-minded countries is incredibly important for our region. It brings stability, it brings balance. Moon says that this trip has nothing to do with China and Morrison immediately added: When you are engaging with other countries in these types of contracts, it is an objective to be doing so with those countries who are like-minded in their outlook, and I think between Korea and Australia we share a very similar view and a similar aspiration for the Indo-Pacific. Moon Jae-in has been asked by reporters if visiting Australia just days after the government decided on a diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics was likely to upset South Korea’s relationship with China (which is always fairly strained anyway, given the issue of North Korea). He was also asked if South Korea intend to issue a similar boycott. Moon: With regards to the Beijing Olympics on the diplomatic boycott, we have not received a request from any other country, including the United States, to participate in the diplomatic boycott. We are not considering a boycott measure. With regards to AUKUS, we respect the decision made by the sovereign state, Australia, and this is the decision made by Australia as a sovereign nation and we respect that. And Australia is making efforts for peace and prosperity of the Indo-Pacific region and within the region. Australia does not desire dispute arising in the region and, for peace, we will continue to cooperate with Australia. And the state visit I make at this time has nothing to do with our position over China and we believe that between Korea and Australia it is very important that we cooperate over the core minerals and for the hydrogen economy and for the low-carbon emissions technology. Moon: Third, we agree to strengthen supply chain cooperation. Australia, the world’s richest country in mineral resources, and Korea, a major producer of batteries and electric vehicles, play an important role in the global supply chain. Our two countries share the view that establishing a stable mineral supply chain is important not only for the two countries but also for the global economy, and we have signed the MoU on cooperation in the critical mineral supply chain. We will systematically cooperate throughout the entire resource development cycle including mineral exploration, development, production and mining disaster management, further strengthening human exchange and technical cooperation. Today, the two countries have set a new milestone in cooperation based on the solid friendship and trust we have built over the past 60 years. We will, together, prepare for a new era. South Korea and Australia are also apparently great space buddies now! Moon: Second, we have agreed to nurture our key future industries together. The two countries declared to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 and are focusing on a transition to a low-carbon economy. Today, the prime minister and I signed the plan for low- and zero-emissions technology partnership by broadening the ecofriendly technologies such as hydrogen economy, solar power and carbon capture mechanisms. We will turn it into an opportunity to create new jobs and industries. We have also decided to strengthen space cooperation. Australia established a space agency in 2018 and is spurring efforts to foster its space industry. Korea has also set a new turning point for space development, with the launch of the new rocket this year. I hope that the MoU regarding space cooperation will enhance exchange and foster cooperation in fields from space exploration in the launch vehicle industry to satellite navigation, and I hope the agreement becomes a stepping stone for the two countries. If you were wondering whether this is all a thinly veiled front to send a message to China about who really has power in the Indo-Pacific, here is Moon: The prime minister actively supported the Korean people and the peace process and two countries continue working to the towards the lasting peace on the Korean Peninsula, and also peace and prosperity in the Indo-Pacific region. Moon is now delivering his speech in Korean. Luckily I’m fluent! (I’m not, I shall be using the ABC translation.) Your excellency, prime minister Morrison, thank you very much for the warm hospitality. You have invited me as Australia’s first [leader] since the Covid-19 outbreak and today our two countries have formed a close cooperative relationship. I think this will be a great gift for the people of two countries to celebrate the 60th anniversary of diplomatic ties ... Today the prime minister and I advanced our bilateral relations and elevated to a comprehensive Australian partnership. Together our two countries will leap forward as global leaders and look forward to moving towards a future of shared prosperity. First, we agree to strengthen ... strategic cooperation for fostering regional prosperity. Morrison: Australia and Korea have some of the highest vaccination rates double-dose of anywhere in the world, and so that is enabling our economies to open up and we see that today here in Australia as the borders come tumbling down there in - between Queensland and the rest of the country - and Australians are being reunited because of their effort to get vaccinated and to see families reunited, to see Australians coming together as we get to the end of this year. This is encouraging, but I know the more than 123,000 Australians of Korean ancestry will be looking forward to seeing their friends, their family and them being able to join together. This has been made possible because of the outstanding achievements in Korea in managing Covid and I congratulate the president on their achievements. We look to proceeding with the many agreements that we have announced today, whether in defence, defence materiel, the memorandum of understanding to establish an implementation plan for Australia and Korea’s low zero-emissions technology partnership that the president and I agreed we would proceed with when we met together in the UK at Carbis Bay at the G7. Here is Daniel Hurst with a bit more information on those deals that were signed by Morrison and Moon this morning. Morrison: Today, as always, our economies complement each other. We are important trading partners and we welcome the prospect of Korea joining the CPTPP [comprehensive and progressive agreement for trans-Pacific partnership] and we look forward - should they wish to take that decision and step - we look forward to being an encouraging partner. The CTPPP sets a high bar for countries that understand the importance of the rule of law in trade that deals with its partners fairly and consistently in a way that promotes free trade and Korea has already achieved those marks, not only in their relationship with Australia, but with the many trading partners with whom they have trusted relationships. This investment goes in both directions and we look forward to that continuing. We’re also important security partners as we have just witnessed with the howitzer contract, a billion-dollar armoured vehicle centre for excellence to be located in the Geelong region. Here is Morrison speaking, and yes, he did get the name of the Korean War wrong ... while speaking to the president of Korea. It’s a great honour to have you here in Australia in what is your first ever trip to Australia along with first lady Kim. As guest of our government on this important state visit, the first of these we have had since the outbreak of Covid ... As you know, the friendship between your nations is deep and historic. From Kapyong to here we are now in Canberra. Our ties were forged during the Vietnam - during the Korean - War. Australia was the second nation after the United States to come to Korea’s aid in those very dark days. More than 17,000 Australians fought to defend your freedom and, indeed, the freedom of all liberal democracy peace-loving countries in these conflicts. Australia and South Korea have struck a $1bn defence deal as leaders Scott Morrison and Moon Jae-in hold formal talks in Canberra, reports Paul Osborne from AAP. The South Korean president and first lady Kim Jung-sook were welcomed to Parliament House, where they signed the official visitors book, by the prime minister on Monday. Australia and South Korea will upgrade their ties to “comprehensive strategic partnership” status during the visit. The $1bn deal - under which Korean defence company Hanwha will provide 30 self-propelled howitzer artillery weapons, 15 ammunition supply vehicles and radars to detect enemy artillery - is the largest defence contract struck between Australia and an Asian nation. The new vehicles will be able to quickly fire and move to avoid enemy counterattacks. Defence minister Peter Dutton touted the deal as a boost for Australian firepower and security in the Indo-Pacific. [It] is one of several projects that will modernise the Australian Army, ensuring it continues to maintain a capability advantage now, and into the future... We are committed to keeping our region safe while protecting our interests in a rapidly changing global environment. The deal is expected to create at least 300 jobs in the Greater Geelong region, where the manufacturing facility will be based. Construction is due to start in 2022. Morrison said the relationship continued to grow, underpinned by trade, shared values, common regional strategic interests and a commitment to an open, inclusive and prosperous Indo-Pacific region. Our comprehensive strategic partnership with the Republic of Korea is underpinned by our joint commitment to defence and security cooperation. This year mark 60 years of diplomatic relations between the two nations. Moon is the first international leader to visit Australia since borders reopened. So Moon and Morrison are signing some partnerships and deal first, and I assume will speak after that. We are standing by for Scott Morrison and the South Korean president, Moon Jae-in, to give a joint address from Parliament House in Canberra. A flood warning and total fire ban in the same state on the same day has pretty big “post-apocalyptic” energy, doesn’t it? It’s time to have a chat about what’s going on at The Sydney Morning Herald. Overnight, the newspaper posted an article confirming that newly appointed editor, Bevan Shields, had called longtime opinion columnist Elizabeth Farrelly and ended her arrangement with the paper after she “failed to disclose that she had registered as a candidate for the Labor party in the Strathfield local government elections when she wrote a piece criticising Liberal and independent councillors in the electorate”. The writer has now issued a statement on the situation via a Facebook post, stating that it was “an oversight on my part” not to disclose her registration, but says she never actually intended to run for local government. Simply to keep my options open, I registered my interest online. I was not preselected for the Labor federal candidate, nor for the Labor council ticket, so I did not run in the recent council election. I was involved with the Labor campaign only insofar as I agreed to have a placard on the front lawn for a couple of weeks and to hand out on polling day for 2 hours. This was done in thanks for the warm welcome I received to the neighbourhood. The ABC is reporting this morning that the Victorian Greens have referred the government-owned logging agency VicForests to the state’s anti-corruption watchdog and the ombudsman. It follows the ABC’s reporting of allegations that VicForests had logged sites illegally and spied on a conservationist. The logging agency has denied it logged illegally and said it always complied with the law. The Greens’ Ellen Sandell has written to the Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission (IBAC) and the ombudsman, asking them to launch investigations. I respectfully request that IBAC conduct an investigation into whether these actions by VicForests — especially the allegations of spying on a private citizen — constitute corrupt conduct and warrant further investigation... Using taxpayer money to hire a private investigator to spy on a private citizen I would consider a gross misuse of taxpayer funds. Serious allegations of widespread illegal activity by a Victorian public sector agency I would consider something also worthy of investigation by IBAC. Trade minister Dan Tehan has urged businesses not to hoard a chemical key to keeping Australia’s freight and logistics sectors on the road, reports AAP’s Georgie Moore. Australia has about seven weeks’ worth of urea – used in the diesel exhaust fluid AdBlue – left amid a global shortage as China restricts exports. The federal government is speaking to countries including Indonesia about shoring up Australia’s supply. It is also approaching Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Japan. Korea last month flew 27,000 litres of urea to Australia. Tehan told ABC radio this morning that the Covid-19 pandemic had highlighted the fragility of some supply chains: There will always be some stock which they [businesses] keep in warehouses ... But what we don’t want to see is the excessive warehousing of AdBlue at this stage. He is confident Australia will be able to secure the urea it needs: There is obviously issues around containers, shipping disruptions which we’re also working through ... But from everything that we’re seeing, there is clear supply which we can bring to Australia. Independent MP Andrew Wilkie has spoken to Radio National about the plight of Australian Julian Assange. Although attempts to extradite him from the UK to the US are ostensibly for their court system, Wilkie said “the reality is it’s always been intensely political” because he claims charges are politically motivated against Assange for “doing his job” as a journalist and reporting via WikiLeaks: This can be solved politically by Scott Morrison picking up the phone to Joe Biden and Boris Johnson and saying, ‘This has gone on long enough – it’s not acceptable that an Australian Walkley award-winning journalist is being kept in jail for really doing nothing more than publicising hard evidence of US war crimes in Iraq and Afghanistan, let’s release him and let him come back home.’ Wilkie also called on Labor leader Anthony Albanese to commit to the same, if he is elected. Wilkie said jail “is killing” Assange. On who he will help form government in a minority parliament, Wilkie said he had been burned by Julia Gillard reneging on his pokies reform, and in future he will treat “every vote on its merits including confidence and supply” – meaning no deal to support one side. Still, he said climate change will be important to him and Morrison has done “terribly” on the anti-corruption commission issue. Scott Morrison is currently welcoming the South Korean president, Moon Jae-In to Australia. Gosh, we are so far away from everyone, it’s always exciting when a political leader makes their way down here! Federal health minister Greg Hunt is speaking now from Melbourne where he has just announced that Medicare-funded telehealth options will become permanent. He also reiterated that Australia is on track to open the border for skilled labourers and international students: The first is about the reopening of the borders for students and for skilled labour on 15 December. Yes, we are on track for that. That has been reconfirmed over the weekend. We said on the 29th of November that we were intending to reopen on 15 December. That has been through the national cabinet process ... Then in terms of telehealth, it’s a continuation of the existing measures across the work of GPs, allied health and specialists and I want to thank everybody for their involvement in that. All of the different parts of the medical community have played their role but the RACGP has been our principal partner on that front and well supported by the AMA and ACRM. Independent MP Andrew Wilkie has implored Scott Morrison to pick up the phone to Joe Biden and Boris Johnson to end the prosecution of Julian Assange, AAP reports. The former intelligence analyst told the ABC: The reality is this has always been an intensively political matter and it can be solved politically by Scott Morrison picking up the phone to Joe Biden and Boris Johnson. It comes after reports the 50-year-old WikiLeaks founder suffered a stroke in prison in October. Wilkie said: Jail is killing Julian Assange. There is no way he will survive continued incarceration in the UK. Assange has just suffered a legal blow after the UK high court ruled he could be extradited to face charges in the US. His lawyers say they intend to appeal the decision in the UK’s highest court. He faces an 175-year prison sentence on espionage charges in the US over an alleged conspiracy to obtain and disclose classified information which revealed alleged war crimes in Afghanistan and Iraq. Just very normal things happening on the NSW/Queensland border. After a Gold Coast man who bludgeoned his teenage girlfriend to death escaped a murder charge by arguing that he had been provoked by her tales of infidelity, the Queensland government decided to step in. “Other than in exceptional or extreme cases you can’t rely on words, or conduct that consists substantially of words,” the state’s then attorney general, Cameron Dick, said in 2011. “We need a change to the law … just because you say something it doesn’t mean that you should be killed.” A decade later, another Queensland man, Arona Peniamina, also convinced a jury his spouse’s suspected infidelity had provoked him into ending her life in a jealous rage. The government’s reforms had not prevented him from successfully arguing he was guilty of manslaughter, rather than murder, because he had been provoked. You can read the full report below: Watch out, Queensland! Anthony Albanese is in your state now and is bringing the election campaign with him! Here’s what he had to say to the ABC before jumping on his flight to the sunshine state. We need to reconnect with Queenslanders, we didn’t do well enough in the last election. When I was locked out of Sydney because of restrictions, I spent a long time in Queensland, I did a couple of road trips up and down the coast. I visited every small place that there was in between Rockhampton and Brisbane down the coast, and I think that Queenslanders know that this is a tired government, the end of its third term, they don’t have an agenda for today, let alone a vision for tomorrow and I’ll be talking today about our plans including 465,000 free Tafe places, 20,000 additional university places, and how we build back stronger. We need to take of the sacrifice that Australians have made by actually trying to envisage how we become more resilient, how we make more things. On my trip to Queensland a few months ago, I went to Maryborough, they’re doing fantastic there. Making trains, building things, creating jobs in regional Queensland and that’s what I want to drive. A total fire ban has been declared for north-western Victoria, AAP reports. The Country Fire Authority says the Mallee and Wimmera regions will be subject to a total fire ban on Monday, It means no open-air fire can be lit or remain alight, and strict rules apply for the use of farm machinery, chainsaws and lawnmowers. “CFA advises people living in areas at risk of fire to activate their bushfire plan,” the authority said. Temperatures are expected to reach the mid to high 30s in the two regions, with strengthening north-westerly winds forecast early before a blustery southerly change crossing the state throughout the day. There is also a low risk of dry lightning in the area. A high fire danger rating applies for central, north-central, northern country and south-west regions, while the eastern parts of the state are of low to moderate risk. It is only the second total fire ban of the season, thanks in part to cooler and wetter-than-average weather in November. The outlook for this fire season indicates a lower threat of prolonged bushfires but grass and crop blazes remain a high risk across the state after average to above-average rainfall and strong fuel growth. CFA acting chief officer Garry Cook said: Overall, we’ve had milder conditions leading into this fire season, but we can’t afford to be complacent about these hot and windy days where the fire danger spikes. Grass and crop fires are prevalent this season and can move at speeds of up to 25km/h and jump highways. A person in New South Wales has been admitted to hospital infected with the Omicron variant of Covid-19, the first Omicron patient to be hospitalised since it arrived in Australia last month. It comes as thousands of protesters marched through capital cities yesterday to oppose vaccine mandates, and Western Australia and Queensland prepared to reopen their borders. After two years of border closures, the WA premier, Mark McGowan, is today due to announce when the state’s borders will reopen to domestic and international travellers, after reaching the 80% vaccination milestone at the weekend. And “tens of thousands” of people are expected to cross into Queensland after its borders reopen at 1am on Monday. It will be the first time in 229 days people will not need to quarantine on arrival, provided they are fully vaccinated. You can read the full report below: Of course with Queensland’s border opening, tourism minister Dan Tehan is out and about this morning taking a victory lap (even though the decision to open the border has nothing to do with the federal government). Here he is chatting to ABC radio: All the forecasts are, when it comes to domestic tourism, by the end of next financial year it will be back to pre-pandemic levels and international tourism will follow on the back of that, so there are positive signals for our tourism industry ... 660,000 jobs in our tourism sector, we want to make sure that reaches beyond post-pandemic levels and we need those overseas skills ... here in Australia helping us strongly rebuild the tourism sector. Things seem to be getting pretty loose over in the Barnaby Joyce isolation suite, with the deputy prime minister placing his phone inside a microwave to get the perfect camera angle for his Sunrise interview. I feel like there is a joke about radiation frying your brain in there somewhere, but I’ll just leave that up to you. China has responded “irrationally” to the Aukus pact between Australia, the US and Britain, defence minister Peter Dutton says. The conservative Australian minister continues to mount forthright criticism of the Chinese government, accusing it of “bullying” countries that stand up to it. Yesterday Dutton said the Australian government had formed the Aukus partnership with the US and the UK because it wanted to see “see increased stability and peace in our region”. “The response by China to that, I think, was irrational,” he told Sky News Australia. You can read the full report below: Time to chat about next year’s election, and the battle the treasurer is facing from an independent in his home seat. Michael Rowland: You are now facing, as we know, Monique Ryan in the seat of Kooyong. She’s a Royal Children’s hospital doctor. You’ve labelled people like she, an independent, as a front for Labor and the Greens. What evidence do you have for that? Josh Frydenberg: Well, at the last election, I had an independent who said they were gonna vote for Labor. That’s a pretty clear indication. We’ve also seen plenty of cases where they’ve just mirrored the policies of our political opponents. Rowland: But what evidence do we have at this time? Frydenberg: This is a rinse-and-repeat, Michael. What we’ve seen, we’ve seen obviously a lot of funding going into these independents around the rest of the country, and it’s a democracy, so people can put their hand up. ABC News Breakfast host Michael Rowland: Just on Omicron, you might have caught up with the news just in the last hour or so, Boris Johnson, the UK prime minister, made an address to the nation there. He’s declared a tidal wave of Omicron case is about to hit the UK. He’s declared it a public health emergency, and has declared that all British adults over the age of 16 can get a booster shot by the end of the year. Taking that into account, are we being a bit too sanguine about Omicron here in Australia? Treasurer Josh Frydenberg: We saw the medical advice, and that saw a pause for two weeks of the reopening of the border to international students and to skilled workers. That was a precautionary measure. But we will continue to listen and follow the health advice, and it has served us well to date. But at the same time, we need to ensure that our economy keeps this momentum going. And we’ve seen a very strong rebound, Michael. We’ve seen 350,000 jobs come back since the start of September. We’ve seen business and consumer confidence lift. We’ve seen Australia maintain its AAA credit rating. We’ve seen a very strong pipeline of investment, both in the housing market and more generally across the economy. The Queensland premier taking a victory lap as the borders reopen this morning. Federal treasurer Josh Frydenberg is chatting to media this morning, discussing the Queensland border reopening. He was asked if he is “absolutely confident” that state border closures are now a thing of the past. I certainly hope so ... We do know that the Omicron variant is not the first or not the last variant that we will probably see with respect to Covid. We also know that it’s highly transmissible, but perhaps not as severe as previous variants. We also know that the vaccine has proven to be a very effective defence against the virus, with the number of hospitalisations and deaths coming down, and restrictions being eased accordingly. So, I’m very hopeful that the state premiers will stick to the plan, keep their borders open, and allow Australians to be reunited at Christmas and allow businesses to flourish. The NBN has announced plans to switch to 100% renewable electricity by the end of 2025 and use electric or hybrid cars where possibly by 2030, reports AAP. Australia’s NBN Co has announced a “towards-zero carbon ambition”, with the company outlining a plan to use electricity exclusively from renewable sources by the end of 2025. As well as purchasing 100% renewable electricity from December 2025, an initial three-year roadmap works toward switching to electric or hybrid cars were possible by 2030, and reducing annual energy use by 25 gigawatt hours by the end of 2025. Total electricity generation in Australia was estimated to be 265,232 GWh in 2020, according to government numbers. More than 8.3m premises are connected to the NBN network, and the company says it will seek a “more efficient use of energy as data demand and the number of connected premises continues to grow”. NBN Co chief executive Stephen Rue said: Beyond the direct impact of becoming an environmentally sustainable business, what’s equally exciting is the power of the network to help enable digitisation, and the huge benefits that unlocks for the nation in terms of emissions reductions, as well as socio-economic benefits. The company has already entered into a renewable power purchasing agreement intended to deliver almost 20% renewable energy to the network by the 2o23 financial year. It plans to reach the 100% target through further power purchase agreements and contracts for renewables. The announcement comes as NBN Co becomes the first Australian telco and government business enterprise to join RE100, a global initiative joining “the world’s most influential businesses committed to 100% renewable power”. RE100 Australian co-ordinator Jon Dee said: It joins 110 other major companies in Australia that have joined RE100 and made the commitment to switch to 100% renewable electricity. Between them, Australian members of RE100 use more than 5.5 terawatt hours of electricity a year, enough to power 800,000 Australian homes. The towards-zero carbon ambition is part of NBN Co’s second sustainability report released toay, which also looks at social and economic impacts. With 33% of management positions held by women, NBN Co outperforms the national average, it notes. Additionally, as at 30 June 2021, NBN Co had a gender pay gap of less than 1%. Good morning everyone and welcome to the new week! It’s Matilda Boseley here on the blog with you today and I have some good news to start us off. After nearly five months the Queensland border has finally opened! As of this morning, anyone from Victoria and NSW can enter the sunshine state as long as they are fully vaccinated and have proof of a negative PCR test before beginning their journey. With tens of thousands of people expected to travel today, Jen King is up on the NSW/Queensland border this morning to bring us all the updates. Let’s go west now because Western Australia’s premier is set to finally reveal when the state’s borders will open, ending months of speculation. Mark McGowan is expected to announce a firm date for the reopening, this morning, likely in late January or early February. The state’s borders are closed or heavily restricted to every other state or territory except Tasmania. It’s anticipated the vaccination rate will have climbed to 90% by the time the borders finally reopen. Once the borders come down, transitional restrictions will come into effect. This will likely include mask mandates in high-risk indoor settings, and proof-of-vaccination requirements for large events with crowds of more than 1,000 people, nightclubs and casinos. Entry to remote Indigenous communities will remain restricted and contact registers will still be used. OK! With all of that out of the way, why don’t we jump right into the day?1) Aubameyang captaincy surely in doubt Mikel Arteta has had his fill when it comes to off-pitch issues at Arsenal, but Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang has given him another. We only know one side of the story but the manager’s position is that Aubameyang returned late from a trip abroad and, not for the first time, violated one or more of his “non-negotiables”. Arteta was already grappling with his captain’s dwindling goal output to the extent that Aubameyang was benched at Everton last Monday. Now he must consider whether dropping him from the squad that convincingly beat Southampton is sufficient punishment. Arsenal’s inconsistent young team need better leadership from their senior players, a theme yet to be consigned to history despite Arteta’s efforts, and there must be huge question marks over the 32-year-old’s status as captain now. Nick Ames Match report: Arsenal 3-0 Southampton 2) Watford unable to dine out on clean sheets It’s now 26 matches and counting since Watford’s last clean sheet in a Premier League match – that 3-0 victory over Liverpool on 29 February 2020 under Nigel Pearson. In the hope that they don’t have to wait until the next leap year to achieve another, Claudio Ranieri has promised his players a meal out for every clean sheet they can manage. They came within six minutes of getting one against Brentford on Friday before conceding two late goals. Unfortunately for Emmanuel Dennis, who scored his seventh goal of the season, his steak is on ice for a while longer. “I walked up to him [Ranieri] after the Manchester United game and said, ‘you need to pay for dinner,’ and he said, ‘it wasn’t a clean sheet!’,” said the striker. “I said, ‘you’re lucky but we’ll try next week to keep a clean sheet so you can pay for dinner’. A very expensive one.” Ed Aarons Match report: Brentford 2-1 Watford 3) Antonio needs help up front for Hammers Michail Antonio has been a revelation after his reinvention. He was the league’s joint top-scorer early in the season but he is now on an eight-game goal drought in all competitions. It is worth noting that the former winger and wing-back, yet to score more than 10 goals in a top-flight season, is the lone senior striker at a club who stand a genuine chance of securing a top-four finish. If there is a question what Antonio can be expected to do – is his ceiling 15 goals? 20? – it also illustrates the importance of buying in January. Failing to score at Burnley should not be attributed just to him on a day when only Declan Rice excelled, but it was the sort of scrappy game a professional penalty-box predator might have won. Richard Jolly Match report: Burnley 0-0 West Ham 4) Chelsea still lack cutting edge Chelsea have scored three goals in their last two games, but there is still no sign of a clear identity in attack. The European champions are not like Manchester City and Liverpool; it is rare for them to blow organised teams away. Creating clear chances often feels like a slog and it should be a worry that Chelsea’s most effective attacker during their victory over Leeds was Antonio Rüdiger, who won both Jorginho’s second-half penalties. Indeed, there was not much of a celebration from Thomas Tuchel when the Italian sealed the win in added time. Even Chelsea’s first goal against Leeds, crisply converted by Mason Mount, only came when they won possession high up the pitch and caught Marcelo Bielsa’s side out of shape. Otherwise it was too predictable. The title is likely to prove out of reach if Chelsea cannot sharpen their cutting edge. Jacob Steinberg Match report: Chelsea 3-2 Leeds 5) Attitude important for struggling Everton When Richarlison was taken off just before the hour mark at Crystal Palace, he looked disgruntled by the decision. The Brazilian had offered very little in the time he spent on the pitch, thanks to a mixture of good defending and Everton’s incredibly defensive style of play. After making his way to the back of the dugout, he settled in for a good sulk, even when Everton got back into the game thanks to his replacement, Salomón Rondón. Lucas Digne has missed the past two games for apparent off-field reasons, a sign that not everything is right at a club who have now won once in 10 matches. The cracks are showing before a crucial period for a frustrated group of players. With significant January investment unlikely, Benítez needs his best assets onside or they could face an even more troubling second half of the season. Will Unwin • Match report: Crystal Palace 3-1 Everton 6) Rodgers welcomes back terrific Tielemans It was difficult to look beyond James Maddison for Leicester’s star turn in the 4-0 win over Newcastle given the quality of his play, particularly the outside-of-the-boot pass that led to his team’s second goal, scored by Patson Daka. But pulling the strings a little further back was Youri Tielemans. The midfielder returned from a month-long injury lay-off in Thursday’s Europa League defeat at Napoli and he cut loose here. There were the two goals, both lashed high into the net – the first from the penalty spot – but as pleasing for the manager, Brendan Rodgers, was the vision and accuracy of his passing together with his work without the ball. It was Tielemans’ pressure that led to the turnover for the opening goal and there would be a crucial defensive header to keep Newcastle out at 1-0. No Leicester player made more tackles. It was the complete performance. David Hytner Match report: Leicester 4-0 Newcastle 7) Gerrard looks forward after Anfield loss Ambition dominated Steven Gerrard’s thoughts following his Anfield return and the second defeat of his Aston Villa reign. Could his team have shown more in a game that Liverpool dominated but finished nervously after the introductions of Danny Ings, Emiliano Buendía and Morgan Sanson by the visitors? “You can go too gung-ho too early against the top sides and get hit for a big scoreline,” the Villa manager pondered. “But I’ll look at myself and whether I should have done it earlier.” Five games in, the new Villa manager is already thinking ahead to days when his team start on the front foot at places such as Anfield. “I want the players and people at the club to be as ambitious as myself,” he added. “I am not saying my ambitions are different to theirs, but we won’t settle for anything except trying to improve. It is still early days but we have seen enough to believe we can take this club forward, finish the season in a positive position and build.” Andy Hunter Match report: Liverpool 1-0 Aston Villa 8) Guardiola backs struggling Grealish Following another underwhelming performance by Jack Grealish against Wolves, Pep Guardiola defended his £100m signing while admitting he must add to the two goals and three assists he has recorded in all competitions for Manchester City this season. “One day it will unlock and he’ll score or he’ll make a goal,” said the manager. “Jack is a player whose decision-making is really good. In the final third he has to do it [better], but it will come. When you are a forward and the other team plays with 10 players or nine players in the box [as against Wolves] it’s so difficult. When one team doesn’t want to play – always it’s so difficult.” That is all fair but what is undeniable is that Grealish, having arrived from Aston Villa at great expense, is yet to truly sparkle for City. Jamie Jackson • Match report: Manchester City 1-0 Wolves 9) Sørensen steps into breach for Smith Twenty minutes into a sodden Saturday evening fixture Dean Smith had problems. Grant Hanley’s shoulder had popped and, despite a valiant attempt to continue, his night was done. With an already patched-up defence, Smith turned to the utility man Jacob Sørensen. Having joined from Esbjerg last summer, the Dane appeared 32 times in Norwich’s Championship title run. All bar one of his 20 league starts came as a stand-in left-back. The exception was a rare outing in his preferred defensive midfield role, which is where his 10 previous Premier League minutes had come. A natural fit to come on at right-centre back against Manchester United, then. But Sørensen was not fazed. His four blocks and five interceptions were both team highs, while eight successful presses were bettered only by Josh Sargent. Even faced with Cristiano Ronaldo’s stepovers, Sørensen remained unmoved. His efforts embodied a valiant display by the hosts, even if they came away empty-handed. Sam Dalling Match report: Norwich 0-1 Manchester United 10) Penalty calls a result of top teams’ pressure The margins are often very small at the highest level of the professional game, and Saturday summed this up perfectly. Manchester City, Chelsea, Liverpool and Manchester United all won thanks to a penalty. Many will shout about conspiracies and big-club bias but it is actually just the nature of modern football, where better teams with deeper squads dominate matches and tire out the opposition. They spend more time in the box, ultimately giving them greater chance of earning a spot-kick once defenders make mistakes. The call for handball against João Moutinho was questionable but justifiable, and few could argue with the others. None of the victorious teams were at their best on Saturday but still spent most of their matches on top – United’s possession level was the lowest of the four at 54%. Even if all four sides can perhaps count themselves lucky to win, luck is another thing teams need to be successful. Will UnwinIt’s hard to imagine what motivated the Las Vegas Raiders to prance to the middle of Arrowhead Stadium and stomp on the Chiefs’ logo during pregame warmups. “You don’t want people coming into your stadium and disrespecting what you’ve built,” Patrick Mahomes would later say. There is no official rule against what the Raiders did but there are also things called etiquette and common sense. And as the Raiders quickly learned Sunday, there’s another thing called karma. Seventeen seconds into the game it was the Chiefs who were dancing after defensive tackle Jarran Reed caused a Josh Jacobs fumble, which cornerback Mike Hughes took to the house for the first of what felt like a million points for Chiefs. Twenty-one minutes later it was 28-0 Chiefs. The final score was 48-9. It was an embarrassment on all levels for Las Vegas. The Raiders’ little pregame ritual certainly didn’t help matters. Raiders linebacker KJ Wright admitted so after the game. “I would have been upset, too, if I was them,” Wright said. “Anybody that comes there and do that? And they definitely came out and responded to their anger and we couldn’t hold up. “It was spur of the moment. One guy said, ‘Let’s go’ and we all got to ride together. We all went out there together. We did it as a team and just gave them a little more motivation than we needed to give them.” The Chiefs defense was once again dominant. The midseason addition of defensive end Melvin Ingram and the return of Chris Jones to the inside has turned the line into a juggernaut and ignited the entire defense. The dynamic duo were integral in keeping Derek Carr at bay and at one point they combined to turn the poor Raiders quarterback into a hamburger patty. Sunday’s walloping of the Raiders marked the third game in a row that they have only allowed nine points. In the first seven games of the season, the Chiefs allowed 29 points a game. In the last six, they’ve allowed just 10.8. Meanwhile, Mahomes is back to looking like his generational self. The Chiefs scored on seven straight possessions. Mahomes, who finished with 258 yards, two touchdowns and no turnovers, put out on a clinic at all depths and degrees of difficulties. And he even unwrapped a new toy in wideout Josh Gordon, who scored one of Kansas City’s gazillion touchdowns. Elsewhere, the Dallas Cowboys almost suffered a similar result to the Raiders after their strange displays of bravado. First, head coach Mike McCarthy handed Washington bulletin board material when during the week he promised a Cowboys win. “We’re going to win this game. I’m confident in that,” he told reporters. Dallas’ psychological warfare took a much stranger turn Sunday morning when it emerged Cowboys owner Jerry Jones had flown in team-branded sideline benches to be placed at Washington’s FedEx Field. There is no rule prohibiting this – visiting teams largely control their own sideline equipment. But the optics were clear it was audacious and all Jones. The Cowboys won but McCarthy’s speech and Jones’s redecorating may have given Washington a spur when they found themselves 24-0 down at halftime. They came back with vengeance in the second-half but Dallas hung on to win 27-20. They’ve also let the rest of the league know they are comfortable bending the game’s unwritten rules. Unfortunately for them, there are a lot of strong NFC teams that will be happy to finish the job that Washington could not. MVP of the week Justin Herbert, QB, Los Angeles Chargers. There have been plenty of descriptions of Herbert since he burst on to the scene last season. Beast. Freak. Superhuman. All of the sentiment was captured in one monstrous throw on Sunday. That pass stole the show but he was nearly flawless in a 37-21 win over the Giants. His 275 yards and three touchdowns led the Chargers to a second-straight win. It was a crucial victory that keeps the Chargers in the mix with the Chiefs in the AFC West. And luckily for the NFL world, the two teams meet this week on Thursday Night Football. The Chiefs defense will present a much tougher test than the Giants but Herbert is rolling and should have wideout Keenan Allen return from the Covid-19 list. Video of the week It was an emotional scene in Denver as the Broncos paid tribute to Demaryius Thomas, their beloved former star wideout who unexpectedly died at age 33 last week. Thomas’s 88 was everywhere: on fans’ jerseys, etched on players’ helmets and painted on the sidelines. Stat of the week Tom Brady is now 107-1 when leading by 21 points. The 107th win when ahead by three touchdowns wasn’t as easy as most of the rest. After Brady’s Bucs took a 24-3 lead into halftime, the Bills adjusted, figuring out ways to make up for their struggling offensive line. The result was a 27-27 tie at the end of regulation. But then Brady went into Hall of Fame mode, taking the field with that ruthless look in his eyes. A minute later he hit Breshad Perriman on a 58-yard game winner. Another crazy stat from this game: the Bills did not hand off to a running back once in the first half. Clearly that didn’t work out very well for them, although quarterback Josh Allen did rush for more than 100 yards for the game. Quote of the week “You’re not supposed to reach the ball for the pylon, but nobody said anything because I scored” – San Francisco 49ers wide receiver Brandon Aiyuk. Aiyuk won the game for the 49ers against the Bengals in overtime 26-23 with an incredible stretch in which he was first called down at the one. Upon replay, the officials reversed it to the game-winning walkoff when it was evident that his feet and all other parts of his body stayed inbounds as he dove for the pylon. It’s the type of risky play that too often results in a fumble. It was a fitting moment for Aiyuk, who spent most of the season’s first-half strangely excluded from the offense but has now paired with Deebo Samuel to give Jimmy Garoppolo two alpha receiver-running-back-do-it-all options. Elsewhere around the league -- Watch out for those scrappy Cleveland Browns, who pulled out a 24-22 win over the Baltimore Ravens. The Browns were aided by Lamar Jackson’s exit – he was carted off with an ankle injury in the second quarter. But Cleveland were monstrous on defense in the first half, smothering Jackson, and then his backup Tyler Huntley. Myles Garrett collected yet another sack, putting his season total at 15. -- Reports say that Aaron Rodgers will have to deal with his toe injury for the rest of the season. It doesn’t seem to be doing him much harm. He threw four touchdowns – and continues to own the Bears – as Green Bay beat their divisional rivals 45-30 on Sunday Night Football. -- The aforementioned Bills find themselves as the final seed in the AFC playoff race (for now) and two games behind the division leading New England Patriots. Sunday’s game was supposed to be a massive test in how they would respond from the all-rushing-all-the-time coaching masterpiece Bill Belichick used to bury them in Week 13. Now they must bounce back from losing an emotional game that was within reach against the game’s greatest quarterback. The next test comes in Week 15 against the Panthers. Time to stop the bleeding, Sean McDermott. -- If Urban Meyer truly deems himself a winner, while calling his assistants losers, as was reported Saturday, he ought to be examined for short-term memory loss. The Meyer-led Jaguars lost to Tennessee 20-0 and dropped their fifth-straight game. Jacksonville again played a sloppy, too conservative brand of football. Trevor Lawrence threw four interceptions. The Jags are now 2-11, and are a laughing stock. There are many reasons to wait until the regular season ends to bid farewell to a failing coach. And sometimes clubs wait out of respect for a long-serving coach. But out of respect to the players and city of Jacksonville, it’s time to pull the plug on the failed Meyer experiment now. There is too much toxicity in the building among players and Meyer and coaches and Meyer, and presumably some between ownership and Meyer. Between the losing and friction, a fresh face is Jacksonville’s only chance to end the season with some sense of positivity. -- It was a win-win day for the Titans. They shut out the Jags (their first home shutout since 2000) and remain entrenched atop the AFC South. More importantly, star running back Derrick Henry is reportedly on track to return for the playoffs. Henry broke his foot in Week 8 against the Colts. He has rushed for over 150 yards in three of his six playoff games.One of Australia’s most experienced geriatric specialists has told a Sydney court there was a “highly irregular” power imbalance between a GP and his wealthy patient who left him tens of millions of dollars. Raymond McClure, who died aged 84 in 2017, left his GP, Dr Peter Alexakis, 90% of his estate worth more than $30m. McClure altered his will twice in the five months before he died. Previous wills – the first of which was made in 1986 – made the Salvation Army and other individuals the beneficiaries of McClure’s estate. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Salvation Army’s legal secretary, Gary Masters, is challenging the final will in the New South Wales supreme court, arguing that it was executed in suspicious circumstances and that Alexakis had undue influence over his patient. The will is also subject to multiple cross-claims. On Monday, Dr Melanie Wroth, the senior staff specialist in geriatric medicine at the Royal Prince Alfred (RPA) hospital, gave evidence about her involvement in McClure’s case. Wroth, who is also the chief clinical adviser for the federal Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission, met with McClure and two other doctors in June 2017. McClure was a patient at RPA, and the meeting had been called after one of the doctors overheard McClure discussing his will with solicitor Angelo Andresakis in his hospital room earlier that month, the court heard. The court has previously heard that Andresakis was recommended to McClure by Alexakis. Alexakis told the court in an earlier hearing that he had not struck a deal with McClure to get him out of hospital if he was “looked after” in the will, and he did not know McClure planned to leave any of his estate to him when he recommended Andresakis as a solicitor. Wroth, who the court heard had extensive experience in elder abuse and was a senior member of the guardianship division of the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal, said she believed McClure was vulnerable to exploitation when he was in hospital. However, she said the type of exploitation would have to be more clearly defined. She said the fact McClure was physically weak and frail would affect his energy levels and the robustness of thought required to perceive any risks of exploitation. McClure was taking multiple doses of hydromorphine per day, which could have clouded his judgement, Wroth said, but added that that may be less likely, given he had been on the medication for some time. While there was an acknowledged power imbalance between all patients and their doctors, the “highly irregular” nature of the relationship between Alexakis and McClure meant this was greater than normal, she said. McClure hated hospitals, had tried to leave RPA without being discharged, and was suspicious of doctors, the court has previously heard, but was dependent on medical care because of several serious medical problems. Not only would much of this dependence fall on Alexakis after he left hospital, but Alexakis was one of the only people who visited him, the court heard. “The power imbalance would be on the basis of both the respect Mr McClure had for Dr Alexakis’s position as a general practitioner,” Wroth said. “And it would also be on a basis of his reliance … on Dr Alexakis for all of his social interactions. “There was such a great respect for his position as a medical practitioner, and there was a belief that the extra attention that he was getting in relation to what would be a normal doctor-patient interaction, he was flattered by that, and he valued that he had someone he could sit down and talk to when there was nobody else in his life with who that could occur.” Wroth said she was only aware of one other GP visiting a patient in hospital during her career, and that it was also unusual that Alexakis recommended a solicitor to McClure. Once Andresakis visited in hospital, McClure also had less opportunity to change his mind, she said. Wroth acknowledged that McClure had passed a test that proved he was of sound mind when he made the will, and that much of her comments about his vulnerability went to concerns about his physical state and social interactions. Wroth said McClure endorsed the care provided by Alexakis during the meeting, but appeared concerned that the decision he made on his will had got Alexakis “into trouble”. The hearing will continue on Wednesday.Given the content of her smash-hit comedy One-Woman Show, there’s no little irony in interviewing Liz Kingsman. In the show, the Anglo-Aussie comic plays an ambitious, self-absorbed version of herself, here to share with us her formulaic (and, unbeknownst to her, blissfully funny) feminist monologue in the hope of emulating Phoebe Waller-Bridge and propelling herself from the fringe to the front page. And lo, here we now are, discussing how fantastic Kingsman is in a national newspaper. “I am extremely aware,” she laughs, “of the show eating itself. Anything that happens off the back of that show” – in career and profile terms, she means – “is extremely hypocritical of me.” Since One-Woman Show is a terrific piece of work, I’d advise Kingsman to brace for extreme hypocrisy: the comedy world is surely hers for the taking. But does she want it? One-Woman Show, it turns out, interrupted a process whereby, “I’d closed the chapter on live comedy.” Comedy fans know Kingsman mainly as one-third (with Stevie Martin and Tessa Coates) of the top-notch sketch group Massive Dad. “I’d never had any desire to make a solo show,” she says. She did so only because “my agent needed a script from me, and I was like, ‘Yeah, yeah, I’ll definitely do that’ – then wrote this instead. This show is an elaborate form of procrastination for a different piece of work entirely.” Its genesis, she says, was her observation that “suddenly, you couldn’t move for one-woman shows. I suppose a lot of women felt the only way they could get better auditions and have agency was to write a solo show. Which, after all, had worked for a number of high-profile people.” Kingsman sympathises with the impulse. Having once worked as a runner in the film industry, and as an occasional stand-in between takes for the likes of Felicity Jones (“I’m 5 ft 4 and brunette, which is a common demographic among actresses”), her acting career has traced a path via “lots of auditions for roles like ‘Dave’s girlfriend’ or ‘Steve’s wife’: quite two-dimensional, often eye-rolling women crossing their arms and not having any of the fun.” Faced with that, who wouldn’t create their own roles instead? But what interested Kingsman more was what she calls “the messy-woman genre” (think Fleabag – chaotic life, lots of sex, minimal sense of purpose) into which most of these shows fitted. Unlike Steve’s wife, these women “are having fun, are liberated and living their own lives. But the pendulum has swung so far back that way and got stuck. Because there are so many other female stories between those two poles. I don’t relate to those messy-women narratives. None of my female friends talk about their sex lives a lot. And I’d be hard pushed to find a single one who is aimless: everyone is hustling and working really hard.” Such was the thinking that led to One-Woman Show, which Kingsman was previewing in March 2020 as Covid struck. It’s been a frustrating wait to bring the full production to the stage, although “worrying that your show wasn’t going to be put on at a time like that,” says Kingsman, “felt like an insane champagne problem to have. I was more concerned about my entire livelihood going overnight. And I was worried that the zeitgeist would move on. I thought there’d be a Guardian think-piece about that genre, and my whole show would go down the drain.” Far from it: one of the many pleasures of One-Woman Show (aside from the sky-high joke count and self-mocking meta-commentary) is how ripe the “messy-woman genre” suddenly feels for satirical plucking – albeit, in Kingsman’s case, from the perspective of a fellow feminist respectful of the space that genre has staked out. Certainly, the show struck a chord – although Kingsman claims to have been oblivious to its phenomenal success at London’s Soho theatre in October, as it coincided with some film work. “In that first week, I was getting a train up to Manchester for filming after each show. I had to go to a country house, play dead – I’m literally a corpse in the film – then get back on a train to London, and do my show. So my head wasn’t able to process the idea of it being successful.” She’s processing it now – but ambivalent about what success may bring. “I’m so sleepy! I just want to go and play with my dog for a bit.” She hasn’t entirely forsworn live comedy, but “can’t imagine having another idea I want to pursue so fervently.” Acting and films are where her ambitions lie – she’s loving her (English-speaking) role in the French TV comedy Parlement, about the European parliament, and hopeful it will soon be broadcast to UK audiences. Might a Waller-Bridge-alike TV career be soon to blossom? And – more immediately – might the creator of Fleabag (itself launched at Soho theatre) be invited to Kingsman’s January run? She’d love One-Woman Show, surely? “Oh, I don’t think I can say,” says Kingsman. “I can’t speak for her. That’s the thing: women can’t speak for other women!” She laughs. “But it would be funny. I just don’t want to know what day she comes.” One-Woman Show is at Soho theatre, London, from 5-15 January.If I close my eyes and think of Stephen Sondheim, I remember him sitting in my kitchen in north London. It wasn’t a showbiz fest. It was just talking about nothing, about life, about dogs. He was this amazing, mellow man, so personable and warm. Even at the time, I thought, blimey, here is this legend, having a beer in my kitchen. That’s one for the book! He was so extraordinary, the last of the big boys, the final link with the great American songbook, a man with personal connections to Oscar Hammerstein and Leonard Bernstein. He changed musicals, made unhappy musicals happen. He set down such a very good path that led in so many different directions. We first met in 1990 in my dressing room at the Phoenix theatre when I was playing the Baker’s Wife in Richard Jones’s production of Into the Woods. He said he’d like to thank me for what I was doing with the character. And because I was nervous, I just sort of blurted out: “Well, you don’t write an easy tune, do you Stephen?” There was a particular note I couldn’t get, and I told him. He said: “Change it. Just change it.” That was such a shock to me because I wasn’t really a Sondheim aficionado at that point, and people who were said you couldn’t touch anything in his work. After that, of course, I decided I’d really try to do it as he’d written it. But that was Stephen all over. He never made you feel inadequate. He only ever wanted all of us to be our very best. I didn’t see him again until I took on Mrs Lovett in Sweeney Todd in 2011. We were in Chichester, which is lovely because you can gather in the bar after the show, and all the younger actors were beside themselves with excitement. He knew that and sat with them; he was never someone who just wanted to sit with the director or the producer. He knew how much he meant to people. What struck me was his joy at seeing a production of his work. He would never say, well you know, we did it like this at such and such a time, or imply that he wished we were doing it differently. I thought: gosh, this is a lesson, isn’t it? To be so present and so very encouraging about what was happening now. I am sure he gave the director and the music director loads of things to think about, but he created an atmosphere where it was easy to be creative, not to be stifled by someone else’s view. He was never locked into a vision of how something should be done. A year later, when I knew I was going to be playing Momma Rose in Gypsy, my husband, Jim, and I went to Stephen’s house in New York for dinner. We went into this lovely room full of what I thought were awards, but they turned out to be the most extraordinary metal puzzles. There were also all these wonderful things to do with magic and circus. Jim is really into that as well, so the whole night I didn’t get a word in edgeways. For me, his work is not about how the songs sound. It’s how they feel. In one respect, he’s done so much of the work for you. You don’t have to worry about how you are going to make the songs work; you just have to read them. He wrote monologues and then, in the music, he gave you the rhythm and the heartbeat of each one. They are challenging and intricate but that makes them more satisfying to do. When I was singing Gypsy, we talked a lot about motherhood, and bad parenting. We discussed the lyrics and how much his own journey with his mother informed this particular mother. He writes so well about pain. And joy. He’s Shakespearean in that way. He’s like Shakespeare too because, like all the best writing, there’s no one way to do him. His work is just so rich. I’d kept in touch with him, through emails, until he died. But the last time I actually saw him was at Follies at the National Theatre in 2017, when I played Sally. He gave me the only specific note I remember him giving me, about Losing My Mind. He said: “Don’t even try to make it sound anything other than a nervous breakdown. Don’t worry how it sounds. This is a woman just tumbling down.” Anyhow, at the end of the first preview, I stepped forward and said: “Look ladies and gentlemen, Mr Sondheim is in the building, and we just have to recognise this man.” He was standing on the staircase, and we all clapped for what seemed like five hours. I thought: I don’t know when this will happen again. I wanted to do that for him. I am really glad I did.There is a phrase Rachel Bellesen can’t shake, even to this day. It echoes in her dreams, the moment the judge read her the charges: deliberate homicide. Punishable by death. Punishable by death. To this day, Bellesen can’t remember much past that phrase. The last 24 hours had already been a blur: the assault, the shooting, the arrest and now this – her arraignment. It was 9 October 2020. Bellesen had started the day thinking she was the victim. After all, she had already explained how her ex-partner attacked her. How he tried to rape her. How she shot and killed him in self-defense. But throughout the night, Bellesen noticed she hadn’t been treated the way a crime victim should. Still, she figured if she was being charged something, it had to be because she had been driving drunk or didn’t have the proper gun permit. It didn’t occur to her until now that the justice system saw her as a perpetrator – as a killer. Not after everything she had survived at the hands of Jacob Glace. “I felt like I was dead inside,” Bellesen says, looking back. “I felt like a person standing very still in the center of a tornado that was just exploding all around – and not being able to move or breathe or think or feel anything.” In the United States, nearly one in four women – and one in 10 men – experience intimate partner violence or stalking during their lifetimes. Bellesen thought she had left that all behind; moving to Montana was supposed to be a fresh start. But her history with Glace was about to come flooding back – in a public trial that would test the lengths necessary to prove self-defense, even after a lifetime of domestic abuse. Until her move, Bellesen had lived with the specter of violence almost her entire life. It started, she says, with abuse she sustained as a child at the hands of a relative. Then came Glace. Bellesen, née Hansen, was only 15 when they met, living in a remote mountain neighborhood outside Leavenworth, Washington. Glace was 23, a pot dealer with a handsome face and a love of the outdoors. They were dating within weeks. At first, the relationship spelled freedom for Bellesen. They shared a passion for hiking and snowboarding, and Glace, with his car, could whisk Bellesen far from the confines of her tiny town. But soon, freedom turned to isolation. Bellesen got pregnant shortly before her 16th birthday. Her mother presented her with a choice: either have an abortion and move with her family to their new home in Montana, or stay in Washington with Glace. She chose Glace. Cramped with him living in a shed that had been converted into a studio apartment, Bellesen felt increasingly adrift. She stopped going to school. She lost contact with most of her friends. And without a driver’s license, her horizons seemed to shrink. Glace, once so eager to sweep her away on adventures, increasingly left her at home. Bellesen says Glace started raping her after the birth of their first child. If she rebuffed his advances, he would call her a tease. If she cried as he pinned her down, he would berate her for making him feel bad. It would take years for Bellesen to realize that what was happening was a crime. She was still in her teens when she found herself pregnant with her second child. He stopped raping her during the pregnancy, but the violence continued. Glace would shove her as he passed, often with an “Oops, sorry, I didn’t see you there.” Once, while holding her firstborn child, Bellesen made the mistake of interrupting him while he was outside with friends. As she turned to leave, a sharp pain pierced her shoulders. Her infant slipped from her fingers. Glace had thrown a beer bottle square against her spine. Whore. Bad mother. Ugly. Loveless. Clingy. The insults were daily. And then, days after she returned home with her second child, Glace started raping her again. “That was much more violent than before,” she would later tell her defense team. The sutures from her C-section nearly tore open. She attempted suicide. When she woke up in the emergency room, Glace looked like he’d been crying. He seemed scared – more for himself than for her, she suspected. The physical assaults stopped for a while after that. Glace promised to do better, to be better. It was during that lull that Bellesen agreed to marry Glace. She figured it was the right thing to do: they had children together, after all. But Glace soon returned to his pattern of violence, only now it escalated. Strangulation became part of the routine, Bellesen says. One incident left her so injured, she peed blood for three days afterwards. Bellesen tried to leave, but she faced pressure from family to stick it out and be a good wife and mother. Even after they finally separated – following an incident where Bellesen says she discovered Glace sleeping with another teenager – she would sometimes notice Glace’s black Chevy Tahoe following her. Feeling alienated from family and friends, Bellesen went through periods of homelessness, of addiction to drugs and alcohol, as she attempted to recover from all she endured. Montana was going to be different. In 2005, after reconnecting with her mother – whom she hadn’t spoken to in years – Bellesen hopped on a train out of Washington with nothing more than a backpack. Given her lack of housing, a judge had awarded Glace custody of their children. “Moving here was very difficult. I left behind everybody I knew. I left behind my kids,” Bellesen says. “I didn’t know if I was jumping out of the frying pan and into the fire. But I really felt like it was my only choice to really try and get my life back on track.” Bellesen initially settled in the tourist hub of Whitefish, a ski destination just like Leavenworth had been. The resort-town dynamics felt familiar: there were the locals, and then there were the tourists. In Leavenworth, Bellesen had the pride of being on the locals’ side. “We felt like it was our town,” she recalls. But in Whitefish, the tables had turned. It was a lonely time. The only people she knew in Montana were her sister, her mother and her stepfather – and those relationships remained largely strained. Without a support system, Bellesen continued drinking, leading to a string of convictions for intoxicated driving. But slowly, Bellesen turned her life around. With Glace’s agreement, Bellesen’s two sons came to live with her. She received treatment for her addiction, and in 2012, newly sober, she registered for the dating app Match. One profile stood out to her. It featured a father of two from southern California, with a description that was brief and to the point: Not social. Doesn’t do bars. Must like kids. And no drama. It belonged to Corey Bellesen. They exchanged emails and telephone calls for a couple of weeks before they agreed to meet in person. Corey, a tall man with bright eyes and a scruffy, close-cropped beard, remembers being instantly smitten. In her plaid shirt and jeans, Bellesen seemed casual but confident. Her hair, long and dark at the time, spiraled down past her waist. And then there was the ease he felt around her: “It was like talking to an old friend,” he recalls. Their first date played like something out of a movie. First they went for a meal, followed by a stroll by a lake. Sitting on a rock by the water’s edge, lost in conversation, they were caught unaware when the sky turned black. But even as the downpour began, they chose to stay – if but to remain in each other’s company a little while longer. Soaking wet, they drove back to Corey’s house to dry off on the porch. He knew right away that she was the one. “It was crazy,” he says. “She just had a smile and a gleam in her eye.” They got married that same year. By 2017, Bellesen was finishing a degree in addiction studies. She wanted to be a counselor. Looking for opportunities, she stumbled across a listing for the Abbie Shelter, a Kalispell nonprofit supporting survivors of domestic and sexual violence. She decided to volunteer. Entering its headquarters for the first time proved to be a shock. It was nothing like the cold, institutional shelter Bellesen had spent nights in back in Washington. She made her way across a big yard dotted with flowers and a swing set, toward a welcoming, purple-trimmed house. Inside, she was greeted with the fuzzy pillows, couches and a room buzzing with life. At the center of it all was the Abbie Shelter’s executive director, Hilary Shaw. Bellesen met Shaw at her first volunteer meeting. A chipper, self-described ski bunny from Connecticut – who jokes that she moved to Montana after meeting a “cute guy,” her husband – Shaw sat breastfeeding in the middle of the room. It was an image of confidence that seared itself into Bellesen’s mind. “When she spoke, she spoke in a way that I never really heard another woman speak before,” Bellesen explains. “It was the voice of a woman who had been told her whole life that she was perfect just the way she was and that she was confident and capable and strong.” Bellesen pauses. “And I had not experienced women like that, ever.” Bellesen set to work making herself an essential part of the Abbie Shelter community. She even brought her own set of power tools, helping to fix the fence and rewire the electrical system. Soon, she was promoted from volunteer to staff member. Still, Bellesen kept much of her personal experiences to herself. “I’ve found over the years that, when I would tell people about my history with Jake or growing up with my stepdad, they either would get extremely angry about the situation or they would get completely grossed out about it and distance themselves.” But even as Bellesen made strides in her new life, she couldn’t shake her nagging self-doubt. Glace’s voice echoed in the back of her mind, taunting her, warning her she wasn’t good enough. She couldn’t escape it. Nor, as it turns out, could she escape Glace himself. The assertive Roman nose. The blue-grey eyes. The small ears. The strong jawline. Every time Isaac Glace caught a glimpse of himself, he saw a younger version of his father: “I’d look in the mirror and I’d see the person I hated the most on this earth.” Isaac, now in his early 20s, hadn’t always felt that way. Growing up, he saw his parents’ relationship as nothing more than “an awkward game of custodial tug of war”, no different than in other divorced families. As Glace and Bellesen’s youngest son, Isaac was too little to remember his move to Montana. But he does recall that his father started commuting to the state shortly afterwards. Glace would try to insinuate himself into his children’s lives, attending birthdays and theater recitals. “My father, he would show up one night, like every six months, and take me and my brother out to dinner or something,” Isaac recalls. He could tell his parents’ reunions were uneasy but that they muscled through with a “do-it-for-the-kids” attitude. But something still felt off. As Isaac entered his teenage years, he started to realize the tension went beyond the usual divorce drama. It prompted Bellesen and her husband Corey to join him for a family therapy session. There, Isaac started to learn about his mother’s past – and his father’s violence. “It felt so obvious in hindsight, you know? And I felt bad for not understanding sooner what had gone on,” Isaac says. As he grew older, there were more and more incidents that chipped away at his father’s nice-guy persona. The turning point came one night when Isaac was about 15 years old. He had gone to visit Glace in the town of Plains, Montana, where he was living with his then-girlfriend, Jasmine Sayler. It was close to midnight when Isaac was awoken up by the sounds of a fight. “Whore.” “Bitch.” Isaac remembers his father, drunk, shouting in Sayler’s face. He feared the insults would escalate into violence, so he dialed 911. But then Glace did a sudden about-face. His anger disappeared. He seemed calm, kind even. And with the 911 operator on the other end of the line, he convinced Isaac to end the call. “The moment I hung up, he went right back to being incredibly violent and incredibly abusive – but this time to me.” Isaac says Glace pointed a rifle in his face before storming off into the night. Ultimately, it was on the premise of talking about his son that Glace suggested he and Bellesen meet on the afternoon of 8 October 2020. Bellesen felt she had little choice: Glace was upset at Isaac and itching to confront him. If Bellesen didn’t agree to a visit, she feared Glace might ambush Isaac and berate him – or worse. The day started like any other. Her husband Corey, an operations manager at an internet service provider, got out of bed in his Lakeside home and kissed his sleeping wife goodbye before heading to work. By the time he saw her again that evening, she was sitting at the Cornerstone Convenience store on a desolate stretch of Highway 28, racked with shock. Corey’s eyes traveled from her tattered shirt to the blood on her jeans. Bellesen had been planning for a relaxing afternoon. She had a half day off, so as soon as she wrapped up her work at the Abbie Shelter, she headed to the slopes of Blacktail Mountain for a hike with her dog. That’s when she received Glace’s telephone call, pressuring her to meet. She was irritated. Still, she did what she thought was right: She returned the dog home and prepared to set out on the hour-long drive to Paradise, Montana, where Glace was living at the time. Nobody knew where she was going, not even her husband – Corey wouldn’t have approved. Instead, she texted him and kept her absence vague: “work is busy, I’ll see you late tonight.” When Bellesen arrived, she noticed Glace had been drinking. His demeanor seemed a little too friendly. “He has this face that he gets where he smiles, but his eyes don’t smile,” she would later tell her defense team. Bellesen had arrived in a new car, a 2020 Land Rover Discovery, and Glace insisted they take it for a drive. It would give them more privacy, he argued. She obliged, despite her misgivings. She suspected his friendliness was a smokescreen for his anger. With Bellesen behind the wheel, Glace guided her out of his sleepy little town, away from its lonely antique store and white picket fences. They drove across the Clark Fork River, over train tracks and down an empty road where the conifers grew tall and dense. A rocky outcropping rose out of the ground before them, about two stories high. Glace instructed Bellesen to turn onto a dirt road behind it, where a clearing opened onto the river. They parked, and Bellesen lifted the back hatch of the car. She sat on the tailgate while they shared swigs of vodka. “Well, what do you want me to say?” Bellesen remembers asking, exasperated. The conversation about their son had reached an impasse. Glace deflected: “You look really good.” He commented on her breasts, sneering about how Corey was a lucky guy. His temperament seemed erratic – and Bellesen grew anxious to leave. She glanced at her cellphone. No signal. Glace moved in for a kiss. She quickly pushed him away, but by then, the hairs on the back of her neck were standing on end. She moved to slide off the tailgate, but her feet never reached the ground. In that second, she says, Glace had come at her again – only this time, he pinned her down by the shoulder and was ripping at her shirt with his free hand, tearing the buttons and the clasp of her bra. It all happened so fast. Trapped under his weight, she feared he would choke her like he had in the past. She felt like she might die. His eyes seemed so narrow, so glassy. Scratched and bruised, she managed to wriggle free – but Glace’s hand shot forward as she sprinted around the side of the Land Rover, catching her pants with such force that her pants went slack. Her zipper had broken. But she made it to the front car door. As she tried to climb inside, Glace behind her, she noticed Corey’s Glock 26 pistol in the car’s center console. She spun around, closed her eyes, and squeezed the trigger. Missoula-based attorney Lance Jasper was not looking for another homicide case to represent. In fact, as he puts it, he was having a pretty shitty day. His wife lives with progressive multiple sclerosis, an incurable disease that attacks the nervous system, and was in the process of transitioning to a wheelchair. Jasper was frustrated: there was nothing he could do to stop the disease’s advance. He was faced with a constant onslaught of bad news he was powerless to do anything about. “I like to have control – or at least think I can direct the outcome of something in a manner consistent with effort, right? If you try hard enough, things will get better,” he says. “Whereas when you are stricken with a disease you can’t do anything about, you just watch it take a person, the person you love the most.” It was during this time that a friend at the public defender’s office tipped him off about a new case: a woman was in jail in Thompson Falls, Montana, charged with deliberate homicide in the shooting of her abusive ex. Would Jasper be interested in representing her? He wasn’t sold on the idea but leapt at the prospect of getting out of the office. Driving helped clear his mind. A straight-talking ex-construction worker with a round face and a horseshoe mustache, Jasper counts nearly two decades of working criminal defense cases. But what he saw in the Thompson Falls jail that day was a rarity in his line of work. It was a “unicorn” case – a true instance of self-defense. Bellesen sat across from him behind a glass window, speaking into a telephone mounted on the wall. She kept repeating: “I didn’t have a choice, I didn’t have a choice.” Bellesen was afraid she was facing the death penalty, but Jasper knew such a verdict was rare in Montana. Only three people had been executed in the state since 1976. A lengthy prison sentence, however, was not out of the question. “I saw a woman really in terror,” Jasper says. “I didn’t quite have a real idea of all the trauma at that point in time that she had went through. But what I saw was a victim.” Experts often explain domestic violence as a means of control – a pattern of behavior used to intimidate, silence and isolate victims, on top of any physical injury they may endure. As he started to delve into Bellesen’s case, he saw how that control had played out in Glace and Bellesen’s relationship. But here was a chance to seize back the control – both in Bellesen’s life and his own – by coming to her defense. Jasper decided to take the case pro bono. “It helps balance me, in the sense that seeing someone else in need, that’s something I can do,” Jasper says. “You’re not changing the world, but you can change some things.” The first hurdle, however, was getting Bellesen out of jail. Bellesen had been in custody ever since police officer Gary Stanberry picked her up from the convenience store where she and Corey dialed 911. Home since then had been a square cement cell she shared with three other women. One of her cell-mates, Bellesen soon learned, was a domestic abuser herself. Lying on her bunk, Bellesen tried to drown out the insults the woman screamed over the telephone to her family by placing a blanket over her head. “Being forced to listen to that every day for three weeks was horrible,” she says. Estimates vary as to how many incarcerated women have suffered sexual abuse and domestic violence themselves, though many studies suggest a correlation. One 1999 survey of female prisoners in New York documented a rate of physical and sexual abuse as high as 94%. And yet, a struggle remains when states hand down charges and sentences. In 2021 alone, advocates in Washington state and Oregon introduced bills requiring courts to consider histories of domestic abuse, when relevant, as cause for lowering criminal penalties. These bills were modeled after similar legislation in California, Illinois and New York, which enacted its Domestic Violence Survivors Justice Act in 2019. Both bills have thus far failed to pass, but they are part of a growing field of domestic violence law that, itself, is relatively new. “The fact of [domestic] violence has gone on for hundreds, thousands of years. But it’s only, I would say, since the 1960s and 1970s that there has been the recognition, understanding it as a serious legal harm,” says law professor Elizabeth M Schneider, an early leader in the field. Even when legal strides are made, it can take time for the public – and the justice system by extension – to catch up. “What we see in many areas,” Schneider explains, “is that even when the law changes, it can take the public a very, very long time to change.” Even though Bellesen had survived what she saw as an attempted rape, Jasper noticed that her body wasn’t treated like the crime scene it was. No photos were taken of her ripped clothing, her scratches, when officers first encountered her. And what evidence was collected was improperly handled, he says. “We only had what the police put in their report, which was geared to saying it was a homicide,” Jasper explains. Later, as he interviewed Sanders county investigator Brian Josephson as part of Bellesen’s defense, Jasper would discover that officers delayed taking Bellesen to a clinic certified in collecting forensic evidence for sexual assault. “Why did you not take her there?” Jasper asked him. Josephson replied: “There was not penetration, so I decided not to take her there.” There are moments in life when your world suddenly shifts. For Abbie Shelter executive director Hilary Shaw, one of those moments came late on 8 October 2020, when her phone rang with a call from Bellesen’s husband Corey. Those early hours were filled with shock and confusion. She knew little beyond the basics: that Bellesen had shot her abuser. “There wasn’t a clear path of escalation in Jake and Rachel’s relationship towards homicide, the way there typically is when someone’s still in that abusive relationship,” Shaw says. Only later did she discover that Glace’s violence had escalated – just with different partners. At the time of his death, he faced two charges from 2020 of felony “partner or family member assault” – one in nearby Mineral county and one in Sanders county itself. Still, Shaw never doubted that her colleague acted in self-defense. “It’s a great illustration of how there are some abusers that you just can’t ever be free of,” she says. That night, Shaw didn’t sleep. Instead, she drafted a list of who to call in the morning, laying the groundwork for a grassroots campaign in support of Bellesen. One of the first people she reached out to was Kelsen Young at the Montana Coalition Against Domestic and Sexual Violence. Whenever she’s asked to illustrate the hurdles of prosecuting domestic violence in Montana, Young points to one fact: it takes only two offenses for an animal abuser to qualify for a felony. For domestic abuse, it takes three. But the solution isn’t as simple as changing the laws. “I would love to be able to say that our criminal codes need enhancements and that the path to enhancing those is clear. It’s just not,” Young says. A bill designed to stiffen penalties for domestic violence might enter the Montana legislature — and come out with amendments that make existing punishments more lax, Young explains. The result is that her organization sometimes has to defeat its own legislation. Bellesen’s case was playing out against the backdrop of an election year, so Young had to be careful. Montana Republicans were on the eve of taking back the governor’s mansion for the first time in a decade. Young had to weigh whether her coalition’s support would turn Bellesen’s case into a political football. “Just the right amount of pressure might’ve made it worse” for Bellesen, Young says. The initial plan was a show of force at Bellesen’s bail hearing: bail was set at $200,000, far beyond what she and Corey could afford to pay. Bellesen’s colleagues at the Abbie Shelter had started a GoFundMe campaign to offset the costs. The next step was to show support, either by calling the prosecutor or attending the hearing itself. Young did receive pushback from members of her coalition, which includes advocates based in state and local government. They felt it was a conflict of interest to weigh in on the affairs of their colleagues in Sanders County. But Shaw was adamant they move forward: “It’s like: Who are we serving? Are we serving our partners in the judicial system who can’t handle being held accountable for their mistakes? Or are we serving survivors? When we try and advocate for survivors in a way that reflects poorly against prosecutors, it’s not okay for us to be shamed about that.” On 27 October 2020, Bellesen and Jasper appeared in front of Judge James Manley in an attempt to lower the bail. Due to the pandemic, the public was invited to attend remotely, via Zoom. Bail hearings are usually sparsely attended – a few dozen people on a good day – but this time, Jasper remembers the tally of Zoom participants kept climbing. “Judge Manley’s a guy that kinda has got a furrowed brow. And he just starts looking at me, shaking his head,” Jasper recalls, chuckling at the judge’s bewilderment. The number of participants that day peaked at over 100. By the evening, Bellesen was free from jail, her bail dropped to $20,000. It was a triumphant day – but not wholly so for Bellesen. What she remembers, more than anything, is the shame she experienced walking into the bail hearing. Even to be transported from the jail to the courthouse – neighboring buildings – Bellesen says she had to be shackled at the ankles and wrists, with a big leather belt across her stomach to secure her chains. With the addition of a face mask to protect against the spread of Covid, she felt like Hannibal Lecter. As she turned a corner to walk past the metal detector, she found herself face to face with her husband and kids. It was humiliating. “I had to walk past them dressed with those chains and everything. I wasn’t allowed to look at them,” she says softly. And then there was the courtroom itself. To her left, a TV was set up to display the Zoom participants. The screen was speckled with little squares, each representing a different viewer. It felt like the whole world was watching – and there she was, looking like a murderer. Bellesen had been aware that Glace had had other relationships since their marriage. But she never knew just how violent those relationships had been. She had no clue other women had been raped, too: “I thought it was just me.” But in the courtroom that day, Jasper called a witness Bellesen knew personally: Jasmine Sayler. She and Glace met in the winter of 2010, when Sayler was a single mother working at a casino. Within months, they were dating. At first, Glace seemed polite and caring. But then the insults and accusations started. And when Sayler became pregnant with the first of their two children in 2013, Glace turned physically violent. From there, the aggression only intensified. Sayler remembers one incident when her son was four: Glace had shoved her on a coffee table, with his forearm across her throat and his fist balled around a handful of her hair. His other arm was raised to punch when her son burst in, yelling: “No! Don’t hurt mommy!” She felt like a shell of the person she once was. Even her kids were affected. The slightest disturbance sent them into a state of terror. Once, a FedEx delivery man knocked on the door unexpectedly. “I found them in the kitchen with my son protecting my youngest daughter behind him with a butter knife.” Sayler pauses. “They were seven and five at the time.” Sayler says she stopped counting how many times she called the cops on Glace – how many times her neighbors called, her kids called. Each time, when the authorities arrived, Glace had either settled down or left the house. No action was taken. “The main thing people don’t get is that men, women and children are not just sitting there getting abused, doing nothing,” she says. “They also don’t understand that people do try to leave, but when you try to leave, that’s when it’s more dangerous.” Sayler was one of the two women who filed felony assault charges against Glace in the spring of 2020. But even after Sayler and her children enrolled in the Montana’s Address Confidentiality Program as part of a protection order to keep Glace away, Sayler still had to contend with his manipulations. She says he used family and friends to gather information about her whereabouts. Speaking to the court by telephone in Bellesen’s bail hearing, Sayler remembers being asked if she was afraid – not of Glace but of Bellesen. The question alone made her angry. Her answer was matter of fact: No, absolutely not. The evidence of Glace’s prior assaults was overwhelming. There was a trail of police reports stretching back to his time in Washington state. But what Jasper needed to understand were the specifics of Bellesen’s self-defense – specifics that could help diffuse any arguments that this was an “execution,” as one police detective termed it. After all, that same history of abuse could be argued as motive for premeditated murder. Jasper knew the burden was on the prosecution to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that Bellesen’s actions did not constitute self-defense. But he was also aware that, around the country, defendants with histories of sexual violence routinely end up behind bars, despite claims that they feared for their lives. They include high-profile cases like Cyntoia Brown, Nicole “Nikki” Addimando and Marissa Alexander. Studies indicate that juries can bring powerful misconceptions into the courtroom, including the idea that an abused partner can simply exit the relationship. A 2012 report found 62% of mock jurors felt battered women were convicted in self-defense cases because they should have found an alternative to homicide. Jasper had to find a way to make Bellesen’s fear real for the courtroom. In her panic, Bellesen had taken actions even Jasper struggled to understand: how did she manage to shoot Glace five times in the heat of the moment, when she only remembers squeezing the trigger twice? Why did she wait to dial 911? And why did she jettison Glace’s shirt and cellphone as she drove away? He had to illustrate the toll domestic violence could take on the psyche. Bellesen’s future depended on it. “If you do lose, you know that that innocent person’s likely going to spend the majority of their life in prison,” Jasper reminded himself. So he decided to assemble a “million-dollar defense”: a group of experts, all working pro bono, that he dubbed “the A-Team”. Jamie Merifield was among the firearms specialists, medical experts and legal advisors that Jasper assembled. A blonde woman with short curly hair, born and raised in Montana, Merifield formerly served 12 years as a police detective specializing in domestic and sexual violence. She also happened to have firsthand experience with sexual assault. Her abuser, she says, was a fellow detective, a good-time guy everyone seemed to like: quick with a smile, quick with a laugh. In 2007, she alleges he trapped her in her chair, opening her legs and placing his knee between them while “verbally berating” her. “When I was assaulted, I was terrified,” Merifield says. The distrust many sexual assault survivors feel toward the criminal justice system was something she grappled with herself, even as a member of the police force. “I didn’t say anything for six weeks.” What stood out to Merifield about Bellesen’s case was that she was never treated like a victim. Bellesen was put into handcuffs before the police even ascertained whether she needed medical attention. “Law enforcement is a power-and-control job, and so is domestic violence. The difference is, law enforcement should be on the right side of it,” Merifield says. While Merifield was tasked with reviewing police procedure, Sarah Baxter – a clinical and forensic psychologist – was brought on board to help unravel the dynamics of abuse. In a state where outsiders can sometimes be viewed with suspicion, Baxter takes pride in the fact that she’s from Twodot, a tiny agricultural town named for the dots a local cattleman used to mark his herds. Her goal was to articulate why Bellesen took actions others might struggle to understand. “Sometimes child sexual abuse survivors seem to really repeat that pattern and hook up with people who tend to be also abusive,” Baxter says. “They don’t read dangerous situations well. And rather than learn from their experiences, they seem bound to repeat them to some extent.” That mindset can be difficult for judges and juries to understand, Baxter adds. “That can turn into victim-blaming, in the sense of people asking, ‘Well, why was she drinking? Why did she go out to X, Y or Z location?’” Baxter also believes the burden of shared parenting played a large role in Bellesen’s decisions. “That’s a failing of our legal system, because we can’t figure out very effectively how to manage the co-parenting relationship when there’s been domestic violence,” she says. For Bellesen herself, the challenge was how to work through her trauma. Jasper feared that she might sound rehearsed on the witness stand if she delved too deeply into the events during therapy. “When you go to trial, you don’t want to have someone necessarily that has dealt with the issues [with a counselor]. It all needs to be raw,” Jasper explains. “It needs to be as real as it can be.” But that was difficult. “I really just tried not to think about it,” Bellesen says. She immersed herself in house projects: repainting her kitchen, baking, watching a lot of what she calls “stupid TV”. Sitting at her black Janome sewing machine, she threw herself into quilting for the first time in years, piecing together tiny scraps of fabric into a king-size blanket. Her everyday routines had been upended. Before, she and Corey used to eat brunch in a little café each weekend, the kind of place where the wait staff knew your name. But the events of October 2020 put a stop to that. “I don’t think we’ve been back to that place twice since October,” Corey says. The first time they did attempt to go out, for a meal at Famous Dave’s BBQ, Rachel’s face was plastered on the front cover of the local newspaper. Copies were available for guests to read at the entrance of the restaurant. “Sure as shit, it was sitting right there as we walked in,” Corey recalls. As his wife sat down at a table, clearly shaken, Corey excused himself. He walked over to the stack of newspapers and turned them upside down. “I don’t think there was a day we could go by without being reminded of it,” he says. “We constantly lived with the fact that, if [the trial] goes wrong, this could be the end.” The Bellesens describe themselves as an introverted family, and the media attention and the pressure of the case made them retreat even further. Articles rehashed Bellesen’s history with addiction and suicide, plunging her into anxiety and shame. Knowing her friends and colleagues at the Abbie Shelter could be called as potential witnesses, Bellesen couldn’t reach out to them. “I was cut out of the very service that my agency provides,” she says. Her children were supportive, but she was keenly aware that they were grieving too – and that she was the person who killed their father. She offered them comfort as best as she could, but her past threatened to overwhelm her. “Not only did it all just come rushing back out of nowhere – all of the memories are just as vivid as if those things had just happened – but the whole world knows about it now,” Bellesen says. Glace’s voice kept echoing in her mind: “No one’s going to believe you.” Bellesen desperately wanted to stay in bed until the whole ordeal was over. But as the months passed and the winter snows started to melt, the defense team proposed a new tactic: reenacting the afternoon of 8 October on the very site where it happened. “I was horrified. I did not want to do that,” Bellesen says, furrowing her brow at the thought. By that point, she was working with A&amp;E on a TV documentary about her case. The legal team would be recording the reenactment for her defense, while the A&amp;E crew would capture it for TV. The day of the reenactment, Bellesen had three sets of microphone wires snaking up her shirt. All eyes were on her. She plucked up her courage by reminding herself this was a chance to tell her story: If the media was going to talk about her anyway, she might as well have her say. One moment in particular caught her off-guard. She looked up to see the crime-scene dummy in the same position Glace was lying in after he was shot. “Everything was exactly the same as in that moment,” Bellesen says. “It all came flooding back. Like I got hit by a semi-truck.” Baxter caught sight of Bellesen as she doubled over. “I thought she was going to vomit, but she was just gasping for breath.” But despite the stress involved, the defense team hoped the reenactment would help bolster their evidence – and convince Montana assistant attorney general Chris McConnell to dismiss the case. In April, the prosecution seemingly relented. It submitted a motion to dismiss the case, citing the difficulty it faced in meeting the high burden of proof. But in the final paragraph, the prosecution included an ominous note: it hoped to “make a determination at a later date” whether to refile the case. Jasper says that language infuriated him. “I don’t think I’ve been that pissed in my life ever. When I get a dismissal, I should be doing a dance,” he says. The possibility that Bellesen could be recharged left his client vulnerable. Chances were high that she wouldn’t have the same resources in the future as she did with Jasper. And because there is no statute of limitations for deliberate homicide charges, the case would hang over her head for the rest of her life. “It frustrated the shit out of me,” Jasper says, swearing liberally at the thought of it. His voice rising, he emphasizes that self-defense is perfectly legal: “There’s nothing wrong with the state patting someone on the back and saying, ‘You know what? You did follow the law. And that’s why it’s here. It’s here to protect you.’” For Jasper, the evidence was clear. “She didn’t get away with murder. She saved herself from being murdered.” Bellesen also found herself filled with rage. “It was a slap in the face,” she says. She decided then and there that she would risk trial rather than living with the possibility of criminal charges looming over her. She was done staying silent. Isaac Glace had to psych himself up to go to court on 25 May. He didn’t know if the hearing would be another step in sending his mother behind bars – or if it would result in her freedom. He felt so nervous, he forgot to take his sunglasses off as he walked into district court judge Amy Eddy’s courtroom. Lance Jasper and his mother were already seated; so too were supporters and experts ready to testify. But a counter-protest had also assembled: about 10 individuals wearing shirts printed with the slogan “Justice for Jake.” From the get-go, Bellesen and her supporters were nervous. They were pushing for what seemed to be the impossible: a dismissal with prejudice, one that would prevent prosecutors from ever pursuing the case again. After hearing arguments from prosecution and defense attorneys, Judge Eddy announced she was prepared to issue a decision immediately. Citing Bellesen’s constitutional rights and a lack of substantive outstanding evidence, she announced the case was indeed dismissed – with prejudice. Rachel Bellesen threw her head back in relief. “I think I had been holding my breath while she was talking. And then when she said that, it was like all the air just rushed into my body,” she says. “It was indescribable really – maybe the exact opposite of the way it felt when that first judge said ‘punishable by death.’” Jasper himself had been feeling the ups and downs of the court acutely: “At first you think you’re winning. Then you’re losing, winning, losing.” When he sensed the judge was about to make her final pronouncement, he did something he doesn’t ordinarily do: He glanced at his client’s face. “So I turn, and I look at her. And there was a moment there I’ll never forget – of seeing that weight lifted and that faith coming back to her, in a way that I just can’t describe.” The decision came as such a surprise that Isaac didn’t even realize his mother had won until he started to hear clapping. A wave of relief rushed over him, as if hope itself had been restored to his life. “There gets to be a tomorrow,” he remembers thinking. “There gets to be a future.” Isaac believes his mother’s legal victory sends a message: “If it can happen in small-town, rural Montana, despite the odds, it can happen anywhere.” He is now in college, studying criminology. He aims to help families like his. When Bellesen woke up the morning after the verdict, she didn’t feel the elation she expected. Instead, she was swallowed by depression. “I couldn’t figure out why I was feeling that way,” she says. “I’m like, ‘The best possible outcome that one could expect happened. I got what we fought so hard for. Why am I not happier?’” In ways big and small, the people around her were contending with similar feelings. For Abbie Shelter executive director Hilary Shaw, it was a quote published in the Associated Press that got under her skin. A “Justice for Jake” supporter had told the reporter, “She walked out of there after she killed my best friend because she knew the right people, she knew what to say, she knew what she was doing.” Those words cut deep. “When Jake’s friend made that comment of ‘she knew all the right people,’ that was painful for me,” Shaw says. “Not that I thought he was right, that Rachel unjustly or unethically utilized her connections to get an unjust outcome. But that, because Rachel is connected to all the right people, she did receive more support than most survivors would. And as service providers, that is painful for us to admit.” Corey Bellesen was likewise grappling with the fury he felt reading reactions on social media – comments along the lines of: “Money can buy you freedom.” He understood, to a degree, where those reactions stemmed from. “You’re supposed to be innocent until proven guilty. But in reality, if you don’t have the means to prove your innocence, you’re guilty,” he says. He estimates his family’s out-of-pocket expenses ranged from $30,000 to $40,000, just for travel, medical bills, jailhouse phone calls and costs like the alcohol monitoring bracelet Bellesen was forced to wear. His nails dig into his crossed arms as he recalls how he installed a camera in his truck at one point, fearing he was being tailed by the police in Sanders county. If Jasper had not offered legal services for free, he believes his wife would be in prison. “Do I think if this was in the hands of the public defender that we would have had such a favorable outcome? Absolutely not.” Bellesen herself echoes those concerns. She sees factors like race and class weighing heavily in her case, paving the way for a successful outcome. “If you’re a victim of abuse, you probably struggle with substance abuse and chronic, untreated mental illness,” she says. “And if you do have to use lethal self-defense, odds are you’re probably not going to be the right color. You’re probably not going to be someone with enough money. You’re not going to be sober enough.” In the months since Judge Eddy’s decision, Bellesen and her family have endeavored to move on from last year’s events. In June, Bellesen’s Land Rover was released from the police impound. After cleaning away the crime scene tape, Corey quickly sold it. He didn’t want his wife to see it again. Bellesen herself was able to return to work at the Abbie Shelter in a new role: community advocate. She lights up just talking about it. Ever the crafter, she already plans to paint a landscape onto the wall of her new office: a window onto the world that’s forever sunny. When asked about whether she feared lingering suspicions in the community – or from the “Justice for Jake” crowd – Bellesen instead expresses sympathy. “Abusers are manipulators, the very best of the kind, and they don’t just manipulate their partners. They also manipulate everyone they’re around,” she says. Glace’s supporters may not know it, she adds, but they’re victims too: “Just a different kind of victim. They’ve been completely duped.” Still, Bellesen struggles to move forward as she seeks to redefine her life without the violence that shaped her. “All the way up until the day of the hearing really, I had spent all of my life just fighting against one abuse after another, one horrifying event after another,” she says. “When you go through things like that over and over and over and over again, it just becomes part of who you are. It’s written into your narrative, your internal belief system about yourself.” Her chin quivers. “I did not know how to live in a life where those things didn’t exist anymore.” Those feelings are beginning to subside, though the nightmares about Glace endure. Still, it pains her to see the people she cares about wrestling with the fallout of Glace’s death. At least one is battling mental health and substance abuse issues. On 8 October 2020, after Bellesen shot her abuser, she remembers thinking, “It couldn’t get any worse than this.” But now she says it can – and it has. “I can honestly say that I would rather go through October 8th every day for the rest of my life” than watch her loved ones suffer, she says quietly. Since her legal victory, well-wishers have congratulated her. “I bet you’re glad to have your life go back to normal,” they offer. But Bellesen knows life doesn’t go back to normal after domestic assault. There is no normal to go back to. The only thing she can think to do now is discover who she might be without violence in her life – and go forward from there. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.org.We’ve heard much about the importance of stories in recent years. It has been said that Vote Leave won the Brexit referendum because they told a better story than Remain; that Donald Trump won the US election in 2016 because he told a better story than Hillary Clinton, and lost in 2020 because his story fell apart. Some think the Labour party has struggled to turn the tide decisively against a corrupt, chaotic government because it doesn’t have a clear story to tell. Stories have been central to community organisation for as long as communities have been organised. As Nesrine Malik writes in her insightful collection of essays, We Need New Stories: “Every social unit, from the family to the nation state, functions on the basis of mythology, stories that set them apart from others.” National stories can support any viewpoint: left or rightwing, liberal or authoritarian. They are integral to nationalism and represent a form of identity politics. While many across the political spectrum dislike nationalism and identity politics, the world is mostly made up of nation states. Unless that changes, those nations will continue to be part of how we identify ourselves – whether or not we embrace or reject their dominant values. Politicians of all stripes ignore the power of national stories at their cost. National stories may encompass science, the arts and religion, yet they are rooted in history: they create a narrative of how a nation, uniquely, was formed. These stories are always exceptionalist, suggesting that “our” nation is different from (and usually superior to) others. They are intended to exclude as much as they are intended to unite. In Britain, there have been many attempts to construct national mythologies from a complex and chequered history. Our Island Story by HE Marshall, first published in 1905, is still often referenced today; in 2010, the then prime minister David Cameron named it his favourite childhood book. Marshall emphasised that Our Island Story “is not a history lesson, but a storybook”. She advised her young readers: “I hope you will not put this beside your school books, but quite at the other end of the shelf, beside Robinson Crusoe and A Noah’s Ark Geography.” Whether or not this advice was effective, many of them internalised her depiction of an exceptional ascent to greatness. National stories are not set in stone. In fact, comparing different versions written decades or centuries apart can reveal dramatic shifts. In 1746, the Duke of Cumberland, son of George II, defeated Bonnie Prince Charlie’s Jacobite rebels at Culloden. Cumberland ordered “no quarter” be given to Jacobite survivors. Slaughter ensued. In the immediate aftermath of his bloody triumph, Cumberland was hailed as a “Hero-God” in England (and in much of lowland Scotland). He was burnished as an icon of progressive British liberty against the regressive, superstitious authoritarianism of the Catholic Stuarts. The Highlanders and Jacobites who had fought him were represented, in the words of historian Murray Pittock, “as savages to be tamed”. Handel wrote his famous oratorio chorus “See, the conqu’ring hero comes!” in Cumberland’s honour. A century later, everything had changed. Queen Victoria was then on the throne: she adored Scotland, and Highlanders particularly. The truth about Culloden was now well known. Victoria’s great-grand-uncle, the Duke of Cumberland, was no longer seen as the “godlike youth” of Handel’s chorus, but as the “Butcher of Culloden”: a monster, a villain, an embarrassment. The national story changed to accommodate this. Cumberland’s statue in London was removed in 1868. Victoria herself is thought to have ordered the erasure of the word “Culloden” from his memorial obelisk in Windsor Great Park. In 1856, a popular history book, The Comprehensive History of England, claimed that Cumberland “left behind him in Scotland the name of the Butcher, and the people of England, disgusted sooner than any other with cruelty, confirmed this title to the hero of Culloden”. The story continued to be one of British and English exceptionalism, modernity and unity. The difference was that in 1746 these values had been demonstrated by the English people celebrating Cumberland, whereas by 1856 they were demonstrated by their rejecting him. So, while national stories may be rooted in history, they are not history. As the historian Richard Evans has said: “History isn’t a myth-making discipline, it’s a myth-busting discipline.” The process of historical inquiry inevitably challenges national stories. It is, therefore, often seen as a threat by their proponents: witness the recent attacks on the National Trust for stating some discomfiting facts about the links of some of its properties to colonialism and historic slavery in an academically rigorous report. National stories are propaganda, fairytales, superhero origin stories. They are supposed to unite, and exclude, through belief. As with all forms of faith, true believers will defend them vigorously. In repressive societies, this defence of faith often prevails over historical research and analysis. Societies that are more at ease with themselves are generally much less anxious about the truth coming out. It is possible to tell national stories that are sober and restrained; that speak of shared liberal values, democracy, artistic and scientific achievement, diversity of views or identities. Fundamentally, they are still fictions. Those who tell them will pride themselves on the unique sophistication of their own grown-up national stories compared to everyone else’s absurd delusions, thus neatly reinforcing the paradigm of exceptionalism yet again. Perhaps one day someone will find a more compelling story to tell beyond nationalism, and national stories will cease to have such a hold on us. For the moment, they are with us, whether we feel we “need” them or not. So long as this holds true, it is important to recognise that the prejudices within them are never fixed. Every generation interrogates and questions what it is told: the stories must adapt. The enduring popularity of myths may frustrate historians, but we can comfort ourselves that those myths are always in flux. It’s a sign of health if our societies are open to change; if we never entirely agree. •Alex von Tunzelmann’s Fallen Idols: Twelve Statues That Made History is published by Headline. To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. Further reading Britons Forging the Nation 1707-1837 by Linda Colley (Yale, £16.99) We Need New Stories: Challenging the Toxic Myths Behind Our Age of Discontent by Nesrine Malik (W&amp;N, £8.99) Imperial Nostalgia: How the British Conquered Themselves by PDK Mitchell (Manchester, £14.99)A national disability insurance scheme provider did not accept a woman’s claim she was physically assaulted by a support worker even though the employee admitted pushing the client to the ground, the disability royal commission has heard. NDIS provider Life Without Barriers is facing allegations of neglect and violence that took place at homes in New South Wales and Victoria. Facing the royal commission on Monday, Stephen Doley, a director of policy at Life Without Barriers, conceded the provider had made mistakes at the troubled homes. That included not consulting residents and families about new clients that would be moving in and the failure to report serious incidents to the NDIS watchdog. Those admissions followed claims last week that some residents had been repeatedly physically assaulted by other clients at the Victoria home to the point where violence had become “normal”. Doley also admitted an internal investigation into claims a support worker had pushed over one of the residents at the NSW home was flawed. The inquiry last week heard a resident known by the pseudonym Sophie was kicked out of the home in 2019 after she attacked the support workers. Sophie, who lives with cerebral palsy, a mild to moderate intellectual disability and left hemiplegia, had been sexually assaulted outside the home by a date about two years earlier and was stressed by the ongoing court proceedings. Sophie claimed her behaviour followed an earlier incident where one of the support workers had pushed her to the ground. The inquiry heard Sophie hurt her leg and had bruising after the incident. Life Without Barriers ran an internal investigation which later informed Sophie’s parents there was “insufficient evidence of any wrongdoing by a worker”. Sophie was evicted from the home by Life Without Barriers. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Yet the inquiry on Monday heard the employee had told the investigation they admitted pushing Sophie to the ground. Doley agreed with criticism from the NDIS watchdog that the provider’s internal investigation was flawed. “Not only was that referenced by Sophie herself in an interview, it appears that the worker had also admitted to that taking place,” he said. “So by virtue of that, I think the allegation … should have been substantiated.” Doley also accepted rules imposed on Sophie denying her the right to have visitors after 6pm – including her then fiance – were not appropriate. He said there were “some complexities” in creating policies to allow Sophie to explore sexual intimacy, but she “certainly” should have been allowed to have her boyfriend stay over at the house. Last week the inquiry was told Sophie had been sexually assaulted in a public park after she was forced to leave her home to meet up with another date that she’d connected with online. Under questioning by counsel assisting Belinda Baker, Doley agreed the provider should have reviewed these rules prohibiting male visitors after the assault. Doley was also grilled about how another resident at the NSW home, known by the pseudonym Natalie, had been hospitalised with a bowel instruction after her support workers failed to follow her care protocols. Natalie, who has cerebral palsy and a moderate intellectual disability, required major surgery and her mother told the inquiry last week she had nearly died. Doley conceded on Monday there were about three months of bowel charts that were not filled out by support workers. He agreed this was a “clear deficiency” and said the provider had taken steps to improve its processes. Doley also confirmed Natalie’s hospitalisation was not reported to the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission and that Life Without Barriers failed to review the incident. He also agreed it was wrong that the provider had not always followed a request from Natalie’s mother that her daughter’s personal care was only carried out by female staff. That request followed allegations that Natalie had been indecently assaulted by a staff member. The support worker was charged in 2015, but found not guilty two years later. He was dismissed from Life Without Barriers. Life Without Barriers’ chief executive Claire Robbs will front the inquiry on Tuesday. • Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467; Kids helpline 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636South and North Korea, China and the US have agreed “in principle” to declare a formal end to the Korean war, almost 70 years after the conflict ended in a shaky truce, the South Korean president, Moon Jae-in, has said. But Moon conceded that talks on the 1950-53 war were being held back by North Korean objections to present-day “US hostility”. Speaking in Canberra on Monday during his four-day visit to Australia, Moon said he believed the four main parties agreed in principle to a peace declaration. But he added that North Korea had made an end to US hostility a precondition for talks. “And because of that, we are not able to sit down for a negotiation on the declarations between South and North Korea, and those between North Korea and United States,” he said at a press conference with the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison. “And we hope that talks will be initiated. We are making efforts towards that.” Moon said he believed it was important to end the “unstable” armistice that had been in place for almost seven decades, adding that a peace declaration could improve the prospects for a breakthrough on Pyongyang’s nuclear weapons programme. “This is going to be help us start negotiations for denuclearisation and peace … [on] the Korean peninsula,” he said. “This is very important on that front as well.” Hours later, the South Korean unification minister, Lee In-young, said a declaration could be a “turning point for a new phase for peace”, and urged North Korea to accept Seoul’s offer of dialogue. “North Korea has been seemingly showing a more open manner towards dialogue than before,” Lee said, according to the Yonhap news agency. “North Korea has fired multiple short-range missiles this year but it hasn’t made the situation deteriorate severely by raising tensions to a high level.” The Korean war ended in July 1953 with an armistice but not a peace treaty, meaning the North and South are still technically at war. Moon, who has made engagement with North Korea a key feature of his administration, is pushing for a peace treaty before his single five-year term as South Korean president ends next spring. He repeated his call for a formal end to hostilities during his speech at the UN general assembly in September, prompting Kim Yo-jong, the influential sister of North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, to describe his initiative as an “interesting and good idea”. Chinese officials have reportedly voiced support for the proposal, while South Korea and the US are reportedly in the final stages of drawing up a draft declaration. But North Korea has indicated that it will not join talks on ending the conflict while the US maintains its hostile stance, a reference to the presence of 28,500 American troops in South Korea and annual US-South Korea military drills that Pyongyang regards as a rehearsal for an invasion. Opinion in South Korea and the US is divided over the wisdom of signing a formal peace treaty while North Korea continues to develop nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles in defiance of UN sanctions. Supporters agree with Moon that it would normalise ties with the North and encourage the regime to return to stalled nuclear talks, but critics believe it would reward the regime’s provocative behaviour and could threaten the presence of US troops in the South.Western Australia’s premier, Mark McGowan, has announced the state’s border will reopen on 5 February when double-dose vaccination is predicted to hit 90%, allowing for quarantine-free travel to the state. Here’s what you need to know before you book travel into WA. What do I need to do before travelling from interstate? All interstate travellers 12 years and older must be double-vaccinated, obtain a G2G pass and return a negative PCR test 72 hours before departure, unless you are ineligible or medically exempt. You will also need to carry out another PCR test within 48 hours of arriving in the state. There are different rules depending on the time you are intending to spend in WA. If you are travelling into WA for six days or more, then you must receive a negative PCR test within 72 hours of departure and undertake a PCR test within 48 hours of arrival into the state. If you are planning on spending five days or less in WA, then you must receive a negative PCR test within 72 hours of departure and you will not be required to undertake any tests once you have arrived in WA. Anyone travelling who experiences symptoms of Covid must get tested immediately. Unvaccinated travellers will not be permitted to enter WA unless they are ineligible or medically exempt. What if I am travelling internationally? Double vaccinated international travellers will not be required to quarantine but will need to return a negative PCR test 72 hours prior to arrival in the state. International travellers will also need to undertake another PCR test within 48 hours of arriving in Perth and on day six. If travellers are not vaccinated or have not received an approved vaccine, they will still need to undertake 14 days of quarantine at a hotel or at a designated facility. The cost of quarantining will be paid by the traveller. “There will be a cap on the unvaccinated, one that is significantly lower than the cap now in place,” McGowan said. What are the public health rules in WA? Face masks are required on public transport, taxis or rideshares, at airports, on flights, in hospitals, and aged care or corrections facilities. Proof of vaccination is required for major events with 1,000 or more patrons, such as nightclubs and Perth’s casino. QR code check-ins must be used through the SafeWA app. Conditions will remain for entry into some Aboriginal communities. When do I need to provide proof of vaccination? You will need to provide proof of vaccination when you travel into WA, attend events with more than 1,000 patrons and attend major stadiums, including Optus Stadium, RAC Arena, HBF Park and HBF Stadium. Why was 5 February chosen? The date was chosen based on advise provided by health professionals and projections that 90% of people older than 12 will be double-dose vaccinated by 5 February. “We are very confident that by 5 February we will hit double-dose vaccination for the entirety of Western Australia,” McGowan said. What are the vaccination rates like in WA? Statewide, more than 200,000 people still need to get their second vaccination dose to reach the 90% mark. Currently, 57% of the Aboriginal population have received their first dose and about 40% are fully vaccinated. More than 90% of people aged 50 and over are fully vaccinated; about 82% of the 40-something population are fully vaccinated; 75% of 30–40-year-olds are fully vaccinated; for the 20-something cohort, 60% are fully vaccinated; for those aged 16 to 19 years, 63% are fully vaccinated; and half of all kids aged 12 to 15 have been vaccinated.Hospitals are already operating at between 94% and 96% capacity, the organisation which represents NHS trusts has warned, as Sajid Javid said that there had been no known deaths from the Omicron variant in English hospitals so far. There were, thus far, 10 people in English hospitals with the variant, the health secretary said, stressing that even if Omicron turned out to be less severe overall than the Delta variant it is supplanting, the sheer number of cases would still put the health service under severe strain. His comments came as Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, said a shortage of social care staff and the removal of some beds to control coronavirus infections meant hospitals were trying to operate with 30% to 35% fewer beds. Hopson told Sky News: “For this time of year, the NHS is busier than it’s ever been before. That’s obviously a worry because it’s before the traditional winter peak in January and it’s before any kind of cases really coming into hospitals – that are now starting to do so – in terms of Omicron cases.” NHS Providers, a membership organisation that represents NHS trusts, said hospitals were already operating at between 94% and 96% capacity. Stressing the need for a massive increase in the number of booster jabs given during December, as announced by Boris Johnson in a televised address on Sunday evening, Javid said Omicron was spreading with enormous speed, already accounting for 40% of all Covid infections in London. Asked about deaths from the variant, he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “I don’t know of any confirmed cases at this moment. There are 10 hospitalisations right now confirmed in English hospitals. There are some also in Scottish hospitals. “But in terms of hospitalisations and deaths, what we have learned about this virus is there is always a lag between infection and severe disease, hospitalisation and, sadly, death.” The “phenomenal” spread of Omicron was unlike anything previously seen in the pandemic, Javid said: “Many people are claiming this is less severe but let’s see, let’s establish the facts. Even if it is less severe, a smaller percentage of infected people experiencing severe disease is still a huge number if put against a large number of infections.” The “new national mission” of seeking to provide boosters, which have been shown to significantly increase protection against the variant compared with two doses, to as many adults as possible before the end of the month, would mean some non-urgent NHS appointments being postponed, Javid warned. “These decisions are not easy, but at any one time there is only limited capacity in the NHS,” he said, stressing that this should not affect anything more urgent, such as checks for people with potential cancer symptoms. On ramping up the booster campaign, Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, which represents the healthcare system in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “The health service was already under unprecedented pressure, and this is going to mean that other important parts of the NHS’s work are going to have to be put on the back burner in order to be able to deliver this.” He added: “It’s really important the government is clear with the public about the consequences this is going to have for what the rest of the health service is going to offer.”All adults in England will be offered a booster by the end of the year, the government has announced, bringing forward the deadline by a month in a bid to avoid further restrictions. Over-18s who had their second dose of the vaccine at least three months ago are able to get their booster from Monday. We’d like to hear from people who are eligible about their experiences. Will you have a booster once you are invited? Have you encountered any issues receiving an invitation, booking an appointment or with walk-in centres? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.MVP Nobody in MLS reached the level of Carles Gil in 2021. The 29-year-old was the conductor through which so much of the record-breaking New England Revolution’s play flowed. Without Gil, the Revs wouldn’t have been the regular season force they were. German attacker Hany Mukhtar, whose 16 goals and 10 assists fired Nashville to an unexpected third-place finish in the Eastern Conference, deserves a mention, as does Minnesota United playmaker Emanuel Reynoso who dragged his team through a number of matches. But Gil, who ranked first in MLS for Expected Assists per 90 minutes, key passes, passes into the penalty area, progressive passes, through balls and goal-creating actions shone brighter than anyone. Best goal There is an unavoidable subjectivity to the assessment of a goal’s quality, but if social media views can be used as a sort of yardstick Jakob Glesnes’ thunderbolt for the Philadelphia Union against Atlanta United stands out as the most remarkable finish of the season. It also contained a pleasing audio element as his shot thudded off the bar and over the line. Raul Ruidiaz’s missile for Seattle away to Austin FC also warrants a mention, as does Rubio Rubin’s perfectly executed overhead kick for RSL against San Jose. Team of the year While New York City lifted MLS Cup for the first time, the New England Revolution set a new standard at the top of the regular season standings, claiming the Supporters’ Shield by breaking the league’s single-season points record. Bruce Arena’s side boasted the MLS MVP in Gil, the league’s Goalkeeper of the Year in Matt Turner and a budding superstar in Tajon Buchanan, who secured a $7m move to Club Brugge in August. The Revs played a brand of attractive, attacking soccer that was as entertaining as it was effective. Of course, New England fell at the first hurdle in the playoffs, but the postseason isn’t necessarily where the best teams make their mark, certainly not in the case of the record-breaking Supporters’ Shield winners. Fiasco of the year Everyone in the league knows only three Designated Players are permitted per team. Everyone besides Inter Miami, that is. The Florida franchise had already endured a difficult start to life in the league when it emerged that they essentially had five DPs on the books. This fiasco resulted in MLS meting out a league-record penalty of $2m with a $250,000 fine issued to Inter Miami managing owner Jorge Mas (the league found no wrongdoing on the part of another of the team’s other part-owner, David Beckham). Sporting director Paul McDonough was suspended until the end of 2022 with Inter Miami’s allocation money for playing signings in 2022 and 2023 significantly reduced. It was an episode that could take the club a long time to recover from. Coach of the year Pablo Mastroeni did an exceptional job in difficult circumstances for Real Salt Lake, leading them to the Western Conference final following shock playoff wins over Seattle and Sporting KC, while Ronny Deila led NYC FC to MLS Cup glory. But the winner of this year’s award is a familiar name. After the debacle of the USMNT’s unsuccessful qualification campaign for the 2018 World Cup, many believed Bruce Arena to be yesterday’s man. However, the 70-year-old has enjoyed a renaissance since taking over at the New England Revolution, with his achievements this season ranking among his very best in MLS. Story of the year The fairytale of Real Salt Lake’s postseason ended in the Western Conference final, where they suffered a comprehensive defeat to the Portland Timbers, but nonetheless, it was a captivating run that demonstrated how predicting the playoffs is close to impossible. First, Mastroeni’s side squeezed into the playoffs with a stoppage time winner against Sporting KC on Decision Day. Then they beat Western Conference heavyweights Seattle Sounders on their patch without having a single shot on goal before their penalty shootout victory. Next up they mounted a comeback from 1-0 down against Sporting KC with 18 minutes left to play. For three weeks, Real Salt Lake, who replaced their manager midway through year and are still without a new owner, were the talk of the league. Transfer of the year Until Ryan Gauld’s arrival at BC Place in late July, the Vancouver Whitecaps had drifted through the 2021 MLS season. With the Scottish playmaker in their team, though, the Canadians found their groove, losing just two of the 19 regular season games played after his signing as a free agent from Farense in Portugal. Four goals and five assists in 19 games (14 starts) illustrated the immediate impact he made. Brian White also played a significant role in turning around the Caps’ campaign, arriving from the New York Red Bulls in the summer, but Gauld caught the eye more than any other new signing in the league in 2021. Vancouver fans surely can’t wait to see what the Scot, nicknamed ‘Mini Messi’ earlier in his career, does in a full season.In February 2020, at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Vanessa Nakate had her point made for her in the most vivid and “frustrating and heartbreaking” way. The Ugandan climate crisis activist, who turned 25 last month, had gone to Switzerland to introduce some perspective to its cosy consensus. “One of the things that I wanted to emphasise was the importance of listening to activists and people from the most affected areas,” she says. “How can we have climate justice if the people who are suffering the worst impacts of the climate crisis are not being listened to, not being platformed, not being amplified and are left out of the conversation? It’s not possible.” To this end, she appeared at a press conference with Greta Thunberg and three other white, European youth climate strikers. When the Associated Press published a photo of the meeting, it cropped out Nakate. It was, she said at the time, her first encounter with direct and blatant racism – and only reinforced her point and made her campaign more urgent. AP later expressed “regret” for its “error in judgment”. If those discussing climate can’t even bear to acknowledge – never mind focus on – African activists, then their solutions will be incomplete and myopic. More importantly, they will only exacerbate the injustices that are already embedded in the crisis. “Africa is responsible for only 3% of global emissions,” Nakate says, speaking to me on a video call from Kampala, Uganda’s capital. “It’s important to recognise that the climate crisis was caused by the global north and it is the global south that is suffering. This creates a huge responsibility that lies with the global north to take action, to give climate justice, especially for communities on the frontlines. But this conversation is a hot tea for many people.” “Hot tea” is a phrase she uses a few times. It conveys something between “strong medicine” and “difficult, challenging idea”. The image is typical of the way she speaks: unflinching, trenchant and persuasive. Launching a hard conversation about climate reparations and environmental imperialism on a global stage is not where Nakate thought she was heading three years ago. At the start of 2019, she was about to graduate from Makerere University Business School, part of Uganda’s oldest university. “All my life, I knew what I was doing. I’m going to high school, then I’m going to upper high school; I’m going to university, then possibly do a master’s or professional course, get a job, get married and live happy ever after.” Her degree was in business administration and marketing and she was keen to do a postgrad in marketing. “It was all about having a greater advantage in the job market, living, being able to survive and take care of the basic necessities of life.” It was not that she came from an apolitical family; her father, a businessman, was involved in local politics of a green, progressive bent, while her mother, who looked after her and her siblings full-time, was sympathetic to those views. But Nakate never imagined becoming part of a protest movement: “I got to know the word ‘activism’ when I started doing activism. I don’t remember it ever being in my vocabulary, or even in my imagination.” The convention was for students to have a few months off before graduation, to do voluntary work in their communities. As Nakate started to research what challenges people were facing in their daily lives, she began “to understand what global warming means, how much impact it’s having”. They had covered climate at school, but in abstract terms of degrees of warming and to what this could be attributed; the lived experience of the crisis was new to her. Many of the active industrial and agricultural harms, “the coal and oil industries, the impact and the food we eat, all this I’ve been learning from fellow activists, from communities living on the frontline”. As 2019 progressed, it lurched from one extreme weather event to another. In March and April, cyclones Idai and Kenneth struck south-east Africa and left 2.2 million people needing flood relief – this in Mozambique, where nearly 1 million people had already been displaced by floods. Over the summer, flooding in Niger threatened 200,000 people; in November, Djibouti recorded two years’ worth of rain in a single day. As Nakate started researching the impact of the climate crisis in her locale, she was pulled into the vortex of devastated livelihoods across the continent. The organisations she founded – Youth for Future Africa, Rise Up and the Green Schools Project – pan in and out from the micro to the macro. She visits schools to mobilise the next generation and to help install solar panels and eco-stoves. She has just published A Bigger Picture, which is partly a memoir, but mainly a call to arms. She spoke at Cop25 and Cop26 – and alongside Ban Ki-moon, the former secretary-general of the UN, at the Forum Alpbach, which brings together major political figures and leading thinkers. And it all started on the first Sunday of 2019, with the thing she least wanted to do: a street protest. “I was so scared to go to the streets and just hold a placard. I was scared of people looking at me, scared of what my friends from school would think. If you took to the streets, this is what many students would call a walk of shame. Who would do that?” she says. “And I wasn’t wrong about my fears. My fellow students, telling me what they thought of my activities; they were laughing, they were mocking. I was right to think it would be embarrassing.” At the time, there was a protest movement against tuition fees, but it was considered fringe and Nakate didn’t consider herself countercultural. Student strikes face more hurdles in Uganda than they do in Europe and the US. There are bureaucratic hoops to jump through; demonstrators need permits to gather by civic buildings. While Nakate has never been arrested, some of her friends have. She was daunted by the scale of resources a movement needed just to organise a muster point with microphones. “The other thing is education,” she says. “It is so valued in our families, in our country. Not every child is able to go to school, not every child is able to finish school, and you grow up with this feeling that education is the key to success. [Thirteen years of education are free in Uganda, the first seven of which are compulsory, but dropout rates are high.] We respect education, we understand how hard our parents have worked for it. So it is really hard for students to skip school, you know, and do a climate strike. They could be expelled.” Boarding schools are more common (and affordable) in Uganda than in the UK, but students can go a full term without accessing the internet – and thus without knowing a youth climate movement has even started. “It’s much more difficult to build a social movement on the internet in Africa,” she says. “In Europe and the United States, students can have phones at very young ages. It’s not the same in my country. You might get a phone at 16 if you’re really lucky. More likely it would be 18.” Initially, the protests comprised Nakate alone or with a sibling (she has two brothers and two sisters, as well as “a lot” of cousins). Over time, though, her friends stopped ridiculing her and joined in. They were older than the school strikers across Europe, in their early 20s, which was part of the reason she founded Youth For Future Africa, because “school strikes” didn’t quite describe the growing movement. She was inspired by the Friday school strikes elsewhere in the world. Nakate says they made her feel “so scared. I had this realisation that I could not let another week pass without speaking up. But it was actually a Saturday and I realised that Friday was already gone. It gave me this feeling of urgency, this feeling that I should have started earlier. It wasn’t climate change – it was a climate crisis.” So she started her Friday strike the next day. The movement snowballed on social media as much as on the streets, in front of petrol stations and malls, and became the muster point for various issues that were becoming more urgent, such as the degradation of the Congolian rainforests. At the end of 2019, she was one of very few youth activists invited to Cop25, which took place in Madrid. Travelling to summits, engaging at close quarters with the speechifying of global leaders, often leaves her disillusioned – “with the feeling that things are speeding up in the wrong direction”. It is grassroots movements that restore her optimism. “I choose to believe that another world is not only necessary, but it’s also possible,” she says. “I have that hope because of the people who are organising in different parts of the world. If I ever stopped hoping, I wouldn’t have the strength to strike.” One of the things she has been trying to add to the global agenda is loss and damage – making a proper evaluation of how much the emissions of the developed world cost the developing world, in terms of extreme weather events and the destruction of habitats and livelihoods. Rich nations periodically pledge money for decarbonisation and building renewable infrastructure, but it is often very slow to materialise. Nakate says: “We need a separate fund for loss and damage. Because communities cannot adapt to the loss of their cultures or their traditions, they cannot adapt to the loss of lives, or to starvation. We have to start this conversation about the climate crisis; who is responsible and who has to pay?” It is important to conceive this money not as aid, but as reparations, she says. At a practical level, the money must come in the form of grants, not loans: “We don’t want to see the climate movement adding to the existing debt of the global south.” The international community is comfortable having a conversation about adaptation finance, but shies away from the idea of reparations, the cost of which researchers are only beginning to piece together. But, says Nakate, a discussion that “won’t hear or recognise who has been harmed or affected in the past can’t recognise or respect the knowledge, wisdom and decisions of the people on the frontlines. There are so many solutions that are already on the ground in vulnerable countries. Every activist has a story to tell, and every story has a solution, and every solution has a life to change, but this change will only happen if every activist is listened to.” At their most generative, climate summits throw up solutions that sound like the future, but actually exacerbate the problems of the present. “You hear governments talking about tree-planting campaigns – these often mean that indigenous communities are going to lose their land. This isn’t what climate justice will look like. “If governments are talking about transitioning to electric vehicles, that cannot involve dumping all unused petrol and diesel engine vehicles in already vulnerable countries. That is not climate justice. Some of the material that is used in the manufacturing of electric vehicles means that people – women, children, girls – are exploited in the process. If the cost of having electric vehicles means exploitation of people in specific parts of the world, that is not climate justice.” By the time Covid-delayed Cop26 happened, the carelessness of the global north towards the south – and the absurdity of trying to reach international agreements without addressing that – had a new exemplar: vaccine inequality. “Many activists from the global south have challenges getting to Cop – accreditation, funding – but now the challenge was vaccination. It made it quite impossible for activists to travel and talk about their experiences. Once you see the connection, how vaccine iniquity is hindering the centring and platforming of voices from the most affected communities, you then see the connection between vaccine distribution and climate justice.” At the close of that conference – which had been studded with supposedly fruitful developments and last-minute pledges worthy of a soap opera – “the climate tracker showed that we were on a pathway to 2.4C”, Nakate says, soberly. “This is a death sentence for so many. It just made me realise how commitments will not stop the suffering of people in different parts of the world. Promises will not stop our planet from warming. Pledges will not stop the impact of the crisis. Only real action will bring about justice.” A Bigger Picture by Vanessa Nakate is out now (Pan Macmillan, £20). To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Maria Rios, 75, has worked as a food prep worker with contractor HMS Host at Phoenix Sky Harbor international airport for 17 years, where she makes $14.50 an hour. Her husband, who is retired, only receives about $400 a month in social security benefits. Rios would like to retire also, but she doesn’t have the option even as she is battling ovarian cancer. When Covid-19 hit the US, Rios was one of thousands of workers in the food service industry who were furloughed, and was only recalled back to work a few months ago. While receiving unemployment assistance, Rios and her husband had to rely on food banks to have enough food to eat, and because she lost her health insurance along with her job, she had to skip cancer treatments until she was able to get Medicare, but still paid hundreds of dollars out of pocket for treatments. Her situation means that at a time when many might assume she should be enjoying a well-earned rest, she is still forced to work. “At 75 years old, I’m forced to still have to work to try to make ends meet. The healthcare the company provides is way too expensive and they’ve yet to provide a more affordable health insurance plan,” said Rios, who pays about $200 a month for her health insurance. “ It’s also very important for people to be able to have a pension too, to be able to retire with dignity so people aren’t forced to be in a position where I am right now, 75 years old and still having to work”. She even recently went on strike with her co-workers for 10 days, fighting for higher wages, more affordable healthcare and a pension. Media reports of older workers have often been framed as feel-good stories, such as a viral news report of an 89-year-old pizza delivery man who received a $12,000 tip raised by a customer out of remorse, as he works 30 hours a week because he can’t afford to retire on social security benefits alone. Or an 84-year-old woman who started a new job as a motel housekeeper in Maine in July 2020. Or an 81-year-old woman in Ohio who volunteered to start working at her favorite restaurant in November 2021 because it shut down temporarily due to an inability to hire and retain enough staff. But the grim reality is millions of Americans are working into their senior years because they can’t afford not to have a job. Over the next decade, the number of workers ages 75 and older is expected to increase in the US by 96.5%, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, with their labor force participation rate projected to rise from 8.9% in 2020 to 11.7% by 2030, a rate that has steadily increased from 4.7% in 1996. By 2040, the US population of adults ages 65 and older is expected to increase to 80.8 million from 54.1 million in 2019. The number of workers who retired during the pandemic was about 2 million more than expected. 50.3% of US adults ages 55 and older said they were out of the labor force due to retirement in the third quarter of 2021, compared to 48.1% in the third quarter of 2019, according to an analysis by the Pew Research Center. Though in recent months, the unretirement rate of US workers has gradually increased toward pre-pandemic levels. As the ageing US population grows, participation in retirement plans has declined since 2000. Nearly half of all families in the US have no retirement savings at all and inequality among Americans based on retirement savings is greater than income inequality. Over 15 million adults ages 65 and older are economically insecure, with incomes below 200% of the federal poverty line, with Black, Hispanic and women ages 65 and older more likely to live in poverty. “I have no savings, no assets, I don’t even own the home I’ve been renting for 15 years,” said Dr Lisa Natale, 65, a chiropractor in Hawaii who put herself through school as a single mother. “There’s no way I could afford to retire.” With the average estimated social security retirement benefit in 2021 at $1,543 a month, even with a 5.9% cost of living adjusted increase for 2022, millions of Americans who rely on social security benefits are forced to continue working past retirement age in order to make ends meet. Kathy Luebbe, a 69-year-old teacher in the Cincinnati, Ohio, area, has continued working through retirement age because social security benefits and her partial pension only provide $2,600 a month, which is not enough to cover her bills and student loan payments. “I have to work just to keep paying my regular bills,” said Luebbe. Ted Newman of Columbus, Ohio, is a retired state government employee, but continued working full-time through his retirement, along with his wife, for the past eight years. “I have been working full-time for the last 8 years since retiring, and my wife also. Her yearly salary went almost completely to pay student debt and I worked to have extras for the home,” said Newman. When Covid-19 hit, his wife stopped working and he shifted to part-time due to health conditions. They paid about $1,000 toward parent plus loans for their daughter’s tuition for years, but still owe the principal of the loan. “Now our income is cut in half and our loans will be coming due again in 2022,” added Newman. “I can’t live long enough to pay the debt and plan to let it go to default because I can’t afford to pay it any more.” As the US population ages, with millions of Americans having no retirement savings, the number of older Americans with student debt, either for themselves or for children, is on the rise. Nearly 9 million Americans ages 50 and older still have student debt, and the amount owed by this demographic is growing faster than any other age group. In 2015, 40,000 Americans had their social security retirement benefits garnished for student loans. Jane Switchenko, 63, of Massachusetts, and her 68-year-old husband cannot afford to retire, in part because of parent plus student loans they took out for their children to attend college. “My husband and I must work until we die. Parent plus loans take over $1,000 a month, every month, for a decade now and we continue to see a rising balance,” said Switchenko. “Not only can we not retire, we cannot afford to fix our old house – we are desperate for new windows, have a leaking chimney and need new electrical work done.” She added: “We work hard. We are frugal, but we’re getting up there and have nothing to look forward to because of these loans. We have five grandchildren and don’t know what we’ll be able to buy for Christmas.” This article was written with the support of a journalism fellowship from the Gerontological Society of America, the Journalists Network on Generations and the RRF Foundation for AgingThe Biden administration admitted that a court decision did not compel it to lease vast tracts of the Gulf of Mexico for oil and gas drilling, shortly before claiming it was legally obliged to do so when announcing the sell-off, the Guardian can reveal. Last month, the US government held the largest-ever auction of oil and gas drilling leases in the Gulf of Mexico’s history, offering up more than 80m acres of the gulf’s seabed for fossil fuel extraction. The enormous sale, which took place just four days after crucial UN climate talks in Scotland, represented a spectacular about-turn from Joe Biden’s previous promise to halt offshore drilling and was denounced by outraged environmental groups as a “huge carbon bomb”. The president’s administration insisted it was obliged to hold the lease sale due to a court ruling in favor of a dozen states that sued to lift a blanket pause placed on new drilling permits by Biden. But a memo filed by the US Department of Justice before the lease sale acknowledges that this judgement does not force the government to auction off drilling rights to the gulf. “While the order enjoins and restrains (the department of) interior from implementing the pause, it does not compel interior to take the actions specified by plaintiffs, let alone on the urgent timeline specified in plaintiffs’ contempt motion,” wrote government lawyers to the federal court in Louisiana in August. The issuance of new drilling permits would require further steps under federal laws, the memo states, adding that “the court’s order does not compel the agency to act in contravention of these other authorities”. The memo’s language was first referenced by The Daily Poster. Just a month after arguing that it was not required to hold the sale, however, the department of interior’s bureau of ocean energy management (BOEM) announced it would auction off an area of the gulf that is two times the size of Florida to oil and gas companies. The expanse of the gulf put up for auction contains around 1.12bn barrels of oil and 4.2tn cubic ft of gas, with the leases locking in years – and potentially decades – of planet-heating emissions. It comes at a time when the International Energy Agency has said no new fossil fuel projects can be established after this year if the world is to avoid catastrophic heatwaves, flooding and other disastrous impacts from runaway climate change. “The administration has been misleading on this, to put it mildly. It’s very disappointing,” said Thomas Meyer, national organizing manager of Food and Water Watch. “They didn’t have to hold this sale and they didn’t have to hold it on this timeline. “We know this will exacerbate the climate crisis, it undermines US credibility abroad and it contradicts a campaign promise by Biden. If the administration was taking the climate crisis seriously they would be fighting tooth and nail to keep every molecule of fossil fuel in the ground. They are nowhere near to doing that.” The auction, held on 17 November , ended up netting the government $191.6m from companies such as Exxon, Chevron and BP, the company responsible for the Deepwater Horizon disaster in 2010. A total of 308 tracts of the gulf’s seabed were sold off, covering 1.7m acres, an area larger than the state of Delaware. The rapid staging of the lease sale was not required by the courts and could have instead been delayed by a proper federal review of climate and other environmental impacts according to Earthjustice, an environmental group that is suing to halt the leases before they come into effect in February. “Interior had a lot of discretion over whether to hold this lease sale and they chose to do it anyway,” said Brettny Hardy, a senior attorney at Earthjustice. “The Biden administration is talking about a climate crisis and getting to net-zero emissions and then it makes decisions like this that lock us into impacts for decades to come. These leases could potentially be producing oil 50 years from now. We have no good answer as to why they are doing this. It’s problematic and disappointing.” A spokesperson for the department of interior said that it was “complying with a US district court’s decision” in going ahead with the leases. He did not answer questions over why the government said in August that this court decision does not compel the auction. The decision to go ahead with the sale has damaged Biden’s climate credentials after the Cop26 talks in Glasgow where he said the US would “lead by example” in slashing greenhouse gas emissions. The president, who has called the climate crisis an “existential threat” to the US, said in a Democratic primary debate last year that under his administration there would be “no more drilling, including offshore. No ability for the oil industry to continue to drill, period, ends, number one.” This jarring contradiction has alarmed even some of Biden’s closest allies, with three Democratic members of Congress filing a brief last week with the federal court calling for a halt to the gulf lease sales. The three admitted that they are “deeply concerned” and “shocked” that the government is pushing ahead with the drilling “despite its own findings that the largest lease sale in history has not had an adequate environmental review”. Biden has set a target for the US to reach net-zero emissions by 2050 and the use of the huge amount of land and ocean overseen by the federal government is seen as critical to this goal. The production and consumption of fossil fuels on federal land causes about a quarter of all American greenhouse gas emissions and a president has broad unilateral powers to limit or expand oil, gas and coal development. The Biden administration’s apparent reluctance to aggressively wield this authority may cost it politically, as well as worsen the climate crisis, ahead of midterm elections next year. “This is not going to help with Democratic turnout next year,” said Meyer. “There is a core constituency of young people and people who care about climate change who are upset and feeling betrayed by the Biden administration.” Some commentators have pointed to Biden’s need to appease senator Joe Manchin, a fossil fuel– friendly centrist Democrat who is a crucial vote for the president’s Build Back Better spending bill, as a reason for the drilling. “If it is political, that is unfortunate because the climate doesn’t really care about politics,” said Hardy. “Climate change will continue to cause problems for the whole nation if we don’t address it.”Amid the Covid-19 pandemic the president of one of the largest Native American– run non-profits has warned that health and economic disparities are still seriously affecting Indigenous communities, despite some progress achieved by the Biden administration. Josh Arce, president of the Partnership With Native Americans (PWNA), told the Guardian in an interview that challenges affecting Indigenous groups ranged from health inequities such as high rates of diabetes, heart disease and other illnesses to inadequate infrastructure such as running water and reliable electricity. Nearly all of these problems were worsened by the pandemic. “The issues are, by and large, some of the same issues that we’ve been confronted with but they’ve been really highlighted and exacerbated by Covid-19 throughout the past two and a half years,” said Arce, who added that such challenges “really permeate all aspects of Native life and communities”. For centuries, Indigenous communities in the US have faced challenges in public health, education, infrastructure and other areas, an aftershock of violent colonization and widespread racism. While the Biden administration has marked some progress, such as the appointment of Native American Deb Haaland as secretary of the Interior, an achievement that Arce noted was critical and brought hope to Native communities, Arce warned that more action is needed to ensure more progress for Indigenous communities in the US. “The consultation and the meetings and the tribal input will only go so far until there starts to be some action behind the words that they’re saying and the policies that they want to put in place,” said Arce. Like other marginalized communities, Native Americans were disproportionately affected by Covid-19, dying from the virus at twice the rate of white Americans. Health infrastructure in Native American communities, provided through the Indian Health Service, often is substandard , with hospitals and other medical centers generally under-resourced and understaffed, said Arce. Native Americans are also more likely to be uninsured, according to data from the office of minority health in the US Department of Health and Human Services, adding another barrier to tackling complicated health challenges such as the current pandemic. “A tribal hospital system might only have six beds in their ICU, and so you start to run out of space a lot more rapidly than you do in a mainstream system,” said Arce. The pandemic also affected mental health in many Indigenous communities. Native American populations already experience higher death rates from suicide, about 20% higher than non-Hispanic white Americans as of 2019, and higher rates of depression. But isolation and grief triggered by the pandemic has made the mental health epidemic worse, specifically among Native American youth, says Arce. “That type of isolation, prolonged isolation, has really had an adverse effect on communities,” said Arce. Arce also noted that generally poor mental health among Native American youth and insufficient resources to address mental health concerns were worsened by the pandemic, with rates of suicide among Native American teenagers “sky high”. Economic challenges such as poverty – affecting one out of three Native Americans – and high rates of unemployment are also chronic concerns in Native American communities, said Arce. While Arce noted that much-needed aid was delivered to Indigenous communities through the Biden administration’s American Rescue Plan, different reservation communities, notably those in more rural areas, still face challenges securing basic infrastructure needs such as reliable electricity and running water. “If we can overcome that next hurdle and really get these basic needs met for the reservation community, that’s going to be a huge improvement to the lives and wellbeing for those tribal members,” said Arce. Education nationwide has also been hurt by the Covid-19 pandemic, but historically underfunded schools within the Bureau of Indian Education (BIE) system were already struggling to cope. The impact of the pandemic – such as meeting remote learning needs – has made the sector even more challenging. Native communities had problems accessing reliable, high speed internet, an inequity termed the “digital divide”. Previous attempts to deliver broadband to tribal communities did not take into account power limitations in some areas. While there has been a surge of funding from recently passed social aid packages, Arce says that communities are still facing long-term problems such as the blighted conditions of school buildings, understaffed districts and teachers not receiving adequate pay. Climate change will also affect Indigenous communities, Arce said, with its effects differing by region. For low-lying tribes based in states like Florida or Louisiana, predicted sea level rises could subsume communities. Similarly, Indigenous people in the northern plains could see their growth seasons, a critical fixture, disrupted. “They’re going to essentially get evicted by the results of climate change,” said Arce. Arce said that the Navajo nationis still dealing with the aftereffect of pollutants from uranium mining that occurred decades ago. Other tribes have struggled without basic necessities like clean drinking water, with one in 10 Indigenous Americans lacking access to safe tap water or basic sanitation, a phenomenon called “plumbing poverty”. Arce said that many of these struggles within Native communities aren’t new phenomena but areproblems that have been plaguing residents for decades. While the Biden administration is “definitely [moving in] a positive trajectory”, Arce said he is hopeful that more action can be taken in combination with recently passed policy to address basic necessities in tribal communities and other overwhelming needs. “I know that the pace of government can be very slow so I hope that these policies and improvements turn into action and not just be a policy that doesn’t have a whole lot of teeth,” said Arce.Pool A twig breaks. Promptly, obligingly staging the haiku, one or two new frogs plop in the water, where their younger kin lie or skitter, hundreds and hundreds of fat commas swept from the compositor’s workbench into the sandy shallows, hundreds of little fat breathing pauses in the water’s dull paragraph. When their breath has pumped up shiny eyes and limbs, they will wait too, throbbing by the pond’s Edge, listening for the crack of danger, for the dry foot of this uncertain upper world that no-one had predicted back when it was all wet long soundless clauses between the wriggle of black breath; ready to leap from this new Purgatorial height back into steady dark, away (for a while at least) from the terrors of what the sun sucks upwards – green, limbs, lungs, even words or wings. Pool begins with the startling sound that sets “one or two new frogs” to “promptly, obligingly” stage “the haiku” by leaping into the pool. The haiku, of course is Basho’s. Anglophone translators have enjoyed imitating the sound the frog makes as it slaps the water’s surface, but Basho, according to his Japanese commentators, is more oblique: his third line simply says “sound of the water.” There is no onomatopoeia: this is left to the reader’s imagination. Rowan Williams is doing the same kind of thing, perhaps, with his first sentence, “A twig breaks.” We have to imagine the cracking sound, and the frogs’ frightened leap to safety. Literary allusion takes on a typographical turn when the tadpoles in the water’s “sandy shallows” are seen as “hundreds / and hundreds of fat commas swept / from the compositor’s workbench …” The metaphor may connect the double life of the amphibian with the coexistence of type and text, print and language. It may also allude to one of the translations in Rowan Williams’s collection, In the Days of Caesar by Waldo Williams. The latter is a beautiful poem, intensely of and for Wales and the Welsh people, but suggesting a transformation that seems boundless. This is the last stanza: Well, little people, and my littler nation, can you see the secret buried in you, that no Caesar ever captures in his lists? Will not the shepherd come to fetch us in our desert, gathering us in to give us birth again, weaving us into one in a song heard in the sky over Bethlehem? He seeks us out as wordhoard for his workmanship, the laureate of heaven In the last line of the translation, the Old English compound “wordhoard” may suggest that lesser nations, too, will be redeemed, as poems, or perhaps one poem, by the “laureate of heaven”. The tadpoles in Pool are perhaps the punctuation marks vital to opening the verbal treasury. In the second stanza, it’s the turn of the new cohort of adult frogs, now fully “pumped up” and able to breathe on land as well as under water, to prepare for “the crack of danger”. The life cycle is merciless. Predation and desiccation are suggested by the “dry foot of the uncertain upper world / that no-one had predicted / back when it was all wet long soundless / clauses between the wriggle of black breath”. The grammatical metaphor persists with “clauses”, a reminder of the water’s “dull paragraph” of sentences. But now a watery luxuriousness is realised in the epithets “all wet long soundless” with their echo of Dylan Thomas’s Fern Hill, and possibly a nod towards Gerard Manley Hopkins’s delight in “wildness and wet”. The long stanza-crossing sentence that began after the caesura in line nine (“When their breath …”) flows onwards to its brief culmination. It’s cast in the future tense, but promises inescapable certainty: the new frogs “throbbing by the pond” will also be poised to leap from the “new Purgatorial / height back into steady dark”. Older emergent life forms may be implicated in this description. Less than joyously sun-struck once on dry land, they’re nostalgic for the earlier evolutionary stage. Williams builds an impressively varied vertical structure as his sentence finds its goal in the two-line list of “what the sun sucks upwards -/ green, limbs, lungs, even words,/ or wings.” Language itself settles to a lesser place in the jostled democracy of organisms and parts of organisms. The redemptive possibility implied by “Purgatorial” is narrowly kept alive, obscured by the uncertainty in which all life-forms participate, “the crack of danger” they fear, and represent, as soon as they emerge into self-sufficiency. Even the sun is ominously framed, its symbolism darkened, perhaps, by the environmental hazard the poet now senses in its life-giving radiance. By the last line, only two words, two syllables, are left. • Pool is from the New Poems section of Rowan Williams’s Collected Poems. As well as the Waldo Williams translation mentioned earlier, Poem of the week has previously featured Rowan Williams’s poem about the Russian iconographer Andrei Rublev. • This article has been amended. An earlier version incorrectly included the word “wings” instead of “limbs” in the poem’s penultimate line.Trans actor Mya Bollaers brings a personal stillness and confidence to this flawed road movie from Belgian film-maker Laurent Micheli. Bollaers works well with co-star Benoît Magimel and together they do their best to raise the standard of this well-meaning but basically unsatisfying work. Bollaers plays Lola, a young trans woman who has been thrown out of the family home by angry father Philippe (Magimel) and is now living in foster-care accommodation while preparing for gender reassignment surgery. But Lola’s mother, who had always accepted her identity, has died and now a somewhat contrived series of events means that Philippe and Lola must take a car journey up to her childhood home by the sea to scatter the ashes – that time-honoured trope. Philippe is bad-tempered and transphobic, he misgenders Lola and uses her old name, Lionel. But there are no prizes for guessing whether they gradually come to terms with each other. There are quite a few cliches here: at one moment, Lola actually puts her hand and head out of the car from the passenger seat as it drives along, luxuriating in the rush of air and freedom in the manner of TV ads. She even steals something from a petrol station convenience store and is made to pay for it by Philippe – a narrative touch weirdly similar to the sugary Oscar-winning road movie The Green Book. There are some laborious flashbacks showing Lola’s unhappy memories of childhood seaside holidays and Philippe’s car itself plays a strange role: it bursts into flames unattended at one stage for reasons that are not made entirely clear, apart from that it brings some bigoted cops into the picture, from whose ugly abuse Philippe protects Lola. This is a film that never quite diverts from route one: but Bollaers and Magimel show their talent. • Lola and the Sea is released on 17 December in cinemas.Film Bill and Turner Ross’s 2020 docufiction Bloody Nose, Empty Pockets is set in a Las Vegas dive bar the night before it is to permanently close and, cultural differences aside, it is a frighteningly accurate depiction of the highs and lows of a boozy night down the local. The bonding, bickering and barstool philosophising among this increasingly inebriated motley crew is almost embarrassingly recognisable, but though it doesn’t soft-pedal the bursts of antagonism, fumbled passes and beckoning hangovers, neither does the film judge characters simply trying to push back the break of dawn, one drink at a time. In vino there’s often veritas; sometimes we see more clearly through the bottom of a glass. Jessica Kiang *** TV “Alcohol: the cause of, and solution to, all of life’s problems!” This phrase was coined by one great small-screen boozer (Homer Simpson) but it could equally have been credited to Don Draper and most of the cast of the darkly glorious Mad Men. There were very few business deals that could not be lubricated by an old fashioned or five. Alcohol acted as a relaxant, an accelerant, a truth serum and an aesthetic. In the world of Mad Men, it was both a creator of reality and a shield against it. And in some ways, it served as a route into understanding the world of advertising and the impoverished inner lives of those involved. It was a quick fix that both reflected and exploited a more profound emptiness. Phil Harrison *** Games Two college grads find themselves in hell – before their time, obviously, if you ask them – and the first thing they do is head into a sports bar full of demons and order some shots. There, they discover that the only way out of the underworld is to make it into Satan’s nightly party and drink him under the table. With its characterful bars, ridiculous cocktails and talkative strangers Afterparty is in some ways a tribute to the endless nights that alcohol can fuel. But it also reminds us that endless partying isn’t necessarily as fun as it sounds. Keza MacDonald *** Music Broadly, songs about heavy drinking either venerate the act or detail its long-term effects. Few attempt to do both simultaneously. But then Pulitzer prize-winning rapper Kendrick Lamar isn’t like most lyricists: his trap-adjacent single from 2012’s Grammy-nominated Good Kid, MAAD City Swimming Pools (Drank) flits between hypnotic party-ready anthem and sobering all-caps warning. The oddly pitched, chanted intro – “Pour up (drank) ... pass out (drank)” – initially sounds like your typical house party narrative, but it’s quickly tempered by verses that explore the perils of peer pressure. Later, Lamar’s conscience tries to shepherd him away from “the damage of vodka”. Deeply relatable. Michael Cragg *** Books Probably the least controversial book by the late philosopher, Roger Scruton’s 2009 memoir I Drink Therefore I Am: A Philosopher’s Guide to Wine is a splendidly convivial fireside draught. Looking back on his youthful travels in continental vineyards, Scruton self-deprecatingly calls himself a mere “wino” rather than a connoisseur, but argues seriously that good drink can be an aid – as modern “health fanatics” too seldom acknowledge – to good thought. A sweet hymn to Bacchus that also recommends the best wines to quaff while reading famous philosophers, and urges us to beware of the dangers of “drinking on an empty mind”. Steven PooleChest puffed, eyes wide and fixed on their target, Gerwyn Price steps up to the oche at the start of a new leg in the final of the Grand Slam of Darts. His first dart pings the red treble-20 bed. His second dart nestles in alongside it. Without breaking stride Price throws his third and final dart: another treble-20. As the crowd in Wolverhampton rise to their feet, Price pumps his fist for the camera as referee George Noble fills his lungs and belts out the signature call: “ONE HUNDRED AND EIIIIIIIIIIGHTY!” Viewers watching on Sky Sports, however, will have experienced this moment slightly differently. No sooner had Price’s second dart thudded into the treble-20 than a remote camera stationed just behind the stage was sharply zooming in to the bed, magnifying the tension ahead of the third dart. For even semi-regular watchers of darts the 180 zoom has become so familiar it is barely even noticed any more, part of the tapestry of darts for more than 40 years. The 180 zoom is probably the most famous camera shot in the whole of televised sport. And yet it’s essentially a gimmick: an entirely confected and artificial injection of drama that bears no resemblance to anything the players themselves are experiencing on the stage. Virtually nothing like it exists in any other sport. It is the equivalent of adding a Batman-style “KAPOW!” graphic to the screen every time someone gets punched in boxing, or a comedy bassoon sound effect when a footballer misses an open goal. Yet whereas such devices are decried and detested in other sports, darts has always been radically different. Right from the start of its existence as a professional pursuit it was designed to be a television product as much as a sport in its own right. And so really the 180 zoom is more than a piece of nifty camerawork. In a way, it is the story of how darts burst out of the pubs and clubs and took over the world. In late November I spent an afternoon with the Sky Sports production team in Wolverhampton to see how the 180 zoom works in practice. Out in the arena a cameraman called Chris Pendlebury operates the crucial Camera Two, which is usually homed in on the treble-20. Until 2017 the zoom was still done manually but now it runs robotically, according to a pre-set computer programme. The hard part is being able to decide when to push the button. The man who has to make that call is Keith Deller. Deller is probably best known as the 1983 world champion but these days he is one of Sky’s “spotters”, whose task is to instruct the director and camera operators where a player is going to throw his next dart. “Down!” he shouts from his seat at the back of the production truck. “Back up! Now treble-20, double-18… double nine!” It is one of the most high‑pressured, nerveless jobs in television. Deller needs to watch the players’ eyes, so he can see when their gaze shifts down towards the treble-19. He needs to know which players like which combinations. He needs to know that some players – like Portugal’s Jose de Sousa – are prone to miscounting and throwing at the wrong number entirely. A typical two-minute leg of darts will contain about 50 different camera shots, almost all of them commanded in real time by the spotter. “It’s hard,” he says. “But you mustn’t panic.” These days there is an added tactical dimension. Not every player who hits two treble-20s will necessarily aim for a third. Maybe the bed is blocked. Maybe treble-19 offers a better route to a finish. “Players back in the day would just continue on the treble-20,” says the Sky analyst Wayne Mardle. “But that doesn’t always leave you the easiest route to finish. The players have evolved. There’s more money in it, it’s more professional. They’re playing the percentages.” Players such as Michael van Gerwen often like to go for three treble-19s. Others, like Michael Smith, will go for the 180 even if he’s on 182. “There’s something special about the call of a 180,” Mardle says. “The guys get a buzz out of it. Sometimes board management goes out of the window, Russ Bray or George Noble bellows ‘180’, the crowd roars like lunatics. And just maybe, it gets into your opponent’s head.” The tactics have changed, the psychology has changed, the pace of the game has changed, and yet what is striking is how little the product has changed. Visually speaking, darts on television is largely the same as it was more than 40 years ago, when the BBC decided to take a punt on the inaugural world championships in 1978. Nobody really knows for sure who invented the 180 zoom. Perhaps the strongest claim lies with Nick Hunter, the former BBC Sport director in charge of organising the corporation’s coverage in the 1970s and 1980s.Until that point televised darts had largely been a messy low-budget affair, characterised by frequent awkward cuts between the player and the board and a jarring lack of visual consistency. The board itself was invariably shown in wide angle, making it hard to see where darts had landed. But at some point between the quarter-finals and the final of that 1978 championship came the transformation that would change the sport forever. Hunter’s idea (or possibly presenter David Vine, or possibly producer Ray Lakeland, or possibly co-commentator and spotter Tony Green) was to film in split-screen, with one camera trained on the board and one on the player’s face. “This simple technical solution,” writes Dan Waddell in his book We Had Some Laughs, “changed darts from a sport that was difficult to capture to one made for the medium.” Zooming on a 180 had been tried before on ITV’s Indoor League, but only after the third dart had been thrown. The genius of the BBC’s innovation was to initiate the zoom after the second treble, instantly letting us know that a 180 was on. It quickened the pulse. It drew the viewer in a little closer, a technique almost cinematic in its manipulation. “The camera zoom told the story,” says Rory Hopkins, who has produced Sky’s darts coverage since 1994. “When it starts, you know you’re watching the ultimate.” These days various sports have tried similar tricks. In football La Liga has begun experimenting with a dramatic high-focus camera for its touchline shots. Cricket briefly flirted with a giddy low-angle camera shot for free hits. Inevitably such innovations have felt weird and ersatz. By contrast darts was conceived first and foremost as a piece of storytelling. It was not simply a case of pointing a camera at the action: the camera became the action. Perhaps this explains why, through changing habits and changing audiences, darts has not just endured but thrived. While other sports fret about how to make their product more television‑friendly, darts was there long before them. The split‑screen, the facial close-ups and the 180 zoom established by the BBC in the 1970s created a powerful visual grammar that, a few minor touches aside, has endured largely unchanged until the present day: a classic formula that, in hindsight, was decades ahead of the game. “We’ve looked at how we can make it better,” says Hopkins. “But really, they got it right the first time.” Sky Sports Darts is showing the William Hill World Darts Championship from 15 December to 3 January.Online estate agency Purplebricks will be forced to set aside as much as £9m after it found that its lettings business had failed to follow law protecting tenants’ deposits. The company on Monday said it would delay publication of its results for the six months to 31 October, which were due on Tuesday, in order to work out how much the error would cost. Purplebricks’s share price slumped by 20% on Monday morning to reach a new all-time low of 25p after it revealed the error. The company described the problem as a “process issue in how it has been communicating with tenants on behalf of its landlords in relation to deposit registrations”, in a statement to the stock market. Purplebricks, which is listed on London’s Alternative Investment Market, on Monday said it needed to cover “potential future claims which could arise under the Housing Act in relation to this regulatory process issue”. Under the Housing Act, landlords have 30 days to inform their tenants of details of how their deposits are protected under government-backed schemes. If the landlord has not protected a deposit, a court can order the landlord to pay tenants up to three times the original amount. The deposit protection schemes were brought in by the government in 2007 to prevent unscrupulous landlords from keeping tenants’ deposits, which are often worth a month’s rent or more. The error is the latest blow to Purplebricks, which has struggled to live up to its promise as a UK tech company that was worth as much as £1.4bn in 2017 before its international expansion foundered. On Monday its market value fell below £80m. Purplebricks made revenues of £91m in the year to the end of April, but a £9m hit would have wiped out operating profits of £8.2m. The company last month warned that profits would be lower than expected as the supply of homes on the market failed to match the demand for more space prompted by the pandemic. The profit warning sent shares down by more than a third. It faces legal action from 100 estate agents who argue that they were in effect employed by the company so should be entitled to holiday pay and pension contributions.Malta will this week become the first European country to legalise the cultivation and possession of cannabis for personal use, pipping Luxembourg to the post, as the continent undergoes a wave of change to its drug laws. Possession of up to seven grams of the drug will be legal for those aged 18 and above, and it will permissible to grow up to four cannabis plants at home, with up to 50g of the dried product storable. A vote in favour of the legislation in the Maltese parliament on Tuesday will be followed by the law being signed by the president in order for it to be enacted by the weekend, Owen Bonnici, the minister responsible, told the Guardian. The move by Malta, the EU’s smallest member state, is likely to be followed by reform across Europe in 2022. Germany recently announced a move to establish a legally regulated market, following announcements from the governments of Switzerland, Luxembourg and the Netherlands. A referendum in Italy is planned, while Canada, Mexico and 18 US states have already enacted similar legislation. Boris Johnson’s UK government has, in contrast, been accused of taking a Richard Nixon-style “war on drugs” approach after maintaining its tough approach to cannabis use and making criminal sanctions for the users of class A narcotics a central plank of its recently published 10-year strategy. Bonnici said his government did not want to encourage the use of recreational drugs but that there was no evidence for the argument that the use of cannabis was in itself a gateway to harder substances. He said: “There is a wave of understanding now that the hard-fist approach against cannabis users was disproportionate, unjust and it was rendering a lot of suffering to people who are leading exemplary lives. But the fact that they make use on a personal basis of cannabis is putting them in the jaws of criminality. He added: “I’m very glad that Malta will be the first country which will put words in statute in a comprehensive manner with a regulatory authority”. The change in approach by a number of European governments follows a decision by the UN last December to remove cannabis from a listing of drugs designated as potentially addictive and dangerous, and having little or no therapeutic use. The Maltese approach seeks to avoid criminalising any cannabis use while regulating to ensure harm reduction, Bonnici said. Possession of up to 28 grams will lead to a fine of €50-€100 but with no criminal record. Those under the age of 18 who are found in possession will go before a commission for justice for the recommendation of a care plan rather than face arrest. Those who consume cannabis in front of a child face fines of between €300 and €500. Beyond allowing people to grow plants at home, albeit out of sight of the public, it will be legal for non-profit cannabis clubs to cultivate the drug for distribution among their members, similar to organisations tolerated in Spain and the Netherlands. Club membership will be limited to 500 people and only up to 7 grams a day may be distributed to each person, with a maximum of 50 grams a month. The organisations, which cannot be situated less than 250 metres from a school, a club or a youth centre, may also distribute up to 20 seeds of the plant cannabis to each member every month. Bonnici said his government had conducted a long debate over whether to put in controls on the strength of cannabis that can be grown and used, measured by the level of the key psychoactive, or mood-altering, ingredient, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (TCH). He said: “We had a huge discussion internally on that. And we concluded that if a limit [can be put] on the strength of the cannabis, the THC levels, you will be creating a new market for the black market. What we need to do is to educate people and inform them day after day.” The Netherlands is possibly the European country most associated with a relaxed attitude toward the use of cannabis. However, possession and trade are technically illegal there. The government instead has a gedoogbeleid, a “tolerance policy”, under which use is largely accepted within bounds. A trial is planned under which the production of the drug will be regulated.In the final race of the most dramatic Formula One season ever, Lewis Hamilton failed in his bid to become a record eight-time world champion. Cruising to victory with just five laps left, a crash, and an outrageous decision by the race stewards, led to his chief rival, Max Verstappen – on fresh tyres – overtaking him on the final lap. Yet in “losing”, Hamilton has proven himself a true champion. This year he became the first Formula One driver to win 100 races. He was a key protagonist of the greatest season the sport has ever known. And, though he remains on seven world titles, no other driver has won more. But almost more important than all of that is the fact that, in the past 18 months, he has grown into someone who is not just a fantastically successful racing driver, but who has transcended sport and become a major global cultural figure. The change in Hamilton has been profound. Until May last year he was known beyond racing mainly as someone who promoted his own fashion wear and who hung around with other celebrities. But the murder of George Floyd in May 2020, and the global anti-racism movement it sparked, awakened his sense of social justice. As Hamilton told the Guardian: “I was in tears. And this stuff came up that I’d suppressed over all these years. And it was so powerful and sad and also releasing. And I thought, ‘I can’t stay quiet’… And so when I did speak out, that was me letting the Black community know, ‘I hear you and I stand with you.’” He’d once, 10 years ago, made a semi-joking reference to the often harsh way Formula One stewards treated him, saying: “Maybe it’s because I’m Black” – after which he quickly apologised and remained largely silent on race issues. This wasn’t surprising because, as the only Black driver in the history of the sport, and with only a handful of Black faces among the thousands who work for the teams and the Formula One management, he’d have known few people would back him up. But when the Covid-delayed 2020 season began in Austria just over a month after Floyd’s death, Hamilton took the knee before the race, donning a Black Lives Matter T-shirt, and persuaded the other drivers to wear End Racism T-shirts alongside him – 13 taking the knee, six standing. This pre-race protest has continued into the current season. At one race last year, Hamilton – referring to another Black death at the hands of US police – wore a T-shirt reading: “Arrest the cops who killed Breonna Taylor.” After this, the sport’s organisers introduced new rules banning “political or religious” messaging on clothing worn post-race. Hamilton didn’t only take a symbolic stance: he funded an investigation into the lack of diversity within motorsport, bringing together senior Formula One figures, engineering institutions, MPs and equality campaigners. The subsequent report was published in July and called for change, and action, in all aspects of the sport and in the fields of science and engineering. Beyond that, Hamilton has spoken out against human rights abuses in the nations that have hosted grands prix. Before the race in Hungary he posted on Instagram: “I want to share my support for those affected by the government’s anti-LGBTQ+ law.” He raced in a rainbow-coloured helmet at the last three grands prix – in Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Abu Dhabi – in solidarity with the LGBTQ+ community. Though Hamilton faced a media storm this month when it emerged that his Formula One team, Mercedes, had accepted sponsorship from a company that had manufactured some of the combustible insulation used on Grenfell Tower, this was a decision of his team owners in which he played no part. Within days, the deal was terminated. Beyond his political words and actions, in this season in particular Hamilton has connected at a personal level with many who have watched the unfolding drama. Quite simply, it has been a story in black and white. This year, in cars of equal quality, Hamilton faced a young opponent who has been continuously willing to bend the rules to breaking point in order to win. If there’s one theme that runs through the season it’s of Verstappen seemingly being prepared to risk a crash to stop Hamilton overtaking him. In San Marino, Spain, Brazil, Saudi Arabia and on Sunday in Abu Dhabi, Hamilton had to take avoiding action to prevent a collision – though it was only in Saudi Arabia that Verstappen was penalised. How, many ask, would a Black person be treated if they drove the same way as Verstappen? It’s a situation many Black people can identify with in their own working lives: where the bad behaviour of a white colleague is excused or, worse, seen as a sign of their genius. Verstappen, who went way off track in Brazil to prevent a Hamilton overtake, received no punishment, to the astonishment of many fellow drivers. And even when he has been penalised, the bad behaviour has continued. On the podium after the Saudi race a week ago, where his driving was penalised and criticised by many for being aggressive, Verstappen stormed off before the traditional celebrations began. Contrast that with Hamilton’s grace and dignity on Sunday, where he praised Verstappen for his championship win despite the huge controversy. Few could imagine Verstappen doing the same if the title had been wrenched from him in similar circumstances. It’s behaviour Hamilton has witnessed before. Two years ago his then main rival, Sebastian Vettel, smarting after a penalty denied him victory, swapped round the “first” and “second” placards in front of the drivers’ cars in the paddock. Could Hamilton have ever behaved like this without sparking a huge outcry and incurring the wrath of the authorities? That’s why Hamilton’s experiences, despite being at such an elite level, connect so much with Black people. We can’t lose our temper; we can’t raise our voices; we can’t walk out in a strop. All we can do is make our talent do the talking, and hope it’s enough. For Hamilton, in a sport where ability is clearly measurable, that has worked. And after a weekend of barely believable bad fortune, followed by a hugely contentious decision, he’s proved himself to be a true champion. Joseph Harker is the Guardian’s senior editor, diversity and development. He is a former editor and publisher of the weekly newspaper Black BritonIn the sample clues below, the links take you to explainers from our beginners series. The setter’s name often links to an interview with him or her, in case you feel like getting to know these people better. The news in clues Sometimes a setter comes up with a set of words for a clue that within days becomes something you might overhear in the distanced queue at the chemist. So it is with Pasquale and this one … 5a Belonging to Tory team, class thinking of no one else (13) [ definition: ‘thinking of no one else’ ] [ wordplay: synonyms of ‘belonging to’, ‘Tory’, ‘team’ and ‘class’ ] [ IN + CON + SIDE + RATE ] … for INCONSIDERATE. Paper-free Three puzzles from off the beaten track. First, cryptics in America: the American Values Club subscription crossword has had a “hype week”, including this cryptic by the wonderful Brendan Emmett Quigley. Go, as they say, see. Next, the Cambridge Alumni Magazine has a puzzle with an Only Connect theme from the setter known locally as Enigmatist. Last, this is an opportunity to remind us all that Christmas is a good time to print off the Guardian Genius puzzle, online-only and this paper’s contribution to the genre of “engrossing puzzles”. The latest is by Jack, of whom more presently. Latter patter Nutmeg gives us a rowdy image in her clue … 14a Head for crowded raucous square where ecstasy’s to be had? (5,4) [ definition: place associated with feeling ecstasy ] [ wordplay: first letter of (‘head for’) CROWDED + synonym for ‘raucous’ + number that’s a perfect square ] [ C + LOUD + NINE ] … for CLOUD NINE. Did this cloud always have this number, or has it been subject to the same kind of inflation as the “per cents” given by footballers? Well, in this paper we have seen, in 1963, Granada chair Sidney L Bernstein saying of some broadcasting regulations … This was a very different kettle of fish; instead of cloud seven philosophy we got something much more materialistic. … then, by 1976, a piece in the gardening section has this aside … Now this may seem to you a little way out, not to say cloud seven, or even eight. … and since the subject is talking to plants, it offers a reminder that the various clouds have been home to those detached from reality as well as the simply happy. Happiness became the main meaning and, perhaps helped by the Temptations hit, number nine was so established that Nigel Mansell used it as a benchmark in a 1985 edition of the Observer … I feel I can relax and enjoy my racing now. It’s a fantastic feeling, but I’m not on cloud nine. More like cloud seven, that way you haven’t got so far to fall. … as if cloud seven had never existed at all. For our next challenge, let’s have an expression not subject to this drift, helped perhaps by its rhyme. Reader: how would you clue SEVENTH HEAVEN? Cluing competition Many thanks for your clues for PINCH. You might remember that the previous winner, for INCH, was Catarella’s “Leaders of industrialised nations hope to restrict carbon – scarcely progress” and so the audacity award goes immediately and not because of the business with the hyphen to PeterMooreFuller’s “Leaders of pre-industrialised nations hope to restrict carbon – just a little bit”. I especially enjoyed this “tribute” from Schroduck: “Steal and start to plagiarise last week’s solution”. The runners-up are Phitonelly’s suggestive “Take one for Ugandan leader in satirical magazine” and Steveran’s abrupt “Not much cop”; the winner is Catarella’s “Chip and pin ultimately replaced swipe”. Kludos again to Catarella; please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition – as well as your non-print finds, and picks from the broadsheet cryptics – below. The latest in our collaborative playlist Healing Music Recorded in 2020-21 to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen To is some more guitar, and I recommend the guitar links in the discussion following Wellywearer last time. Clue of the Fortnight A tip of the finished hat from Knut … 5d He opens the mind in a creative way, embodying singular genius (7,8) [ definition: genius ] [ wordplay: anagram (‘in a creative way’) of HEOPENSTHEMIND, containing (‘embodying’) abbrev. for ‘singular’ ] … to STEPHEN SONDHEIM, whose own puzzles we looked at last week. • Here’s a collection of all our explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs. • The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be ordered from the Guardian Bookshop.‘Calling me an outsider artist … yes, I think it’s apt. It’s taken me a long time to join the gang.” On Thanksgiving Friday, Michael Hurley – freak-folk singer-songwriter and artist of nearly 60 years’ standing – is considering where he fits in. He’s calling from his little house in rural Oregon, among the doug firs and tall pines, where he’s just brewed 11 gallons of cider from his homegrown apples. “It’s really quiet here. Few cars go by. It suits me. It’s remote. It gets a little lonely sometimes.” To celebrate his 80th birthday, Hurley is releasing his first album of new material in 12 years, The Time of the Foxgloves, named after his favourite flower and his favourite time of year. His band on it includes the left-field bluesy singer-songwriter Josephine Foster, one of many contemporary fans. Other admirers include Cat Power (who has covered his songs Werewolf and Sweedeedee), Devendra Banhart (who released two Hurley albums on his Gnomonsong label), Lucinda Williams, Yo La Tengo, Violent Femmes and Will Oldham. “He’s a real hero,” Oldham said in 2017. “Seeing him singing and smiling makes me think I can get through this life doing what I do.” You hear some of their influences in Hurley’s eccentric, pared-back, bluegrass and blues-inspired back catalogue. At times his songs are sparse and tender (Be Kind To Me; Valley of Tears) at others spikily surreal (and with titles to match, like What Made My Hamburger Disappear?). The music’s playfulness is underscored by his records’ cartoonish cover art, featuring werewolves inspired by his childhood pet collies Boone and Count, psychedelic sunrises and women in bars drinking beer – “my favourite thing to draw”, Hurley says. Born in Bucks County, Pennsylvania, in 1941, Hurley spent childhood summers on the road with his siblings and operetta-directing father, travelling between their home and theatres in Florida. In the car, they would soak up artists including Fats Waller and Jelly Roll Morton, and make up “simple songs”; he also got on stage for the first time back then. “At the beginning of the shows, we’d be there, us kids, pretending we were fishing into the orchestra pit. Then the actors would come on and chase us off, make it part of the show!” His voice flutters with sleepy delight. “I always wanted to be a creative writer. I never dreamed that I would record.” He became a teenage school drop-out who passed his time making fanzines with names such as The Outcry and The Morning Tea – then he started playing music and hitchhiking with his sister’s blond Stella guitar (“I loved the way it looked and the way its strings would resonate”). One day, he was picked up by the folklorist Fred Ramsey, who lived up the local river road; he’d recorded traditional music across the south in the 50s and invited Hurley to his house to play his songs. He liked what he heard. Hurley’s debut album, First Songs, produced by Ramsay, came out in 1965 on the renowned Folkways label, home to Woody Guthrie and Harry Smith’s Anthology of American Folk Music. On its cover, Hurley already looked different, slightly edgy, peering from under a roguish swoosh of dark hair, a devil-may-care 22.  He was also playing the Greenwich Village coffee house scene at the time, where Bob Dylan and Paul Simon had made early career moves. He had meeting with major producers but nothing transpired: one assumes Hurley never wanted to be a bigger musician. “I did,” he replies, “but I didn’t have a progressive drive about it. I didn’t enjoy the process of applying for gigs, that determination to penetrate things, all this trouble you had to go through. I preferred playing parties. Little gatherings. Drinking with friends, hopping across the river.” He says he didn’t seem to fit people’s ideas “of what the blues or bluegrass or folk should be”. He thinks it’s funny that he first played the Newport folk festival in 2013. “By which time there was practically no folk at all, just indie-rock, so I played a real old folk song, Barbara Allen. Now I’m acceptable!” Seven years passed between his debut album and its follow-up, Armchair Boogie, in 1971. In the meantime, he’d got married, had kids, separated from his wife, had another kid with his girlfriend, and worked as a hospital janitor, artist’s model, shoe pattern-maker and pretzel vendor on the streets of Boston. But he kept making music. His 1975 album, Have Moicy! with the Holy Modal Rounders and Jeffrey Frederick &amp; the Clamtones became a cult favourite: its raggedy, joyful folk-rock holds premonitions of early-80s REM. Over the next three decades, Hurley managed to make a modest living selling his art, touring and making drowsy new albums every few years (the critic Robert Christgau said 1984’s Blue Navigator “sounds as if Hurley padded over to the studio before he was done with his nap”). This has meant his social life has for decades been on an international cycle. “I’ve been spoilt over the years in a way, catching up every year with old friends.” The pandemic has been hard. “I’ve been adjusting to staying in my locality. Doing two to three gigs a month. Going to drive-in automobile places … and I’m scared to fly yet. Hopefully I’ll be lucky in spring when the conditions will be better.” In recent years, he has enjoyed the new interest in his work from younger artists. He adores lots of their covers, highlighting the Hackles’ softer, subtler version of 2002’s O My Stars and Cat Power’s 2000 version of Werewolf, an eerie classic he wrote in the 60s, inspired by the horror films of Lon Chaney and Boris Karloff. “Cat’s version puts it in a whole different place. I don’t want people to sound like me. I want them to sound like them.” His new compositions on The Time of the Foxgloves warmed his heart in the summer: he says he loved playing with a full band in a studio – violin, pump organ, upright bass, banjo and percussion. Tracks include Knocko the Monk, an instrumental where a pump organ wheezes beautifully behind his spiky, nimble finger-picking, and Jacob’s Ladder, on which Josephine Foster’s ghostly alto acts as an antique, woozy foil for Hurley’s reedier tones. “The way music comes to you … it’s like dreaming,” he says. “Something’s going on. Melodies just drop into my thinking.” He has a theory about the type of person who is drawn to his songs. “They respond to the irregularity of it, how it’s not ordinary. A mother of a young son wrote to me recently and said, ‘My son gets so stressed but when I play your music, it calms him way down.’ Oftentimes, musicians have trouble with irregularities, but not everyone’s the same.” He takes a moment in silence. “That’s how it is. Some people feel its beauty.” The Time of the Foxgloves is out now on No Quarter Records.Good morning. Joe Biden declared a major federal disaster in Kentucky after a swarm of deadly tornadoes hit the state on Friday, as representatives of a candle factory destroyed by a twister said far fewer people may have died than previously feared. The president had previously declared the storms a federal emergency, and the move to designate the storms a federal disaster paves the way for additional aid, as thousands face housing, food, water and power shortages. It follows a formal request from the Kentucky governor, Andy Beshear, who said the tornadoes were the most destructive in the state’s history. He initially said more than 100 people could have died. But yesterday afternoon he said the death toll could be as low as 50, according to the Associated Press. Isn’t spring the main season for tornadoes? Yes, this latest event was very unusual coming in December, when colder weather normally limits tornadoes, said Victor Gensini, an extreme weather researcher. Does the climate emergency have something to do with this? Possibly. Biden has asked the Environmental Protection Agency to investigate what role the crisis might have played. Fauci urges Americans to get Covid booster as US nears 800,000 deaths The US government’s leading infectious diseases official, Dr Anthony Fauci, has called for Americans to get a Covid-19 booster shot, as the US approaches 800,000 lives lost to coronavirus since the start of the pandemic. Fauci warned the Omicron variant appeared to be able to “evade” the protection of two initial doses of the mRNA-type Covid vaccines – Pfizer/BioNTech’s and Moderna’s – as well as post-infection therapies such as monoclonal antibodies and convalescent plasma. Omicron is spurring new fears as US infections begin to surge again, with infections currently still led by the highly-transmissible Delta variant that has dominated since the summer. Fauci said an extra vaccine shot provided “optimal” protection against Omicron. What makes boosters more effective than the first two Covid jabs? Mutations in the virus look quite different from that of the original Wuhan strain that all current vaccines were designed to target. That in turn means existing antibodies will be less efficient at intercepting Omicron and a higher quantity of antibodies is required to compensate for them being less well matched. Naomie Harris says ‘huge star’ groped her during audition The Oscar-nominated actor Naomie Harris has said a #MeToo incident on one of her recent projects prompted the “immediate” removal of the perpetrator, as she recalled another occasion when she was groped by a “huge star” who faced no censure. In an interview with the Mail on Sunday, Harris, who played Moneypenny in the last three Bond films and was up for an Oscar for her role in Moonlight in 2017, recalled an incident she had previously discussed in which “a huge, huge star” put his hand up her skirt during an audition. “What was so shocking about it was the casting director was there and the director, and of course no one said anything because he was – he is – such a huge star. That was my only #MeToo incident, so I felt very lucky given how rife that behaviour was. “Now things have definitely changed: I was on a project where there was a #MeToo incident and there was no hesitation – [the perpetrator] was immediately removed,” she said. Who were the perpetrators? Harris declined to name either of the men allegedly responsible. In other news … Almost 80 pages of investigative reports obtained by the San Francisco Chronicle lay out the tragic missteps that led to the death of Ellen Chung, Jonathan Gerrish and their one-year-old daughter, Miju, in August and hold important lessons about the dangers of hiking in a grueling climate. South and North Korea, China and the US have agreed “in principle” to declare a formal end to the Korean war, almost 70 years after the conflict ended in a shaky truce, the South Korean president, Moon Jae-in, has said. But he added that North Korea had made an end to US hostility a precondition for talks. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, has said the collapse of the Soviet Union spelled the end of “historical Russia”, revealing that he drove a taxi to make ends meet after the fall of the USSR. He said it was “unpleasant to talk about” his cab work in that period as he lamented Soviet Union’s demise. Amid the Covid-19 pandemic, health and economic disparities are still seriously affecting Indigenous communities, the president of one of the largest Native American–run non-profits has said, despite some progress achieved by the Biden administration. Stat of the day: millions of Americans can’t afford to retire as number of workers 75 and older expected to rise by 96.5% Millions of Americans are working into their senior years because they cannot afford not to have a job. Over the next decade, the number of workers aged 75 and older is expected to increase in the US by 96.5%, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, with their labor force participation rate projected to rise from 8.9% in 2020 to 11.7% by 2030. “At 75 years old, I’m forced to still have to work to try to make ends meet,” Maria Rios, a food prep worker told the Guardian. Don’t miss this: the doctor defying local laws to provide safe abortions by sea or mail In 2018, Dr Rebecca Gomperts founded Aid Access, a site that allows women in the US to get abortions with the help of 10 US-based providers. Founded especially to help American women – and to evade legal challenges in the US – Aid Access is one of the most affordable ways to get a safe abortion in America. “They only charge $150,” Gomperts says. The website says the organisation tries to help women who cannot pay, too. But she has been helping those facing restrictive legal regimes get safe abortions since long before the advent of Aid Access. … or this: She killed her ex-husband in self-defense. Can she now find peace? On 9 October 2020, Rachel Bellesen started the day thinking she was the victim. After all, she had already explained how her ex-partner attacked her. How he tried to rape her. How she shot and killed him in self-defense. But throughout the night, Bellesen noticed she hadn’t been treated the way a crime victim should. It didn’t occur to her until now that the justice system saw her as a perpetrator – as a killer. Not after everything she had survived at the hands of Jacob Glace. “I felt like I was dead inside,” Bellesen says, looking back. Climate check: Biden administration was not legally bound to auction gulf drilling rights The Biden administration admitted a court decision did not compel it to lease vast tracts of the Gulf of Mexico for oil and gas drilling, shortly before claiming it was legally obliged to do so when announcing the sell-off, the Guardian can reveal. Last month, the US government offered more than 80m acres of the gulf’s seabed for fossil fuel extraction. The enormous sale, which took place just four days after the Cop26 UN climate talks in Scotland, was denounced by outraged environmental groups as a “huge carbon bomb”. Last Thing: Woman who mastered ‘trading up’ from hairpin realizes dream of owning a house In May, the Guardian spoke to Demi Skipper after she’d traded three tractors for one of only a few Chipotle celebrity cards in the world, worth about $20,000. She had been inspired by Kyle MacDonald, who in 2006 traded a red paperclip all the way to a house, and wanted to reach her goal by summer’s end. Only a few months later than hoped, Skipper, 29, has been handed the keys to a little house near Nashville, Tennessee. No mortgage. No fees. And not a penny spent (except on shipping).The sawdust on the floor, the not-unpleasant smell of fat, the hooks and flesh against the white tiles: I remember these things about Harbours Butchers on Southdown Road, Harpenden. Also, the glass booth across from the counter where Mrs Harbour sat and took money and dispensed receipts, a scene recreated back home when I forced my younger brother and sister to be customers. Maybe more than any other shop, I recall the chatter at Harbours, how talk and advice were passed back and forth across the counter like the parcels of lamb chops and bacon. There was even more chatter 180 and 250 miles farther north, in Oldham and Stokesley, at the butchers frequented by my granny and grandma respectively. It was with them I learned what a good combination small talk, health updates and the price of four ounces of liver makes, and that, if you do eat meat, how rewarding a relationship with a good butcher can be. Both Alice and Phyllis, also my aunty May, who loved a cow heel, would have liked Testaccio market. It has five butchers’ stalls, all of which have a direct (or indirect) line back to the slaughterhouse, which may have closed in the 1970s, repurposed for other functions, but is still an imposing presence just metres from the new market. If I could, I would take all three of them to Cesare, who runs one stall with his wife, Delia, the smallest of the five, but maybe the most enmeshed with the quarter since 1918. He may have left his memorabilia behind when the market moved a few years ago, but I still know Cesare is a devoted Beatles fan. And this knowledge is nice; in my head, it hangs around our every interaction, as he carefully squashes two sausages into the twice-minced beef for meatballs, cuts a fold of tripe or bones a whole chicken. I first made this dish for Christmas 10 years ago, when I was given half a boned turkey and the advice to stuff it, which I did hastily, and then managed to overcook it. Cooking disappointments, I find, are like fairground games, and have two results: banishment (never doing/making that again) or determination (until I get it right, which I think I have). Ask a butcher or capable person to bone the chicken. The recipe can be adapted for breasts, skin on and split, stuffed and tied. Or the stuffing can simply be used with a whole chicken, either stuffed inside or baked and served on the side. I recommend the boned version, though: it is celebratory and rewarding, everything bundled neatly, the juices and generous chestnut-prune-apple stuffing keeping everything tender, slicing neatly. Stuffed chicken with chestnut, prune, apple, sage and onion Serves 4-6 1 chicken approx 1.7kg, boned 1 small onion, peeled and diced 1 knob of butter, plus extra for smearing 2 tbsp olive oil 100g peeled cooked chestnuts, chopped 50g soft prunes, chopped 50g apple, peeled and diced 1 sprig fresh thyme, minced 3 sage leaves, minced A pinch of dried oregano Salt and black pepper 100ml white wine Lay out the chicken breast side down and season. Get some string ready and heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Fry the onion in the butter and olive oil until it turns soft and translucent. Add the chestnuts, prunes, apples, herbs, a pinch of salt and plenty of black pepper, and cook for a few minutes more. Take off the heat and leave to cool for a couple of minutes. Arrange the stuffing in a heap down the centre of the open chicken, then bring the sides and legs up and in to form a parcel (the skin can be helpful here). Using either a single piece of string or several lengths, tie the chicken into a bundle. Rub the skin all over with olive oil, season and put the chicken breast side up in roasting tray or dish that’s just a bit larger than the bird itself. Roast for an hour, pouring the wine into the bottom of the dish after 30 minutes. Test by inserting a skewer into the middle of the meat: if the juices run clear, it’s ready; if not, return to the oven for five minutes and test again. Cover loosely with foil, rest for 15 minutes, then carve into thick slices and serve with a spoonful of the cooking juices. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoAmbitious plans have been announced for all adults in England to receive their Covid booster by the end of the year. What has changed? Two weeks ago, the prime minister said every eligible adult would be offered a booster by the end of January. That has now been brought forward a month with all over-18s who had their second dose of the vaccine at least three months ago able to get their booster from Monday. Why has the booster programme been accelerated? Experts have said Omicron infections are doubling in the UK every two to three days and a report by the UK Health and Security Agency found that two doses of a Covid vaccine offers less defence against symptomatic infection from the Omicron variant than with Delta but a booster raised the level of protection. How can you get your booster? Everyone aged 18 and over will be able to go into a walk-in centre to get the vaccine from Monday. Some vaccine centres had already been allowing younger people to get jabs despite NHS England not officially offering boosters to under-40s (they were to be extended to over-30s before the prime minister’s announcement). With age priority scrapped, it is likely to lead to a scramble by people to get vaccinated, particularly so their immune response kicks in before Christmas when many younger people will be intending to visit elderly relatives, who they will not want to risk infecting. A similar scramble is likely to occur on Wednesday when the NHS booking system will open for everyone aged 18 plus. How many jabs a day will be needed for the government to hit its target? By Sunday 46.7 million people had had a second dose, while 23.1 million had had a booster, a difference of 23.6 million. They will not all be adults but most will be, given second jabs for under-18s were only approved just under a month ago. Even if there were 20 million adults still to have a booster that would require administering almost 1 million doses a day, and that is without accounting for Christmas Day and Boxing Day when the appetite for giving and receiving boosters is likely to be low. Is it achievable? On Saturday, 592,337 people of all ages received a dose but totals are generally higher on Saturdays. The highest figure on a weekday last week was 527,342. In May, it was reported that the government wanted to vaccinate 800,000 a day, rising to as many as one million people a day as part of a drive to save the British summer, amid the threat posed by the Delta variant. However, the peak reached in May was 762,361. The highest number of new vaccinations reported in one day in the UK was 844,285 on 20 March – a figure that will probably need to be surpassed every day to hit the government target. To try to achieve it, Boris Johnson said the government will be deploying 42 military planning teams and setting up additional vaccine sites and mobile units and extending opening hours so clinics are open seven days a week, earlier and later. But it is still likely to require GPs and other health professionals to forgo other responsibilities to deliver boosters at a time when waiting lists for routine operations are at record levels and one senior health figure said the NHS is “on its knees”.Scotland’s health secretary, Humza Yousaf, has said it will be “extremely challenging” to hit the new Covid booster target and confirmed there would be new controls to stem the spread of the Omicron variant. Yousaf said the health service would need to draft in medical students, army personnel and private contractors, and switch NHS staff from normal duties, to have a chance of hitting the new target of boosting all eligible adults by the end of January. He said some non-essential operations may need to be postponed. “It will be extremely challenging and that’s why we’re going to have to strain every sinew we can [and] that includes potentially having to move NHS staff away from other core duties to do this,” he told BBC Radio Scotland. In her statement on Sunday evening confirming the Scottish government supported the revised booster target date, Nicola Sturgeon hinted that it could be hard to achieve. Describing the new date as “the aim”, the first minister said it would be met “if possible”. Yousaf said it was “inevitable” the first minister would announce fresh restrictions to combat the rapid surge in Omicron infections in an update to the Scottish parliament on Tuesday, after briefing her cabinet that morning. He would not speculate on what that would involve. He confirmed that closing schools early for the Christmas holidays – a proposal being pushed by the EIS, Scotland’s largest teachers’ union, was being considered but he said that was a measure of last resort. The first minister had made clear last week she wanted to avoid disrupting schools, partly to support children’s mental health. “We will do everything we possibly can to keep schools open during this period,” Yousaf said. Although Scotland already has the highest booster vaccinations figure of any UK government, the health secretary added, hitting the target date would mean nearly doubling the daily rate. As things stand, he said, there were not enough qualified vaccinators to do so. There are already long queues and delays at many vaccination centres, and some walk-in clinics are running out of doses. Last week, Yousaf had warned it would be very difficult to meet the original booster target date of 31 January, and ministers in Edinburgh had been pressing the Ministry of Defence to release more army personnel to help. “To ramp up even more from where we are at the moment would require us to go from 40,000 third doses and boosters in a day to somewhere like 70,000. That’s a huge increase that we have to try to get to,” he said on Monday.Even as the mob ran screaming and smashing through the capitol on 6 January, it was clear this was a coup attempt. It was equally clear that it had been instigated by the then president and his circle, much of whose audience in the “stop the steal” rally would become that mob. Everything since has been fill-in, important in building the legal case against the leaders of this attempted coup and establishing the facts for history and public knowledge – and, one hopes, for efforts to prevent another such attempt. That the goal was a coup is a solemnly horrifying fact. That those who orchestrated it and those who have excused and dismissed it afterward continue to conspire against the rule of law and the right of the people to choose their leaders is another such fact. Documents such as the Powerpoint presentation turned over to the 6 January commission by Trump’s then chief of staff Mark Meadows confirm the details and build our understanding of the threat. On the basis of sometimes ridiculous pretexts, the circle around Trump intended to steal the election and seize power. Many, including Utah senator Mike Lee and South Carolina’s Lindsey Graham, reportedly knew the agenda. Had they succeeded in grabbing power with such an openly lawless act, they could have kept it only by suspending the rule of law. This is what a dictatorship is, and this is what they wanted: a government in which laws are nothing and the ruling junta or thug is everything. What the American people and foreign nations would have done in response might have overturned it further down the road, had it not failed that day, but the whole business is still terrifying, and the threat is not over. It was clear the military leadership was already alarmed: on 3 January , all 10 living secretaries of defense coauthored an editorial declaring, “Efforts to involve the US armed forces in resolving election disputes would take us into dangerous, unlawful and unconstitutional territory.” That few Republicans would defend the US constitution, the voice of the voters and the orderly transition of power was also obvious. At 1.09pm that day, the Capitol police chief said he wanted to declare an emergency and call in the National Guard. At 1.11pm, Trump ended his speech with the words “If you don’t fight like hell, you’re not going to have a country anymore…” At 1.12pm, two of America’s slimiest elected officials, Congressman Paul Gosar and Senator Ted Cruz, were objecting to certifying Arizona’s electoral votes. Gosar, according to two participants in the riot, seemed to know what was coming and had promised “blanket pardons”. The evacuation of the House and Senate would begin an hour later. At 2.24, Trump tweeted, “Mike Pence didn’t have the courage to do what should have been done to protect our Country and our Constitution…” Two conservative Republicans, Vice-President Mike Pence and Congresswoman Liz Cheney, have been among the few to refuse to participate in the coup, the big lie and the surrounding corruption, and have paid for it. That terrible day, House minority leader Kevin McCarthy reportedly called Trump to rage and curse at him and demand he call the mob off, but he would then fall in line and fudge the reality and significance of what happened. That day, Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell noted that to overturn the election results would send democracy into a “death spiral”. Afterward he was furious and shaken, but he too squirmed his way back into alignment with the big lie. By May he was trying to block the formation of the 6 January committee to investigate what had happened. The crisis isn’t just that we had a coup attempt almost a year ago, but that the Republican party has itself become so venal, so corrupt, so ruthless in its quest for power, that it seems assured that we will see further attempts to overrule any election outcomes they don’t like. Already the kind of election laws they’ve pushed across the country seem aimed at such goals, and voter suppression has long been one of their anti-democratic tactics (it played a substantial role in Trump’s 2016 win, and the genuine illegitimacies of that election – foreign interference, anomalies the recount might have uncovered had the Republicans not stopped it – were appropriated as false claims for 2020). The Republicans made a devil’s bargain decades ago, when they decided that they would not change course to win the votes of an increasingly nonwhite, increasingly progressive people, but would try to suppress those who would vote against them. That is, they pitted themselves against democracy as participatory government and free and fair elections. The rhetoric of the far right makes it clear they are fearful and know their power will ebb if they cannot command and subvert the laws and elections of this nation, and they are aiming at some form of minority rule. That’s perfectly clear from their attack on the constitutional process unfolding that afternoon of 6 January, which was itself a refusal to accept a loss. The refusal to recognize the authority of Congress by Trump associates, including Steve Bannon and Mark Meadows, is a further sign of their belief, emboldened by Trump’s four years of criming in public, that they make their own rules. Both have been found in contempt of Congress. The crisis isn’t just that we had a coup attempt and have a political party that has gone rogue, but that much of the rest of the nation seems to be normalizing or forgetting or sleepwalking through the crisis. The warnings are getting more urgent. “They’ve decided to burn it all down with us inside,” said NBC anchor Brian Williams on Thursday, in his parting words before leaving the network. Senator Brian Schatz of Hawaii stated Sunday: “The road to autocracy is paved with overly chill responses from people who would see this all with great clarity if only it were happening in a faraway place.” Connecticut Senator Chris Murphy declared, “This is nation-ending stuff we’re dealing with here and folks better wake up soon. I’ll do my part. Think about what yours is.” Rebecca Solnit is a Guardian US columnist. Her most recent books are Recollections of My Nonexistence and Orwell’s RosesDemon’s Souls One of the most quietly significant games of the 00s has been transformed here into a visually incredible, endlessly rewarding dark fantasy. Make your way through imposing medieval castles, a horrendous prison tower and foul swamps using a sword, shield, wand and whatever else you can scavenge to defend yourself against what you find there. This game can be brutal and unforgiving – progress is hard-won, the combat is exciting and consequential, and the bosses are legendary – but you can always summon other players to help you, and if you can engage with its challenge, this is a game you’ll never forget. Returnal You’ve crash-landed on a hostile planet full of fascinating and dangerous creatures that look and sound like something out of an Alex Garland movie. You make your way tentatively through jungles, deserts and ancient structures, finding better guns and trying not to be unceremoniously slaughtered by everything you meet. When you inevitably die, you do it all again, right from the start. Returnal might not sound like fun and yes, it does require commitment, but it’s just so thrilling to play that living out the same time-loop again doesn’t seem like a chore. Plus, the further you get into the game, the cleverer it turns out to be. • Read the review. Hades A stylish, moreish and unexpectedly sexy game in which you try to fight your way out of the Greek underworld as Zagreus, son of Hades. The ingredients are simple – a few different weapons, various perks from all the gods of Olympus rooting for your escape, snappy and intelligent dialogue – but they combine into something different and interesting, and with every attempt you edge closer to the surface. Its memorable, playful take on mythology helps make this the best game in its genre. • Read the review. Deathloop Developer Arkane Studios brings so much style and aesthetic confidence to its games, they’re a pleasure just to witness and exist in – and Deathloop is no exception. An exuberant, super chaotic action adventure set in a degrading time-loop on an island inhabited solely by sociopathic rich people, this game boasts smooth gunplay, wild locations and narrative chicanes that have you gripping the proverbial safety bar in disbelief. However will this talented team follow it? • Read the review. Ratchet &amp; Clank: Rift Apart An absolutely joyful game about a lonely space-rodent, his robot pal, and a supervillain crisis that has him meeting his dimensional twin and going on a galaxy-spanning adventure with her. Whether you are pointing cartoonish weapons at wonderfully animated alien enemies or leaping and skating around alien planets on jet-boots, it always looks absolutely sumptuous and wants you to be having a good time. It’s technically astonishing, sure, but also big-hearted, lovable and very, very fun to play. • Read the review. Ghost of Tsushima: Director’s Cut Set in Japan in the 1200s and hugely informed and inspired by samurai cinema, this is the most absurdly beautiful open-world game around. Just watch the cherry blossoms fall and grass blow in the wind as you ride around the island of Tsushima and slash through Mongol invaders. Its action wears thin after a while, but nonetheless this is a game that shows off both the PlayStation 5 and developer Sucker Punch’s superabundant attention to visual detail. • Read the review. Final Fantasy VII Remake Intergrade Building on the acclaimed 2020 update of Square Enix’s classic steampunk adventure, Intergrade tweaks the visuals for PS5 and adds the Episode INTERmission content, which brings in a whole new quest around fan-favourite character Yuffie. It’s wonderful to see well-known locations around Midgar lavishly redecorated for the new console, and for those who have never previously encountered the original game or the remake, my goodness, what a treat you have in store. • Read the review. It Takes Two A co-operative adventure about a failing marriage doesn’t sound like the stuff of gaming magic, but Hazelight Studios has brought startling innovative flair to what could have been a mawkish trial. Arguing parents May and Cody are shrunk down to toy size and have to fight their way through their own home and garden to reach their daughter, fighting giant instincts and working together to solve clever, engrossing puzzles (and these are truly collaborative ventures, not just one player standing on a switch, while the other opens a door). Ultimately, this is a game about the value of communication and beyond the annoying talking book narrator, it delivers its marriage guidance in the subtlest of ways. • Read the review. Astro’s Playroom The PlayStation 5’s first game is still one of its best, an exuberant tribute to PlayStation history, hardware and games that is effortlessly likable. You can get through it in an evening, but in those few hours you’ll use the controller to climb mountains as a robot monkey, fire arrows at a dragon made of stone and zip around an imaginative dreamworld of twisted-together cable trees and platforms made of disc trays. Plus, the music will be playing in your head for weeks. • Read the review. Spider-Man: Miles Morales Somehow, Insomniac Games took the same city, the same mechanics and the same hero as its original Spider-Man game and made everything feel totally rejuvenated via its fresh leading man. Miles’s story of uncertainty, vulnerability and gaining strength through experience is truly moving, and the way New York City reflects his very different journey – the neighbourhoods he frequents and the people he meets – is so skilfully and subtly done. But this is also a kick-ass action game with enough new moves and cool set-pieces to entertain and challenge veteran webslingers. It also looks astonishing on PS5. • Read the review.Alex was studying transport management in Boston when he first came across Amanda in 2001. They belonged to the same internet forum for railway enthusiasts. “At the time it was a hobby dominated by men and a lot of women who did join disguised themselves,” says Alex. “I remember seeing Amanda’s name and thinking it was great that she could be herself.” There was an AOL chatroom within the message board, and they began to talk. A New Yorker, Amanda had always been interested in transport systems. For several years they chatted online, but neither expected it to turn into more. “She was dating a subway operator and I told her to be careful because the railroad life can be really tough,” he says. By 2006, Amanda had embarked on a career in business journalism. Alex was working for an engineering contractor and travelling regularly from Boston to New York to look for secure jobs. Both were single. One day in early 2007, Alex asked her permission to flirt. “When he asked if he could hit on me I was a bit taken aback, but thought: ‘why not?’” says Amanda. Alex was “actively seeking a new partner” and keen to explore whether their friendship might develop into more. Amanda began to dig deeper into his interests. “He was very intriguing,” she says. “I’d only lived in New York and he was such a worldly person. He had been living all over the world and had interesting stories to tell.” After years of chatting online, they agreed to meet that spring outside K Mart in Penn station, New York, for a day out. “We rode the subway down to Coney Island and walked around,” says Amanda. “I took him on the Staten Island ferry and we rode around on the railway there.” Alex was impressed by her fearlessness. “I had only lived in smaller cities and was a bit intimidated by some parts of New York.” A few weeks later, he drove his rickety 1988 Volvo down to visit her again and she showed him around Long Island, where she lived. They became a long-distance couple, until Alex accepted a job with the New York Transit Authority in July 2007. “I was living at home with my mum and grandmother and asked if he wanted to be a lodger,” says Amanda. For Alex, it was a leap into the unknown and the adjustment wasn’t easy. “I’d lived on my own for so long that I struggled,” he says. “Amanda seemed more family-oriented.” Six months later, Alex moved out again and the couple took a break from the relationship. They stayed friends and met now and again for dinner. But by 2009, they slowly began to realise they wanted to be together. “I could tell we both felt we should make it work,” says Amanda. That September, Alex invited Amanda to meet him at Penn station where they first met. She was expecting a friendly dinner and was shocked when he proposed. “He pulled out an origami box he had made out of metro cards. I was so busy looking at the pretty box it took me ages to open it,” she says, laughing. “We hadn’t discussed it, but I knew it was right so I said yes.” In 2010, they focused on travelling, and then bought a home of their own in 2013 – the day before their wedding. Their children were born in 2017 and 2020. “Alex has made my life so much more adventurous,” says Amanda. “He’s expanded my horizons and I didn’t realise how insular my world was before I met him.” In turn, Alex says Amanda makes him a better person. “She has helped me to develop my emotional intelligence. I’ve grown as a person and I don’t think anyone else could have done that. We are always finding out new things about each other.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about yourself, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.A competition pitting 10 teachers against each other to scramble for dollar bills to fund school supplies in a city in South Dakota has been described as “demeaning” and drawn comparisons with the Netflix hit series Squid Game. The local newspaper the Argus Leader reported $5,000 (£3,770) in single dollar bills were laid out on the ice skating rink during the Sioux Falls Stampede hockey game on Saturday night, and the teachers from nearby schools competed to grab as many as possible in less than five minutes. Footage of the competition that went viral on social media showed teachers stuffing the notes down their jumpers and into hats while the audience cheered. The money was reportedly donated by CU Mortgage Direct to fund teaching supplies and classroom repairs. The company and the Sioux Falls Stampede later apologised for the competition, following widespread backlash. “Although our intent was to provide a positive and fun experience for teachers, we can see how it appears to be degrading and insulting towards the participating teachers and the teaching profession as a whole,” they said in a joint statement. Earlier, American Federation of Teachers president, Randi Weingarten, tweeted that the display was demeaning. “This just feels demeaning … teachers shouldn’t have to dash for dollars for classroom supplies,” she said. No doubt people probably intended it to be fun, but from the outside it feels terrible.” On social media the “dash for cash” footage was described as “humiliating” and “dystopian”. Some people likened the footage to scenes from Squid Game or the Hunger Games franchise. The teachers involved in the competition appreciated the cash and said they planned to use it to buy flexible seating, such as standing desks or wobble chairs, or document cameras so they could upload lessons online, the Argus Leader reported. “I think it’s really cool when the community offers an opportunity like this for things that educators a lot of times pay out of pocket for,” Alexandria Kuyper, a fifth-grade teacher at Discovery elementary school said.Chelsea’s title defence hits the rocks Chelsea were dealt their second defeat of the season and a potential title-winning blow as Reading beat the defending champions 1-0. After winning the FA Cup and battling with Juventus in the Women’s Champions League, Emma Hayes rotated her squad. Zecira Musovic was picked in goal and Fran Kirby and Pernille Harder were named on the bench. The slight change in the Blues starting chemistry meant Reading were ahead after four minutes and Chelsea couldn’t claw back a point. With Arsenal continuing their unbeaten run, Chelsea are now four points off the top spot. They will have to beat the Gunners when they face each other again in the second half of the season and hope Jonas Eidevall’s side start to drop points. If they don’t Chelsea’s title defence has gone up in a puff of smoke at the Madejski Stadium. Sarah Rendell Match report: Reading 1-0 Chelsea Dominant United look up the table Marc Skinner has taken a little time to get going at Manchester United since succeeding Casey Stoney last summer but everything seemed to click on the south coast on Sunday. Time will tell if United’s 2-0 victory will prove a watershed yet only the excellence of Brighton’s Victoria Williams at centre-half and Megan Walsh in goal kept the score down as Skinner’s team both revived their European hopes and ended a run of four games without a WSL win. “This was a dominant performance which has been coming for a while,” said Skinner, who was delighted to see the impressive Norway international Vilde Bøe Risa score her first league goal for United. “We were much more like the Manchester United team we want to develop; I loved the aggression from us. We showed what we can be.” Louise Taylor Match report: Brighton 0-2 Manchester United Birmingham send message in narrow defeat to City Christie Murray’s penalty opened the scoring in Birmingham City’s thrilling 3-2 defeat against Manchester City and laid down a marker in the relegation battle. Veatriki Sarri was fouled by Hayley Raso which gave the Scotland international the opportunity to put Birmingham ahead. She took the perfect penalty as she sent Karima Benameur Taieb the wrong way. Though the Blues eventually lost to a late winner from Ellen White, their interim manager, Darren Carter, believes the performance shows the team will fight to stay up. “The perception of Birmingham at the moment is we’re a soft touch and it’s easy to get points against us – that’s a narrative we want to change,” he said. “Hopefully today they’ve sent a message that we’re no longer going to roll over in games. We’re going to fight to the end.” SR The WSL deserves better than failing FA Player For a long spell in the first half of Aston Villa’s 2-1 defeat to Tottenham fans had only the sound of the crowd to listen to as the commentary feed went down on the FA Player. This meant both goals in the first 45 minutes were left without analysis or reaction. The issue was not addressed when the commentary returned at 32 minutes and that just is not good enough. The WSL broadcast deal was welcomed this season as a sign of the progression in the women’s game but also that supporters didn’t have to watch all the games through the FA Player. Last season saw echoing commentary and feeds going down. The matches not chosen for TV coverage deserve professional standards too. SR Duggan salvages draw for struggling Everton Toni Duggan was one of the big WSL signings in the summer but she had been without a goal before scoring the equaliser against West Ham on Sunday. The ball was hurled into the box from a throw-in and Duggan took a deft touch to half-volley the ball into the net. It has been a strange season for Everton with a managerial change and results not going their way despite heavy investment. Against West Ham they had more shots on and off target and 60% of the possession but came away with only a point. They are ninth, six points off a Champions League place. Next they go to Spurs, who currently occupy that third place. SR Leicester fall with new manager but key game awaits Newcomers Leicester acted after eight games of the WSL season and no points, relieving Jonathan Morgan, the manager who got them promoted, and appointing Lydia Bedford in his place. It is Bedford’s first job in club management and she was handed the toughest possible fixture to start her WSL tenure: league leaders Arsenal away. Predictably the assignment was too tough for Leicester, losing 4-0 after a harsh sending off of Jemma Purfield. Now Arsenal away is not a tie they were ever expecting to win and Bedford praised their players resilience, especially in the second half. She will only have another week to work with the team, though, before the key game against second-bottom Birmingham on Sunday. Marcus ChristensonDruid theatre company’s triple bill by Seán O’Casey comes with music hall flourishes and a light touch. Rarely performed, these one-act comedies show a very different side to the O’Casey whose major dramas from the 1920s tackled the political conflicts and tragedies of his times. With the endlessly inventive cast going all out for the ridiculous, Garry Hynes’ production delivers farce with hints of satire. While an anti-authoritarian theme runs through all three plays, Bedtime Story from 1951 has the most pointed comments to make, in this case about religious hypocrisy and sexual double standards. Set in a claustrophobic boarding house, it concerns a pious young man, John Jo (Aaron Monaghan), who wants to cover up the fact that he has invited a woman, Angela (Sarah Morris), back to his room overnight. As he haplessly tries to smuggle her out of the house and pretend it never happened, Angela turns the tables on him, with the audience cheering her on. Petty officialdom is the obstacle to two men’s carousing in A Pound on Demand (1939) in which Jerry (Rory Nolan), moderately less drunk than his pal, Sammy (Aaron Monaghan), attempts to help him withdraw money from his post office account, although he can barely sign his name. With her modicum of power, the postmistress (Venetia Bowe) relishes obstructing them, supported by her admirer, the village policeman (Liam Heslin). As they lurch dangerously or are flung out through the door, Nolan and Monaghan’s brilliant comic timing compensates for a flimsy script. Clowning and slapstick are central to the stage business in The End of the Beginning (1937). In a contest between a farmer husband, Darry (Rory Nolan) and wife Lizzie (Sarah Morris), absurd male antics ensue, with the self-important Darry joined by the delightfully gormless Barry (Marty Rea) to attempt a day’s housework. All gangling limbs, Barry adds to the ensuing mayhem: a mess of broken crockery, spilled oil and a heifer on the loose. With designer Francis O’Connor’s lovingly detailed period sets and costumes, piano interludes in true vaudeville style from composer Conor Linehan, this production wraps O’Casey’s lesser works in a seasonal bow. On tour until 18 December.Bookmakers have made the Liberal Democrats the favourites to win this week’s North Shropshire byelection, odds that if reflected in Thursday’s vote would deliver a significant fresh blow to Boris Johnson’s authority. Lib Dem campaigners stress that the result is hard to predict, given variables such as turnout and the number of Labour and Green supporters who decide to vote tactically. But the party says it is “neck and neck” in the usually ultra-safe Conservative seat, which was held by Owen Paterson in the 2019 election with a near-23,000 majority and has been Tory for all but two of the last 190 years. The byelection was called when Paterson resigned after Johnson abandoned efforts to change the disciplinary system for MPs to save the former environment secretary from being punished for breaking rules on paid lobbying. Although the Lib Dems finished third to Paterson and Labour in 2019, with 10% of the vote, they have successfully positioned themselves as the most likely opposition party to cause an upset, and have been consistently second favourites in voting odds. But following Johnson’s tumultuous week facing claims over lockdown-busting Christmas parties in Downing Street and questions over the financing of renovations to his official flat, bookmakers have the Lib Dem candidate, Helen Morgan, as favourite, at about 1/2. In contrast, the odds for the Conservatives’ choice to replace Paterson, Neil Shastri-Hurst, a Birmingham-based barrister, have lengthened to about 6/4. While the Labour candidate, Ben Wood, has been fighting an energetic campaign and says he is the main challenger, party officials have devoted few resources to North Shropshire. Speaking on Sunday, the Labour MP Yasmin Qureshi effectively acknowledged the party had deliberately left the field clear for the Lib Dems. “Well, it’s realistic,” the shadow Foreign Office minister told Times Radio. “I mean, let’s face it, Labour are never going to win North Shropshire. The Lib Dems do have an opportunity to do so. “It’s not just soft-pedalling, I do think that in constituencies like these ones, where Labour don’t have a huge amount of resources … we know, realistically, we have no chance of winning.” Another imponderable is the strength of support for the Greens’ candidate, Duncan Kerr, given strong local election results for the party last May, giving it 12 of 18 council seats in Oswestry, the constituency’s biggest town. Overall, the result remains very difficult to call, with other complications including a notably short campaign, in which some locals received postal votes before the parties had a chance to contact them. A key factor could be how many traditional Conservative voters who are now dissatisfied with the party and with Johnson decide to stay at home on Thursday, or even to vote Lib Dem. Daisy Cooper, the Lib Dems’ deputy leader, who spent the weekend campaigning in North Shropshire, said support for the Conservatives there “has collapsed”. She said: “We are now neck and neck with the Conservatives and our campaigners are flooding into the constituency from across the country. “As we enter the final few days of the campaign, the crucial question is: will enough Labour and Green voters vote tactically for the Lib Dems? If they do, this could help deliver a knockout blow to Boris Johnson.”“Oh, it was raining much harder than this,” Dame Sarah Storey says before taking another mouthful of pizza on a miserable afternoon in London as she remembers the testing conditions she endured when winning her historic 17th Paralympic gold medal in Tokyo in September. The epic road race around the foothills of Mount Fuji was cloaked in driving rain and ghostly fog which makes an al fresco lunch beneath a canopy on a wet winter afternoon in Stratford seem almost summery. “The rain was bouncing, going halfway up your wheels and more,” she says. “There were hailstones at one point. It was so dreadful and photographs from the day show just how mad it was.” The 44-year-old has just made the shortlist of six for the BBC’s Sports Personality of the Year and, after her eighth Paralympic Games, she feels she is yet to tap fully into her “potential” as she plans to win three more gold medals in Paris in 2024. Storey also reflects on the bullying and eating disorder she overcame as a girl while stressing that her preparations and training remain as rigorous and driven by science as always. But first, relaxing and eating, she is absorbed by memories of that landmark day in Japan. “This is pretty good visibility,” she exclaims while we peer out at a murky setting where the rain keeps falling so relentlessly that we move inside so we can hear each other more clearly. “In the road race you could barely see the lights of the lead car. The commissaire bikes were having to move the camera bikes on because they were holding us up as, unless they were very close, they couldn’t see us. It was very hard.” It was also difficult for her husband Barney, who watched the race in the early hours of the morning in Cheshire. “It was definitely the hardest one to watch,” he says, “because I knew fairly early on it had not gone as planned. There’s always the expectation that Sarah’s going to disappear into the sunset – especially after she’d won the [3,000m individual] pursuit and the time trial. But everyone’s human and sometimes you just have to find a different way to win.” Storey nods. “There was an expectation it was a foregone conclusion because the more you win, the more you’re expected to do so again. I remember going into the world champs this year and I’ve never been so nervous because it hadn’t gone well the week before and I was saying: ‘Is my time up? Have I run out of cards to play?’ In the end the worlds went well – but I never take it for granted.” The Paralympic road race took an unexpected twist when Germany’s Kerstin Brachtendorf was 75 seconds ahead of a small pack of riders after four of the six laps. In the chasing group of five, only Storey was willing to put in the work to reel in Brachtendorf. Why did the other riders not share the workload? “Nobody was going to help me win that gold medal,” Storey says. “If they helped bring Kerstin back, they knew I’m the fastest sprinter. So everything was on my shoulders. I’m always the most marked person so I’ve had to keep finding different ways to outsmart the others. This was a genuinely technical race, too – we’ve never had a really technical descent in the Paralympics.” Showing great daring and skill, Storey began the last lap in the lead. Her British teammate, Crystal Lane-Wright, who finished second, did not challenge Storey in the final sprint as she said: “I have morals.” She knew Storey had done all the work to crack the Brachtendorf breakaway. “Crystal said she didn’t have the legs either,” Storey points out. “We also swept the gold and silver in all three events, which is pretty cool.” But the absence of spectators, especially her family, curbed the elation. “It was really difficult when I crossed the line because there was no one there. When you finish, normally you’ve got that instant feedback from the people who are the most critical and most productive. So to achieve history felt a bit strange when I couldn’t really compute what had happened. I was absolutely freezing and had brain freeze. It was really difficult to make sense of it all because it wasn’t what we expected from both a tactical and conditions perspective.” There is a long pause when I ask Storey to name the last time she felt she had failed. “I haven’t raced that much,” she eventually says, “hence why I’m having to think. Fortunately the international races have gone well. But, for example, this May there was a circuit race at Loughborough University and I felt out of practice. I was convinced the whole race I was doing dreadfully and I gave myself a really hard time. “After I finished 15th I learned that half the field hadn’t finished and we’d lapped most of the riders. I wasn’t that far off the lead group but I was really cross. It was a week and a bit before the worlds and I was like: ‘Oh my goodness.’ But I’m a human being like everyone else. I had to shake the cobwebs off and take it on the chin. The following week was very good.” Storey claimed her 11th world title in June, winning the road race, and set herself up for more Paralympic glory three months later. She remarks coolly that she knew the Fuji course better than anyone because “I’d reccied it so well, riding laps at a steady pace, just looking at the lines. One of my skills is that I’ve got a photographic memory.” Her husband smiles. “She’s one of those really annoying people that can remember absolutely every single detail of everything.” Storey shrugs casually. “We’ll be in the car driving away from the course recce and I’ll say to Barney: ‘You know such and such a corner?’ And he’ll be like: ‘Where was that?’” Barney then has “to look at all the GoPro videos of her riding round so I can see the fine details Sarah remembers instantly after one look”. When did Storey understand she had this gift? “At school I realised no one else was doing their homework in their head during swim training. I could see the sheet in my head and I could work out the answers and go home and write them down.” *** Storey stood out at school and endured a distressing period of bullying. She was born without a functioning left hand, but other girls were jealous of her sporting success. Storey won her first two gold medals at the age of 14, as a swimmer, at the Barcelona Games in 1992. “I was always very pragmatic and my parents helped me,” she replies when I ask if she had come close to quitting competitive sport. “They reminded me that, while school was five days a week, when I went training the rest of the time or I was competing on the weekends I had so many fantastic friends. I’m still in touch with all of those swimmers I had as friends and last month it was the 30th anniversary of our meeting. I remember thinking if I allowed the bullies to win, then I wouldn’t get to hang out with these really cool people. Thankfully the bullying didn’t last that long in the grand scheme of my career.” She also gained control of an eating disorder. “My GP recognised that, if I wrote everything down, I could see how little I was eating. She said: ‘You’re a clever girl. You know what good nutrition looks like. Write down what you’re eating and compare it to what you’re supposed to eat.’ That level of accountability gave me the confidence to eat more and not worry. The challenge at school had been going on for about nine months so I was well-versed in avoiding those people and I didn’t need to use food. I could control things a different way.” Storey stresses how her sense of control as a supreme Paralympian is rooted in scientific analysis and a steely discipline. “It’s enjoying that discipline, being comfortable with being uncomfortable and utilising that ability to dig deep when it really matters. People see the highs but they’re not there for the lows. They’re not there for things like illness or having to make difficult decisions. But you reconcile things with the science so you can always go back to the nuts and bolts of what’s going to work. That doesn’t mean it isn’t hard or you don’t have doubts. But as you get older it’s easier to know you’ve made the right decision and stick to it.” This Sunday’s BBC extravaganza marks her third appearance on the Spoty shortlist which includes 18-year-old Emma Raducanu. “We were actually in London the weekend she won the US Open,” Storey remembers. “So we watched her. It reminded me she’s the same age I was when I won my three golds in Atlanta [in 1996].” Storey remembers. “I’d got my A-level results poolside the day before I won the first. “It was pre-social media, pre-digital, nobody even had email. I got my first mobile phone after those Games because I went to uni. It was a different world compared with the world Emma lives in now. But there was a level of expectation on me, as I came back from those Games as the most successful athlete, and it was not always easy.” Now, with Barney and her two children eager for her to compete in Paris in 2024, Storey is thinking of improving rather than retiring. She had said earlier: “When you’re close to reaching your potential, and none of us ever know when that will be, the gains you make are smaller and smaller. So you have to make logical adjustments.” Does she really believe she is still to reach her full potential as an athlete? “I think so. There’s still a lot to learn in the sense of exactly how fast you could go in the velodrome. We’ve only just completed a project on my time-trial and need longer to refine everything and sharpen the discipline of me holding my head in the right position. I need to go back to those Tokyo videos and see whether I did. We obviously look at the raw data and know that the last two laps were slower than I would have liked. So there are still obvious points where you can say: ‘Yes, there are improvements to be made.’ Then, on the road, we still have some technological gains to make and you can always keep pushing that leaning envelope.” Storey smiles. “I don’t think the girls in the road race would necessarily agree. They were asking what tyres I was using. I wasn’t touching my brakes on that descent, just leaning.” Racing through the rain and mist on a dizzying descent, without braking, was Storey’s last challenge. Winning three more golds in 2024, and improving all the time as she aims to raise her total of Paralympic titles to a perfectly round 20, seems a logical aim for this extraordinary athlete.‘How do you feel about killing somebody? Because us getting out of here is pretty goddamn dependent on it.” Dolph Lundgren and Scott Adkins make a fine odd couple in this meatily satisfying action film – once it gets moving. The ageing hulk is on prime form, juggling directorial duties with a Balboan blue-collar turn in front of the camera, while Adkins, the current king of kickass B-movies, again shows his range and brings the Brit-comedy – a levity that borders on dorky, if that’s an appropriate word to describe a martial-arts matinee idol capable of caressing your jaw with a spin-kick. Adkins plays Mike Wade, an over-the-hill MMA fighter from Birmingham, England, down on his luck in Birmingham, Alabama. Cadging a job as part of a demolition crew stripping Castle Heights hospital, he finds a three-holdall stash of greenbacks in a cupboard. With the building due to be dynamited in 90 minutes, he returns solo for the money – unaware that two other interested parties are also moving in: Lundgren’s prison guard Ericson, who needs to finance his daughter’s cancer treatment, and a gang kingpin (Scott Hunter) out to secure the loot on behalf of his incarcerated brother. That’s all that needs to be said. Andrew Knauer’s script spends the first third of the film unnecessarily detailing the various allegiances, which defers the good stuff: Lundgren and Adkins pounding seven shades out of each other and then teaming up against the real heavies. Lundgren, in his fleece and spectacles, looks like the most virile crown-green bowling player you’ve ever seen. With a surprisingly substantial action-directing resumé behind him, Lundgren makes strong positional use of the decrepit high-rise in a way that Die Hard did expertly, though his action choreography – serviceable but staid – is less cutting-edge than Gareth Evans’s in The Raid. With so many factions in play, Adkins arguably doesn’t carry Castle Falls as much as he should – and deserves a better character flaw than “must overcome continually being put in a sleeper hold”. Crammed into the film’s back half, his and Lundgren’s break for the ground floor feels like it’s only just getting going, but this is a partnership that deserves to have legs. • Castle Falls is available online on 20 December.It’s a genuine thrill to encounter a film as exciting and immediate as Flee. The true story at its centre is a harrowing and suspenseful refugee narrative of loss and resilience, and director Jonas Poher Rasmussen could have brought it to the screen in many ways, almost all of them more conventionally easier than the one he finally chose. Rasmussen’s friend, known in the film as Amin, is an Afghan refugee who agrees to share how he made his way from war-torn Kabul in the 80s to now, living a settled, open life in Denmark as a gay man, one he’d never thought was possible. In animating the interviews with Amin and the various events being recalled, Rasmussen finds an unusually immersive way to pull us in even closer, one that’s both emotionally involving and artfully realised. Amin’s childhood, as with many others like him, was interrupted in the late 80s as conflict forced him and his family to escape their home, finding their way to Moscow. Rasmussen also includes montages of archival footage, deftly informing us of the basics of the political chaos that surrounds Amin’s life in both Afghanistan and Russia. It’s impossible to recall a refugee story told with such devastating efficacy as well as such specific nuance, showing us the horrors Amin experienced but also, importantly, how they stuck to him in the years after and still do. There’s a natural rhythm and sense of discovery to these recollections, as if Amin is working so much of it out for himself still as he talks. It’s a nakedly personal film and we feel honoured being allowed in the room with them. Flee is a remarkably humanising and complex film, expanding and expounding the kind of story that’s too easily simplified. Rasmussen has created a loving and unsparing tribute to his friend.Fairly early on Monday morning last week I got a call from a radio station: could I come on to discuss a study showing London is the world’s most congested city, and this is because of cycle lanes. Hang on, I replied – say all that again? As it turned out, I never appeared (someone else got the part). But, intrigued, I looked into the research which supposedly showed all this. And that was when things started to get strange. Both claims: London being the world’s most congested city, and cycle lanes being part of the problem – were all over the media that morning. This included outlets you would expect (Daily Mail: “Cycle lanes installed at start of Covid pandemic help make London most congested city in world”) and some you’d hope better of (BBC London: “Cycle lanes blamed as city named most congested”). And yet … both arguments were seemingly nonsense. They were based on a report called the Global Traffic Scorecard by a company called Inrix, which sells traffic data. The first problem was the claim of London being the world’s most traffic-clogged city, a position no similar ranking has ever given it. One clue came when I got hold of the report – it doesn’t even list a single city in Asia or Africa. This wasn’t a global study, it was one based on where Inrix happens to operate. Even more of a puzzle was the idea of cycle lanes being at least partly responsible. The papers carried the same quotes, from an Inrix employee called Peter Lees. “Use of roads is all about supply and demand,” he said. “If the demand goes up but the road space is being shared with other forms of transport, there’s less tarmac effectively for the cars to be on, which then has an impact on the speeds on the road and therefore congestion.” There are two problems with this, the first and more pressing being that it shows a fairly worrying ignorance about the fundamentals of traffic. I don’t wish to rehash many decades of research, but the basics are that you can’t liken traffic to water, with the width of the pipe determining how much can flow. Traffic is very different, as shown countless times through the idea of induced demand. The second problem is that even the Global Traffic Scorecard doesn’t make this argument. Cycle lanes do not even get a mention in its 21 pages. So where did it come from? Seemingly, it was straight from Lees, who was interviewed by PA Media, the news agency. PA included them on Sunday in an embargoed story, which was then picked up by the other outlets. The PA story identified Lees as the “Inrix operations director” but his official title is actually “director of operations – media”. He’s head of press, not a traffic wonk. How did all this happen? Inrix and Lees have been somewhat coy. After several emails last week, Lees said he could answer queries in writing, which I sent. But despite several followups, all I got was digital tumbleweed. One slight plot twist came in a tweet which reprinted a reply from Lees to an Imperial College London scientist querying the findings. The No 1 ranking for London, Lees said, “indicates a positive economic rebound [from Covid] for the UK”. Cycle lanes were mentioned among “much smaller contributory factors”. Some of the headlines were “not accurately representing what we said”. Without wanting to get too Hercule Poirot, I think we have a plausible sequence of events here. A company that makes its money from the auto industry, and which is part owned by Porsche, tries to get some free PR by publicising its research in arguably questionable terms. The head of media does an interview and floats the extra, newsworthy theory. Was this a planned ruse? Perhaps we’ll never know. Either way, we have a pair of myths escaped into the wild, where they will lurk for years, turning up occasionally as evidence in the weird culture war against cycling. Already one has appeared: a Sunday Telegraph article this weekend arguing against low-traffic neighbourhoods confidently named London as the world’s most congested city. What can we do? Not much, I supposed, except simply, and yet again, observe the depressing and slippery slope from press release to news story to unkillable myth when it comes to cycling stories. I’d like to think some people would learn lessons from this debacle. But I’m not exactly confident.The way Lewis Hamilton was treated by the FIA in the dramatic Formula One world title finale on Sunday was “a disgrace”, said the driver’s younger brother. Nicolas Hamilton accused the F1 governing body of “letting down” Lewis, following his loss in Abu Dhabi. He labelled his brother as “THE TRUE CHAMPION” in a heartfelt post on Instagram, and added: “The FIA broke their own rules, which is a disgrace to our whole sport. “Nevertheless, regardless of being mistreated today, the Hamilton’s were humble in defeat. My father [Anthony], the guy who raised us, congratulating Max &amp; his father Jos. People can say what they like, but my father’s gesture proves all of the doubters &amp; haters wrong &amp; shows who we are as ‘The Hamilton’s’. “Proving people wrong is in our DNA, which Lewis does on a daily basis. With utter professionalism &amp; decency in defeat, even though we all know, that he was let down by the sport that he has given so much to. Congratulations to Max for such a fantastic season from him.” The Formula One season climax is understood to have garnered a peak audience figures of 4.4 million on Channel 4. Max Verstappen clinched his maiden F1 world championship with a thrilling last-lap overtake at the Yas Marina Circuit with a one-minute peak viewing figure of 4.4 million at 2.32pm. The Red Bull driver stormed past title rival Hamilton in the closing stages of the race, having benefited from a late safety car that bunched up the pack. There was a combined peak TV audience of 7.4 million at 2.32pm – a 60% share – with Channel 4 and all three Sky Sports channels that were broadcasting the race. Confusion reigned as the under-fire race director Michael Masi changed his mind to allow lapped cars to pass the safety car – meaning Verstappen had a clear run at Hamilton in the final lap and, on much faster tyres, made his move to claim a first F1 title. Mercedes immediately launched two appeals against the result, one against Verstappen for allegedly overtaking under a safety car and a second claiming a breach of rules regarding race restarts following a safety car period - both of which were dismissed.A Christmas show about James Bond? Well, not quite. In Eastern Angles theatre company’s production, MI5 and MI6 have merged to save money for the new Downing Street meeting room. This means 007 is unaffordable, so we’re left with the not so charming knock-off, James Boond (Herb Cuanalo). With a mission to investigate the disappearance of a nuclear scientist and amateur birdwatcher, Professor Padraig O’Plenty, our hero’s journey is more chaotic than stylishly smooth. Behind a silver curtain on the stage that forms part of Emily Bestow’s factory-looking playground set, complete with spray-painted silver ladders and fireman’s pole, the actors hurriedly change costumes to switch character. Despite some wholehearted performances – particularly from Lottie Davies as the larger-than-life turkey rearer, Matthew Bernarde – much of the humour feels hammy and barely gets an audience snigger. “Why are we laughing,” the evil accomplice Major Ovaranova asks international woman of mystery, Edie Effe. “Well, someone has to,” she replies – and we can’t help but agree. Led by Boond we are introduced to a medley of not exactly traditional Bond characters. Alice Robinson convincingly transforms from the Irish almost Bond girl Kitty to secretary Spendapenny, but too often the momentum is slowed by pitchy renditions of Chris Warner’s music. Still, this not-quite-panto directed by Ivan Cutting is somewhat lovable. Firmly set in the theatre company’s home of Ipswich (Rushmere is a nearby village), there are fond references to local supermarkets and the nearby district of California, and the high points come when the audience is spoken to directly. Though not overflowing with belly-aching gags, this alternative pantomime is full of heart. From Rushmere With Love is at Sir John Mills theatre, Ipswich, and also live-streamed until 8 January.US president Joe Biden declared a major federal disaster in Kentucky after a swarm of deadly tornadoes hit the state on Friday, as representatives of a candle factory destroyed by a twister said far fewer people may have died than previously feared. Biden had previously declared the storms a federal emergency and the move to designate the storms a federal disaster paves the way for additional aid, as thousands face housing, food, water and power shortages. It follows a formal request from Kentucky governor Andy Beshear, who said the tornadoes were the most destructive in the state’s history. Beshear had said on Sunday morning that the death toll was expected to exceed 100 after twisters tore through the US midwest and south on Friday night but later that figure had been revised down, although amid power cuts and disrupted phone services across many communities, there was not yet certainty over numbers. Dozens of people in several counties in the state are still believed to have died in the storms, but Beshear said later on Sunday that the death toll might be as low as 50, according to the Associated Press. “We are praying that maybe original estimates of those we have lost were wrong. If so, it’s going to be pretty wonderful,” the governor said. Among the 110 people who were at the candle factory, eight have been confirmed dead and eight others remained missing, said Bob Ferguson, a spokesperson for Mayfield Consumer Products, which owns the factory. He said 90 people had been located, a figure that authorities were still trying to confirm on Monday morning. “There were some early reports that as many as 70 could be dead in the factory. One is too many, but we thank God that the number is turning out to be far, far fewer,” Ferguson said, adding that rescue teams were still searching for the eight who remained unaccounted for. It was unclear how many factory workers Beshear was counting in his latest death toll estimates. By Monday morning, weather experts had estimated that more than 40 tornadoes hit parts of nine states. Rescue workers continued to scour debris for survivors and many people without power, water or even a roof over their heads salvaged what they could two days after disaster struck. While Kentucky was hardest hit, six workers were killed at an Amazonwarehouse in Illinois after the plant buckled under the force of the tornado, including one cargo driver who died in the bathroom, where many workers said they had been directed to shelter. A nursing home was struck in Arkansas, causing one of that state’s two deaths. Four were reported dead in Tennessee and two in Missouri. Nowhere suffered as much as Mayfield, a community of about 10,000 in the south-western corner of Kentucky, where the large twisters also destroyed the fire and police stations. The governor said the tornadoes were the most destructive in the state’s history. “The very first thing that we have to do is grieve together and we’re going to do that before we rebuild together,” Beshear said, noting that one tornado tore across 227 miles (365 km) of terrain, almost all of that in Kentucky. A vast storm front moved across the Mississippi basin and parts of the US south-east and midwest on Friday night, spawning more than 30 tornadoes. Spring is the main season for tornadoes and this latest event was very unusual coming in December, when colder weather normally limits tornadoes, said Victor Gensini, an extreme weather researcher at Northern Illinois University. Asked if he thought the intensity of the storms was related to climate crisis, president Biden said: “All I know is that the intensity of the weather across the board has some impact as a consequence of the warming of the planet. The specific impact on these specific storms, I can’t say at this point.” Illinois was hit, too, and six people were killed in the collapse of an Amazon warehouse in Edwardsville, with another injured worker airlifted to a hospital, fire chief James Whiteford said. In addition, so far four people have been reported killed in Tennessee, two in Arkansas and two in Missouri as well as the high toll in Kentucky. Kyanna Parsons-Perez, who was at the candle factory in Mayfield, said she felt the building was making her and her co-workers “rock from one side to the other” right before it collapsed. Parsons-Perez was stuck for three hours in the rubble, and documented part of it in a livestream on Facebook in which her co-workers can be heard crying in fear. Sitting in the hospital, she told the Guardian how a gust of wind suddenly changed everything. “My ears started popping and I felt my body swaying,” she said of the moments right before the building collapsed. She became very scared upon learning that she was buried under. “When I found out it was an air conditioner on me and five people on the debris on top of me is when I got scared,” she said. The storm was so powerful that a photograph from a tornado-damaged home in Kentucky was found almost 130 miles away in Indiana. The US uniquely experiences more than 1,200 tornadoes annually, more than four times the number in other countries around the world where they occur, combined, according to experts. With Reuters and the Associated PressTwo feuding Amazonian politicians have settled their differences with an ultimate fighting-style rumble in the jungle that has fuelled fears over the increasingly antagonistic nature of Brazilian democracy. Simão Peixoto, the mayor of Borba, a town 90 miles south of Manaus, was publicly challenged to the fistfight in September by a former councillor called Erineu da Silva. Silva, who uses the nickname Mirico, was reportedly livid at the mayor’s alleged failure to conserve a waterpark near the Madeira river and demanded a showdown with a politician he called a “rotter” and a “crook”. Peixoto accepted the challenge, publishing an online video in which he indicated his readiness to thrash his antagonist by pummelling his palm with his fist. “Show your face!” the mayor told Mirico. Peixoto softened his tone after some voters suggested that was conduct unbecoming of the man elected to govern their Amazon outpost. The mayor assured citizens he would only take part in an organised altercation inside a ring. “I’m not a street fighter … I’m the mayor of the municipality of Borba,” the politician said on his official Facebook page in early November. “[But] if he really wants to fight … we’re ready to fight … I’ve always been a winner.” A month later, in the early hours of Sunday, the fighting commenced, with hundreds of paying spectators packing the gymnasium of a local school. Peixoto swaggered into the ring at about 2.30am, surrounded by aides and carrying a black towel stamped with the name “Jesus”. The mayor appeared in a bellicose mood as he stamped on the platform and squared up to his rival. “Twice he went over to his opponent’s corner and ran his finger across his throat – the sign of a reaper,” reported the website BNC Amazonas. Witnesses to the 13-minute skirmish – which Peixoto’s team livestreamed – said Borba’s conservative mayor landed several painful blows. In the opening seconds, the 39-year-old briefly knocked Mirico on to the ground. But Mirico, 45, battled back. After three shambolic rounds, “the mayor of Borba was almost unable to walk because of the number of low kicks he received from his adversary,” reported BNC Amazonas. “The mayor took such a beating his jaw dropped,” another regional website, Fato Amazônico, reported. Even so, Peixoto prevailed. “Strangely, Mirico lost on points,” Fato Amazônico said. “‘A stitch-up,’ spectators shouted, disgusted with the result.” The brawl in Borba was not the only episode of political violence reported in Brazil this weekend. On Sunday, security guards and supporters of the country’s far-right leader, Jair Bolsonaro, were accused of assaulting journalists as they covered a presidential visit. “What we are seeing is the reflex of a climate of hostility towards the press created by the president,” tweeted Andréia Sadi, a prominent political journalist. Some Brazilians saw the Amazonian dust-up as further evidence of the truculent political atmosphere that has gripped their country since Bolsonaro’s 2018 election. “This is what politics in Brazil has become of late. It’s frightening,” one critic tweeted, alongside footage of the fisticuffs in Borba. “We’ve become the wild west.”Newcastle have made the Lille centre-back Sven Botman a priority signing in the January transfer window with Manchester United’s Jesse Lingard also on Eddie Howe’s wishlist. The upcoming transfer window will be Newcastle’s first under new ownership and they are in desperate need of reinforcements, sitting 19th in the table after one win in their first 16 games. They are, however, only three points from Watford above the relegation zone and Howe is confident of dragging the side out of trouble if the right players are signed. Botman, a 21-year-old Dutch defender who has been with Lille since 2020, has been targeted as the first-choice centre-back to reinforce a unit that has conceded the most goals in the Premier League, 34. Lille, however, may be reluctant to sell the defender mid-season with the team having qualified for the Champions League last 16, in which they will face Chelsea, and struggling in mid-table in the league. Newcastle would have to pay at least £30m but Lille could ask for as much as £40m. Milan are another club keen on Botman’s services, needing a replacement for Simon Kjær, who has suffered a long-term injury. Howe is also looking to sign Lingard from United, either on loan or on a permanent deal. The 28-year-old has yet to start a league game this campaign. West Ham, too, are interested in Lingard with the player having had a successful loan spell there for the second part of the 2020-21 season.Officers searching for the missing hospital worker Petra Srncova are not treating her disappearance as suspicious, they have said, after a body was found in a park in south London. Police have not formally identified the body, which was discovered close to where the 32-year-old was last seen, but they have informed the senior nurse assistant’s relatives. Srncova was reported missing five days after failing to return home from her shift at Evelina London children’s hospital in Westminster on Sunday 28 November. It was thought she was travelling to her home in the Camberwell area. The body was discovered in Brunswick Park in the same part of the capital just before lunchtime on Sunday – two weeks after her disappearance. The local MP, Labour’s Harriet Harman, was among those to leave floral tributes to Srncova on Monday as she expressed her “deepest sympathy” to the Czech national’s relatives. The Czech foreign minister, Jakub Kulhánek, called the news “very sad” and offered his condolences to Srncova’s family, while the country’s embassy in London told PA Media: “We would like to express our deepest condolences to the family of the deceased Czech citizen.” Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS foundation trust, for which Srncova worked, said: “This is extremely sad and worrying news regarding the disappearance of our colleague. Our thoughts are with Petra’s family, friends and colleagues at this hugely difficult time. Thank you to everyone who has helped to share the appeal to find Petra.” A community effort had been launched to find the hospital worker, as fears grew she had come to harm. Harman and others put missing posters up around the area and issued an appeal for members of the public to help police with their search. After the discovery of the body, Scotland Yard said early investigations suggested the circumstances were not suspicious. “Police have been appealing for information to trace missing senior nurse assistant Petra Srncova from Camberwell. “At approximately 11.40am on Sunday 12 December, police were called by a member of the public to reports of the body of a woman that had been found in Brunswick Park, SE5. “Officers attended and found a woman who was deceased. Her death is being treated as unexplained but initial inquiries suggest the circumstances are not suspicious. A postmortem examination will take place in due course. “While formal identification awaits, Petra’s family have been informed of this development.”Mole, pronounced “moll-ay”, is from the Nahuatl word molli, meaning “sauce”, hence guacamole is an avocado salsa. The UK has had an incredible food renaissance over the past 15 years, and so, too, has Mexico, with its chefs creating all sorts of modern interpretations of moles using different nuts, herbs, vegetables and fruits. Today’s velvety one is simple by mole standards, but it has a rich, complex flavour that adds real oomph to the golden roast cauliflower. Baked cauliflower with roast almond and prune mole If you can’t get hold of pasilla chillies, use two ancho chillies instead. A powerful blender will help make your sauce silky-smooth. Prep 15 min Cook 50 min Serves 4 120g skin-on almonds 1 large cauliflower, leaves removed (save them for another dish) 3 tbsp olive oil Salt and pepper 2 pasilla chillies (25g), or 2 ancho chillies, stems and seeds removed, flesh torn into a few pieces 60g prunes 1 medium onion, peeled and cut into 6 wedges 2 garlic cloves, unpeeled 2-3 tomatoes (200g) ¼ tsp ground allspice ¼ tsp ground cinnamon 1-2 tbsp sherry vinegar 30g butter or lard For the crispy capers 2 tbsp olive oil 4 tbsp capers, drained Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/375F/gas 4. Lay out the nuts on a baking tray, toast in the oven for 10-15 minutes, until golden, then leave to cool. Turn up the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7. Cut away the stem of the cauliflower, leaving the core, and steam for five minutes, until tender in the centre (or microwave for five minutes). Put on an oven tray, rub all over with the olive oil, season and roast for 30-35 minutes, until dark golden. Meanwhile, heat a dry frying pan on a medium heat, toast the chillies for 20-30 seconds, until fragrant, then transfer to a small bowl, cover with boiling water and set aside for 10-15 minutes. Plump up the prunes by covering them with boiling water, too. Put the onions, garlic and tomatoes in the chilli pan, and dry toast, turning frequently, for five to six minutes for the garlic and eight to 10 minutes for the onions and tomatoes, until charred all over and the garlic is tender. Put 70g of the cooled nuts in a powerful blender with the onions, garlic, tomatoes, drained chillies and prunes. Add the spices and vinegar, then run the motor, pouring in 150ml water little by little and stopping frequently to scrape down the sides. Season with a teaspoon of sea salt and continue to blitz, adding enough extra water to create a sauce the consistency of double cream. Heat the butter/lard in a saucepan, then pour in the sauce and fry for 10 minutes, to cook it out and give the ingredients a chance to meld. Adjust the seasoning to taste. Put a small frying pan on a medium heat, add the two tablespoons of oil, fry the capers until crisp, then use a slotted spoon to transfer to kitchen paper to drain. Once the cauliflower is cooked, cut it into quarters and put each piece on a bed of the mole. Sprinkle the capers and remaining almonds on top before serving with rice and soured cream. The simple flex … Try using chicken stock instead of water for extra flavour. The mole is also delicious with pan-fried venison, or garnish the cauliflower with sauteed lardons as well as capers. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado“We need the ball and we need to control the game,” said Domenico Tedesco, summing up his plans at RB Leipzig after a first game, and a first win. If the phrase was fairly anodyne in terms of a new coach setting out his ambitions for a club that wants to continue climbing, it pricked up the ears. This was not from what many thought was the Tedesco playbook. There was a circularity, if not an inevitability, about the 36-year-old pitching up here. Not just because of his fitting the youthful outlook of the club, and not just because he was a coursemate and friend of Julian Nagelsmann in DFB coaching class going back seven years. Tedesco had made his top-flight coaching debut against Leipzig in August 2017, freshly installed in the top job at Schalke in the days when it felt like they might just be a forward-thinking club who could lose their culture of waste without bottoming out, like they did in last season’s relegation. It was a significant game not just for the tyro Tedesco but, it felt, for the Bundesliga as a whole. Leipzig had adapted so smoothly to the top flight for the first time. Against the backdrop of an administrative model that deeply offended swathes of the Bundesliga’s fan community – and they were made to know by just how much on a regular basis – they made clear that they weren’t going anywhere in a hurry. The sporting side of the model not only made light of the leap between divisions, but they offered the promise of sustainability. Ralph Hasenhüttl’s team had the Bundesliga worked out in an instant. Tedesco’s Schalke had an answer to that. In the opening game of the season in Gelsenkirchen, the home side had a plan. Leipzig like to attack, so let them have the ball and see how they deal with it. It was the ultimate second album syndrome for Leipzig – they were in their plush residential studio with writer’s block, drinking endless cups of tea, playing pool and trying to recycle offcuts from their debut. Schalke had 36% possession that day and they picked the visitors off expertly, winning 2-0 in a style that was very un-Schalke, where front-foot football is traditionally encouraged and appreciated. Relatively soon after Roberto Di Matteo’s cautious approach had finished him at the club, Tedesco dared to go circumspect – and it was clear a largely experienced squad were singing off the same hymn sheet straight away. Saturday’s debut in charge at Leipzig yielded similarly instant gratification as Tedesco’s new charges swatted aside an ailing Borussia Mönchengladbach and it demonstrated not just the new man’s ability to muster some unity but his way of absorbing what a set of players need, as he had done well at Spartak Moscow post-Schalke. “I heard the team was longing for possession,” he said after the game, underlining that keying in with players who hadn’t really clicked with his predecessor Jesse Marsch had been paramount. “Pressing was [only] the second priority today.” So Leipzig started like a train against prone opponents, showing no mercy. With a return to three at the back Angeliño was off the leash, creating first-half goals for Josko Gvardiol and the waking André Silva, scorer in four of his last five games. Gladbach benefitted from an incredible reprieve when Silva hit the bar with Yann Sommer miles out of his goal after the goalkeeper lost the ball to Christopher Nkunku, but Ramy Bensabaini’s smart finish late on for Gladbach, which should have set up a final push for the visitors, merely provoked Leipzig into finishing off the game as they should have done before, via Nkunku and Benny Henrichs. Leipzig now have the opportunity to garland their revival and push towards the top four, with Augsburg then Arminia Bielefeld next up. “We have one of the best squads in the Bundesliga. The aim is to qualify at least for the Champions League,” emphasised the CEO, Oliver Mintzlaff. Tedesco has no excuses but he appears canny enough to adapt to his surroundings, even if going against the grain. Talking points • On the other side of the coin in Saxony was Gladbach having collected a third straight defeat, with the matches accumulating two goals for and 14 against in total. “The question is how we can get out of this together,” said coach Adi Hütter, though it was not a huge leap of faith to suspect that the expensively recruited coach is standing on rapidly thinning ice. Sporting director Max Eberl isn’t hiding from the criticism and fulfilled his appearance on Das Aktuelle Sportstudio in which he outlined his concerns. “We have to show balls now,” he demanded, though interestingly didn’t repeat his unconditional backing of Hütter from the aftermath of last week’s thrashing by Freiburg. “Of course the coach is responsible,” Eberl said, “but I’m responsible too.” Next up on Wednesday is Eintracht Frankfurt, Hütter’s old club. • In a weekend when Joshua Kimmich gave a television interview with ZDF in which he spoke about his regret for not getting vaccinated sooner – and saving Bayern a few weeks of consternation – his team clawed their way to a satisfying win over a good Mainz team without him, having been a goal down at half-time. Jamal Musiala, who was also quarantined twice in the last month, delighted Julian Nagelsmann with his winner and his increasing all-round application, though the coach stressed that “Jamal doesn’t have to become Gennaro Gattuso”. • Should we be more surprised that Borussia Dortmund failed to keep pace by dropping points at Bochum, or that the home side couldn’t close what would have been a fourth successive home win? Substitute Julian Brandt’s late equaliser saved BVB from the full nightmare on Castroper Straße, but the ‘mini-derby’ always looked destined to cause them problems, especially given the fortitude of Thomas Reis’s team in recent weeks. “Dortmund were superior in terms of play, and in terms of stats, but I don’t care about that today,” said Reis. • Nobody, it appears, is in the form to press Bayern. After their recent surge Leverkusen took an early 2-0 lead at Eintracht Frankfurt via a Patrik Schick double – only to subsequently be buried under an avalanche of five unanswered goals from the home side, capped by another Djibril Sow rocket from range. “The way we performed [after going two down] was unbelievable,” said coach Oliver Glasner of his improving side. • It was a weekend of stabilising for Stuttgart, winners of their first away game, 2-0 at Wolfsburg. Despite CEO Thomas Hitzlsperger’s imminent departure, sporting director Sven Mislintat has reiterated his commitment. “I’m here because this club is fantastic,” he enthused. The home side were rather less chipper after a fifth loss in a row, which has also incorporated an exit from Europe, though sporting director Jörg Schmadtke pointed out new-ish coach Florian Kohfeldt is “paying for things he isn’t responsible for”. • Joy at last for Greuther Fürth, managing their first win of the season and – perhaps even more unbelievably – their maiden top-flight victory at home by beating Union Berlin 1-0 on Sunday thanks to Havard Nielsen’s winner.The founder of Wetherspoons, Tim Martin, has criticised restrictions designed to curb the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 as “arbitrary”, warning that the pub chain’s first half profits could be wiped out by what he called “lockdown by stealth”. In an update to the stock market, JD Wetherspoon told investors that “uncertainty, and the introduction of radical changes of direction by the government, make predictions for sales and profits hazardous”. The company, which consistently reported soaring sales before the pandemic, suffered a £105.4m loss in the year to July 2020 followed by a record £195m deficit the year after, as coronavirus restrictions took their toll. It had been hoping to rebound from the impact of the pandemic this year but told investors that the government’s plan B for tackling Omicron, including guidance to work from home where possible, meant it was likely to be “loss-making or marginally profitable” for the first half of its financial year. Martin has been one of the most high-profile Brexiters in British business, a role that had previously seen him endorse Boris Johnson. But he has since become an outspoken critic of the prime minister over Covid-19 measures affecting the hospitality industry, which he claims is not a significant source of outbreaks of the disease. “The typical British pub, contrary to received opinion in academia, is usually a bastion of social distancing,” he said on Monday. “However, the repeated warnings and calls for restrictions, mainly from Sage [committee] members and academics, combined with arbitrary changes of direction from the government, invariably at short notice, affect customer sentiment and trade. “In effect, the country appears to be heading towards a lockdown by stealth.” He cited comments made by Dr Angelique Coetzee, chair of the South African Medical Association, who has said the Omicron variant does not warrant the “extreme action” taken by the UK government. Martin added: “For reasons best known to themselves, perhaps in order to encourage more vaccinations, the UK government and its advisers are creating an entirely different and more frightening impression of the variant, which appears to be at odds with the South African experience. “In spite of these problems, booster vaccinations and better weather in the spring are likely to have a positive impact [on Wetherspoons’ trading] in the coming months.”At least one person in the UK had died with the Omicron variant, Boris Johnson has said as he refused to rule out imposing further restrictions across England in the run-up to Christmas. After a warning to the government from Britain’s top health officials, revealed by the Guardian, that “stringent national measures” needed to be imposed this week, the prime minister said he would “take whatever steps are necessary to protect public health”. Concern is mounting among scientists and in Whitehall that the Omicron variant could soon become the dominant Covid strain, weakening the defences two vaccines offer against the virus. Pressed several times about whether a “plan C” of further restrictions would be necessary, Johnson said: “Throughout the pandemic I’ve been at great pains to stress to the public that we have to watch where the pandemic is going and we take whatever steps are necessary to protect public health. “We think the steps that we are taking – so plan B, combined with a hugely ambitious acceleration of the booster campaign, bringing it forward by a month so we offer a booster to every adult by the end of the year – we think that’s the right approach.” His official spokesperson said there were no plans for further restrictions but that all options were being kept under review. He acknowledged that MPs may not be consulted if further measures needed to be brought in urgently. “In extremis, we have the ability to act in the interests of public health” without the permission of parliament, he said. Further measures could include an order for contacts of Covid cases to isolate, shutting hospitality venues or toughening the requirements for Covid passports for people to show that they have had either a booster jab or a negative lateral flow test result. It came as a further 1,576 Omicron cases were reported across the UK on Monday, taking the total number to 4,713, the UK Health Security Agency said. Of those additional cases, 1,534 were in England, 27 in Scotland and 15 in Wales. There were no additional cases in Northern Ireland. Johnson, who is preparing to face a rebellion from at least 70 Tory MPs on Tuesday over some of his “plan B” measures and is under fire for Christmas parties held in Downing Street last year, said Omicron was likely to form the majority of new cases in London within the next 24 hours. Speaking at a vaccine centre in Paddington, west London, after pledging to speed up the booster programme, he said: “We now want to hit warp speed and we’ll have to attain a pace and a number of daily booster doses that will exceed anything that we’ve done before.” Johnson confirmed Omicron was “producing hospitalisations” and added: “Sadly at least one patient has been confirmed to have died with Omicron.” He stressed: “I think the idea that this is somehow a milder version of the virus, that’s something we need to set on one side and just recognise the sheer pace at which it accelerates through the population. So the best thing we can do is all get our boosters.” Following his offer, there was some confusion over the target and whether the government was promising jabs in arms by the end of the year for over-18s or only the chance to book a slot. However, Johnson’s official spokesman clarified on Monday that everyone eligible would have the chance to get their booster vaccination if they booked in good time or attended a walk-in clinic. “Those who are eligible should be going on the national booking system and getting an appointment,” the prime minister’s spokesman said. No 10 said about 750 troops had been mobilised to support the NHS with its vaccination programme, including medics, strategists and 50 military planning experts. Johnson’s spokesman also insisted that people should have no worries about cancer appointments being cancelled for the vaccination programme. “We are talking about non-urgent services for cancellation, not cancer appointments. You would not expect someone with cancer in need of urgent treatment to see their treatment degraded,” he said, adding: “If we do not do this, the damage to all aspects of care will be much greater.” No 10 also confirmed that the inquiry into Christmas parties in Downing Street would be widened to include a virtual quiz held by the prime minister. Asked about the Christmas quiz he hosted in Downing Street last year, when London was under tier 2 restrictions and indoor social mixing was banned, Johnson insisted he “certainly broke no rules”. He said the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, was investigating the matter and would report back “as soon as we reasonably can”.The UK competition regulator has opened an investigation into Microsoft’s proposed $16bn takeover of Nuance, the artificial intelligence and speech recognition firm best known for its work on Apple’s virtual assistant Siri, in its latest move to scrutinise the impact of deals struck by big tech. The move by the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) comes weeks after it ordered Facebook parent company Meta to sell the gif creation website Giphy, the first time the regulator has moved to block a deal struck by a major Silicon Valley company. Microsoft moved to buyMassachusetts-based Nuance, which has a stock market value of almost $18bn, in April to build up its cloud computing operation for healthcare and business customers. Nuance says that it works with more than three-quarters of US hospitals, and has also been used by the NHS in the UK, with the deal the second-largest in Microsoft’s history after the $26.2bn acquisition of LinkedIn five years ago. “The CMA is considering whether it is or may be the case that this transaction, if carried into effect, will result in the creation of a relevant merger situation,” said the regulator. “And, if so, whether the creation of that situation may be expected to result in a substantial lessening of competition within any market or markets in the United Kingdom for goods and services.” The CMA said it is inviting comments from interested parties and rivals as it assesses whether the deal warrants an in-depth investigation. The deal has already been unconditionally cleared by regulators in the US and Australia. The European Commission has also been taking soundings from rivals, with a decision on whether to investigate expected as soon as this week. The commission is expected to clear the deal. Nuance offers healthcare businesses and hospitals services including medical transcription, clinical speech recognition and medical imaging. Its technology has paid off during the pandemic as it cuts down on note taking, helping doctors and nurses reduce their exposure to coronavirus. Microsoft has been in preliminary talks with the CMA, which now has 40 days to decide whether to launch an in-depth investigation, ahead of the formal request for approval of the deal. Facebook has said it disagrees with the CMA’s decision ordering it to sell Giphy, which it acquired for $400m last year, and is considering an appeal. The CMA is set to be given beefed up powers to investigate deals struck by Silicon Valley companies through a new dedicated digital markets unit, which also includes a new enforceable code of conduct in dealings with third parties such as publishers based on “fair trading and trust and transparency”. The government is yet to officially grant the DMU powers which requires parliamentary time for new legislation.NHS trusts are facing calls to suspend the use of a monitoring system that continuously records video of mental health patients in their bedrooms amid concerns that it breaches their human rights. Mental health charities said the Oxevision system, used by 23 NHS trusts in some psychiatric wards to monitor patients’ vital signs, could breach their right to privacy and exacerbate their distress. The call comes after Camden and Islington NHS foundation trust (C&amp;I) suspended its use of Oxevision after a formal complaint by a female patient who said the system amounted to “covert surveillance”. The Oxevision system allows staff to monitor a patient’s pulse and breathing rate via an optical sensor, which consists of a camera and an infrared illuminator to allow night-time observation. It includes a live video feed of the patient, which is recorded and kept for 24-72 hours, depending on the NHS trust, before being deleted. Oxehealth, which created the system, said it was not like CCTV because staff could only view the video feed for about 10-15 seconds during a vital signs check or in response to a safety incident. The system, which is also installed at Exeter police station custody suite and an Oxfordshire care home, can alert staff if someone else has unexpectedly entered a patient’s room or if they are in a blindspot, such as the bathroom, for too long. Alexa Knight, associate director of policy and practice at Rethink Mental Illness, said: “While we appreciate that the motivation for putting surveillance cameras in people’s bedrooms stems from the need to protect them, to do so without clear consent is unjustifiable and this pilot should be suspended immediately.” Camden Borough User Group and other service users have raised concerns with C&amp;I that patient consent was not being consistently obtained. The trust’s patient information leaflet about Oxevision states that rooms are monitored by an optical sensor but does not mention that patients are being recorded. A spokesperson for C&amp;I said the trust acknowledged that patient consent for Oxevision needed to be tightened, including the option to opt out of the system. “While the [patient] leaflet advises that the system monitors service users 24/7, we are not confident that the video element was always made clear,” she said, adding that the trust was conducting a review into whether to resume using the technology. Rheian Davies, head of legal advocacy at mental health charity Mind, said: “Being videoed without consent in your own room is a dreadful thought and could add to the distress someone is already feeling.” Davies, a former psychiatric nurse, said: “We urge any mental health trusts considering trialling, or trialling, this technology with their patients without consent, to pause and reconsider, because of the legal, ethical, and clinical questions it raises. “Even if you are detained under the Mental Health Act you do not lose all your legal rights … and blanket use of surveillance raises issues of privacy, which is protected under the Human Rights Act.” Of the 17 other NHS trusts that Oxehealth said it could disclose as piloting the system, another five revealed patient leaflets with similar descriptions to C&amp;I’s: Derbyshire Healthcare NHS foundation trust, Midlands Partnership NHS foundation trust, Pennine Care NHS foundation trust, Rotherham Doncaster and South Humber NHS foundation trust (RDaSH), and West London NHS trust. All five trusts said patients were informed by staff about how Oxevision works, and RDaSH added that its leaflet was under review. Leaflets provided by three trusts – Central and North West London NHS foundation trust, Cumbria, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS foundation trust and Surrey and Borders Partnership NHS foundation trust – explicitly mention that Oxevision incorporates a camera or records video footage. Several other trusts did not clarify whether their leaflets did so but said patients were informed about the system. Mary Sadid, policy officer at mental health charity the National Survivor User Network, said: “Oxevision is playing out in some settings as blanket surveillance with questionable attempts at informed consent. “The Care Quality Commission does not authorise the use of ‘covert intrusive surveillance’. What we have heard about Oxevision so far, including possible breaches of right to privacy, points to a potential need for an investigation by the regulator. The suspension of blanket surveillance and surveillance without consent should be an immediate priority.” Oxehealth’s own research, with up to 78 patients from five mental health trusts, found that 80% agreed the system provided a better sense of safety and two thirds agreed it provided a greater sense of privacy. A spokesman said: “We take patients’ privacy rights very seriously and Oxevision is fully compliant with all the laws that apply to it. It is a service that is only used where necessary and it is only used for patient benefit. Oxevision offers significant patient safety benefits and allows clinicians to measure pulse and breathing rate without disturbing the patient.” Case study: Lily’s story Lily, not her real name, who has schizotypal disorder and autism, became acutely distressed after discovering that she was being recorded by Oxevision at Camden and Islington NHS foundation trust. The 26-year-old was admitted to the Rosewood Unit, based at St Pancras Hospital, which is dedicated to treating the trust’s most vulnerable female psychiatric patients, in mid-July, after she “became incredibly unwell and a danger to myself”. “A nurse came into my room while I was using the toilet and said: ‘Oh you’re in the bathroom, I couldn’t see you on the camera.’ When I asked what camera she meant, she claimed she misspoke. I was later made aware of a poster and leaflet that had been placed next to the nurse’s station but neither of these mention a camera. “It was a few more days before a nurse showed me the monitor they have in the office. It fed into my delusion that staff were intentionally keeping patients unwell … I tried to cover the cameras but staff stopped me, and I became so distressed that the response team was called. They nearly injected me. “Staff still told some patients that Oxevision only took their blood pressure and heart rate, and denied the existence of the cameras. So a lot of patients thought that I was having psychotic delusions. “To be under surveillance 24 hours a day is incredibly distressing and dehumanising. It is a violation of privacy and dignity. This constant monitoring can make people who struggle with paranoia or psychosis even more unwell. “I rely on staff to tell me if a thought is rational or delusional. I can no longer trust them to do this. I told the staff that the system was unethical and required consent.”Dusan Vlahovic finished off a weekend’s work by playing Father Christmas. He had already delivered two goals for Fiorentina on Saturday, helping them to a 4-0 win over Salernitana at the Stadio Artemio Franchi, but while his teammates went to celebrate under the Curva Fiesole he took himself to the stand behind the opposition bench. A young fan had prepared a sign asking for the striker’s shirt. It was enough to get on Santa’s “nice” list. Privately, Vlahovic might have been happy for the excuse. His relationship with the Ultras who occupy the Fiesole has not recovered since the club’s owner, Rocco Commisso, went public about the breakdown of his contract negotiations in October. Vlahovic, whose deal is set to expire in the summer of 2023, turned down an extension that would have made him Fiorentina’s best-paid player of all time. He was worthy of such an offer. Vlahovic is Serie A’s top scorer this season with 15 goals from 17 appearances. He has struck 32 times in this calendar year, placing him just one shy of the league record held by Cristiano Ronaldo. Across Europe’s “big five” domestic championships, only Robert Lewandowski has outgunned Vlahovic in 2021. All this at 21 years old and playing for a club that finished 13th last season. Vlahovic is not a one-man army, and Fiorentina have made real strides in this campaign under their new manager, Vincenzo Italiano, rising all the way to fifth in the table. Yet the Serbian is still responsible for 48% of the club’s goals so far – and that’s before we start counting assists. Commisso was reported to have offered as much as €4m a year after tax – five times Vlahovic’s current pay rate. In a statement, he claimed to have raised his offer repeatedly to accommodate the player’s representatives. The player gave no public comment, but the suspicion was that no amount of money could persuade him to tie himself down at a time when he knew bigger clubs were starting to show an interest. Newspapers were linking him already with Juventus, provoking a grim sense of deja vu for Fiorentina fans. They had lost Federico Chiesa and Federico Bernardeschi to the Bianconeri in the past four years, just as they did Roberto Baggio three decades before. When your most promising young talent so often leaves to join your most hated rival, you can start to develop a complex. Vlahovic heard whistles from the Fiesole before Fiorentina’s next home game, a 3-0 rout of Cagliari. When the Viola won a penalty at that end of the pitch, he declined to take it – passing duties to the club’s captain, Cristiano Biraghi. Italiano would later insist that this was not a big deal and that penalties were a question of “feeling”. But the surprise was evident in the moment on the faces of Vlahovic’s teammates. He would score a free-kick at the far end later in the match, but while the rest of the Franchi celebrated a section of the Fiesole refused to join in. They did not jeer, but responded with performative indifference, extending a rehearsed chant without missing a beat. That has been the tone of things since. While most Fiorentina fans have shown themselves willing to get behind Vlahovic, a small and unyielding core of Ultras has resisted, making it clear that they would prefer him not to celebrate at their end. Meanwhile, the player’s form has only got better. Vlahovic followed up the Cagliari game with a hat-trick against Spezia, then two more goals and an assist in a 4-3 win over Milan. Then he went away on international duty and helped Serbia to qualify for the World Cup. Since returning, he has scored seven more goals in five games. Such extraordinary form will only sharpen the interest of potential suitors. Arsenal and Manchester City were among the teams linked to the player last summer but at this point just about every leading club in Europe is at least monitoring his progress. With 18 months left on the player’s contract, Fiorentina could face a complicated decision if any of them decides to come forward with a worthy offer in January. Yet all indications are that the player himself would prefer to stay until the end of the campaign. Any longer than that is unlikely, even after he celebrated scoring against Milan by pointing a finger down at the pitch as if to say: “My place is here.” Vlahovic has spoken openly about ambition, about wanting to keep progressing and challenging himself. As he put it in an interview with Dazn this September, “a life without risk is not worth living”. Yet he believes Fiorentina is the right place for him to be at this moment, describing it as somewhere he can, “take a step forward, score lots of goals, give lots of assists and win lots of matches. The rest will come as it comes.” And Fiorentina are flying right now, with four wins – and 15 goals scored – in their last five games. Italiano earned his opportunity at the club by overachieving at Arzignano Valchiampo in Serie D, Trapani in Serie C and then Spezia in Serie B, securing repeat promotions before guiding the latter club to top-flight safety last season. He is popular with his players and was cited by Vlahovic as a key factor in the decision to stay this season in Florence. “He is always on you, correcting the smallest mistake,” said the striker. “I like that because with someone like that I can only grow.” Of the two goals Vlahovic scored on Saturday, the first was more eye-catching: an angled chip back across his own body from the edge of the box. It was the second, though, that he enjoyed more, arriving at the near post to sweep home a cross from Riccardo Sottil. He had been working with his manager to get better at those exact runs for weeks now. The pair celebrated together in front of the dugout. This was a satisfying evening all-around for Italiano, who has wanted more goals from midfield as well and had them delivered here by Giacomo Bonaventura and the substitute Youssef Maleh. It was the second strike in as many games for the latter player, 23 years old and signed from Venezia in January but allowed to stay on loan there until the summer. There is more to like in this squad than just Vlahovic. Maleh’s emergence is an encouraging note, as are the strong recent performances of Bonaventura and the Argentinian winger Nico González. Together they have helped to propel Fiorentina to fifth in the table, two points clear now even of Juventus. Vlahovic will eventually leave – whether sooner or later – but the club has a window of opportunity now to exploit his talent. It is not Father Christmas’s job, after all, to hang around forever. What better gift could there be, though, for those sceptics in the Curva Fiesole, than a European qualification earned at the expense of those most hated rivals?The vacuum cleaner maker Dyson has told many of its UK employees to continue working in the office, claiming that large portions of its business are impossible to carry out from home. Dyson’s billionaire owner, Sir James Dyson, has consistently opposed working from home and the company has stuck to that line despite the rise of the Omicron coronavirus variant, stoking concern among some employees. All Dyson offices should remain open, according to an internal message sent to all UK staff last week after the prime minister announced the new plan B guidance advising work from home. In contrast to lockdowns earlier in the pandemic, the guidance does not legally oblige companies to allow staff to work from home, but Boris Johnson said last Wednesday that people should work from home where possible as a precaution against Omicron, although he also said people should continue to attend work Christmas parties. Dyson, however, said in the message to staff that “we fundamentally disagree” with Johnson on that issue, cancelling its own Christmas party in favour of a summer family event, and recommending that its workers avoid parties and events over Christmas where masks are not worn “to keep safe and protect your friends and family over Christmas”. Employees at Dyson have expressed frustration with its policy on working in the office. One worker, who declined to be named, told the Guardian: “Since the summer everyone in the UK has been mandated to work five days a week in the office. It is as draconian as it sounds.” The worker said the policy went against the spirit of the new government guidance. A wave of large office employers have told workers to remain at home, although some will keep offices open for business-critical functions or exceptional reasons such as for workers with mental health issues. The magazine publisher Future on Friday reversed its demand for staff to come into the office after its stance was revealed by the Guardian. Dyson’s Brexiter founder has been a vocal opponent of working from home. In an interview with the Times in September 2020, he said: “Working from home doesn’t work. I only did it when I couldn’t afford an office or employees. People need to interact and exchange views.” Dyson workers expected to work from the office include teams in research, IT, security, development, commercial and estates management, among other departments – a list that is thought to include large numbers of its UK workers. Dyson claims that the sensitive commercial nature of its work and the need to collaborate means office working is required. While Dyson makes most of its products overseas and controversially moved its headquarters to Singapore in early 2019, it does most of its research, development and design of products including vacuums, fans and dryers in the UK. It is understood that James Dyson has continued to work from the main UK campus in Malmesbury, Wiltshire, in recent weeks. There are some limited exceptions to Dyson’s UK office mandate. Workers in the office of the chief executive, financial, legal, communications and human resources teams, among other departments, will be allowed to work from home in some cases, but they may be “required to work from the campus” if they need to “collaborate with others”, as well as for other reasons such as accessing equipment, according to the internal message. Dyson will also honour previously agreed exemptions to working in the office for workers in other departments. Employees have expressed concerns to the Guardian about Dyson’s strict line on office working on several occasions during the pandemic, including during separate lockdowns in May and November 2020. Dyson previously said it complied with all government guidance and that its employees’ health and safety is its top priority throughout the pandemic. It has also said that its safe-working practices go beyond the government’s requirements. A Dyson spokesperson said: “The latest government guidance states that employees ‘should continue to go into work’ if they need to access equipment or complete their role in person. Dyson is asking select groups to continue attending our campuses for practical, confidentiality and security reasons; and others may work at home. “We have gone beyond the government’s guidance throughout the crisis to keep our people safe – introducing mandatory mask-wearing long before the guidance required it, and these measures have remained in force since.” The spokesperson added that Dyson has donated £1m to Race Against Dementia in lieu of spending on its Christmas party.Barcelona will play Napoli in the knockout round play-off of the Europa League, marking a face-off between two of the late Diego Maradona’s former clubs. Barcelona, who crashed out of the Champions League after finishing third in their group, will host Napoli in the first leg on 17 February before playing away a week later. Napoli, winners of the Uefa Cup in 1989 with Maradona as captain, were runners-up in a Europa League group which included Leicester. The eight play-off ties pit teams who finished second in the Europa League groups against clubs who were third in the Champions League groups. The winners will join the eight Europa League group winners in the last 16, the draw for which will be held on 12 February. Rangers will take on a Borussia Dortmund squad including Erling Haaland, Jude Bellingham and Giovanni Reyna, whose father, Claudio, played for Rangers from 1999-2001. The Scottish champions were a distant second behind Lyon in their Europa League group and Dortmund finished behind Ajax and Sporting in their Champions League group. The remaining play-off ties drawn were: Sevilla v Dinamo Zagreb, RB Leipzig v Real Sociedad, Zenit St Petersburg v Real Betis, Sheriff Tiraspol v Sporting Braga, Atalanta v Olympiakos and Porto v Lazio. In the third-tier Europa Conference League, Leicester City will face the Danish side Randers while Celtic will take on the Norwegian champions Bodø/Glimt in the knockout play-off round. Rapid Vienna will face either Tottenham or Vitesse, depending on Uefa’s verdict on Spurs’ postponed game against Rennes. Uefa’s control, ethics and disciplinary body is to meet, possibly this week, to rule on what should happen after Spurs and Rennes were unable to find a date to replay the game. The most likely outcome is that Spurs, who were unable to fulfil the fixture due to Covid-19 cases, will forfeit the game 3-0 and be eliminated – although there is an outside chance the match could still be played in January. Other ties in the Conference League play-off round, which follows the same format as the Europa League, include: Marseille v Qarabag, PSV Eindhoven v Maccabi Tel-Aviv, Fenerbahce v Slavia Prague, Midtylland v PAOK and Sparta Prague v Partizan.Large parts of Afghanistan’s health system are on the brink of collapse because of western sanctions against the Taliban, international experts have warned, as the country faces outbreaks of disease and an escalating malnutrition crisis. With the country experiencing a deepening humanitarian crisis since the Taliban’s seizure of power in August amid mounting levels of famine and economic collapse, many medical staff have not been paid for months and health facilities lack even the most basic items to treat patients. Dr Paul Spiegel, director of the Center for Humanitarian health at Johns Hopkins University, said that on a recent five-week trip to the country he had seen public hospitals – which cater for the most vulnerable – lacking fuel, drugs, hygiene products and even basic items such as colostomy bags. He said the Covid-19 responsehad almost ground to a halt and called for a more nuanced response to western sanctions in order to avert a deeper public health disaster. “It’s really bad and it is going to get a lot worse,” Spiegel, a former chief of public health at the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees among other high-profile humanitarian assignments, told the Guardian. “There are six simultaneous disease outbreaks: cholera, a massive measles outbreak, polio, malaria and dengue fever, and that is in addition to the coronavirus pandemic.” Some parts of the primary healthcare system were being funded through a two-decades-old scheme, Spiegel said, but large parts remained largely unsupported, even as health officials, international organisations and NGOs have been required to restart programmes on hold after the Taliban regained control of the country in August. “I’ve been everywhere during my career. What is shocking is that you don’t normally have an abrupt halt to everything. The UN organisations and NGOs supporting healthcare in Afghanistan are not just dealing with acute emergencies, they’re having to respond to getting the basics running. “For example, there are supposed to be 39 hospitals dealing with Covid-19 cases of which 7.7% is fully functioning. And it’s not just the hospitals. It’s the whole thing that glues together public health systems: surveillance systems, testing and there’s very little oxygen to treat those who do have Covid.” He described the main referral hospital for infectious diseases in Kabul as “on its knees”. “None of the staff have received salaries for months, though most are still coming in. There is hardly any medicine and they are cutting tress in the courtyard to heat the rooms because there is no gas. They’ve also sent their ventilators to the Afghan Japan hospital to treat Covid cases but that is also struggling.” His comments reflected mounting concern over the collapse of healthcare across Afghanistan, a country of about 40 million people. Exacerbating the issue is that Afghanistan’s economic issues, with the IMF warning of a contraction of some 30%, have plunged ever more people into poverty, which has had a knock-on effect for those needing healthcare but unable to afford to seek it. Outside of Kabul and other major cities, Spiegel said the situation was even worse. “There is a provincial hospital in Sarobi outside Kabul I visited. There was insufficient water and soap for hygiene protocols,” he said. “There was a small child who had been born at the hospital with an anal fistula. She was so sick that they had put a colostomy in but they had no bags and so they were using whatever material find – like toilet paper – to collect from the colostomy.” Dave Michalski, head of programme at Doctors Without Borders in Afghanistan, last week warned in an interview with NPR that there likely to be Afghans in need of healthcare who were not able to access even the reduced levels available. “How many people are being blocked [from seeking healthcare],” he asked. “How many people are not taking the bus to the next province to find healthcare that is working because their own provincial health care system is closed or because there are no drugs on the shelves. “And if you don’t have the money to travel around to find a private health care facility … and many private health care facilities are also in trouble because of supply lines.” The UN children’s organisation Unicef has warned that the growing crisis in the country’s health system is exacerbating Afghanistan’s mounting malnutrition issues. “The current humanitarian situation in Afghanistan is dire, especially for children. Winter has already set in and, without additional funding, Unicef and partners will be unable to reach the children and families that need us the most,” said Alice Akunga, Unicef’s Afghanistan representative. “As families struggle to put nutritious food on the table and health systems are further strained, millions of Afghan children are at risk of starvation and death. Others struggle to access water and sanitation, are cut off from their schools and at heightened risk of violence.” Spiegel said the west needed to find a different approach to the imposition of sanctions on the Taliban: “There needs to be much more nuanced way of implementing sanctions than using such a blunt instrument [as they are currently configured],” he said. “While understanding concerns about the Taliban … the reality is that a lot of people will die because of them.” • This article was amended on 3 January 2022. The population of Afghanistan is about 40 million, not 23 million as an earlier version said.The Mayfield Consumer Products factory was the third-biggest employer in this corner of western Kentucky, an important economic engine that churned out candles that lined the shelves of malls around the US. But why its workers kept making scented candles on Friday night as a tornado bore down on the region remains unclear as rescuers continue scouring the factory wreckage for signs of life under what is now 15 feet of twisted metal, poisoned with corrosive chemicals and with wrecked cars on what was the roof. Kentucky’s governor said on Sunday the ferocity of the storm was so great that there was nowhere safe to hide inside the plant. The 110 workers on the night shift had about 20 minutes warning that a powerful tornado was bearing down. “It appears most were sheltering in the place they were told to shelter,” the governor, Andy Beshear, said. “I hope that area was as safe as it could be, but this thing got hit directly by the strongest tornado we could have possibly imagined.” A company spokesperson said Sunday that eight of the 110 workers on the overnight shift Friday are confirmed dead and another eight are missing. For most of Sunday, the authorities had feared that more than 70 of those shift workers were missing and Beshear started saying the death toll was expected to exceed 100 just in Kentucky. But as of Monday morning, more than 90 workers have now reportedly been accounted for, indicating that the final death toll in the state will be lower than most had feared hours earlier. The factory employs many people in and around Mayfield, a city of about 10,000 in Kentucky’s south-west corner and is Graves county’s biggest employer. Some inmates at the county jail have worked there. Scented candles made in the plant eventually found their way on to the shelves of prominent US retailers like Bath &amp; Body Works. Shifts were going around the clock to fulfill Christmas demand. The company’s founder, Mary Propes, in the mid-1990s “started this in her garage and it grew to one of the largest candle-makers”, said the company’s spokesman Bob Ferguson. Bryanna Travis, 19, and Jarred Holmes, 20, stood vigil near the rubble of the Mayfield candle factory at the weekend where they had worked for months, usually for about $14.50 an hour. The engaged couple wasn’t working when the storm hit. “I worked with these people. I talked to these people. I tried to build connections with these people. And I don’t know if one of my friends is gone,” Holmes said. Shaniyah McReynolds, who also was lucky enough not to be working at the factory on Friday night, told CNN on Sunday that if the authorities would allow the public close to the dangerous wreckage she would be frantically looking for survivors herself. “I would be down there digging if they would let me, with my own fingers,” she said. CEO Troy Propes, the son of Mary Propes, said in the statement: “We’re heartbroken about this, and our immediate efforts are to assist those affected by this terrible disaster. Our company is family-owned and our employees, some who have worked with us for many years, are cherished.”Fears that Turkey is on course for a full-scale financial crisis have intensified after the lira plunged to fresh lows against the US dollar. Turkey’s central bank was forced to step in to defend the ailing currency – selling US dollars for lira – after the latest sharp selloff. The lira was at one stage trading at almost 15 to the dollar as currency dealers contemplated the prospect of the latest in a series of interest rates cuts demanded of the central bank by the country’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. Erdoğan’s insistence that the central bank should keep reducing the cost of borrowing despite annual inflation running at 20% has led to the value of the lira halving during 2021. Official interest rates have been cut from 19% to 15% since September and markets are bracing themselves for another 1-point cut in interest rates on Thursday. Erdoğan was expected to hold talks with the central bank governor, Şahap Kavcıoğlu, the finance minister, Nureddin Nebati, and the heads of state banks in Istanbul on Monday, and some analysts said a crashing lira and the threat of a credit downgrade from the rating agency S&amp;P might force the government to adopt a more cautious approach. Ipek Ozkardeskaya, a senior analyst at Swissquote Bank, said: “Honestly I don’t think they can carry out another 1 percentage point cut this week. The lira has been very volatile for the past few weeks, and S&amp;P has downgraded to a negative outlook. The markets will have very little tolerance to such a move.” At one stage, the lira had fallen 7% against the dollar before mounting a partial recovery to about 14.25 to the dollar on the currency-market intervention by the central bank. Analysts warned, however, that buying lira in the financial markets was likely to provide only a temporary respite. “Last week’s apparent relative stability of the Turkish lira was artificial and non-sustainable. Now we see the buildup pressure unfolding, driving lira weakness to the next level,” Commerzbank said in a note. “Any further attempts of the central bank to stabilise the lira by interventions is probably bound to fail.”Is there name yet for the genre of stories in which a character goes through multiple realities, made magically accessible without any proper science-fiction explanation, in order to learn some kind of life lesson? Let’s call them mystical multiverse tales. It’s a particularly popular plot mechanism in movies these days, although you can trace it back to Charles Dickens’ A Christmas Carol and then on through Frank Capra’s film It’s a Wonderful Life, Groundhog Day, Sliding Doors and beyond. This British comedy-drama is squarely embedded in the mystical multiverse tradition, with its flawed but essentially likable central character – in this case Michael Sheen’s Nottingham-bred wideboy Tony Towers, who discovers one Christmas Eve that he can experience the forking paths his life might have taken by shifting from one carriage to another on a homeward-bound train. The story starts in 1985, when Tony is a fortysomething nightclub owner with a massive Peter Stringfellow-style blond mullet. He’s accompanied on the trip back to see his elderly parents by his nice girlfriend Sue (Nathalie Emmanuel) and his younger brother Roger (Cary Elwes under serious ginger wigs), who is less successful than Tony but is at least happily married to Astrid (Anna Lundberg). But when Tony moves into the next carriage, suddenly his clothes, and hairstyle change and he no longer has his train ticket in his wallet. He makes small decisions, like to open one club rather than six and to give Roger a bigger share of the joint business; when he moves to another train carriage everything changes again. Sometimes we go deep into the past and see the characters played by younger actors and learn about the childhood traumas and events that shaped them. By the end we catch up with Tony in our present day, older and presumably wiser. It’s a pretty high concept posited by writer-director Julian Kemp, made even weirder by the way Sheen’s Tony just sort of rolls with it all, swiftly working out how to tinker with his futures in order to either benefit himself or save loved ones from ruin. But Sheen is an engaging enough actor to pull it off, gurning and goofing around to keep from being upstaged by the procession of well-observed, period-accurate but ridiculously over-the-top costumes, from the Tony Wilson-style sharp-suit-no-tie-fully-buttoned-shirt look, to a blazer the colour of candy floss. And then, by slow degrees, he brings a tender sort of sadness to the story, full of wistful regrets and zen resignation to the contingencies of fate. Props are also due to the production design team, who sourced all the different moquette upholstery fabrics for the train seats that mark the different eras as the story develops. • Last Train to Christmas is available on 18 December on Sky Cinema and NOW.Mary was always a wonderful person, with such a beautiful spirit. I’d known her since we were young growing up in Detroit. She’d always be singing and dancing with her friends in the projects, and we used to rehearse in the same building. Then [when she was 15, in 1959] she became a member of the Primettes, who changed their name to the Supremes a year later, the same year that I became one of the Temptations. Our careers went in parallel in many aspects, and that bonded us as friends. Our bands were known together as Motown’s no-hit wonders – neither of us had a hit until late 1963, early 1964, which was hard. But Mary had a lot of determination. She’d throw everything into her performances. We’d sing in nightclubs together and I’d watch her from the side of the stage, notice how hard she was working. She had that great smoky, sultry voice even when she was a teenager, this silky attitude and swagger. She was a real fashionista too. She loved dressing up and she was always as cute as a button. She was so proud when the band started having big hits around the world, like Where Did Our Love Go and Baby Love [in 1964], then things started happening for us too [the Temptations’ first big hit, My Girl, was No 1 in January 1965]. I remember Mary buying a nice duplex on the west side of Detroit and she was so excited to decorate it and buy things for it. Things like that meant so much to kids like us. Our bands recorded a single together, I’m Going to Make You Love Me [in 1968], and did a big television special – she was such a standout on that. As times went on [Diana Ross left the Supremes in 1970 to go solo], Mary was so determined to keep the band strong. She also fought to keep the Supremes’ name, which I learned a lot from. [Wilson helped draft the Truth in Music bill in the late 1990s, protecting the trademark of a band name for original members, which is now law in 35 out of 50 US states; Williams owns the rights to the Temptations’ name.] And then she wrote her memoir, Dreamgirl, which was a huge success. It sold so well, and I think it was very inspirational and innovative in a lot of respects, like when she’s talking about the ways that life doesn’t always play out the way we want it to [she writes about the decline and early death of her friend and Supremes bandmate Florence Ballard]. Mary had a lot to deal with in her later life too, like when she lost her son [Rafael, in a car crash, when he was 14], but she never lost that spirit. She kept in touch all the time over the years, sending letters and cards and calling. We were last in touch a few weeks before I heard she had gone. She told me she was in the process of doing her new album – we were both still making music – and she said to me: “I’m still your Mary.” It was so out of the blue when she passed. I found out on Facebook that morning, and then I called around people I knew. I just couldn’t believe it. It made me think how Motown came along almost by happenstance, and how lucky we were to be part of something so historic and well loved. I know she loved being part of it too, singing those songs that will outlive us all.Grieving pupils at a primary school in east London are “struggling to cope” after one of their brightest and best-loved classmates was killed over the weekend in an incident being linked to pest control chemicals found in the flats where she lived. Rena Begum, the headteacher of Buttercup primary in Shadwell, said the school was in “great shock” after the death of 11-year-old Fatiha Sabrin in Saturday’s incident. The Metropolitan police were treating her death as unexplained before further tests and a postmortem could be carried out. In a statement it said: “A sweep of the building was carried out by the London fire brigade and a quantity of chemicals – believed to be used for pest control – were discovered. They will be safely removed and an investigation will be carried out to determine how they came to be in the building.” Begum said Fatiha was a school “role model”, who planned to become a doctor and whose written work had just been selected for a national award. After announcing Fatiha’s death to her classmates on Monday, Begum said: “The children are struggling to cope. It is a real shock to them at their young age that suddenly someone is not there. It took them half an hour to take it in, and then everybody started crying and there were tissues everywhere.” Fatiha’s mother, Kanji Fatema, was recovering in hospital after also inhaling toxic fumes at the flat at Nida House in Shadwell. Her seven-year-old brother was back at school after being discharged from hospital. Begum said: “A family friend went to the flat and found two bodies unresponsive. I got a call on the school emergency mobile, was told they were taken to hospital and that Fatiha had been pronounced dead and that the block had been evacuated.” The children’s father was reported to be flying back from Bangladesh, while emergency accommodation was being found for the family. Begum said: “We are doing our best to support the family” and described Fatiha as an “amazing student”. She said: “Every week when someone gets a gold award or star of the week, we write their name down. Her name is still there on the wall. “She was a brilliant writer, and we hope a book will be published soon including her short stories. She just got selected for a national literacy award for young writers.” Begum added: “She had strong dreams of wanting to help the community and becoming a medical professional. Her friends are devastated by her empty seat in class. There was a lot of confusion and tears, it was important for them to just let it out. We are giving them bereavement counselling. “She was a very popular member of the class and always willing to help others when they didn’t understand something. She was one of those students who never had to come to the headteacher’s office. She was a happy and bubbly person.” Fatiha’s class had been due to visit the Imperial War Museum on Monday as part of a project about the first world war. Begum said Fatiha’s family encouraged her to excel. She said: “They are a very supportive family and very ambitious for her. She just did an 11-plus exam to enter a grammar school and not many do that. She knew what she wanted to do in life and her family wanted the best for both of their children.”The House panel investigating the 6 January insurrection at the US Capitol is set to recommend contempt charges against former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows on Monday as lawmakers are releasing new details about thousands of emails and texts he has handed over to the committee. In laying out the case for the contempt vote, the nine-member panel released a 51-page report late on Sunday that details its questions about the documents he has already provided – including 6,600 pages of records taken from personal email accounts and about 2,000 text messages. The panel did not release the documents but described some of them. The report gives details about Meadows’s efforts to help Donald Trump overturn his defeat in the presidential election, communications with members of Congress and organizers of a rally held the morning of the insurrection and frantic messages among aides and others as the violent attack unfolded that day. The panel says it also wants to know more about whether Trump was engaged in discussions regarding the response of the National Guard, which was delayed for hours as the violence escalated and the rioters brutally beat police guarding the Capitol building. The report says that the documents provided by Meadows show that he sent an email to an unidentified person saying that the guard would be present to “protect pro-Trump people” and that more would be available on standby. The committee does not give any additional details about the email. The committee says in the report that Trump’s former top White House aide “is uniquely situated to provide key information, having straddled an official role in the White House and unofficial role related to Mr Trump’s reelection campaign.” The contempt vote comes after more than two months of negotiations with Meadows and his lawyer and as the panel has also struggled to obtain information from some of Trump’s other top aides, such as his longtime ally Steve Bannon. The House voted to recommend charges against Bannon in October, and the Department of Justice indicted him on two counts of contempt last month. The panel is aiming to develop the most comprehensive record yet of the violent attack, in which hundreds of Trump’s supporters violently pushed past the law enforcement officers, broke into the Capitol and interrupted the certification of Biden’s victory. Meadows’s testimony could be key, as he was Trump’s top aide at the time and was with him in the White House as the rioters breached the building. The committee’s chairman, Democratic representative Bennie Thompson of Mississippi, scheduled the vote last week after Meadows failed to show up at his deposition.For many insurrectionists who stormed the US Capitol on 6 January, self-incriminating messages, photos and videos that they broadcast on social media before, during and after the attack are influencing their criminal sentences. Earlier this month, US district judge Amy Jackson read aloud some of Russell Peterson’s posts before she sentenced the Pennsylvania man to 30 days imprisonment. “Overall I had fun lol,” Peterson had posted on Facebook, using the social media abbreviation for “laugh out loud”. The judge told Peterson that his posts made it “extraordinarily difficult” for her to show him leniency. “The ‘lol’ particularly stuck in my craw because, as I hope you’ve come to understand, nothing about January 6th was funny,” Jackson added. “No one locked in a room, cowering under a table for hours, was laughing.” Among the biggest takeaways so far from the justice department’s prosecution of the insurrection is how large a role social media has played, with much of the most damning evidence coming from rioters’ own words and videos, in addition to evidence of entering the Capitol, destroying property or hurting people. Extremist supporters of Donald Trump broke into the Capitol following days of build-up among the rightwing and after a rally in Washington DC, where the then president urged the crowd to try to stop the official certification by Congress of Democrat Joe Biden’s victory in the November 2020 presidential election. FBI agents have identified scores of rioters from public posts and records subpoenaed from social media platforms. Prosecutors used posts to build cases and judges are now weighing them in favor of tougher sentences. As of last Friday, more than 50 people have been sentenced for federal crimes related to the insurrection. In at least 28 of those cases, prosecutors factored a defendant’s social media posts into their requests for stricter sentences, according to an Associated Press review of court records. Many insurrectionists used social media to celebrate the violence or spew hateful rhetoric. Others used it to spread misinformation, promote baseless conspiracy theories or play down their actions. Prosecutors also have accused a few defendants of trying to destroy evidence by deleting posts. Approximately 700 people have been charged with federal crimes related to the riot. About 150 of them have pleaded guilty. More than 20 defendants have been sentenced to jail or prison terms or to time already served behind bars. Over a dozen others received home confinement sentences. Prosecutors recommended probation for Indiana hair salon owner Dona Sue Bissey, but the judge in the case, Tanya Chutkan, sentenced her to two weeks in jail for her participation in the riot. The judge noted that Bissey posted a screenshot of a Twitter post that read: “This is the First time the U.S. Capitol had been breached since it was attacked by the British in 1814.” Chutkan said: “When Ms Bissey got home, she was not struck with remorse or regret for what she had done. She’s celebrating and bragging about her participation in what amounted to an attempted overthrow of the government.” FBI agents obtained a search warrant for Andrew Ryan Bennett’s Facebook account after getting a tip that the Maryland man live-streamed video from inside the Capitol. Two days before the riot, Bennett posted a Facebook message that said: “You better be ready chaos is coming and I will be in DC on 1/6/2021 fighting for my freedom!” Judge James Boasberg singled out that post as an “aggravating” factor weighing in favor of house arrest instead of a fully probationary sentence. “The cornerstone of our democratic republic is the peaceful transfer of power after elections,” the judge told Bennett. “What you and others did on January 6th was nothing less than an attempt to undermine that system of government.” Meanwhile, videos captured New Jersey gym owner Scott Fairlamb punching a police officer outside the Capitol. His Facebook and Instagram posts showed he was prepared to commit violence there and had no remorse for his actions, prosecutors said. Senior Judge Royce Lamberth said other rioters in Fairlamb’s position would be “well advised” to join him in pleading guilty. “You couldn’t have beat this if you went to trial on the evidence that I saw,” Lamberth said before sentencing Fairlamb to 41 months in prison. The role of social media has drawn criticism of the tech companies behind the relevant platforms. Facebook was shown to have ignored warning signs in the build-up to the attack.Lateral flow home test kits have become unavailable online and NHS England has advised people attempting to book a Covid booster jab to try later or on Tuesday as extremely high demand overwhelmed the government’s website. It said on Monday that there were “no more home tests available” and advised people to “try again later” or to book a test site appointment instead. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said there was no shortage of lateral flow tests and that the government had enough stock to meet demand, adding the shortage represented a temporary pause due to increased demand and kits were still available to collect in person. The shortage comes after health officials announced over the weekend that double-jabbed people identified as a contact of someone with Covid-19 in England would be told to take a daily rapid test for seven days from Tuesday. The UKHSA said it would encourage people to use any tests they may already have at home before ordering or collecting more. Asked about the supply of tests after the website problems, Boris Johnson said: “They can get those tests, we do have a ready supply of lateral flow tests. “If you can’t get one online for any reason, then there are ample supplies in the shops. But what I think, if I may say so, what that also shows is that people are doing the sensible thing, and getting tests as well.” His official spokesperson suggested the issues related to a lack of slots with the postal service. “There is no shortage of lateral flow tests. We have more than sufficient supply. What we are seeing is because of the heightened demand today, those available to be posted out today, those slots have been filled already,” he said. “We are working with the postal service and others to further increase slots. But it is important for people to understand if they do encounter trouble they can go to their local pharmacy. The slots refresh daily.” Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, tweeted: “Testing is absolutely vital in keeping us safe and allowing people to make safe choices. “The government’s inability to procure properly and plan for civil contingencies is reckless. Boris Johnson has his priorities in the wrong place.” A UKHSA spokesperson said: “Everyone who needs a lateral flow test can collect test kits – either at their local pharmacy, some community sites and some schools and colleges. “Due to exceptionally high demand, ordering lateral flow tests on gov.uk has been temporarily suspended to fulfil existing orders.” The surge in interest in booking boosters came after the prime minister announced that everyone over 18 in England “will have the chance to get their booster before the new year” in a dramatic acceleration of the vaccination campaign. In a tweet, the health service said: “The Covid vaccine booking service is currently facing extremely high demand so is operating a queueing system. “For users aged 18-29, please be aware that booking opens on Wednesday 15 December. For all others experiencing waits, we would advise trying again later today or tomorrow.” It comes on the first day that 30- to 39-year-olds in England can officially book a booster jab. The service had already booked more than 140,000 vaccine appointments on Monday, NHS Digital said, with people waiting several minutes. Although the booking system does not open for those under 30 until Wednesday, Johnson said on Sunday night some would be able to use walk-in centres as early as Monday. There were queues at several vaccination centres in England after the announcement, with people waiting patiently despite being warned they could face waits of several hours. Long lines built up at St Thomas’s hospital, on the South Bank of the River Thames in London, and stretched across Westminster Bridge towards the Houses of Parliament. In Whalley Range, south Manchester, clinics did not appear prepared for the influx of people. Laura Sears and Joe Hollingworth, both in their late 20s, were told at a clinic in south Manchester that they would have to wait six months from the date of their second dose before they could get a booster. However, after the clinic warden spoke to his supervisors the couple was admitted. “The website has been totally down, it wouldn’t let us try to book an appointment so we tried to walk in,” Sears said. “You can kind of tell from the staff that the communication from the government has been pretty terrible,” added Hollingworth. At the vaccination centre at Haynes Motor Museum, near Yeovil in Somerset, staff estimated there were waiting times of about 45 minutes. One woman, who had booked to receive her booster jab but asked not to be named, said: “I’m happy we can get booked in and want to do the right thing by getting it as quickly as possible. “But it’s not great when you are still queueing more than half an hour after your appointment time and don’t know how much longer it will take, especially when I tried to do it in my lunch break because I couldn’t find any appointments available out of work hours.” Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, which represents the healthcare system in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Monday the booster goals were ambitious. “The health service was already under unprecedented pressure, and this is going to mean that other important parts of the NHS’s work are going to have to be put on the back burner in order to be able to deliver this,” he said. “It’s really important the government is clear with the public about the consequences this is going to have for what the rest of the health service is going to offer.”The White House has been accused of cutting the video feed of a Taiwanese minister after a map in the official’s slide presentation showed the island in a different colour to China’s during last week’s Summit for Democracy, in an effort to avoid antagonising Beijing. Reuters news agency reported that during a panel discussion on Friday, the video feed showing Audrey Tang, Taiwan’s digital minister, was replaced with audio only. The map used in Tang’s presentation is produced by South African NGO Civicus, which ranks the world by openness on civil rights. In it, Taiwan is labelled in green, making it the only regional entity described as “open”, while all the others, including several US allies and partners who were also participants in Joe Biden’s summit, were shown as being “closed”, “repressed”, “obstructed” or “narrowed”. China, Laos, Vietnam and North Korea were coloured red and labelled “closed”. According to people familiar with Friday’s event who spoke to Reuters, the map led officials at the White House National Security Council to express concern. The NSC was also upset as the slide had not appeared in dry-run versions of the presentation before the summit, according to the report. When the moderator for Tang’s session returned to Tang, there was no video of her. An on-screen disclaimer later clarified: “Any opinions expressed by individuals on this panel are those of the individual, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the United States government,” according to the report. The alleged incident came at a highly sensitive time in Washington’s fraught relationship with Beijing, which sees Taiwan as its breakaway province. Last month, the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, told Biden that any support for Taiwanese independence would be “like playing with fire” and that “those who play with fire will get burned”. The way the administration handled the alleged incident also highlighted Biden’s balancing act in dealing with Taiwan. While helping the democratically run island expand its international space, Washington does not wish to be seen as breaking its decades-long policy of “strategic ambiguity” when dealing with Taiwan. Critics say that this incident was the administration’s “overreaction”, and it cast doubt on Biden’s repeated commitment in public that his administration’s support for Taiwan was “rock solid”. “[But] the bigger picture is that Taiwan is a crucial member of the US’s international democratic coalition at a time of stiff competition with China and Russia,” said George Yin, a research fellow at National Taiwan University’s Centre for China Studies. “Nonetheless, the US also has a strong interest in maintaining peace and stability across the Taiwan strait given the troubles surrounding Ukraine.” Tang’s map caused consternation among US officials, the report said, but the state department insisted the incident was “an honest mistake”. It said confusion over screen-sharing resulted in her video feed being dropped. “We valued minister Tang’s participation, which showcased Taiwan’s world-class expertise on issues of transparent governance, human rights and countering disinformation,” a state department spokesperson said. The NSC also disputed this account, saying the report was inaccurate and blamed it on confusion over screen-sharing. Taiwan’s foreign ministry also blamed technical problems for the incident after it was revealed. “Taiwan and the United States have fully communicated on this technical issue, and the two sides have a solid mutual trust and a solid and friendly relationship,” it said.A memoir by the late journalist Sarah Hughes, who died from cancer earlier this year, will be published next March, tackling topics from planning your own funeral to the importance of trashy novels. Hughes, who wrote about coping with her illness during the pandemic for the Observer, and was responsible for the Guardian’s episode-by-episode Game of Thrones and Line of Duty recaps, sold the memoir to Bonnier Books imprint Blink in early 2021. She died in April, aged 48, survived by her husband Kris and two children. The publisher described her memoir, Holding Tight, Letting Go, as “a book about how to die as much as how to live” and “a celebration of everything that can make up a life, and how to hold it all close when everything feels completely precarious”. “I’d be lying if I said that the last decade hasn’t been the best of my life,” Hughes wrote in the Observer in 2019 in a piece about her diagnosis. “I’ve been lucky in love, fulfilled in my work, surrounded by friends, laughed more than I ever thought possible at the most ridiculous of things. I can say with absolute honesty that I have had a lovely time and I don’t regret any of it.” Later, during the pandemic, she advised that “even in these depressing times try to find some part of the day that is worth relishing, whether it is a moment of beauty half-glimpsed outside, the joy found in escaping into a different world on page or screen, or the pleasure of dressing up for yourself and no one else because it makes you feel fine”. Hughes started out in journalism writing about basketball and college football for the New York Daily News. On her return to the UK, she covered horse racing and football, going on to write for papers including the Independent, Telegraph and Metro, as well as the Guardian and Observer. Her reports on abuses by UN peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) with the photojournalist Kate Holt saw her shortlisted for an Amnesty International award in 2004. Her memoir will also include contributions from her friends. When Hughes died, tributes poured in from names ranging from Guardian editor-in-chief Katharine Viner to Jed Mercurio, the television writer and creator of Line of Duty, and the screenwriter and television producer Sarah Phelps. “She was endlessly curious, hilarious and kind, an incisively brilliant and fearless writer,” said Phelps at the time. “Sarah was a guiding light for so many, in so many different ways,” said Blink editorial director Susannah Otter, who acquired the memoir. “She really knew what it was to live, fully and completely, with commitment, honesty and joy. It is a huge pleasure, and a colossal honour, to be publishing this luminously funny, honest collection from her with contributions from those who knew her best.”Touchdown in South Australia was probably a relief for England’s cricketers, no doubt glad to see the back of Queensland after their soggy buildup was followed by defeat at the Gabba. Before landing those with a window seat also got a glorious view of the Adelaide Oval, scene of this week’s second Test. From above it is hard to miss a ground that is three parts modern mega-stadium to one part grass bank and sits nestled in the parkland north of Adelaide’s city centre. Where once there were sloped terracotta roofs three giant stands with bulbous white canopies now horseshoe around the outfield like a huge comfy armchair almost ready for the Stay Puft Marshmallow Man to slump into after a long day terrorising the public. The revamp was met with near widespread praise on completion in 2014, which was not a given. Australia may be a country that is always moving forward by way of disposition – see the emu and the kangaroo on the crest of the fabled Baggy Green for more details – but renovating the home stadium of Don Bradman, the Chappell brothers, Jason Gillespie et al risked compromising its bucolic charm. Yet the architects managed to pull off the ideal blend of increased capacity (now up to 53,000), spectator comfort and a sense of history, as well as the Bradman Collection in the museum – where would-be Dons can similarly hone techniques with a stump and golf ball. A link with the past has been retained by the hill at the northern end and the famous old scoreboard, built in 1911, will once again tick over this week. In recent times the Adelaide Oval has also set about creating a new tradition in the shape of the pink-ball Test. Not that everyone agrees. Ever since the first such match in 2015, when the Australia and New Zealand players were paid danger money to give the new concept a go, it has been a source of grumbling among a local press pack that might prefer to transport tastebuds to the Barossa Valley of an evening. But through a combination of alluring salmon skies at dusk, the flare of the pink Kookaburra as it whizzes down under lights, the scope for spectators to pitch up after work and purchase a twilight ticket, and peak viewing hours for the television audience at home, the format has taken hold. Crowds are capped at 35,000 per day this Test but nearly 200,000 spectators passed through the turnstiles over five days four years ago. The fact that Australia have won all five day-night Tests staged in Adelaide has probably helped a bit, too. A key driver of the revolution was Keith Bradshaw, the former South Australia Cricket Association chief executive who sadly died in November, aged 58, after a long battle with myeloma. A popular and progressive administrator, but one who never lacked a sense of history and tradition with this, Bradshaw, a Tasmanian, had made the move back in 2011 after five years as secretary of MCC. It is fitting that those two worlds come together on Thursday when the newly-forged “Bradshaw Bell” is rung five minutes before the start of play for the first time. This was a tradition introduced during Bradshaw’s time at Lord’s – Ian Botham and Viv Richards were among the first in 2007 – and beginning this new sound in Adelaide this week will be his fiancée, Helen Todd, and daughters Juliet Bigg and Eliza Bradshaw. Out on the field there will be decent representation for South Australia. Travis Head flew home from Brisbane a day early to see his family and will now stride out on to his home ground bursting with confidence after his 152 punished England’s leggy bowlers at the Gabba. Alex Carey, though light on runs with the bat, is also a returning hero in these parts after becoming the first wicketkeeper to pouch eight catches on Test debut. Australia will be without one of their pink-ball specialists, however, after confirmation on Monday that Josh Hazlewood is officially out of the second Test with a side strain. The expectation now is that Jhye Richardson, a pacy purveyor of outswing, will step up as his replacement, while Usman Khawaja is on standby if David Warner’s rib injury proves too painful to overcome in training. Certainly the absence of Hazlewood presents an opportunity for England, so too the fact that Steve Smith averages only 31 from five day-night Test matches at the Adelaide Oval. In Brisbane the tourists had a new plan for Smith, with five men stationed out on the leg side but their seamers still pursuing a line on or just outside off stump. When Mark Wood went wide of the crease and found his edge on 12, it worked. These may be mere crumbs of comfort for a team still licking its wounds after that nine-wicket thrashing in Brisbane. But if they are looking for inspiration, they could do worse than step out on to the Adelaide Oval and take in their surroundings.It must hurt to be Simon Cowell in 2021. For two decades, Cowell was the undisputed master of the singing talent show, trampling the charts into paste with his relentless barrage of power ballads and sob stories. But then The X Factor withered away, and his spot was taken by no end of niche singing shows. Want to watch famous people singing in elaborate costumes? There’s The Masked Singer. Want to watch judges try to figure out whether people can sing, without actually hearing them sing? There’s I Can Hear Your Voice. Want to watch singers cower backstage as their voices are implanted into harrowing frog-style avatars? Go to the US and watch Alter Ego. Or rather, don’t. Which brings us to Walk the Line: Simon Cowell’s attempt to reassert himself on the genre he once dominated. How exactly does he plan to do that? By hooking up the corpse of The X Factor to an electrical current and making it jerk about for kicks, of course. All the old tropes are present and correct. Is Walk the Line presented inside a hangar-sized shiny-floored studio? Yes. Is there an audience that whoops on command so efficiently it sometimes borders on North Korean-style propaganda? Yes. Does it take one hour of television and make it feel like six? Yes. Does it consist of loads and loads of people blurting out wobbly amateur versions of songs you have only ever heard played in supermarkets? For the most part, yes. There is one small difference that separates Walk the Line from The X Factor, though. This new show has zero interest in letting any of these people establish a career. Every episode, five new singers appear, and every episode four of them are binned off into oblivion. The fifth – the winner, if you will – is offered £10,000. They can either take it and sod off, or compete all over again the following night in the hope that they will win £500,000 at the end of the series. But, yes, aside from that, this is The X Factor all over. Not that Simon Cowell is anywhere to be seen. While this was supposed to be his big television comeback, he decided recently to remain offscreen and cede his spot to everyone’s favourite sub-Cowell fun-sponge, Gary Barlow. Barlow now heads a judging panel consisting of Craig David (aggressively anonymous), Dawn French (reliably lovely) and Alesha Dixon (hired because if she goes more than eight months without judging something on TV, her kidneys will explode). You have to wonder if any of them knew what they were signing up for, though, because never have TV judges been more unnecessary. All the hard work, all the actual judging, gets done at the end of each episode by the studio audience, who vote for a winner on electronic pads. This means the judges are only really there to pad out the running time with cliched soundbites. I haven’t seen their contracts, so I can’t be certain, but I suspect the legal definition of their role here might be “rusk”. As for the contestants, they have all just been plucked off the generic singing competition contestant conveyor belt. In the first episode, one guy performed a John Lewis advert version of God Only Knows, one guy attempted to shoehorn as many extraneous notes into Purple Rain as he could, a set of drag queens called Queenz sang a song with the word “Queen” in the title, and one woman did something so bland I wouldn’t even be able to describe it to you under hypnosis. They were, by and large, the musical equivalent of pre-chewed food. Last night’s episode was won by the fifth contestant, a woman from Bristol who sang a song she had written herself. At the climax, she decided to stay on for the next night’s episode. I suspect this is what will make the show gripping in the long run; because all the dramatic tension comes from wondering whether or not the singers will hold their nerve. But that is redundant for me because, now that I have finished the episode I was contractually obliged to watch, I am going to spend the rest of my life pretending that Walk the Line doesn’t exist. Call it self-care, if you like.Uefa was forced to redraw the last 16 of the Champions League after an error-strewn first attempt that wrongly pitted Manchester United against Villarreal, excluded them from a possible tie with Atlético Madrid and paired them with Paris Saint-Germain before Ralf Rangnick’s side landed Atlético at the second attempt. European football’s governing body blamed the “software of an external service provider” for an embarrassing episode that involved the first draw being declared void almost an hour and three-quarters after it started. United were ultimately spared a last-16 encounter with Lionel Messi, Kylian Mbappé and Mauricio Pochettino, who is interested in becoming their manager next summer, when paired with Diego Simeone’s side in an incident-free second draw. Liverpool will meet the Italian champions, Internazionale, having initially received a more favourable draw against RB Salzburg, while Manchester City swapped Villarreal for Sporting. Chelsea drew the French champions, Lille, on both occasions. The problems began when United were drawn to face Villarreal, whom they met in the group stage and were therefore unable to play in the last 16. Uefa officials corrected the mistake and Andrey Arshavin pulled City’s name from the bowl instead. But in the draw for the next tie, against Atlético, Uefa’s deputy general secretary, Giorgio Marchetti, incorrectly stated that United had already been drawn and their ball was not placed in the bowl with those teams eligible to play the Spanish champions. Video evidence also showed that Liverpool had been incorrectly placed in the bowl to face Atlético when the teams were ineligible to meet having been in the same group. United did not challenge the botched draw, despite a daunting assignment against PSG, and left Uefa to consider its options. Atlético, who were initially drawn to face Bayern Munich, announced they were in talks with Uefa “to ask for explanations and a solution after the mistakes made”. Shortly after, European football’s governing body released a statement that read: “Following a technical problem with the software of an external service provider that instructs the officials as to which teams are eligible to play each other, a material error occurred in the draw … As a result of this, the draw has been declared void and will be entirely redone.” None of the English clubs had misgivings over the decision to redraw. Jürgen Klopp insisted it was the correct course of action, the Liverpool manager saying: “I saw it live and I thought: ‘You cannot let it stand like this, there’s no chance.’ Definitely, they had to do it again.” Manchester City’s manager, Pep Guardiola, speaking at a press conference between the two draws, said: “I think it is fair [to redraw]. It was a mistake but sometimes these things can happen. If there was a mistake you have to repeat so it is not suspicious.” Real Madrid will have cause to feel hard done-by. Their initial tie was against Benfica but in the second draw they landed PSG, giving the manager, Carlo Ancelotti, a reunion against one of his former clubs and taking Sergio Ramos back to the club where he won four Champions League titles. Real’s director of institutional affairs, Emilio Butragueño, said of the draw: “It’s been surprising, lamentable and very difficult to understand, considering the millions of fans and the world of sport who were waiting on the draw.” Bayern will face Salzburg rather than Atlético, Benfica play Ajax, who landed Internazionale in the first draw, and Juventus’s opponents will be Villarreal rather than Sporting. Despite the controversy, Klopp welcomed a return to San Siro, where Liverpool beat Milan last week to become the first English team to win all six games in a Champions League group stage. “I had to wait 54 years to play at the San Siro for the first time and now it’ll be twice in three months, so that’s good news,” he said. “All good. Of course it is a tough draw. They are the league leaders in Italy; a good team in a good moment. “[Alexis] Sánchez and [Edin] Dzeko we know well and Lautaro Martínez is one of the most exciting strikers in the world, probably. Simone Inzaghi is there, his first year, last year they were champions, but it is the Liverpool way – it’s never easy, but still possible, so let’s give it a go. It’s a proper Champions League tie and I am absolutely looking forward to it.”For many thousands of people, the festive season begins not with a visit to Father Christmas or popping an angel atop a tinselled tree, but with an explosion of dry ice and Roman Kemp bellowing “Make some noise!” Yes, it’s the annual two-night pop-fest that is Capital Radio’s Jingle Bell Ball, fully powered by the baubles-out, have-another-one-for-Santa attitude of the crowd. That energy is needed, as Covid outbreaks have meant some big-name cancellations: Coldplay on Saturday night, and Lil Nas X and Mabel on Sunday. Justin Bieber therefore has an extended set on Saturday, which he performs with aplomb and in a denim jacket so large he could have smuggled in several puppies. Sorry brings the house down, though it’s Lonely, with its straight-from-the heart lyrics, which is the highlight. In support is pop-house star Jax Jones, who always goes fully tinsel-tastic: in 2019, this meant roller-skating Christmas puddings; this year Jones is dressed as a Gucci Santa, surrounded by giant robots, his eerie-yet-catchy dance bangers bringing a frenzied audience reaction. Sunday night feels makeshift in comparison, with less festive effort from the acts. Opener Joel Corry’s house has a bleak feel: nursery rhyme tunes, tinny vocals and adrenal rushes of beats feel cynical, no matter how often the ex-Geordie Shore star queries if “you guys are ready to go to the club” and someone bangs the glitter cannons. Pop queen Anne-Marie and her hard-working dancers offer some slick verve, and Friends’ “1-2-3-4-5-6000 times” chorus engages full-arena singing. KSI, now one of the biggest names in pop as well as YouTube, brings on Craig David and Ella Henderson, and the show lifts as his infectious delight is met with equal love from the audience. Griff is similarly pleased to be on the stage – she confesses to being in the JBB audience just two years ago, watching Taylor Swift – and, though her friendly chat is a little off-key for the event size, her three-song set showcases her powerful voice: warmer and more soulful than you’d expect from her cool singles. After the break, two last-minute replacements are drafted in. A be-vested Tom Grennan sails through his four songs, big-voiced and upbeat, though his energy can’t make up for a lack of personality, even on the Calvin Harris-produced By Your Side. Brighton rapper ArrDee, a tiny Action Man in his army-patterned tracksuit, is a living firework, as he bounds through his innuendo-packed raps like a speedy southern Aitch. A “shall we nip to the loo now?” DJ session from Capital Xtra’s MistaJam, with Shane Codd, Nathan Dawe and Jonasu, brings the house down simply by playing a slowed, beat-driven All I Want for Christmas. All fine, if slightly unmemorable. It is left to the veterans to show how pop should be done. The recently reformed JLS look small on the stage, without DJs or band, but proceed to swell the arena with good-time vibes. Snappy in black – head-to-toe leather for Aston Merrygold, a brave choice given his propensity for a standing somersault – the now thirtysomething boy band are slick, engaging and demonstrate the never-die appeal of correctly applied formation dancing: Everybody in Love ratchets up the atmosphere from “high sugar” to “ambulance on stand-by”. Finally, Ed Sheeran. Even more pared-down than JLS, Sheeran performs his 10 songs with nothing more than loop pedals and guitar, though he brings on Anne-Marie for 2002, and a keyboardist for the final few hits. Like a slick primary school teacher, Sheeran tells us what he is doing (“Everything I play is live, and I just loop it here”) as well as what we are going to do. “These are sleigh bells,” he says, at the beginning of Merry Christmas, before teaching us the chorus. “You’re going to sing this,” he informs, “and at the end, you’re going to bounce.” Promising “all killer, no filler”, he starts with Bloodstream, plays Thinking Out Loud as an uplifting festival anthem rather than a love song, and whips through Castle on the Hill, Perfect, Shape of You and onward. The crowd respond as one: mobile phones aloft, arms waving like pampas grass, full-throated hollering of every single word. A man more comfortable in his skin would be hard to imagine: Sheeran performs with such warmth and generosity, and with such nailed-on tunes, that – somewhat unbelievably – every single Jingle Beller leaves their Ball even more sloshed with Christmas spirit than when they arrived.The US government’s leading infectious diseases official, Anthony Fauci, has stepped up calls for Americans to get a Covid-19 booster shot, as the US hit the grim milestone of 50m positive cases – by far the highest of any nation in the world. According to the latest numbers from Johns Hopkins university the US now has some 50,025,005 cases of the virus. In terms of deaths, the figures show that the US is also now approaching 800,000 lives lost to coronavirus since the start of the pandemic. Fauci warned that the Omicron variant appeared to be able to “evade” the protection of two initial doses of the mRNA-type Covid vaccines – Pfizer/BioNTech’s and Moderna’s – as well as post-infection therapies such as monoclonal antibodies and convalescent plasma. Omicron is spurring new fears as US infections begin to surge again, with infections still led by the highly transmissable Delta variant that has dominated since the summer. Fauci said an extra vaccine shot provides “optimal” protection against Omicron, even though the government’s official designation of “fully vaccinated” remained at two doses of Pfizer or Moderna, or one of Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccine, which was developed by another method. “Preliminary data show that when you get a booster, for example a third shot of an mRNA, it raises the level of protection high enough that it then does do well against the Omicron,” Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and chief medical adviser to the president, said on ABC. It was, he said: “Another reason to encourage people who are not vaccinated to get vaccinated, but particularly those who are vaccinated to get boosted because that diminution in protection seems to go way back up again. If you want to be optimally protected, you really should get a booster.” Although vaccination rates, particularly boosters, have picked up significantly in recent weeks, about 40% of eligible adults in the US are still not fully protected, and the take-up rate for children ages five to 11, who are newly eligible, remains below 20%, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation. Fauci urged parents: “If your child is five years of age and older, please get them vaccinated. We need to protect the children.” He added: “This idea that children are not vulnerable at all is not so.” Fauci urged the public to follow the CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] guidelines. “When you are in an indoor congregate setting and you don’t know the vaccination status of the people around you, wear a mask. Masking is not going to be forever but it can get us out of the very difficult situation we’re in now,” Fauci said. Experts are still discovering the characteristics of Omicron. CDC director Rochelle Walensky last week said that very preliminary data so far showed Omicron was comparatively mild. Bill de Blasio, the mayor of New York City, meanwhile, defended his new vaccine mandate for private employees. “Omicron is here, it’s all over the country, this variant moves fast,” he said on CNN’s State of the Union show. “We have to move faster. What I hear from our business community, their greatest fear is shutdowns, going back to where we were in 2020, to restrictions, to people losing their livelihood. “The greatest threat to employment is that Omicron and the cold winter months are going to supercharge Covid and take us backwards. Since I put mandates in place starting in August, we have seen over a million more doses, 71% of our people fully vaccinated. A lot of those people made the decision because the mandate was there,” he said. A federal judge is set to rule on Tuesday on a challenge to De Blasio’s vaccine mandate for the city’s 160,000 public sector employees, including police, firefighters and sanitation workers.So let’s try this again: we’re done here. Thanks all for your company and comments, it’s been a blast. Apologies I couldn’t use them all, especially not all the cover versions and not all the railing at the non-cover cover versions - if it’s any consolation, I made the CMS run so slowly it didn’t correct an error my eyes told me had been corrected. Ta-ra! And here’s our report of the draw. Yet more... And more... More reading for you... “For your subjects,” begins Philip Watson. “I Fought the Law (and the Law Won) was written in 1959 by Sonny Curtis, a member of Buddy Holly’s backing band, the Crickets. It was included on their first album released after Buddy’s death in February 1959. The song is now 62 years old...” Great stuff. “Faith No More always do fun covers,” emails Tom Chivers. “Here they are doing Lady Gaga’s Poker Face and Portishead’s Glory Box. I also remember seeing them do Pump Up The Jam and various other unexpected things.” Now 24 veterans will, of course, remember their version of Lionel Richie’s Easy, complete with “Ugh!” As per the below – “twice,” to quote Pep Guardiola – first legs will be played on 15/16/22/23 February, with second legs played on 8/9/15/16 March. For those of you wondering why Villarreal had to play Juventus, it was because the teams left in the hat couldn’t be drawn against each other. To me, at least, that looks a much more exciting draw than the one we had to begin with. Sporting v City should be a really fun tie, Paris v Madrid has plenty going on, Atletico v Man United is intriguing. Salzburg v Bayern Munich Sporting v Man City Benfica v Ajax Chelsea v Lille Atlético v Man United Villarreal v Juventus Inter v Liverpool PSG v Real Madrid ...Real Madrid. Paris Saint-Germain v Real Madrid Paris Saint-Germain will play... ...Liverpool. Inter v Liverpool Internazionale will play... ...Juventus. Villarreal v Juventus Villarreal will play... ...Man United. Atlético v Manchester United Atlético de Madrid will play... ...Lille. Chelsea v Lille. As you were! Chelsea will play... ...Ajax Amsterdam. Benfica v Ajax Benfica will play... ...Manchester City Sporting v Man City. Great trip and Super Bock beer, difficult game. Sporting Clube de Portugal will play... ...Bayern Munich. Salzburg v Bayern, and Chelsea breathe a sigh of relief. FC Salzburg will play... Oh, he’s still there! How are we going to pull this off without Andriy Arshavin? Right massive, it’s back to Nyon and here’s or pal Marchetti apologising for a “malfunction of the software”. He doesn’t elaborate as to why no one - him, for example – said owt at the time, but the “external independent auditor” said the problem might have pre-existed the draw and now each tie will be checked by Uefa officials, who were presumably all out for lunch the first time. “Would it not be more in keeping with Uefa’s thinking,” wonders Kevin Porter, “if, instead of a messy and complex draw, the choice of opponent was auctioned off to the highest bidder. That way the most wealthy club could buy the tie they most prefer. Which is, of course, how it should be.” With the semis and final to take place, F1-style, in Qatar, Saudi and Abu Dhabi. “While we’re at re-dos,” tweets Pete Mumola, “could we finally get one for the Qatar World Cup selection? TIA.” For that, I will gladly spend tomorrow writing another blog suffused with official intervention. You know what'd be good: a proper cover of the Champions League anthem. I’d fancy hearing a Radiohead version, and I’m pretty sure Goldie could also do something serious with it. “I’ve designed an infallible algorithm - the same one Uefa uses to count balls in pot,” emails Paul Griffin. “The best covers answer is below. I’m Fervently hoping Everton, Max Verstappen, or Salvador Dali come out in draw 2.0.” Pep Guardiola speaks: I think it is fair. It was a mistake but sometimes these things can happen. If there was a mistake you have to repeat so it is not suspicious.” A Europa reminder... “A great example for cruciate injury recovery is Ronaldo - Original Ronaldo,” says Peter Van. “Such a great example you can use it to further or to contradict your point about Van Dijk. After his horrific knee injury, Ronaldo came back to win the World Cup and the Champions League. He was still a fabulous player and had the most successful part of his career post-injury, at least in terms of trophies. HOWEVER! I would argue that Ronaldo lost much after that injury. He was still great, but not as great as in his Barcelona / Inter glory. After his injury, he was still one the world’s best players; but before, he was the greatest player I have ever seen. If you’re in need of evidence, well, I’ll point out to a piece you’re surely familiar with.” Any excuse. But yup, he was still brilliant, just not as brilliant. These are the group winners and therefore seeded teams, who’ll play the second leg at home: Ajax Amsterdam (NED) Bayern München (GER) Juventus (ITA) Liverpool (ENG) LOSC Lille (FRA) Manchester City (ENG) Manchester United (ENG) Real Madrid (ESP) And these are the group runners-up and therefore unseeded teams, who’ll play the first leg at home: Atlético de Madrid (ESP) Benfica (POR) Chelsea (ENG) Internazionale (ITA) Paris Saint-Germain (FRA) Salzburg (AUT) Sporting CP (POR) Villarreal (ESP) Teams from the same country cannot face one another and teams who qualified from the same group cannot face one another. First legs will be played on 15/16/22/23 February, with second legs played on 8/9/15/16 March. The away goals rule no longer applies, so if aggregate scores are level after 180 minutes, extra time will be played, and if they remain level are 210 minutes, penalties will be taken. For those of you just joining us, we’re shortly going to enjoy a do-over of the Champions League last 16 draw, because the wrong balls were taken out of the wrong pots at the wrong times, so some clubs weren’t in position to picked to play teams they could legitimately face. Check out the latest Football Weekly! On the too many penalties point, they need to change the laws. Denial of a goalscoring opportunity anywhere on the pitch, penalty; foul or handball in the box but no goalscoring opportunity, direct free-kick. Sometimes the answers come fast. Here’s Dan Christmas: “Divine Comedy wrote My Lovely Horse, so it surely does not belong on a list of great covers. I demand a redraw. “ I was on the F1 yesterday, and now I’m on this today. Can’t wait for tomorrow. “External service provider” though, you’ve got to laugh. Did the “external service provider” decide to plough on with the draw when everyone could see it wasn’t fair as well? We’re getting a lot of cover-version chat, so here are some: Michael Meagher: “Granted there should be an embargo on this song ever being played anywhere for at least a decade. However, waaaaay better than the Jeff Buckley version: Kevin Dwyer: “Divine Comedy covering My Lovely Horse at Electric Picnic.” Iain Pearson: “Bob Dylan got a shout-out for his Clash cover, so how about I Fought the Law as a banging cover of a banging original?” Police and Thieves ismy favourite of theirs, but this also approved. Giles Skerry and Martin Constantinides: “Great example for prosecution on cruciate injuries is Van Nistelrooy,” emails Cristopher Dale. “The player United signed in 2001 was significantly diminished from the player they agreed to sign in 2000.” That is an absolutely befuddling thought, given how good he still was, but yup, I’ve heard that from elsewhere – though I didn’t see him play for PSV. Does anyone else see the words Bodo/Glimt and think: Er, OK then, just me. But what a tie that is for Celtic, nothing better than a trip somewhere you’d likely never go otherwise, and watching your players freeze to boot. Yes it does indeed feel like they’ve just picked words not balls out of a hat, but here it is: Marseille v Qarabag PSV v Maccabi Tel Aviv Fenerbahce v Slavia Prague Midtjylland v PAOK Salonika Leicester City v Randers Celtic v Bodo/Glimt Sparta Prague v Partizan Rapid Wien v Spurs or Vitesse We’ve got a technical issue interrupting the Conference League draw, of course we do. We pause to sort it, rather than style it out because no one will notice. “Always on My Mind is a great cover and I agree better than the original,” reckons Barry Derbyshire. “Jimi Hendrix’s version of All along the Watchtower should get a shout out, as Bob Dylan converted to playing Jimi’s electric rendition at his live shows after Jimi passed away.” And, no doubt, in numerous other ways too. There’s nothing like being at a Bob gig wondering what on earth is this, then about three minutes in realising it’s one of my all-time favourite tunes. Last time I had the honour of seeing him play Watchtower, he segued straight into London Calling. “Best cover, conversation over,” declares Norm Baker, and who am I to argue with this magnificence? “Perhaps players like Van Dijk who have had serious knee operations are much more tentative for quite a while upon their return?” wonders Mike MacKenzie. “It could be a subconscious thing. Maybe that could explain why he hasn’t been as aggressive in making challenges on advancing forwards?” That could absolutely be the case. I suppose my reference point for this is Roy Keane, who needed until December to get going after hurting himself in September. He was 27 and not a pace merchant to begin with, but I’m sure treatment is better now than in 1997-98. “Which other players of his age have returned with nothing lost after doing their cruciate?” says Alan Gomes. “Well, it’s a different sport and a different world, but tearing the cruciate ligament used to be a death knell for basketball players too, regardless of age. When Kevin Durant came back from his injury, he was 32 – older than VVD is now – but he was as great as before. On a different note, how fun would it be if Uefa repeated the draw and the same ties came up? It would be a message from the gods that they really, really want to see another round of Messi vs. Ronaldo before they retire.” It would prove once and for all that the world is run by Narrative. And fair enough re Durrant – of course, medical science is constantly improving, and there could well be other examples. But I don’t think it’s a stretch to wonder if Van Dijk is as good as before – he’s not looked it to me, but he’ll be closer now than he was in August. “Best cover,” tweets Paul Roche, before dropping this belter. “Chaos, chaos, chaos!” begins Peter Van. “I sympathise if the Uefa bungling messed up your lunch (post-lunch?) plans. But I am greatly pleased by it. Not because its the right or fair thing to do - just out of my love of chaos. Oh all those thousands of ‘CL Draw’ news stories being hastily pulled down! Oh all the confused fans expecting a tie vs Lille who will now get Bayern! Great stuff. Also, if the redraw brings some of the same ties (a likely possibility), those will look like the Hand of Fate: ‘Of course Inter and Ajax were fated to meet!’” Ha! If we’re being honest, I’m a one meal a day man, so tend to eat much later, and am on school-run duty at 4.50, so we’re good in that aspect. But if we’re talking football parochialism, then I’m not dismayed that my team’s rivals might not get harder games, and my team might get an away somewhere they’ve not been numerous times lately. And, more generally, I think there’s a better draw out there than the one we were originally dealt, so let’s see. @ShakesMcNails tweets me, noting that my suggestion Van Dijk isn’t the player he was is “A truly ludicrous statement”. As ever, I might be wrong – I often am – but I’d be keen to know which other players of his age have returned with nothing lost after doing their cruciate – see Radamel Falcao, for example. Or if you’re more into data than medical history, this thread has some of that. Great news chums! We’ll now be online for the Conference draw! The Holy One Blessed Be He works in mysterious ways. I just watched an ad deploying a choral version of You Are Always on My Mind. Is the Pet Shop Boys’ version the greatest cover ever? It’s certainly a rare example of one better than the original. That’s the right decision, that should ultimately please everyone. Obviously Man City, Liverpool and Chelsea got draws that, on the face of things, looked kind, so they’ll be loath to lose them, but it’s got to be fair and it wasn’t. It will, though, be funny, if Atleti get Bayern again and Paris draw Man United again. You do, though, have to ask why it took an appeal, and they didn’t just do the right thing at the time. Well, you have to ask, but being a person, you know people, and being a football fan, you know Uefa, so. Here we go! If there is a redraw, I’ll be back here for it – join me should that happen. If not, ta-ra. In fact before I go, it seems as though Atlético are pushing for a redraw – I wonder if they’d be so keen had they got Lille not Bayern – and on the one hand, they’ve every right to want one, but on the other that isn’t often how things work. The Conference League draw will be happening presently, and you’ll be able to find out all about that in full report of today’s activities. For those of you who noticed, yes, my BT did crash during the Europa draw, creating minor confusion, but here we are. Thanks for your company and have a good day. Now that is a draw. One absolute jazzer, and various ooh I’m looking forward to that support acts. You can always rely on the Europa League, as the saying goes. Sevilla v Dinamo Zagreb Atalanta v Olympiacos Leipzig v Real Sociedad Barcelona v Napoli Zenit v Real Betis Borussia Dortmund v Rangers Sheriff Tiraspol v Braga Porto v Lazio Ties to take place on 17 and 24 February ...Lazio. Porto v Lazio. Not bad! Porto will play... ...Braga. Sherrif v Braga Sheriff Tiraspol will play... ...Rangers. Borussia Dortmund v Rangers. Noice! Borussia Dortmund will play... ...Zenit St Petersburg. Real Betis v Zenit St Pertersburg Real Betis will play... ...Napoli. Woof! Barcelona v Napoli Barcelona will play.... ...Real Sociedad. Leipzig v Real Sociedad Leipzig will play... ...Olympiacos. Atalanta v Olympiacos Atalanta will play... ...Dinamo Zagreb. Sevilla v Dinamo Zagreb. Two belting trips there. Sevilla will play... Clubs from the same country can’t be drawn together. Right, here we go... Andrés Palop, the former Sevilla keeper, will help with the draw. Sevilla likes football and the Europa League, and is also hot; more news as I get it. On the other hand, had this not happened, we might’ve been deprived of the joy that’ll be Lionel Messi running at Hazza Maguire. ‘Here’s the BT Sport YouTube video at the timestamp of the Atletico Madrid mistake,” returns Julian Fricker. “As the guy says Liverpool can’t be included, the Liverpool ball was already picked up.” Here comes our man Marchetti, introduced again, still looking like Claudio Ranieri. The backdrop has been changed, which is extremely exciting, to show that the final will take place in Seville. Seeded and away first: Rangers Real Socieded Napoli Olympiacos Lazio Braga Real Betis Dinamo Zagreb Unseeded and home first: Leipzig Porto Dortmund Sheriff Barcelona Atalanta Sevilla Zenit Or, put another way, the group runners-up are seeded and the Champions League rejects are unseeded. There are some potential jazzers here, so let’s hope we get one or two. We’re moving onto the Europa draw now, which has a fair few decent teams in it. West Ham don’t need to think about this bit - they’re through to the last 16 as group winners – but the Champions League rejects need to qualify, along with the group runners-up. “What is wrong with the sports administration in the world?” says Mike Binns. “Why can’t people accept a mistake and correct it? Whether it’s F1 ( or is it WWF1), or Uefa. The only fair outcome is a re-draw. The only voice we as fans have is you the journalists. Why does the world just shrug its shoulders and say “Ah well - that’s life? It’s really not good enough.” I don’t think this is quite like the F1, as officials in all sports make mistakes during the actual sport, and they’re not corrected after the fact. But yup, if we all noticed they botched this, then they did too. Even so, I totally get why they just ploughed on hoping they’d got away with it because I too am human, but it’s such a small deal that trying to do that makes very little sense. “We all saw the mistake of Man Utd being in the pot vs Villarreal,” says Julian Fricker. “Their system messed up after that and they had Liverpool in the pot to play Atletico instead of Man Utd. You can see it on their board, Liverpool with a green marker and Man Utd with red. I checked the video and the guy 100% grabbed the Liverpool ball.” “Re the error where seven balls were wrongly put in the pot to face Villarreal,” says Peter. “After United and then City were drawn, the error was compounded. The balls put in the pot for Atletico Madrid wrongly included Liverpool (put in the pot before the host spotted the error on screen), but didn’t include United (as it was wrongly stated they’d already been paired). All further draws contained the right balls but United were denied the chance to draw Atletico…” Aha, I thought they were left out until the end, but I was also looking at my fingers and my CMS. Read all about it! Stick with me for the Europa League draw, but do send in your thoughts on the one we’ve already seen. “Did Uefa not get the memo?” says Felix Wood. “Was the brief not ‘all bangers, all the time’? Do UEFA need to get Michael Masi in to guarantee TV-friendly drama?” So it’d seem. Absolute disgrace. I’d like to see someone turn up when it’s Villarreal 0-93 Man City and there’s five to go and give it a “Next goal wins”. Joe Cole is looking forward to the Joe Cole derby, Chelsea v Lille. He warns against assuming Chelsea are through, but a tie against the 11th-best team in France sound alright to me. That said, Jonathan David is a danger, so you never know. “A Great expectations X Guardian live blog crossover is almost as weird as the Europa League with Barcelona in it,” says Eli Barrott. “How long do you think it will be before we see them back in the big time?” I know, we’re a bit highbrow for Dickens, but occasionally we like to show the common touch. The money and prestige means it can never be that long, but it might take another season. There is, of course, plenty of narrative in that Paris v Man United tie. Messi v Ronaldo, Rangnick against Pochettino, who might be competing for the same job, and the teams have met a few times lately. But let’s be real, though both could win the trophy, neither are likely to win the trophy, so I’m not having it as a banger. I should note, I think they made a mistake in the draw: we were told that Villarreal could draw any of the seven teams left, which wasn’t so – they couldn’t get Man United, with whom they qualified. United duly came out the hat, and seemed to stay out of it until there was only one team left, so didn’t actually have a chance of being drawn against anyone other than whoever was still in hat bowl. For all the difference it makes. I can’t lie to you, I was hoping for more here. We’ve not got a single stone-cold banger, I’m afraid, and it looks a lot like three of the four English club will progress – at least. But I’m sure that when we get going, things will look very different. The dates won’t work according to the order in which the teams came out of the hat. They will, I imagine, work that one out according to geography – you can’t for example, have Man City and Man United playing at home on the same night and probably not in the same week – and television, aka money. Benfica v Real Madrid Villarreal v Man City Atletico v Bayern Munich Salzburg v Liverpool Inter v Ajax Sporting v Juventus Chelsea v Lille PSG v Man United Paris Saint-Germain will play the only team left, which is Manchester United. Paris Saint-Germain will play Manchester United Chelsea will play the only remaining team they can play, which is Lille. Chelsea v Lille ...Juventus. Sporting v Juventus Sporting Clube de Portugal will play... ...Ajax. Internazionale v Ajax Amsterdam Inter will play... ...Liverpool. FC Salzburg v Liverpool. Similarly, they’d’ve took that. FC Salzburg will play... ...Bayern Munich! Atlético de Madrid v Bayern Munich Atletico Madrid will play.... “I still don’t see the name of Manchester City on the board,” says Marchetti, which I thought was a diss about their lack of trophies but was in fact a technical issue. Villarreal v Manchester City. As Ryan Giggs would say, they’d’ve took that. ...Manchester United, which isn’t possible as they met in the group, so we’ll draw another ball. The suspense! Villarreal will play... ...Real Madrid. Benfica v Real Madrid And now for the draw. Group runners-up, playing home first, will come out of the bowl first. Benfica will play.... Here we go. We’ve had the introduction to the introduction of the draw, and now we’re having the introduction to the draw. Andriy Arshavin, repping for St Petersburg – which will host the final – and sporting a teenager’s moustache, joins us. He was impressed by Ajax, and his favourite memory is scoring the Arsenal goal that beat Barcelona. I wish he’d have been better than he was when he wen there, his top level was an excellent level and he was great to watch. Update: Cristiano Ronaldo, Lionel Messi and Marco van Basten are good. Giorgio Marchetti, the deputy general secretary of Uefa, arrives. He’s telling us that football is good, and the Champions League is good. And with that, we’re away to Nyon for some prattle. Pedro Pinto, the host, may have accidentally put the thin bit of his tie out, which was actually the fashion in my school – that, and pulling out individual threads so that the tie ended up partially black. Oh what larks, dear old Pip dear old chap. Liverpool have been excellent so far this season. I do wonder whether their defence might cost them – the better teams might exploit the space in behind the full-backs, and I’m not sure Van Dijk is quite the player he was. They also don’t quite have the squad some of their rivals do, but on their game, they’re extremely serious: they know exactly what they’re doing, and the confidence of knowing they can do it should not be underestimated. Will this be the year that Man City finally get it done, and Pep Guardiola finally gets it done without arguably the greatest player of all-time, Lionel Messi, and arguably the greatest midfield of all-time, Sergio Busquets, Xavi and Andrès Iniesta? Watching them against Paris, there was plenty of evidence that, like Eastenders’ Irene and Troy, their time is now. But there was also plenty of evidence to the contrary: is that defence really up to it, especially when there’s no reliable scorer to redeem it? And has Guardiola finally learnt to just pick his best team in big games? In the BT studio, they’re busy agreeing that “the English teams are the best”. I think that’s a little strong, but also think it’s fair to say that if everyone plays at their best, Bayern, Liverpool and Mn City are the best teams around, and Chelsea and Man United can beat anyone on a good day. “I share your scars of United’s away goals history,” emails Jake Lewis-Smith, “but I think they may be blurring your judgement here. I reckon Bayern and Madrid are the two to avoid in that list - if Ajax are back as big-hitters, could someone let the rest of the Dutch League know? Also, props for use of ‘Bazzing’!” That was one for my old fella, who I guess learnt it in Cheetham Hill in the 50s. You don’t hear much of it these days, but it’s a goodun. Ajax have a high top level and the game to beat anyone, which is why I’d want to avoid them; Madrid are between teams, I think, though do still have the individuals to sort anyone on a good day. “Watching the clips,” says Michał Pac Pomarnacki, “it really makes you wonder - how did Man United not win more CL trophies in between 1996-2003? Only one final appearance in their prime – that’s really poor considering their strength at that time. Can’t blame it all on the away-goal rule, there were some poor games, at least from the tactical point of view.” Agreed. It’s never the away-goals rule’s fault – every team knows how the competition runs – but it’s fair to say that the first few years English clubs were back in Europe, they were catching up. See Arsenal’s undressing by Benfica for further evidence. The year that stands out for me as the one United should’ve won it was 1999-00 because of those years, that’s the only one in which they were the best team around. But it’s a cup competition so stuff happens; there’s a reason Real Madrid are the only side to retain the trophy in the Champions League era. I’m sure everyone will want to avoid Ajax, as it goes, and don’t be sleeping on Sporting, who’ve been excellent for a couple of years now. The three other English clubs can all get them, Inter, Benfica and Salzburg; Liverpool can also get Paris and Villarreal, Man City can also get Atletico and Villarreal, and Man United can also get Paris and Atletico. There are some absolutely bazzing potential ties here, there really are. Chelsea have caused themselves grief by conceding that late goal to Zenit, because thanks to the other English teams winning their groups, they can only get Ajax, Bayern, Real Madrid or Lille. They’ll want to avoid the former two, but will fancy themselves against the latter two. OK, that’s enough of my trauma. I appreciate your understanding, but at this point I need a professional. And one more. I’m away to cry in the corner. Aha, another away goals nightmare. “My fear is that the near-constant jeopardy in the 2nd leg will be removed,” emails Clive Darwell on the away goals thing. “A few years ago a real cracker between RM and Dortmund all of a sudden died when the 2-1 score was mirrored during the 2nd leg - it’ll be happening much more often now, but we’ll see.” I’m not sure about that, because you can also see a tie die because of away goals – the one below, for example. Dortmund won the first leg 1-0, scored early in the second, and though United had a good go and missed plenty of chances, getting three was always a long shot. Ultimately, it’s an attempt at contriving drama which, as F1 showed yesterday, is not what sport should be (in mine). And here’s another. Feel free to send in your favourites. I mentioned away goals that scarred me. This is one: Tell you what, the removal of the away goals rule is an absolute boon. I admit I’m scarred from watching my own team concede early in home ties, and perhaps that colours my judgment. But morally, it contradicted an essential truism of football – that one goal = one goal. But I also think it was born out of a need that no longer exists. Back in the day, teams would play for 0-0 away from home, hoping to win at their own ground, and that is no longer the case. In practice, it means that winning the group is now more of an advantage. Previously, it gave the side away second the opportunity to score an away goal that couldn’t be equalised, and the potential for an extra half-hour to get one, should the tie go to extra time. That’s now gone, though I remain unsold on the idea that home second is necessarily better – home first, and you might kill the tie in the first leg, just as away first gives your opponents the chance to play themselves into the tie. To my mind, the issue is not clear-cut. Hello, good morning and welcome to the draw for the Champions League round of 16 last 16 of the Champions League. There will now be a long break while people witter on about who knows what, followed by a commercial break, followed by prattle prior to presentation of the prestigious best bucket man of the group stages award, followed by a commercial break. Then, at some point in the next fortnight, balls will be picked from bowls and the matchups will be set; look out for Manchester City getting paired with Chesterfield etcetera etcetera. Oh how we laughed. Anyhow, these are the group winners and therefore seeded teams, who’ll play the second leg at home: Ajax Amsterdam (NED) Bayern München (GER) Juventus (ITA) Liverpool (ENG) LOSC Lille (FRA) Manchester City (ENG) Manchester United (ENG) Real Madrid (ESP) And these are the group runners-up and therefore unseeded teams, who’ll play the first leg at home: Atlético de Madrid (ESP) Benfica (POR) Chelsea (ENG) Internazionale (ITA) Paris Saint-Germain (FRA) Salzburg (AUT) Sporting CP (POR) Villarreal (ESP) Teams from the same country cannot face one another and teams who qualified from the same group cannot face one another. First legs will be played on 15/16/22/23 February, with second legs played on 8/9/15/16 March. The away goals rule no longer applies, so if aggregate scores are level after 180 minutes, extra time will be played, and if they remain level are 210 minutes, penalties will be taken.Just now, Boris Johnson matters. He matters because he is Britain’s prime minister at a critical moment in the pandemic. The authority of his office should be directed at achieving the one reasonably sure defence against it: mass vaccination. Sunday night’s announcement that the vaccination programme is being stepped up to get third doses to all adults by the end of December will require a million doses to be administered every day for the rest of the month. That is a tall order and may not be achieved, but it should be treated as a national priority to fend off another Christmas and New Year in lockdown. Johnson must know that his authority, along with his dignity, is in the worst possible state to order this. His appearance on Sunday, his hair artfully dishevelled, dwarfed by an absurdly large union jack, was that of a clown acting a Ruritanian princeling. His daily photo-opportunities, his misjudgments, mendacities and “global Britain” vacuities insult public intelligence and merely line him up for one fall after another. He has become the media’s favourite victim, a politician inviting constant ribaldry and rotten eggs. It is easy to accuse Johnson’s vaccination promise of coming too late, and its implausible but impressive-sounding million-jabs-a-day target as merely a flashy distraction from his woes. It is also easy to point out that his messy private life and inability to treasure truth make a mockery of his Sunday-night lecture to the nation on moral duty. Yet the vaccination campaign is vital. A pandemic is not unlike a war. At such times the state has a licence, indeed a duty, to take control of new areas of public life. For that control to be effective, it must offer leadership and that must come from the top, from the prime minister. This applies even when that prime minister seems unable to invest his office with its customary dignity or find able colleagues to serve under him in anything other than a shambolic fashion. Circumstance, not justice, entitles him to ask for a degree of loyalty and obedience. Johnson is reportedly furious with the media, and especially the BBC, for a fixation on last year’s lockdown parties in Downing Street. The media can reply that the fault is entirely his, for constantly lying about them. There is nothing so worthy of ridicule as a politician caught in a rat trap. The prime minister seems to believe that the point has been made and coverage of “partygate” has moved from a Westminster gameshow to a personal hate-fest. There is some justice in this charge. But asking a member of his staff to inquire into a possibly illegal activity in his office was hardly a reassuring means of kicking the issue into touch. As it is, Johnson brings a few assets to his current task. Until recently he has been a popular figure. He engages with the public when he encounters them. His bumbling humour when off piste is not unattractive. On Sunday his case that the Omicron Covid variant justified an emergency response was persuasive. If Johnson’s personal qualities have jeopardised this campaign it is for history and perhaps this week’s North Shropshire byelection to judge. They will certainly be entered on the charge sheet as and when Conservative MPs come to ponder who they want to lead them into the next election. At present an emergency is an emergency. The prime minister has asked parliament and the nation to rally round and the national interest indicates that they should do so. For the time being, Johnson deserves a break. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistAs the British film-maker Nicolas Roeg was scouring Arnhem Land, in Australia’s Northern Territory, in search of an Indigenous Australian man to star in Walkabout (1971), he chanced upon the 16-year-old ceremonial dancer David Gulpilil. When asked his name, the teenager responded with the only English word he knew: “Yes.” Looking back on the film in 2015, he said: “I thought I was going to be John Wayne.” Gulpilil, who has died of cancer aged 68, was a more amorphous and mysterious presence. As if Roeg’s fragmented, free-associative storytelling was not startling enough, Gulpilil’s performance was a shock to the system for many viewers. As the tracker who befriends a teenager (Jenny Agutter) and her young brother (played by Roeg’s son Luc) when they are stranded in the outback following their father’s suicide, he embodied an unspoiled naturalism distinct from anything else in screen acting at the time. Friends interviewed in the 2002 television documentary Gulpilil: One Red Blood insisted he was not pretending, and that he was playing his scenes, such as the powerful love dance he performs for Agutter, with unguarded sincerity. Despite speaking no English in the film, Gulpilil conveyed meaning unhindered to audiences who would surely never have encountered anyone like him before on film. (Portrayals of Indigenous Australian characters in cinema of the time, such as the 1967 drama Journey Out of Darkness, were by actors of other ethnicities.) Which is not to say that he necessarily understood this ambiguous, poetic film. Asked by a young fan why his character hanged himself at the end, he said: “I wanna know, too!” His range was exemplified by two very different films made in 1976: the family favourite Storm Boy, in which he helps a boy to raise pelicans, and the outlaw adventure Mad Dog Morgan, starring Dennis Hopper as a 19th-century Irish bushranger and Gulpilil as his partner-in-crime. Their dynamic was reproduced off-screen: it was Hopper’s hard-drinking antics that introduced the younger actor to drugs and alcohol, addictions that would blight his later life. (He was jailed in 2011 for assaulting his wife, and later entered rehab.) During the making of Mad Dog Morgan, Gulpilil disappeared from filming and had to be retrieved by Indigenous trackers. Upon his return, he explained that he had wanted to ask the kookaburras and the trees for their opinion of his co-star. “They all say Dennis is crazy,” he reported. He was best known to international audiences for a memorable turn in the hit comedy Crocodile Dundee (1986), in which he played Neville Bell, a “city boy” who daubs himself with paint before visiting his father, a tribal elder. He nailed perfectly one of the movie’s best gags, in which he prevents a woman in the outback from photographing him. “You believe it’ll take your spirit away?” she asks. “No,” he replies. “You’ve got the lens cap on.” Gulpilil was from the Mandhalpuyngu clan in Arnhem Land and was assigned his birth date by missionaries, who named him David. After the death of his parents, David was raised by his extended family around the missionary station in Maningrida. “I don’t know how old I am,” he said later. “I was a lost child.” He was educated at the missionary school and, steeped in his own Yolngu culture, trained as a tracker, dancer and hunter. In the wake of Walkabout, he travelled the world. Despite his improved grasp of English, he felt frustrated at others’ inability to understand him. “The journalists came along like ants,” he said. “I tried really hard to talk to them but I cried because I couldn’t translate my language.” Among his Australian television work was the detective series Boney (1972), in which he played several different characters as well as appearing as a dancer in the opening and closing credits. He starred with Richard Chamberlain in Peter Weir’s environmental thriller The Last Wave (1977). But he was disillusioned when the international success of Crocodile Dundee did not improve his life. Gulpilil enjoyed a renaissance at the start of this century, starring first in Philip Noyce’s Rabbit-Proof Fence (2002) and then beginning a fruitful collaboration with the Dutch-Australian film-maker Rolf de Heer. This resulted in his first leading role, as a guide helping three white men hunt a fugitive, in The Tracker (also 2002). Both pictures were part of what De Heer called a “glorious outbreak” of Indigenous-themed cinema. It was Gulpilil who suggested to De Heer the idea of making the first full-length feature conceived by, worked on and portraying the history of Indigenous Australian tribes. He also provided the creative spark by showing the director a photograph taken by the anthropologist Donald Thomson of Indigenous men forging through a swamp in bark canoes. The result, Ten Canoes (2006), was a playful shaggy-dog story about a young tribesman lusting after his brother’s wife; Gulpilil was its narrator. He won the best actor prize in the Un Certain Regard section of the Cannes film festival for his performance in Charlie’s Country (2014), De Heer’s drama about an Indigenous man returning to the bush after feeling at odds with modern society. Other films included John Hillcoat’s brutal western The Proposition (2005), starring Guy Pearce and Ray Winstone, and Baz Luhrmann’s old-fashioned adventure Australia (2008). Hugh Jackman, his co-star on the latter, called him “one of the greatest actors Australia has ever produced”. Gulpilil also played the father of his original Storm Boy character in a 2019 remake of that fim, and was the subject of an acclaimed documentary, My Name Is Gulpilil (2021), in which he reflected on his life and his lung cancer diagnosis. His role in improving the representation of Indigenous people was beyond dispute. Before he had reached 30, he was already the subject of the Australian edition of This Is Your Life. In its closing minutes, he was asked what he wanted to achieve. “I’m not doing it only for myself but for Australia and my people and our culture,” he said. “I’m doing it for black and white to know better. That we have culture and history that still exists. I’ll keep trying.” He married several times, and had seven children of his own, as well as several others who called him father, following the Yolngu custom. • David Gulpilil, actor, born 1 July 1953; died 29 November 2021Nearly three days on from its astonishingly ill-judged response to the finding that Robbie Dunne had bullied and harassed his fellow rider Bryony Frost over seven months in 2020, the Professional Jockeys’ Association finally stopped digging on Sunday. Frost, it accepted, really had been bullied: on the racecourse, in the weighing room and online. It wasn’t just a feeling after all. The PJA’s splenetic statement ran to nearly 1,000 words, most of which had apparently been written for the benefit of any or every jump jockey bar the one it should have been doing its utmost to support. It railed at the British Horseracing Authority counsel Louis Weston’s claim of a “rancid” weighing-room culture, accused the independent panel of bias without offering any evidence to back up their claim, and generally sought to share the blame for Frost’s shocking treatment at the hands of another PJA member as widely as possible. David Bass, meanwhile, the PJA’s jump jockey president, suggested that “Bryony and Robbie have been let down by the BHA”. The possibility that PJA members as a whole had been let down by Dunne did not seem to cross anyone’s mind. And this came just hours after the panel had at least partially accepted Weston’s warnings about weighing-room culture, when Brian Barker, its chair, expressed “real concern” about a “deep-rooted, coercive” culture which is “not conducive to the good health and development of modern-day race-riding”. A point that was missed in the PJA’s kneejerk response is that no one is claiming that the riders’ long-standing practice of self-policing disputes behind closed doors means that deliberate bullying is either excused or condoned. What the Dunne case does show, however, is that it can allow abuse to go undetected or overlooked, which is unacceptable in any workplace, no matter how unique. For most jockeys, the weighing room is clearly a safe, welcoming environment where riders collectively share the daily challenges of a profession that is dangerous and gruelling, but also an exhilarating, adrenalin-fuelled way of life. But at the same time, they are not, and cannot be, team players in the manner of a football club’s dressing room. Jockeys are colleagues and also often friends, but they are individuals too, in a fiercely competitive sport. They compete race-by-race and also month-by-month, looking to build a career in the knowledge that one winning ride could open a door that leads to many more. Every weighing room also includes riders, both male and female, with a wide range of age, experience and success. There is obvious potential for jealousy, grudges and rivalries, and if there is also a sense that some have earned the right to rebuke and discipline others, the potential for that culture to be exploited by a bully should be obvious. Bullies are angry and insecure individuals who try to deal with their frustrations by taking them out on others. It may or may not be a coincidence that Dunne’s chosen target was not simply a female rider, but the most successful female rider in the room. Dunne’s evidence to the panel was riddled with contradictions. His witness statement, for instance, claimed that until a post-race incident at Stratford in July 2020, when he said that frustration with what he perceived to be shortcomings in Frost’s riding style boiled over, his relationship with her had been “good or perfect”. Yet as Weston showed in an excruciating exchange for the rider, he had singled her out for abuse in a tweet in April 2020 which mentioned only Yala Enki, Frost’s “ride” in the Virtual Grand National, but was clearly understood by his followers – fellow jockeys no doubt included – to be a deliberate dig at Frost. The weighing-room culture did not cause Dunne to be a bully, but it allowed his bullying to go unchallenged until Frost had the courage to stand up to him. If that point too is eventually accepted by those jockeys who have seemingly shunned Frost for daring to speak out, there will surely be a way to address the current culture’s flaws, without sacrificing the shared experience that so many riders rightly cherish.In one of the more unexpected comebacks of the year, the Hollywood Foreign Press Association has announced the nominations for its 79th awards ceremony, to be held on 9 January – but not screened on television after broadcaster NBC terminated the contract. Belfast, Kenneth Branagh’s black-and-white drama set in his hometown during the Troubles, has seven nominations, as does The Power of the Dog, Jane Campion’s sexually-charged western set in 1920s Montana. Branagh and Campion are vying for best director and best screenplay, while their films are up for best drama. Benedict Cumberbatch is nominated for best leading actor for his role as an aggressive cattle rancher in Campion’s film, while his co-star, Kodi Smit-McPhee, is up for best supporting actor alongside Belfast’s Ciaran Hinds and Jamie Dornan. In the supporting actress category, Kirsten Dunst represents Campion’s film, while Caitriona Balfe is there for Belfast. Jonny Greenwood’s score completes The Power of the Dog’s nominations, while Van Morrison’s Down to Joy gives Belfast a shot at best original song. Don’t Look Up, Adam McKay’s apocalypse satire, which opened to mixed reviews over the weekend, picked up four nominations, for best comedy or musical, McKay’s screenplay and for its stars, Leonardo DiCaprio and Jennifer Lawrence. Steven Spielberg’s remake of West Side Story also took four, as did King Richard, in which Will Smith plays the father of Venus and Serena Williams. Cooper Hoffman, the 18-year-old son of Philip Seymour Hoffman, is up for best actor in a comedy or musical for his debut screen role in Paul Thomas Anderson’s coming-of-age comedy, Licorice Pizza. The musician Alana Haim, another first-timer who stars alongside Hoffman in the film, is up for the equivalent actress category; Anderson’s screenplay is also nominated, and the film is up for best musical or comedy. Olivia Colman, who won the actress in a musical or comedy award in 2019 for The Favourite, is this year in contention for best actress in a drama, for Maggie Gyllenhaal’s adaptation of the Elena Ferrante novel The Lost Daughter. She competes against Kristen Stewart, who plays Princess Diana in Spencer, Jessica Chastain for televangelist tragedy The Eyes of Tammy Faye, Nicole Kidman as Lucille Ball in Being the Ricardos and Lady Gaga in Ridley Scott’s true crime hit, House of Gucci. Andrew Garfield is nominated for best actor in a comedy or musical as Rent creator Jonathan Larson in tick, tick … Boom!, while Irish actor Ruth Negga is up for best supporting actress for her role in Rebecca Hall’s Passing. Succession is scorecard leader in the TV categories, with nominations for best drama series as well as stars Brian Cox, Jeremy Strong, Kieran Culkin and Sarah Snook. Nods for Jennifer Aniston and Billy Crudup helped The Morning Show to four nominations, a number also achieved by Ted Lasso. Squid Game’s three nominations ensured Netflix retained its position as by far the strongest studio at this stage; the outfit is also behind The Power of the Dog and Don’t Look Up. It achieved 12 nominations more than its closest competitor. The list was announced on Monday by Snoop Dogg and newly appointed HFPA president Helen Hoehne. In her opening address Hoehne made reference to her organisation’s tumultuous year and some eight months of attempting “to be better”. The HFPA has long been tainted by accusations of scandal and corruption but in February 2021 an investigation by the Los Angeles Times revealed an organisation plagued by infighting and also revealed that not one of the 87 members, hailing from around 55 countries, was Black. The lack of diversity looked likely to be the final straw for the beleaguered body, particularly viewed in contrast to the organisations which decide the Oscars and Baftas, whose efforts to increase diversity have led to their numbers recently swelling to almost 10,000 and 6,500, respectively. Hollywood publicists cut ties with the HFPA shortly after the investigation was published, as did broadcasters, including NBC, who had long screened the event. Tom Cruise returned his three trophies and numerous stars vowed to boycott proceedings until substantial change was made. The HFPA responded by attempting to fast-track an overhaul, appointing Hoehne, as well as a law firm to look into corruption allegations, rewriting its rules and charter and changing its board of governors. In April, they expelled former president Philip Berk from the organisation after he circulated an article to fellow members calling Black Lives Matter a “racist hate movement”. In October they announced the appointment of 21 new members, primarily Black, and the intention of adding a further 30 within the next 18 months.Film Best film – musical or comedy Cyrano Don’t Look Up Licorice Pizza tick, tick … Boom! West Side Story Best supporting actress in a film Caitríona Balfe, Belfast Ariana DeBose, West Side Story Kirsten Dunst, The Power of the Dog Aunjanue Ellis, King Richard Ruth Negga, Passing Best film – foreign language Compartment No. 6 Drive My Car The Hand of God A Hero Parallel Mothers Best screenplay – film Paul Thomas Anderson, Licorice Pizza Kenneth Branagh, Belfast Jane Campion, The Power of the Dog Adam McKay, Don’t Look Up Aaron Sorkin, Being the Ricardos Best director – film Kenneth Branagh, Belfast Jane Campion, The Power of the Dog Maggie Gyllenhaal, The Lost Daughter Steven Spielberg, West Side Story Denis Villeneuve, Dune Best actress in a film – musical or comedy Marion Cotillard, Annette Alana Haim, Licorice Pizza Jennifer Lawrence, Don’t Look Up Emma Stone, Cruella Rachel Zegler, West Side Story Best actor in a film – drama Mahershala Ali, Swan Song Javier Bardem, Being the Ricardos Benedict Cumberbatch, The Power of the Dog Will Smith, King Richard Denzel Washington, The Tragedy of Macbeth Best original song – film Be Alive, King Richard Dos Orugitas, Encanto Down to Joy, Belfast Here I Am (Singing My Way Home), Respect No Time to Die, No Time to Die Best film – animated Encanto Flee Luca My Sunny Maad Raya and the Last Dragon Best actor in a film – musical or comedy Leonardo DiCaprio, Don’t Look Up Peter Dinklage, Cyrano Andrew Garfield, tick, tick … Boom! Cooper Hoffman, Licorice Pizza Anthony Ramos, In the Heights Best actress in a film – drama Jessica Chastain, The Eyes of Tammy Faye Olivia Colman, The Lost Daughter Nicole Kidman, Being the Ricardos Lady Gaga, House of Gucci Kristen Stewart, Spencer Best film – drama Belfast CODA Dune King Richard The Power of the Dog Best supporting actor in a film Ben Affleck, The Tender Bar Jamie Dornan, Belfast Ciarán Hinds, Belfast Troy Kotsur, CODA Kodi Smit-McPhee, The Power of the Dog Best score – film Dune Encanto The French Dispatch Parallel Mothers The Power of the Dog Television Best TV series – musical or comedy The Great Hacks Ted Lasso Reservation Dogs Only Murders in the Building Best actor in a TV series – drama Brian Cox, Succession Lee Jung-jae, Squid Game Billy Porter, Pose Jeremy Strong, Succession Omar Sy, Lupin Best actress in a limited series or TV movie Jessica Chastain, Scenes From a Marriage Cynthia Erivo, Genius: Aretha Elizabeth Olsen, WandaVision Margaret Qualley, Maid Kate Winslet, Mare of Easttown Best TV series – drama Lupin The Morning Show Pose Squid Game Succession Best actress in a TV series – drama Uzo Aduba, In Treatment Jennifer Aniston, The Morning Show Christine Baranski, The Good Fight Elisabeth Moss, The Handmaid’s Tale Mj Rodriguez, Pose Best actor in a limited series or TV movie Paul Bettany, WandaVision Oscar Isaac, Scenes From a Marriage Michael Keaton, Dopesick Ewan McGregor, Halston Tahar Rahim, The Serpent Best actress in a TV series – musical or comedy Hannah Einbinder, Hacks Elle Fanning, The Great Issa Rae, Insecure Tracee Ellis Ross, Black-ish Jean Smart, Hacks Best limited series or TV movie Dopesick Impeachment: American Crime Story Maid Mare of Easttown The Underground Railroad Best supporting actor in a TV series, limited series or TV movie Billy Crudup, The Morning Show Kieran Culkin, Succession Mark Duplass, The Morning Show Brett Goldstein, Ted Lasso Oh Yeong-su, Squid Game Best actor in a TV series – musical or comedy Anthony Anderson, Black-ish Nicholas Hoult, The Great Steve Martin, Only Murders in the Building Martin Short, Only Murders in the Building Jason Sudeikis, Ted Lasso Best supporting actress in a TV series, limited series or TV movie Jennifer Coolidge, White Lotus Kaitlyn Dever, Dopesick Andie MacDowell, Maid Sarah Snook, Succession Hannah Waddingham, Ted LassoYou wake up with a pounding head, sore throat and runny nose: you reach for one of those lateral flow tests (LFT) you’ve got stashed away, just to check it is not Covid. If it returns a single red line (negative), then most people will pop a couple of paracetamol and go about business as normal – particularly if you’ve been double-jabbed. It probably is just a cold, after all. Yet, the emergence of Omicron has thrown a spanner in the works. According to the latest data, just one month after your second Pfizer or AstraZeneca jab, the ability of antibodies to neutralise Omicron is 30 times lower than if you were infected with the Delta variant – reinforcing the message that double-vaccination is no guarantee against infection. The study follows recent UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) data, suggesting those who have been double-jabbed with the AstraZeneca vaccine have about 10% protection against symptomatic infection with Omicron six months after their second jab, compared with 40% protection against the Delta variant. So, if you’re relying on an LFT to guide whether or not it is safe for you to leave the house, the chances of you being infected, despite being vaccinated, just got higher. The UK government has always stressed that people with Covid symptoms should seek a PCR test, rather than relying on a LFT. Yet, it still defines these symptoms as a high temperature, new, continuous cough and/or a loss or change to your sense of smell or taste – despite widespread evidence that headaches, fatigue, a sore throat or runny nose are also common Covid symptoms. Also, whereas getting a PCR test involves all the trouble of going online, booking a test, either going to a test centre or waiting to have a test delivered, and then waiting a day or two to receive the test results, a LFT delivers a result within minutes. OK, we know they’re not as accurate as PCR tests, but they’re pretty accurate – especially if you’ve been vaccinated and/or had Covid recently – right? It is true that lateral flow tests return an accurate result more often than not: a Cochrane review of 64 studies found that they correctly identify 72% of infected people who have symptoms, and 78% within the first week of becoming ill. Further, the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) claims that the Innova LFT detects more than 95% of individuals with highest viral loads – those who are most likely to spread the virus. Yet, the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), has long-expressed concerns that people may be falsely reassured if they test negative on an LFT: it authorised their use as a “red light” – to find infectious people and order them to self-isolate – rather than providing a “green light” to those who test negative. There are several reasons why your negative LFT might be wrong: you might not be swabbing thoroughly enough, or you could have a dodgy test kit. Of course, these issues can also undermine the accuracy of PCR tests – remember the Wolverhampton testing lab fiasco, that saw up to 43,000 people falsely reassured that they didn’t have Covid, despite many of them testing positive on a LFT? Yet, PCR tests are more sensitive than LFT, meaning they’re more likely to register some virus, even if your swabbing technique isn’t much cop. They’re also much more likely to return a positive result during the early stages of infection, when there’s less virus available to detect. Studies have suggested that PCR tests start to pick up Sars-CoV-2 roughly 1-3 days before the onset of symptoms (assuming the person is symptomatic) – similar to when people start to become infectious. However, virus levels don’t peak until between the first and fifth day of symptoms, on average. So, if you’re swabbing as soon as you start to feel unwell, that might be too soon to return a positive LFT. These tests have thankfully freed us from the confines for that first lockdown, when the advice was to self-isolate based on symptoms alone. But with infection levels sky high, Covid symptoms that too often resemble the common cold, and waning immunity from vaccines, perhaps it’s time to reinstate a degree of caution and stay home if we feel unwell – at least until we’ve done a PCR test, or had several days of negative LFTs. Who wants someone else’s cold, anyway?My friend Jacky Flurscheim, who has died aged 81, was the poetry editor at Oxford University Press from 1976 until 1998, when, to her grief and fury, the list was unceremoniously closed. For many years she also ran the Thomas Tallis Society in Greenwich, south-east London. Born in Altrincham, outside Manchester, Jacky was the elder daughter of Honor (nee Platt) and Charles Flurscheim, an electro-mechanical engineer with AEI (Associated Electrical Industries). She went as a boarder to St Felix school in Suffolk, a county for which she retained a lasting affection, later spending idyllic times in a cottage on the marshes near Blythburgh. At school she flourished, playing the piano and directing plays. After a year at the Central School of Speech and Drama in London, followed by a year at the Sorbonne in Paris, she got her first taste of publishing with a job as an editorial assistant at Thames and Hudson, which fostered both attention to detail and her love of words, as she checked each individually pasted-up page. In 1964 she married Philip Simms, a professional musician and organist at St Alfege Church, Greenwich. Together they launched the Thomas Tallis Society, named after another (rather more famous) organist of that parish. For years Jacky organised concerts, fixed overseas tours, and threw post-concert parties. Somehow she also found time to become a mother, to complete an English literature degree at what is now Goldsmiths, University of London, and to write and publish a novel, Unsolicited Gift (1982). In 1976 she inherited responsibility for Oxford University Press’s poetry list from the academic and poet Jon Stallworthy. For the next 20 years Jacky oversaw publication of one of the most distinguished poetry lists in the UK, nurturing the poets who became her friends. It was a job she loved and for which she was greatly admired. In 1998, however, OUP decided to axe the list. She told the Independent newspaper: “It’s an act of vandalism … you can’t sell the whole list like a sack of potatoes.” Despite loud support from John Carey, Hermione Lee, Craig Raine and many others, OUP was adamant – the list was to go and 26 poets had to find new publishers. There followed some unsettling times when her marriage came to an end, but after a year teaching English literature in Japan, Jacky moved into a beautiful flat in Blackheath and became an active grandmother to two boys, one of whom was a chorister at Temple Church in central London, a place she loved and which gave full expression to her delight in music and poetry. Jacky is survived by her son, Ben, two grandsons, Jake and Oscar, and her sister, Liz.Philip Oakey, vocals, songwriter I had intended to recruit just one female backing singer but when I walked into the Crazy Daisy nightclub in Sheffield, the first thing I saw was Joanne Catherall and Susan Ann Sulley dancing. They somehow looked like a unit while being clearly different individuals. I knew they were right. The band started work on what became the Dare album. Our music was so simple: we’d all laugh when Adrian Wright moved just one finger on the synthesiser and it sounded great. We mainly wrote the songs in a horrible disused vets in Sheffield. Ian Burden, our keyboard player, wrote our first two hits, Love Action and The Sound of the Crowd. Don’t You Want Me started off as a vocal melody from Adrian. Jo Callis, our other synth player, funked it up but it didn’t have a chorus. When we were recording at Genetic studios in Reading, producer Martin Rushent told me to go into another room. “Don’t come out until you’ve got a chorus.” Two hours later I came out with: “Don’t you want me, baby.” The first verse came more or less wholesale from a photo romance magazine I was reading. The first line was: “You were working as a waitress in a cocktail bar.” Our former member Martyn Ware’s girlfriend worked in Sheffield’s only cocktail joint, Sinatra’s Style Bar, so maybe cocktail bars were on my mind. I thought pubs and pickled eggs were the work of the devil, but cocktail bars seemed glamorous. I recorded the vocals in the toilet. David Allen, the engineer, flushed the loo behind me. We left that off the record. We’d been doing shows with left-field bands such as Gang of Four and Joy Division, so I thought Don’t You Want Me was too smooth. When it became the Christmas No 1, it felt weirdly hollow. I thought: “How on earth are we ever gonna beat this?” But the song has given us 40 years of global success. I had always assumed that I’d end up carrying my belongings through Sheffield in a carrier bag with people saying: “That guy thought he was good in 1980.” Susan Ann Sulley, vocals When Philip came over to ask if we’d like to audition, we told him we were doing our A-levels so would have to ask our dads. My dad thought it would be sex, drugs and rock’n’roll, and both sets of parents refused, but we secretly auditioned anyway and then arranged for Philip to come over to meet our parents, but didn’t tell them he was coming until the last minute. He turned up fully made up with red lipstick and high heels, but very businesslike. My dad locked himself in the bedroom and refused to come out. Years later I found out that my grandma told him: “If you don’t go downstairs and give your daughter this chance, she will never forgive you.” And my dad then bundled us over to Joanne’s to persuade her father. Weirdly, Joanne and I had bought tickets to see the Human League in Doncaster, which turned out to be our first show with the band. We were used to posing on the dancefloor, so just added a bit of singing. We went on tour in a white Transit van, so it wasn’t very glamorous, but I remember staring at the cathedral in Cologne and thinking: “I can’t believe I’m here.” Before we knew it, we were in a huge studio recording Don’t You Want Me. I laid down the female vocal part in the middle of the night. The video was a take on The French Lieutenant’s Woman, which was a film about making a film. Duran Duran had shot their Rio video on a yacht in the Indian Ocean – we got a damp evening in Slough. Jo was supposed to be driving a Rover but he couldn’t drive, so he pretended to steer while people behind him were pushing it. When the song went to the top of the charts in Britain and the US, I thought: “This doesn’t happen to schoolgirls from Sheffield.” If we had expected it would be the Christmas No 1, we might have put bells on. When I hear it on the radio today, I still wish I’d sung it better, but I was an ordinary girl doing her best and I think that resonated. I’ve spent 40 years telling people I never worked in a cocktail bar. • The Human League’s Dare 40 tour continues until 18 December. . Human League: Don’t You Want Me at 40 airs on Christmas Day, 7-8pm on BBC Radio 2 and BBC Sounds. • This article was amended on 15 December 2021. In an earlier version the main image, provided to us by an agency, had been flipped on the y axis.In 2018, a man in Germany slipped on his way to work. The fall broke one of his vertebrae, and as such his workplace insurance was obliged to pay out for the accident. This wasn’t your average commute, though: the man was walking between his bedroom and his home office when he fell on the spiral staircase between the two rooms. Against the protestations of his company’s insurer, Germany’s federal social court ruled last week that the journey, less than a minute and inside the man’s own home, counted as a workplace accident. Although the accident took place before the pandemic, the verdict comes at just the right moment: it feels like the latest brick removed from the wall that separates the home from the workplace. Last week Boris Johnson announced yet another return to home working in England, where possible. Just as many businesses had finally got their heads around hybrid working, or indeed had mandated a full return for workers, a large proportion of the country has now had to turn around again. Perhaps you have fallen back into the smothering embrace of your dressing gown; flopped the grubby mouse mat back on the kitchen table; resisted the temptation to work from a fully horizontal position in bed rather than pay for extra daytime heating; gone back to having to stand in front of the bathroom mirror breathing deeply for several minutes at a time and reminding yourself it is not a moral failure that your partner keeps putting her teaspoons in the sink instead of in the dishwasher, and you can absolutely get past this enraging and thoughtless thing and that it doesn’t matter that she uses all seven of them every day, which means you have to wash one individually each time you want to make a hot drink, and that you love her and this is your life that you chose and you like it, you like it, you like it. The very earliest, sort-of-exciting days of working from home seem unimaginably long ago now. “I’m always at home!” quickly became something more like “I’m always at work!” or even, “I’m not really anywhere, I increasingly consider myself a mere flesh vessel for a consciousness that exists on Slack!” And now here we are yet again, back at home working, back at what feels uncomfortably like square one or, more and more, like an interminable game of Whac-A-Mole in which, as soon as we are allowed to poke our heads above ground, we get unceremoniously thumped back inside. After almost two years, nobody has the energy for more discussion about whether working from home is good or bad. Everyone except Tory MPs whose friends own office buildings and power-drunk bosses would now accept that working from home is both good and bad. But what is noticeable, and different, is the feeling in the air that has accompanied the recommendations this time around. Whereas previous WFH mandates, socialising restrictions and even full lockdowns have felt like temporary measures in our effort to work towards something closer to pre-Covid normality, this time, since most people have had the all-important vaccines, the prevailing mood is one of a dull realisation that this may just be how we live now. Covid briefings are back, as are the war and natural disaster metaphors, the scrabbling for tests and booster appointments, the dark talk of a January lockdown. When I hugged my friends goodbye after lunch on Sunday we hugged a little longer, unsure when we may see each other again. And this unease feels like just one stage of a cycle we are dismayingly familiar with, the part where restrictions are creeping back and every day feels slightly worse than the one before. When I asked people I know how they felt about leaving the office and going back to working from home, some of them were glad. They enjoy the short commute, more time with their partners, a later alarm in the morning. And some of them were not glad, annoyed by their lack of a home office, lack of routine, lack of connection-making opportunities with colleagues. The old satisfactions, the old complaints. But almost everyone this time around also expressed resignation to the grinding, repetitive inevitability of it. I once read that when explorers trek over the Ross ice shelf in Antarctica, the vast emptiness of the landscape means the next range of mountains looks so close it seems that the travellers could reach it any moment, whereas in fact they are several hundred miles away. I have often thought about this over the past two years, in the moments when everything seemed ready to get better and then didn’t and the temptation was simply to lie down and die on the tundra rather than face another five months of your housemate’s rancid little experiments in lunch. And then I have tried not to think about it. Trying not to think about it too much is probably the only sanity-preserving way to deal with the merry-go-round of Covid restrictions at the moment. That and investing in a better laptop stand. Imogen West-Knights is a writer and journalist based in LondonTo think of Tiger King is to immediately transport yourself to the heady days of lockdown 2020. Remember it? Remember how filled with artificial purpose we all were? We did Zoom quizzes with all our friends! We made banana bread! We clapped for frontline workers! Looking back, it seems relatively clear that all those things were stupid. Nobody wants to spend more time on Zoom than they have to. Nobody likes banana bread. The clapping didn’t change anything. And as for Tiger King? With the benefit of hindsight, Christ, we chose the wrong show to obsess over. Looking back, Tiger King was grubby and exploitative. Once you’d crossed the “Are these people for real?” hurdle, you found yourself sitting through a carnival of monstrous behaviour. Tiger King was the documentary equivalent of that old Black Mirror episode: as fun as it sounds to watch someone have sex with a pig, at the end of the day you actually have to watch someone have sex with a pig. Unfortunately, Netflix didn’t get this particular memo. The algorithm said that Tiger King was a hit so, guess what, now we’ve got loads more Tiger King to wade through. Last month’s Tiger King 2 tried to keep the party going, but it was clearly running on fumes. The story was over, participants had backed out and the whole thing was pasted together from scraps. It was less a documentary and more a hopelessly padded out DVD extra. As such, the buzz that accompanied the first season was noticeably duller the second time around. Sensible heads would have ended things there. But Netflix, in all its infinite wisdom, has already churned out yet another Tiger King series. This one, Tiger King: The Doc Antle Story, takes the form of a true crime documentary, aimed at a peripheral character from season one. You will probably remember Doc Antle. We met him in the second episode of the first Tiger King, running a private zoo that Joe Exotic desperately wanted to emulate. Antle wasn’t as big a character as Exotic – who is? – but there was something creepy and cultish about his time onscreen. Why were all his staff young women? Was he married to all of them? Did he keep them in stables? Was there a bigger story going on? Inevitably, yes. Netflix has asked reviewers not to reveal too many specifics about The Doc Antle Story, but the short explanation is that Antle is not a great guy. Over the course of three episodes, we’re fed a slow drip of his abuses. And there are many to get through: coercion, child abuse, underage marriage, near-starvation, animal cruelty, foggy accusations of murder. One by one, victims and acquaintances from every stage of Antle’s life reveal a pattern of behaviour that is harrowing and ugly. The Doc Antle Story, then, is not Tiger King. It’s about a predator who takes what he wants without care or thought. There is none of the dayglo sideshow fizz of Tiger King here. Joe Exotic, for all his obvious flaws, had an element of joy to him. This is the flipside. This is relentlessly dour. However, the production team doesn’t seem to realise that. For some reason the Tiger King DNA is more important to them than the actual story, so they spend much of it gunning for kook. It’s still a cavalcade of bad taste and unfortunate hair. The incidental music is lighthearted. At one point we are treated to a clip of a man juggling chainsaws. It feels to me as though the producers set out to make an extension of Tiger King and then, when they realised that they’d actually created a document of systematic abuse, panicked. Tiger King itself could get away with being cartoonish, because Joe Exotic was jailed for attempted murder. There’s something darkly funny about that, because failure is baked into the charge. Had Exotic actually killed Carole Baskin, Tiger King would not have worked. But Antle’s alleged abuse is unspeakably grim. It can’t be jollied up. The sadness overwhelms everything, and the producers’ various attempts to lighten the mood backfire hideously. Tiger King has always been grotty and exploitative. But this series, full of distraught victims whose lives have been ruined by the actions of one man, pushes the envelope too far. By throwing out three series in the space of a year and a bit, you get the feeling that Netflix is trying to create a franchise out of Tiger King; an expanded universe of all its gnarled and wrongheaded characters. Judging by The Doc Antle Story, the Tigerverse has already expanded far too much. A sharp contraction is now in order.After a long year for many of us, Christmas is at last in sight – along with the chance to catch up with loved ones. Unfortunately, the holidays also mean an increased risk of spreading Covid-19. Over the next few weeks, more of us could well be mixing socially as well as travelling to visit friends and family. Despite Plan B advising everyone who can work from home to do so, that face masks must be worn in some public indoor venues, and the NHS Covid pass becoming mandatory for entry into venues where large crowds gather; the arrival of the Omicron variant means it’s still likely that cases will rise over the coming weeks. So as we attend more events, such as Christmas parties or religious services, it’s important everyone takes action to limit the spread of transmission by adopting Covid-safe behaviours. And while many of us are already familiar with well-known Covid-19 symptoms, such as a new and continuous cough, fever, changes to our sense of smell or taste, or general fatigue, symptoms of the new variant, experts say, may not necessarily manifest in the same way. We may not even realise we’re contagious as many people show no symptoms at all. This means it’s never been more important to play our part and remain vigilant against the spread of Covid-19 as best we can, to help keep ourselves – and each other – safe this Christmas. It’s vital we don’t become complacent as we get into the swing of festivities, or thanks to the arrival of vaccine boosters, says government chief scientific adviser Sir Patrick Vallance. “While vaccines are offering us good protection, Covid-19 is still with us,” he says. “Stay safe over the festive period by taking simple but effective steps like wearing a face covering in crowded indoor spaces, testing regularly, ventilating rooms where possible and getting a booster or vaccine when offered. By doing this, we can reduce the spread of the virus and keep ourselves and others safer.” Take up vaccine boosters Experts agree that the vaccine is our best defence against Covid-19, reducing our chances of catching and spreading the virus, and of becoming seriously ill if infected. The vaccines are safe, effective and the best thing we can do to protect ourselves and loved ones this winter (especially pregnant women, who have a higher risk of complications if they contract Covid-19 and aren’t vaccinated). So far, vaccine take-up has been successful in the UK, with millions of us set to receive our boosters in the coming weeks (currently more than 46 million people in the UK have had their second vaccination, with more than 21 million having received their booster or third dose). In light of the new Omicron variant, the booster programme has been expanded to offer all adults aged 18 and over a top-up jab by the end of December. It’s important not to forget about other jabs and boosters – such as the flu vaccine, which could prove more valuable than ever. Because of the distancing measures put in place last winter, there were fewer cases of flu, which, experts say, could result in a rise in strains this year, as well as less immunity. “Both flu and Covid-19 cost lives, and the increased threat from these two deadly viruses this winter makes it even more important that anyone eligible comes forward for a flu vaccine as soon as possible and books in their Covid-19 booster when they’re invited,” says NHS deputy vaccination programme lead Dr Nikki Kanani. “The vaccines are safe, effective, and the best thing you can do to protect yourself and your loved ones.” Wear a face covering in crowded and enclosed areas Research shows that close contact with people increases our chances of catching Covid-19, and we have a much higher risk of catching or passing it on in crowded or enclosed spaces. Covid-19 tends to spread through the tiny droplets and aerosols released when an infected person breathes, speaks, coughs or sneezes – those particles containing the virus can infect anyone who comes into contact with them. Face coverings are a good way to reduce transmission, so by wearing one in busy public settings and when meeting members from other households, you can help limit transmission. Remember, it won’t always be obvious if the person next to you is infected. Face coverings must currently be worn in shops, some indoor venues and on public transport unless you’re exempt for medical reasons, or a child under 11. The same goes for transport hubs, such as railway stations and airports. Likewise, when legally required, business owners, including transport operators, should ask employees and customers to wear masks. To protect yourself and the people close to you effectively, it’s worth checking that face masks always cover the nose and mouth completely, and are made from at least two layers of material. Ventilation matters In May last year, the virus causing Covid-19, Sars-CoV-2, was officially recognised as “airborne”, meaning it is highly transmissible through the air. It is thought that all variants of the virus are transmitted this way and that transmission mainly happens indoors, where people are close together. That’s why it’s always worth keeping areas as well-ventilated as possible. This might mean keeping windows ajar or briefly opening up doors to create a good flow of air to help disperse the virus (during cold spells, opening doors or windows for just 10 or 15 minutes is helpful). It’s not just at home we should be ensuring that windows and doors are opened – workplaces have to be well-ventilated too to protect employees and customers. People also need to remember to check in using the NHS Covid-19 app when appropriate, so that swift action can be taken to help limit the spread of the virus if an outbreak occurs. Of course, the best places to meet in terms of ventilation are still outdoor spaces, where there is plenty of fresh air compared with crowded or enclosed areas, so thinking ahead is a smart idea. Could you suggest a walk or coffee outside, instead of meeting inside with a friend or loved one? Don’t forget to test regularly Ensuring we test ourselves – and encouraging loved ones to test – not only helps stop the spread of the virus, but gives much-needed peace of mind, too. It’s especially important ahead of periods of “higher risk” (say, if you’re socialising indoors with many people, for example, or visiting those who are at a higher risk of severe illness if infected). “Lateral flow devices are effective at finding people with high viral loads who are most infectious and most likely to transmit the virus to others,” says Dr Susan Hopkins, of Public Health England. “It’s a very good test.” You can get up to two packs of seven rapid lateral flow tests from a local pharmacy. If you give the pharmacy a “collect code” when you pick up the tests, it helps the NHS match your details to the tests. Many schools and workplaces also offer free rapid lateral flow tests, and you can also visit nhs.uk/get-tested to order yours Aim to get in the habit of taking rapid lateral flow tests before going to a crowded event, meeting friends and family, or visiting people with a higher risk of becoming seriously ill if infected. If the test is positive, ensure you self-isolate and take a PCR test, say experts. Don’t forget to test children before and on return to school after the holidays, too. Anyone 12 or over must show proof of a negative PCR or lateral flow test before travelling to the UK from abroad. The test must be taken two days before travel to the UK. People arriving in the UK also have to self-isolate until they receive a negative PCR test on day two after their arrival (and a passenger locator form has to be completed). Remaining vigilant for symptoms is more important than ever, so if you notice any, self-isolate and arrange a PCR test as soon as possible. Likewise, if you have come into contact with anybody who may have been infected, self-isolate for 10 days, regardless of your vaccination status. Be sure to report test results (negative or positive) at gov.uk/report-covid19-result or by calling 119 – it helps the NHS monitor the spread of the virus, and ultimately saves lives. Plan B: key dates and measures Friday 10 December: face coverings compulsory in some public indoor venues, such as cinemas, theatres and places of worship in England. Monday 13 December: in England, those who can will be advised to work from home. Anyone who cannot work from home should continue to travel to their workplace. The governments in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland had already advised people to work from home if possible. Wednesday 15 December: the NHS Covid pass on the NHS Covid-19 app will become mandatory for entry into nightclubs and settings where large crowds gather – including unseated indoor events with 500 or more attendees, unseated outdoor events with 4,000 or more attendees and any event with 10,000 or more attendees. People will be able to demonstrate proof of two vaccine doses via the app. Proof of a negative lateral flow test will also be accepted. This advertiser content was paid for by the UK government. All together (“Get vaccinated this winter”) is a government-backed initiative tasked with informing the UK about the Covid-19 pandemic. For more information, visit gov.uk/coronavirusAmazon is to start selling low-cost Covid PCR test kits to travellers in a move that promises to shake up a market that has been described as a “rip-off jungle” for consumers. The government-approved tests, which will be valid for the UK’s day-two, day-eight and “test-to-release” arrivals programmes, cost £34.99 each but will also be offered in discounted bundles. The retailer’s international arrivals service could be launched and listed on the government’s approved list of suppliers as soon as today. The tests will be processed at Amazon’s lab in Salford, which the retailer set up last year to process tests for employees. It also set up a lab in the US, where it started selling home testing kits in the summer to US shoppers via its website. Earlier this month Amazon started selling testing kits in the UK too, although they were not suitable for travellers. However it meant the company’s name was added to the official list of Covid test providers. Amazon’s entry into the market for travel PCR tests follows complaints from some people travelling to the UK that tests provided by some of the small companies that have sprung up to serve the market arrive late or sometimes not at all. The government has been accused of failing to get a grip on the test market which is once again of vital importance to people in the UK who are hoping to travel abroad this Christmas. It has reintroduced mandatory PCR tests to track the progress and limit the spread of the Omicron variant. The Guardian recently revealed a slew of PCR testing deals had been removed from the site amid fears consumers were being misled by companies advertising tests for less than a £1. It is understood officials acted on complaints from within the industry that certain providers were manipulating the rankings by advertising ultra cheap deals that were in reality hard to access. Last week Lord Tyrie, the former chairman of the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA), called the marketplace a “rip-off jungle”. He said misleading online advertisements, overpricing and unacceptably poor service, had not been eradicated despite having come to light months ago. The CMA says it has written to 25 PCR providers, warning them to get their house in order or risk enforcement action. It has also begun formal investigations into two companies: Expert Medicals and Dante Labs. In the autumn, the watchdog made a series of recommendations to the Department of Health and Social Care, which manages the list of test providers. These included “significantly” improving the basic standards needed for inclusion on the list and a “comprehensive monitoring and enforcement programme”. However, little appears to have changed. Rory Boland, the travel editor at consumer group Which?, said travellers were being “badly let down” in a dysfunctional market where they were exposed to extortionate prices and unreliable providers. “We are yet to see the government take any meaningful action following the CMA’s audit of the private testing system,” he said. Francis Ingham, the independent director of the Laboratory and Testing Industry Organisation (LTIO), a trade association where members have signed up to a code of conduct based on the CMA’s recommendations, said customer choice was a “good thing”. “We welcome Amazon’s new offering. Reliability and transparency are vital, so we hope that the company will meet the standards set by LTIO members.”A small-town man, perhaps wrongfully accused. A confession squeezed out of him by an overzealous police department more concerned with tying a ribbon on their case than anything else. A prison sentence served in defiance, as he maintains his innocence over a course of decades. A reconsideration of the facts, exposing the fault lines in the case against him. With the true crime genre fast approaching the saturation point, this has all come to sound more than a little familiar. And Jody McVeigh-Schultz, director of the new HBO miniseries The Murders at Starved Rock, has seen it all. He knows that simply rehashing the plot beats of Making a Murderer won’t cut it anymore, but he also knows that this savviness can instead be used as a jumping-off point. His new three-episode, two-night event posits the concept of a true crime miniseries for an age it already dominates, in which the parties involved have the amateur-sleuth instincts bred by years of poring over real-life mysteries. The people of La Salle county, Illinois, have spent their lives putting themselves in the shoes of those investigating their homespun tragedy, and now it’s our turn to do the same to them. “We were definitely aware of the [true crime boom],” McVeigh-Schultz tells the Guardian via Zoom. “In true crime right now, you almost have to acknowledge within your own story what’s happening in the genre, with this glut. We had a story that was full of people who were obsessed with this true crime case themselves, and so we were showing how this town and the mythology built by all these DIY detectives could affect the story. One of the interesting things that struck me was how the truth evolves over sixty years. People’s memories evolve, and you end up with mythology and truth competing. The subtext of the piece is that we’re trying to get at who determines what the communal truth is. There are a bunch of different people in this story trying to do just that, to be the arbiters of the truth.” The subject of all this consternation is the fate of one Chester Weger, fingered for the 1960 slayings of three middle-aged women in the Starved Rock State Park. Despite somewhat wobbly evidence against him, law enforcement convinced the stunned Weger that it would be in his best interest to plead guilty as his one shot of avoiding the death penalty. Weger acquiesced, only to recant his statement days later in hopes of pursuing his case, at which time he was too late. The verdict was promptly delivered, but the lingering question of what really happened that night continued to perplex and fascinate this pocket of small-town America. The populace was divided between opposing factions equally convinced of their own rightness, with some insisting that justice had been served while others sift through the details in search of a deeper revelation. “So many people in town had a story that they said could prove innocence or guilt, and you have to follow every thread to prove or disprove them, one by one,” McVeigh-Schultz says. One such armchair inspector is David Raccuglia, who has a closer link to these events than most. As the son of prosecutor Anthony Raccuglia, the man who put Weger away for life, David spent his entire life in the shadow of this controversy. He set out to make a documentary about his perspective years ago, and the footage he never ended up using now forms the basis of the miniseries completing his work. McVeigh-Schultz’s crew rejoins Raccuglia and allows him to take the wheel, following as he examines the timeline and pushes for advances in DNA sampling to sway the parole board at Weger’s prison. “One of the things we realized in the making of this, where a lot of the big decisions are made in the edit room, was that we wanted to tell the story of David’s journey,” McVeigh-Schultz explains. “It starts in his childhood, when he sees Chester Weger as the boogeyman. But throughout the early 2000s when he was making his film, which ended up unfinished until we picked it back up, we go through his process of meeting everyone from the prosecution side and seeing the complete opposite side that he’s never heard before. Then we jump ahead to the point at which we joined the process, and cover the modern court case that took shape … His father really was his hero, and then he spent some time questioning that, probing the holes in this case, and that’s a fraught thing.” Even-keeled and cautiously inquisitive, Raccuglia gains a foil in one of the more reckless self-fashioned gumshoes, an eccentric character named David Marsh. As the head of the Committee to Free Chester Weger, he’s taken it upon himself to do the vital job of ferreting out what really took place on that fateful night, but his methods lack the ethical rigor required to get results. Prone to leaving lengthy voicemails chockablock with verbal harassment in the middle of the night, dismissed by many as a particularly driven kook, he illustrates the hazard of citizen police work. For the purposes of this miniseries, however, he could also be a valuable source of information. It was McVeigh-Schultz’s task to find the nugget of solid intel wedged in Marsh’s flawed process. “I’d heard he’s dangerous. I’d heard, uh, other things, about what time of the day is best to talk with him,” he says. “But he was a genuinely nice person, interesting to talk to, incredibly intelligent. As you learned his version of the story, it took an hour or two, but you start to realize, ‘Oh, not only do you believe in these things that are quite irrational, you connect conspiracies to this larger worldview without skepticism whenever you get the chance.’ The town is really divided on this; they’re having restraining orders, things like that. But you also have to not discount everything a person has to say in an interview, just because some of their ideas are off-base.” McVeigh-Schultz and Raccuglia both strive to exercise more circumspection and care in their judgments. Though the director concedes that “it’s very hard not to make conclusions,” he also knows full well that there are rules he must adhere to, and for good reason. The hasty overeagerness to reach a solution was what got Weger locked up in the first place; that quality would have no place in a legitimate effort to reverse that decision. Though viewers at home might binge the latest true crime fad in the same way that they watch Wheel of Fortune, yelling instruction at the contestants onscreen, the stakes could not be farther from one another. This is a man’s life we’re talking about, not a game, and it deserves to be treated accordingly. The welfare of the accused must always take precedence over the impulse to prove one’s cleverness and get to the answer first. “The one thing that I was thinking as I approached this was, I should be mindful that the amount of things I don’t know is much larger than the amount of things I think I know,” McVeigh-Schultz says. “There’s a sense, and maybe people are subverting this, that the people who become obsessed with a case and take on the home-detective position can come in and provide some clarity or fresh eyes. A lot of people are taken by that idea, of ‘wait, maybe I can solve this!’ David sort of became aware that whenever you’re dealing with true crime, there’s almost a hero complex in this desire to be the first one who breaks it. That can be extremely problematic.” The Murders at Starved Rock starts on HBO on 14 December with a UK date to be announcedA police officer jailed for sharing photos from the murder scene where two sisters lay stabbed, tried to impress his friends by using racist language and claiming police covered up an attack on Asian men. The private messages on WhatsApp from the former Metropolitan police constable Deniz Jaffer were discovered after he was arrested last June by the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC). He and fellow PC Jamie Lewis were ordered to guard the scene where the bodies of where Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman were discovered in north London. Instead, they took photos, some showing the bodies, and shared them in two WhatsApp groups, calling the victims “dead birds”. Both men were jailed last week for two years and nine months after admitting misconduct in public office. The sisters’ mother said Jaffer and Lewis had dehumanised her daughters for their own amusement by taking and sharing photos of them. Sources confirmed that an investigation of Jaffer’s phone after his arrest found he had used racist language in a message in which he bragged to friends about a cover-up of an attack on Asian men by white men. Investigators believe the cover-up allegation was most likely false and in interview he said he made it up, sources said. In a message on 13 June 2020, days after he took and shared the photos, Jaffer wrote on a WhatsApp chat that five Asian men, whom he referred to using a racially abusive term, had been attacked. In leaked extract of an IOPC report, which was first quoted by the Times, Jaffer wrote: “Three white fellas arrested for ABH [actual bodily harm] but we have had a chat off the record. “We will release them under investigation and close it later saying victim unwilling without contacting the P*****.” That aspect was investigated by the Met. In a statement the force said it had no record of the incident nor any arrests: “The allegations relating to the WhatsApp message from June 13 2020 were investigated by the IOPC and MPS. The IOPC encompassed the derogatory racial references within their investigation of PC Jaffer. “The Met’s directorate of professional standards (DPS) investigated the reference to the alleged incident in the message sent by Jaffer but nothing was found to corroborate the arrests or that the incident had happened.” Jaffer had claimed the group he sent the message to were people he knew and trusted and contained holiday friends. Jaffer, 47, joined the Met in March 2018 and had just over two years service when he took four photos of Henry and Smallman when he was supposed to be guarding them. He resigned on 18 August 2021, and was sacked by a tribunal in November and barred from being a police officer for life. Before joining the Met Jaffer worked as a financial trader for 20 years and had claimed being a police officer was a lifelong dream.If there was one thing there appeared to be universal agreement on before Formula One’s season decider in Abu Dhabi, it was that no one wanted the result of an enthralling championship to be decided in the stewards’ room. Inevitably four hours after the flag fell, wrangling with the stewards continued. It may well yet go on for days or longer. Fans were left with a dissatisfying conclusion that was hard to understand, confusing in its methodology and that has triggered only acrimony and rancour. There were celebrations in Abu Dhabi but outside of the Red Bull garage it was far from a celebratory event. Max Verstappen has been crowned world champion and there is no argument that had he or Lewis Hamilton won it, both would have been worthy winners in what has been an absolutely gripping fight between the two rivals. Yet the manner of the victory was bungled almost to the point of farce by the FIA. F1’s rules – lengthy, arcane and of such volume they are hoped to cover almost any circumstance – here proved muddled and apparently open to such discretion and interpretation many are feeling they are perhaps entirely needless. When the FIA race director, Michael Masi, displayed such eagerness to have the race begin again with at least one lap to finish under racing conditions, the regulations had to bend into shape to fit that will. In the rejection of the Mercedes protests afterwards by the stewards, this became clear. Perhaps most jarring of all was this very fervour to ensure one final racing lap took place. With five laps remaining the under safety car and the stricken Williams of Nicholas Latifi taking several laps to remove, the expectation was that the race would conclude behind the safety car. In any other circumstances, it surely would have done. Yet this was dismissed in favour of securing a final lap by any means necessary. There were shades of the same apparent cynicism that had prompted F1 to undertake two laps behind the safety car at Spa to ensure that a race had taken place and a victor could be declared. It is hard not to imagine that with the new Netflix generation of F1 fans it was deemed unacceptable to have the championship decided behind the safety car. The instruction that lapped cars could not unlap followed. To which Red Bull complained. Then Masi announced that the five cars between Hamilton and Verstappen could unlap themselves but not the other lapped cars behind them, an unprecedented halfway house interpretation of the rules and to which Mercedes complained. Masi had used discretion to dictate which cars could unlap themselves based on the rationale that they were the cars that would interfere in the racing between the leaders. Yet in order to do so the rules state that: “Once the last lapped car has passed the leader, the safety car will return to the pits at the end of the following lap.” However the end of the following lap would have been too late as the race would have then been over. So this too was overruled and it came in immediately to allow the final lap to begin. In rejecting the Mercedes’ appeal Masi’s “overriding authority” over the safety car use was cited. Were it not already confusing enough for the average fan this presents some tortuous logical leaps. Masi had decided to overrule the lapped cars rule, and then in turn had to overrule the application of that rule regarding the safety car in order to achieve the end he was committed to making – a final racing lap. Lando Norris dismissed it as being done purely for TV. George Russell was outraged and deemed it absolutely unacceptable. To the Mercedes team principal Toto Wolff’s in-race complaints Masi issued a dismissive rebuttal with an almost hysterical air. “It’s called a motor race, Toto,” he said as this one-lap motor race duly played out. In a season marked by inconsistency of decision-making by the stewards on just what the title protagonists could and couldn’t do on track this was a baffling escalation, apparently placing the expediency of the show, the occasion over normal protocols. The protests may continue and some agreement may be reached but the result will almost certainly not be changed. Verstappen will remain champion and he deserves it. But F1 and its fans also deserved to have had their winner crowned in far more edifying circumstances.“Hypocrisy is the grease that keeps society functioning in an agreeable way, by allowing for human fallibility and reconciling the seemingly irreconcilable human needs for order and pleasure.” Those are the words, unmistakable for their wit and moral clarity, of Janet Malcolm, from her most famous book, The Journalist and the Murderer. They’re not words she lived by personally, however. She was uncompromising in her own response to fallibilities large and small, cheerfully sending back wine at restaurants, rejecting all offers to bring contributions to dinner parties, and chiding anyone who read a certain dire translation of Anna Karenina. I remember on more than one occasion giving her a holiday present, and then watching her unwrap it, look it over, and hand it back to me, explaining that she thought I would enjoy it more than she would. That may not have been the reaction I was hoping for as an eager-to-please nephew. But over time I understood that it was the way she expressed love and generosity, and a telling example of how her art and her domestic life were often animated by the same ambitious impulses. Her theme as a writer, as it emerged over the course of decades of now-canonical works of literary reportage, was the impossibility of objective truth – in psychoanalysis, journalism, biography, and criminal justice. But she was a moralist, not a nihilist – the fact that it was an impossible ideal made it all the more important to pursue. So she pursued it on the page, in her home, and in her relationships. She was direct and candid about everything, including her own life, and that gave her small circle of lucky relatives and friends a bond, even if it sometimes meant returning home with a piece of deficient crockery. She inherited a fundamentally ironic sensibility from her emigre parents (my grandparents), whose Prague social scene drew from the same wellspring of European post-first world war avant-garde transgression that bred the dada and surrealist movements. One Christmas, her present for her sister’s musician husband (my father) was an impenetrable piece of sound art on an old cassette tape recorder. It sounded like (and possibly was) workmen banging on metal for 20 minutes. She was a prolific creator of collages, hundreds of them, featuring scraps of images and words that she saw artistic potential in recontextualising. She kept these scraps in beautiful trays on her desk at home and in an office in Union Square, everything from takeout chopstick wrappers to tables of world temperatures to her psychiatrist father’s old patient notes. At different times her magpie eye also yielded collections of soup cans, lemon juicers, Mona Lisa paraphernalia, laboratory beakers and decaying burdock leaves, the last of which she immortalised in an eccentric and poignant 2008 book of photographs. She collected interesting people as well – professors, psychoanalysts, young aspiring writers whose work caught her attention – inviting them to tea and bringing them together at elegant dinner parties. About that crockery: what exactly was wrong with it? It was never entirely clear, but a visitor to Janet’s homes, in Gramercy Park in New York City, and on top of a hill in Berkshire County, Massachusetts, could see that she curated them as carefully as she crafted her prose, and with the same luminous effect. She captured some of her aesthetic in her first published work in the New Yorker, a 1963 poem entitled Thoughts on Living in a Shaker House: This Shaker house is neat and low And everything is made just so, Its lineaments are straight and clean, The household gods are epicene. In Janet’s airy kitchens, giving way to book-lined living rooms, “just so” meant a sumptuous elaboration of Shaker austerity: clawfoot tables, bentwood chairs, off-white slipcovered sofas, and open shelves lined with yellowware bowls. The art on the walls often had that trademark ironic air of something lifted from a slightly lesser domain: a kitschy hooked rug depicting a pensive deer, a yearbook-style photograph of 1950s businessmen. It all fulfilled an exacting personal vision that, like her writing, had the additional benefit of showing that the human needs for order and pleasure were reconcilable after all. Many of us who enjoyed roast chicken and mint tea at those tables spent the rest of our lives trying to replicate the effect in our own homes. We had as much success as the generations of writers who tried to replicate her prose, inevitably falling short of the paragon but elevated by the effort. Michael W Miller is senior editor for features and weekend at the Wall Street JournalCameron Mackintosh will be as inescapable as mince pies this Christmas. An epic documentary, Cameron Mackintosh – The First 50 Years, will be aired on Sky Arts over the holiday season along with many of his most popular productions: the concert version of Les Misérables, a Royal Albert Hall staging of The Phantom of the Opera, Miss Saigon and the West End production of Half a Sixpence (now called Kipps). The whole MacFest – as I’m tempted to call it – marks his 75th birthday and the documentary is dedicated to Stephen Sondheim. I went to see Mackintosh at his London flat on a Friday in late November and, within hours of our meeting, the world heard of Sondheim’s death. For Mackintosh, who had his first big success as a producer in 1976 with a revue called Side by Side by Sondheim, the news was especially sad and he was on the phone the next morning to express his feelings: “I was talking to Steve the Monday before he died and he was very on the ball. He’d been to see Company and Assassins on Broadway, told me he liked the Spielberg film of West Side Story and was working on a new show. When I asked how it was going, he said it was a third started and promised me that he would ‘finish the hat’. That wasn’t to be.” Mackintosh believes that he and Sondheim bonded because “we were both insane about attention to detail. Steve was also a great teacher. He was the first recipient of the professorship I set up at St Catherine’s College, Oxford, and Julia McKenzie [who was in Sondheim’s Side by Side] said that he changed the way performers sang by getting them to focus on text, meaning and character. Producing Side by Side also taught me how his songs were individual playlets and honed my skills as a dramaturg. But what I will miss most is the laughter we shared over the years.” The admiration was mutual. Presenting Mackintosh with a lifetime achievement award in 2017, Sondheim said: “Cameron may be the only producer, perhaps the only person in professional theatre, who never has a jaded moment … It’s impossible to be with him and not catch his enthusiasm.” Having first met Mackintosh when he was a hard-up young producer in a tiny office over the Fortune theatre in London, I can testify to his undiminished enthusiasm. But even Mackintosh shows his frustration and exasperation with the government, when I ask him how Covid has affected his operations and theatre at large. “It’s a fact,” he says, “that across the board nearly 30% of the people who made a living out of theatre haven’t come back. In our case, we had to make a number of people in our head office redundant and, internationally, several productions have been postponed. Two days ago I was supposed to open Miss Saigon in Vienna but now Austria is closed down. I was due to open Phantom in Australia but that’s been put back a year. The list goes on. In London last December, having been encouraged by the government, we opened the concert version of Les Misérables and had to close down after a week, costing us an absolute fortune. Apart from Covid, as an industry we are having to deal with the rise of big studios such as Netflix and Amazon, which attract a huge number of actors and creative staff.” Is Mackintosh, I ask, pissed off with the government’s attitude to theatre during the Covid crisis? “I’m absolutely flabbergasted,” he says, “at how decisions have been made regarding commercial theatre. We’ve had some help from the furlough scheme but that only affects a tiny minority because most people in the theatre are self-employed. The reduction in business rates has also been of assistance. But, while I’m glad that recovery money has gone to support subsidised theatre, I’m angry that in commercial theatre there has been no help for the people who drive the industry. I was offered a government loan but the cost of repaying it after two years was much higher than I could get on the private market.” Some may argue that a successful producer and theatre-owner such as Mackintosh is less in need of help than others. But he counters that producers like himself, Sonia Friedman and Michael Harrison are pillars of the industry and deserve support. Given that recovery money has gone to the producers of &amp; Juliet and Hairspray, it is fair to ask why it has been denied to the bigger players. “My company,” says Mackintosh, “has paid into the exchequer over a billion pounds in taxes over the years, which is a lot more than some big public companies have. My question is: why don’t you give us some of our money back to put the industry in a stronger position? In New York most of the long-running shows were given $10m because the federal government and New York state recognised that the theatre industry is what makes a great city tick. It’s the same in Australia where Hamilton and Harry Potter have got support. But when I talk to people in Downing Street or the chancellor’s office, I hear sympathetic noises but my words make little impact. To put it bluntly, in the air industry, wouldn’t you prop up Rolls-Royce if it were in the country’s interest?” For all Mackintosh’s fury with government, you can’t keep his love of the theatre out of the conversation for long. He recognises that, with inflation, the decline in tourism and the continuing threat of Covid, the future is unpredictable. But he is not without hope. “The numbers going to the West End,” he says, “are higher than we expected. In our own theatres, Leopoldstadt was packed, Life of Pi is doing well and To Kill a Mockingbird has the biggest advance I’ve ever known for a play. But mostly people are booking two or three weeks, rather than months, ahead: even with Hamilton you can get a ticket for January. One of the few silver linings is that the public appreciates theatre more. Pre-Covid, there was a temptation to take the never-ending roll of shows for granted. After being deprived of theatre for 18 months and hearing of the hardships its workers endured, people are grateful the industry is getting back on its feet.” Mackintosh is also proud of the fact that he manages to keep his shows as fresh as when they first opened. “I want my shows” he says, “to belong to the moment, not to history. That’s why we have a new Les Mis and a revamped Phantom of the Opera.” The latter show led to a spat with Andrew Lloyd Webber over the decision to reduce the orchestra by 50% – a decision that, according to Mackintosh, was made jointly by himself and Lloyd Webber’s company. More wounding to Mackintosh was the accusation that he was opposed to transgender casting. He says his words were twisted in a headline. “When asked about Mary Poppins, all I said was that I wouldn’t make it a transgender role because that is not what Pamela Travers wrote. But I have a long history of putting people into shows from the whole spectrum of human life: I’m only interested in the talent of the artist and in telling the story.” That last phrase is significant. In the Sky documentary, Mackintosh says that “the one connecting tissue in all my work is the writer”. I take that to mean a respect for the intentions of the creative force – whether it be composer, lyricist or dramatist – behind a particular work. But if I had to add my own analysis of Mackintosh, it would be that he is driven by a restless desire for perfection whether it be in one of the eight theatres he owns or in the work he is producing. Nick Allott, vice-chairman of Mackintosh’s company, says in the film that “Cameron can spot an unclean door handle from 100 yards away”. There are countless examples of his zeal when it comes to production – including his desire, when staging Sondheim’s Follies at the Shaftesbury, to knock down the back wall of the theatre. On that occasion he didn’t get his wish but it is that passion to get everything right, along with his boyish enthusiasm, that makes him the phenomenon he is – and is vividly captured in Sky’s yuletide tribute. • Cameron Mackintosh: The First 50 Years airs on Sky Arts and Freeview on 27 December.Refugees crossing the Channel to the UK in small boats are calling on the UK coastguard to review its procedures after claiming officials regularly redirect them to French emergency services after they make 999 calls in what they believe to be the UK part of the Channel. Relatives and survivors of the mass tragedy in the Channel where at least 27 people lost their lives on 24 November said that repeated distress calls had been made to both French and UK coastguards and that the UK had told them to contact the French rescue services. Dan O’Mahoney, the government’s clandestine channel threat commander, told parliament’s human rights committee this month that he could not say with any certainty whether or not those onboard had rung for help. The Guardian has received testimony from several refugees who attempted to cross the Channel in small boats in recent weeks and months who have made identical claims. One group of refugees interviewed by the Guardian on 18 October in Calais had tried to cross the Channel several hours beforehand but had almost drowned. They said they had called the UK coastguard, who told them to call the French coastguard. The latter eventually rescued them and brought them back to Calais several hours after their flimsy boat set sail. The occupants of a small boat trying to cross from France to UK on 20 November, four days before the mass drowning, said they had made repeated calls to both French and English coastguards when their boat got into difficulty in what they believe was the UK part of the Channel. “The English told us to phone the French even without asking for our GPS position,” said one survivor of the near drowning. “We called the French, they asked for our GPS position and told us we were in UK waters. Nobody came to rescue us – neither English nor French. Eventually we called the French organisation Utopia 56 and told them our location. They called the French emergency services, who came to rescue us and brought us back to Calais.” The refugee said it was his fourth attempt to cross the Channel. During the previous three attempts French police had caught them on the beach and punctured their dinghies with knives. “I was so frightened on the boat. When nobody came to rescue us I thought we were finished. I personally thought we were going to die,” he told the Guardian. “The UK coastguard should not abandon us. They should rescue us when we tell them we believe we are on the UK side of the Channel.” A spokesperson for Utopia 56 confirmed that the boat passengers had sent them a series of distress messages on 20 November. He called on both governments to take their responsibilities at sea seriously. One voice message to Utopia 56 said: “Sir, we are still waiting. Nobody is coming. We are really scared that nobody is coming. Please try to send someone.” A second voice can be heard saying: “Please, please, please.” A spokesperson for the Maritime and Coastguard Agency denied the claims that occupants of dinghies in distress in the Channel who made 999 calls had been redirected to the French. She said that on 24 November 2021 the coastguard received over 90 alerts from the English Channel area including 999 emergency calls. “Every call was answered, assessed and acted upon. There also isn’t a circumstance under which we would ask a caller to call French authorities instead of us,” the spokesperson added. One of the challenges of rescuing small boats in the world’s busiest shipping lane is a lack of clarity about where the sea border between UK and France lies. This is not indicated on Google Maps and is not mirrored by phone networks – when a phone network switches from French to English mid-Channel it is not necessarily at the sea border. Maria Thomas of Duncan Lewis solicitors has also received similar reports of people who believe they are stranded on the UK side of the Channel being told to contact the French. She said: “These allegations are extremely concerning, and must be fully investigated. The families of those who perished deserve a full and frank account of what happened, and it is obviously critical that there is complete and transparent cooperation between the British and French authorities. “Both sides have clear obligations with respect to search and rescue operations, and the idea that a boat in distress could simply be bounced between operators is shocking.”Hotels are being turned into temporary care facilities staffed with workers flown in from Spain and Greece to relieve rising pressure on NHS hospital beds. Three hotels in the south of England are being used, including one in Plymouth into which 30 hospital patients have been discharged to be looked after by live-in carers. It is understood that the staff are staying on upper floors while patients are below. At least three other health authorities are considering the move, which is partly driven by the severe shortage of domiciliary care workers able to look after people in their own homes, according to Anne-Marie Perry, chief executive of Abicare, a home care company contracted to set up the facilities. She said they were for people who are ready to be discharged to their homes but couldn’t be because care packages were not available. “The hospitals are on their knees and we are being contacted fairly regularly by clinical commission groups,” said Perry. “The problem Plymouth have is there is not enough domiciliary care provision, so that’s one of the reasons why they can’t discharge patients.” A similar tactic was used at the start of the pandemic in spring 2020, when hotels were used to help discharge tens of thousands of hospital patients in anticipation of hospitals being filled to breaking point with Covid cases. It happened again in some places in January this year. Now, with similar warnings that the NHS faces being overwhelmed by the Omicron variant, Abicare said it has converted whole floors of hotels, and has recruited British nationals living in Greece and Spain, as well as some from the north of England, to staff them in a shift pattern of three weeks on and three weeks off. On Monday, NHS Providers said bed occupancy in hospitals was at 94%–96%, and its chief executive, Chris Hopson, said on Sunday that the shortage of social care staff was a big driver of delayed discharges, with more than 10,000 beds last week occupied by medically fit patients. Perry said the cost of care – around £300 a night – was well under half that of an NHS bed, but the move is likely to raise questions about levels of care, as hotels are not equipped with sluice rooms and other facilities normally available in care homes. Jane Townson, the chief executive of the Homecare Association, described the move as “unacceptable” and said it “feels like [people] being warehoused”. She called for greater funding to boost the workforce that helps people in their own home. Nadra Ahmed, executive chairman of the National Care Association, said she was shocked by the arrangement because hotels were not configured to deliver care and questioned the safety and wellbeing of residents if they need urgent medical assistance. “Is home care so broken that we can’t support people in their own homes where they need to be?” she said. “This is another sticking plaster and the person being moved into the hotel is the person being let down.” Abicare said it had been unable to find live-in care workers based in the UK so it was using expats. But has warned that with more health authorities approaching it to set up hotel facilities in the new year, it may not be able to find staff to meet much greater demand. In January, NHS England issued guidance about using hotels for discharges which said it “should only be used as a short-term measure (days, rather than weeks) for the specific purpose of reducing length of stay for people in hospital and ensuring they are discharged when they no longer meet the ‘criteria to reside’ in a hospital.” Abicare said it has previously worked with Holiday Inn and Best Western hotel groups. A spokesperson for NHS Devon clinical commissioning group said: “Thirty-two beds are currently available to support people who would be delayed in hospital waiting for support at home. Feedback from patients has been excellent and since March 2020 this has saved several thousand hospital bed days. This has freed beds for people who needed inpatient care in a hospital setting.” NHS England has been approached for comment.France’s interior minister is seeking to dissolve an “ultra right” group suspected of attacking anti-racism protesters who entered a campaign rally held by the far-right presidential candidate Éric Zemmour. The Zouaves, who support Zemmour’s anti-immigration and anti-Islam ideology, are thought to be behind the brawl, which happened eight days ago. Members from the anti-racial discrimination group SOS Racisme were set upon after they entered the rear of the venue to protest against Zemmour. The group said it had aimed to protest peacefully but five of its members were injured. In one clip taken that night, a man was caught violently punching the head of a young woman who was wearing a “No to racism” T-shirt. Other assailants kicked and threw chairs at protesters. After the meeting, police said they had identified about 50 people linked to the Zouaves who posed for a picture and chanted: “On est chez nous” (this is our home), according to AFP. On Sunday, the interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, said he had begun legal action to have the Zouaves movement outlawed and hoped the State Council would agree to the ban. “I have initiated the procedure to dissolve this de facto grouping that are the Zouaves, which is a group of people who come from either the GUD [a former far-right student union] or Action Française, that is to say, well-known ultra-right movements,” Darmanin told French media. Marion Jacquet-Vaillant, a doctor of political science specialising in extreme “identity” groups, said the Zouaves Paris organisation brought together “people from other groups for quick, violent actions”. Some members also belonged to Génération Identitaire, a far-right “paramilitary” group the French government banned in March. Jean-Yves Camus, a political analyst from the Jean-Jaurès Foundation thinktank, added that the group was “above all, ultra-violent and ultra-right”. “They have by far one of the most violent pedigrees of all far-right groups,” Camus told Ouest-France. “Their only raison d’être is to fight … fight against antifa, leftwingers in general, anything seen as feminist, LGBT, pro-migrants … etc,” he added. He said the group had no robust ideology. “There are no precise references, nor any intellectual reasoning. It’s a fight to defend French identity, full stop.” Zouaves were originally a class of light infantry of the French army between 1830 and 1962 composed mostly of north African colonial recruits, mainly Algerians. The Zouaves were later grouped into regiments composed exclusively of French soldiers which fought in Crimea, Italy during both world wars, in Indochina and in Algeria – before being dissolved in 1962. In French slang, “to be a Zouave” is to play the fool. The Zouaves are suspected of being behind several violent assaults in recent years, including attacks on football supporters waving Algerian flags in Paris during the 2018 World Cup held in Russia and against a radio journalist during a protest last year. They have also been linked to violence at Gilets Jaunes demonstrations. Made up almost entirely of men in their 20s and 30s, Zouaves is believed to have no formal structure but gravitates around a dozen members that get together to carry out hit-and-run actions. Last month, five Zouaves members appeared in court after an attack on a Paris bar reportedly known to be frequented by antifascists where drinkers were attacked with baseball bats and teargas. The public prosecutor has opened an investigation into the violence at Zemmour’s meeting. Dominique Sopo, the president of SOS Racisme, told Franceinfo radio: “You either have to be drunk with racism or be certain of your omnipotence to be able to act like that in front of cameras. It’s absolutely astonishing and it shows what this candidate is and what the public he draws is and who the militants who gathered there are.”MAYBE INFANTINO WAS GOOD FOR SOMETHING Zadok The Priest booming. Pedro Pinto preening. Giorgio Marchetti officiating. Balls in bowls. A random former Euro star pulling. Yes, Big Cup last-16 draw stuck to its tried and trusted formula, with Andrey Arshavin, one-time women’s fashion designer turned indolent Arsenal playmaker turned St Petersburg ambassadorial suit, fulfilling duties as he was introduced to a gathering in Nyon and a global TV audience. Nothing could go wrong now. Just how hard can a tombola be? PSG v Manchester United came out last as the box-office saver of a pretty dry rack of matches. Lionel Messi could mooch round the Old Trafford turf for one last time, Cristiano Ronaldo stood similarly statuesque at the other end, a superstar soccer version of Last Of The Summer Wine. For those interested in United’s version of Succession, the tie offered the chance for the club’s possible next manager, Mauricio Pochettino, to meet the current interim manager, Ralf Rangnick, someone pencilled in to be the suit working above the next manager. It was going to be brilliant. Mais non. The other half-decent tie, Atlético Madrid v Bayern Munich became the subject of an intrigue as confusing as Sunday’s almighty row following Max Verstappen winning the Vroom Vroom World Championships ahead of Lewis Hamilton. Eagle-eyed viewers noticed the Uefa suits had got their balls all wrong, the finer details of which are far too complicated for The Fiver to properly explain. The latest insult to the self-worth of Manchester United was delivered as Atlético cried foul on social media disgrace Twitter. “Uefa forgot to put United’s ball into the Atlético matchup. Atlético is studying whether it is possible to contest the draw.” “Following a technical problem with the software of an external service provider that instructs the officials as to which teams are eligible to play each other, a material error occurred,” droned Uefa’s statement. Club suits and m’learned friends were circling and so a redraw began with a lengthy Marchetti apology, with the tombola itself taking longer because actual humans had to check the computer hadn’t goofed up again. Arshavin, having redone up his loosened tie, did the business and landed Atlético the tie they had really wanted: Manchester United. Bayern meanwhile got Salzburg. And for PSG, the one they really didn’t want: Real Madrid, who pulled Benfica in the first draw and have spent the last couple of years chasing Kylian Mbappé. “That will conclude the Uefa [Big Cup] draw,” cheered Pedro Pinto rather hopefully. QUOTE OF THE DAY “You have to celebrate victories and that … was a big victory. I said maybe too much when I got hired here, but I don’t regret that. It was a big moment. I will do that again if we keep winning trophies” – New York City FC boss Ronny Deila on how he will keep stripping down to his undies if his side win the MLS Cup again, as they did on Saturday. FIVER LETTERS “Should I laugh at the chaos of the Big Cup draw or feel sorry for The Fiver for having to rewrite today’s story?” – Krishna Moorthy. “Manchester City’s USA! USA!! USA!!!-based cousin Yankee Doodle New York City FC giddy-upped and won the MLS Cup for the first time over the weekend. This latest rendition of the Fairytale of New York is sure to stoke conversation about that controversial line. Y’know, the one about the team having become better after the likes of Frank Lampard and Andrea Pirlo skedaddled” – Peter Oh. “It says something about my snakebelly low expectations that after the botched Big Cup draw I wondered if either Weird Uncle Fiver had done the draw, if Uefa are taking your STOP FOOTBALL campaign seriously or if Uefa felt like doing you guys a solid and making themselves, not The Fiver, the punchbag for The Man today. How did we come to a point where The Fiver looks organised and superior? Where do we go from here, is there any further down we can go?” – Ferg Slade. “Like many non-F1 fans not acquainted with the finer points of articles 48.12 and 48.13, I was mystified how the driver who was in a distant second place and losing ground with five laps to go was suddenly allowed to catch up and ended up winning the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix. This gave me a great idea how we could turn the dull sport of football into something far more exciting. Let’s say a team is losing 5-0, we are deep into stoppage time and a player goes down injured. The referee could simply reset the score to 0-0, allow the team that was losing to bring on two extra players and play five extra minutes of 13 v 11. I am sure the exciting finale would persuade any watching non-football fans to keep returning for more” – Dominic Tighe. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Ferg Slade. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Here’s the latest Football Weekly podcast. There’s a new Ashes pod about too, if you’re that way inclined. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Brentford v Man Utd is this close to being called off after United’s first-team training ground was closed due to Covid. Uefa managed to do the Big Vase tombola without c0cking it up and the standout ties were Barcelona v Napoli and the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers v Dortmund. Newcastle have made the Lille centre-back Sven Botman a priority signing in January with J-Lingz also on Eddie Howe’s wishlist. And Pep Guardiola is not worried that Manchester City might have got a bit giddy when they signed Jack Grealish for – Fiver does Dr Evil finger sign – £100m. “He has to do exactly what he is doing, no more than that,” blathered Guardiola. “The rest will come.” STILL WANT MORE? Dusan Vlahovic played Father Christmas against Salernitana but any parting gifts are sure to be thrown back in his face by Fiorentina’s Ultras, reports Nicky Bandini. $tevie Mbe did nothing to harm his hero status at Liverpool as he passed the Anfield test, muses Richard Jolly. This week’s Premier League talking points make grim reading for Jack Grealish, Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang and Richarlison. We are nearing the toxic endgame for José Mourinho at Roma, reckons floating-football-brain-in-a-jar Jonathan Wilson. Win! Win! Win! Streltsov – Jonathan Wilson’s novel. Like everybody else at Torpedo Moscow, Vanya loves Eduard Streltsov, the dashing young striker who scores hatfuls of goals. But on the eve of the 1958 World Cup, Streltsov is arrested and Vanya has to reconsider everything. Streltsov is a story of fandom and celebrity, of booze and paranoia, of two men who can only really understand the world through football. The Fiver has three copies to give away to subscribers. To be in with a shout just send an email titled ‘Fiver’ along with your name and postal address to info@theblizzard.co.uk. Streltsov is available in print and digital editions and Fiver readers can get £1 off by entering GSTREL at the checkout. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! NICE ONE, UEFA!Lewis Hamilton accused the FIA of manipulating the final race of the season shortly before losing his Formula One world title to Max Verstappen, it has emerged. The Mercedes driver was generous in defeat in Abu Dhabi after his dreams of an eighth world title controversially ended in a final lap showdown. But on that last lap, after Verstappen had passed him, Hamilton said over the radio: “This has been manipulated, man.” After Nicholas Latifi crashed his Williams on lap 53 of 58 the expectation would ordinarily have been for the race to conclude under the safety car. However, Mercedes believe there was an unfair FIA intervention from the race director, Michael Masi, to ensure Verstappen was right behind Hamilton for that final‑lap shootout. Mercedes lodged two protests on Sunday night but both were rejected by race stewards. However, they have given notice of intention to appeal against that decision – and now have until 7pm on Thursday to decide whether to go ahead. Meanwhile Verstappen, who was nursing a sore head after celebrating through the night which ended to the soundtrack of We Are The Champions by Queen, has admitted the FIA may look to change the rules that led to his dramatic last‑lap victory. “Always after things like this you are going to look into what can we do or what should have been done,” he said. “It’s the same in football. Should it have been a penalty? Shouldn’t it have not? What can we improve? These kinds of things you’ve got to bring up for sure. But I and the team didn’t do anything wrong. We just raced when there was a green light, so that also made it really enjoyable for us to be celebrating.” Verstappen also revealed he had been sent a message from the Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, saying he deserved to win the world title. “Toto sent me a text. ‘Congratulations on the season’ and that I deserved to win it. So that was very nice of him. Of course, emotions ran very high to that last lap from both sides. Both teams gave it all to the end and it was just an amazing battle.” The 24-year-old, who won his first world championship, also paid tribute to Hamilton, saying he was impressed by his sportsmanship. “Of course it helps that you already have seven titles,” he joked. “I think that comforts him a bit. I think if it’s the other way around, it would be more painful for me. But Lewis is a great sportsman in general. He came up to me and congratulated me. And it must have been very tough in that last lap. “It also shows the respect we have for each. Of course we had our tough times throughout the season but in the end, you know we respect what we were doing and we’re pushing each other to the limit the whole season. So it has been really enjoyable racing against them.” Meanwhile the FIA’s handling of the controversial ending to the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix has been heavily criticised as the sport “marking its own homework” by a leading international arbitration lawyer. Duncan Bagshaw, a barrister at Howard Kennedy specialising in international arbitration and litigation, was dismissive of the process and said Mercedes would be in a strong position to mount legal action. Bagshaw said: “The FIA, marking its own homework, perhaps unsurprisingly said that they stood by the decision of the race director.” Christian Horner, the Red Bull team principal, had asked Masi to allow the lapped cars between Verstappen and Hamilton to unlap themselves, leaving the title protagonists closed‑up for the crucial final lap. It was initially stated they would not be allowed to do so but it was then announced that those five cars specifically could unlap themselves. When racing resumed Hamilton was a sitting duck on much older tyres and Verstappen swiftly passed him to take the win and the title. Mercedes protested against the handling of the safety car procedures but their protests were rejected. Bagshaw said: “Everybody wanted to see that race finish in racing conditions but the rule makes it very clear that any cars that have been lapped by the leader have to be allowed to pass the leading cars and the safety car before the race is restarted and he did not allow that to happen. It’s very important for Mercedes to give the message that racing is the most important thing to this sport.”Maps depicting Renaissance Tuscany are back on display at the Uffizi Galleries in Florence after being hidden from public view for more than 20 years. The wall paintings were commissioned in the late 1500s by Ferdinando I de’ Medici after the republic of Florence’s conquering of its rival Siena led to the creation the Grand Duchy of Tuscany and depict the newly unified territory. More than 1,200 cities and towns, whose names are written in gold, are featured in the three maps designed by the cartographer Stefano Bonsignori and painted by Ludovico Buti. The maps were the first large-scale representation of Tuscany and are displayed in the museum’s “hall of the geographical maps”, where the Italian director Dario Argento shot a scene from his 1996 film The Stendhal Syndrome, about the mysterious illness thought to strike visitors to Florence after they become overwhelmed by the beauty of the city’s artistic masterpieces. One wall depicts the map of the Florence territory, while another depicts Siena. A third wall features a map of Elba Island off the Tuscan coast. The room also contains a huge window from where visitors can get a bird’s eye view over the landscape of present-day Florence, including the Palazzo Vecchio and the basilicas of Santa Croce and San Miniato al Monte. The restoration of the maps cost €700,000 (£600,000). “Even the smallest and most remote towns are elegantly written in gold and are often accompanied by the first known pictorial representation of the various locations,” said Eike Schmidt, the director of the Uffizi Galleries. “The inhabitants of the [Tuscan] region will be able to recognise places they love in these large maps.” The room, which also now contains seats for visitors, had been closed since the late 1990s. “It was a very old-fashioned, stuffy room that was clearly in need of restoration, although the official reason for keeping it closed was always lack of staff,” said Schmidt. “The wall paintings were darkened and you were really able to notice the dust. We’ve been able to restore them, clean them and install technology that automatically counts the number of people inside the room at one time.” The maps will be on show to the public from Tuesday to a maximum of 20 visitors at a time. The maps were commissioned by Ferdinando I to celebrate the conquering of Siena by Florence. Ferdinando I was the son of Cosimo I de’ Medici, the first grand duke of Tuscany, who commissioned the architect Giorgio Vasari to build the Uffizi palace in 1560.Royal Mail has said it is facing high levels of sickness that mean almost double the number of employees are absent than in 2018, before Covid-19 was identified. The postal service said deliveries were operating as normal across most of the country but that a small number of local offices may not be able to deliver six days a week at present. The Royal Mail online service update identified 21 offices out of 1,200 that were experiencing delays. A spokesperson said the difficulties related “to local issues such as Covid-related self-isolation, high levels of sick absence, resourcing or other local factors”. They said “targeted support” was being offered to those offices affected in order to restore the service. Postal workers said a revision in working practices introduced in recent weeks had only added to difficulties caused by absences and claimed there were shortages of temporary staff to help with Christmas deliveries. One with close knowledge of Royal Mail’s operations told the BBC, which first reported the staff shortage issues, that the situation at the service was “horrific” owing to sickness and increased demand in the run-up to Christmas. The source claimed: “It’s much worse than a normal Christmas.” One postal worker wrote on the Facebook page of the Communication Workers Union (CWU): “Lots of let down customers and we will be delivering Christmas cards and presents in January again”. Terry Pullinger, the CWU’s deputy general secretary (postal), blamed “failings of systems, data [and] management capability” for some of the problems. In an open letter published by the union, Pullinger wrote: “Trying to maintain a great public service throughout the pandemic has been incredibly difficult for everybody, especially while deploying major changes and considering the great annual challenge of the Christmas period pressure.” He said the union was working with management to “respond locally and at pace, in order to tackle the current challenges”.Fresh doubts have emerged over whether Australia can rely on boosting soil carbon to achieve its net zero emissions goals with a new New South Wales government report predicting the land sector will become a significant source of emissions in a warmer climate. The concerns are raised in a report on soil health trends in NSW forests, published recently without fanfare by the state’s Natural Resources Commission. It examined soil organic carbon (SOC) levels in eastern NSW forests and how they may be affected by projected rising temperatures and shifting rainfall patterns. They found major losses could be expected, particularly for southern forests, suggesting “forest managers will have to implement appropriate soil carbon-enhancing strategies even to just maintain current SOC levels”. “This also has implications for identifying ongoing net carbon emissions from NSW lands, with respect to aiming for Net Zero Emissions and mitigating climate change,” it said. In a separate government report detailing the modelling – known as NARCliM – used, scientists found the problem of soils releasing more carbon as conditions became warmer and drier would be statewide and would accelerate with further heating. “From the average of the 12 models, in the upper depth interval (0 to 30cm of soil), there is a statewide average 2.5 tonnes of carbon per hectare decrease to the near-future change period [to 2040] and 5.1tC/ha to the far-future change period,” the second report said. The models ranged from as much as 1.6tC/ha additional carbon taken up on average to losses of as much as 12tC/ha. Scientists have long known the carbon content in soil can vary considerably based on temperatures, moisture content and soil type, among other factors. For instance, rising temperatures tend to boost microbial activity that results in more of the carbon humus in the soil digested, and extra carbon dioxide emitted. As the Australian Academy of Technology and Engineering noted in a recent explainer, more carbon is stored in soil than in the atmosphere and all plant life combined so what happens to that carbon can make a big difference. However, measuring carbon isn’t cheap, costing about $30 a hectare a year. Even so, governments including Australia’s commonwealth and some states are increasingly looking to soil to do much of the work to meet their emissions reduction targets. The Morrison government’s recently released 2050 net zero plan, relies on as much as 17m tonnes of CO2 a year be sequestered in soil carbon projects for carbon neutrality to be achieved. “Until we have better scientific evidence, we need to be cautious about relying on soil carbon to be our saviour in our net zero plans,” said Beverley Henry, an adjunct associate professor at Queensland University of Technology. One priority should be making it cheaper to measure what carbon is contained in the soil, how it fluctuates with weather conditions, and how it can be expected to change in the future. Also, a better understanding of how human intervention can make a difference is needed since farmers can expect millions of dollars in payments for trapping more carbon. “We need to get better, less costly soil measuring techniques,” Henry said, adding many more surveys are needed to shore-up results generated in laboratories. “If you have more droughts, it is more difficult to consistently increase soil carbon,” she said. “The increased variability of the climate makes it harder to build soil carbon but more importantly to keep it there.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Australia’s climate is tending to dry out, particularly in the south, CSIRO and the Bureau of Meteorology have found. Rain-bearing storm tracks are shifting southwards, with more of the moisture missing the continent. The NSW government reports echo findings by scientists such as former CSIRO researcher Jeff Baldock. He identified a decade ago a positive feedback loop may exist if warming temperatures led to more carbon being released, in turn triggering more warming. Baldock said rainfall is typically the “principal dictator” of how much carbon is in the soil. Modelling, such as that cited by the Natural Resources Commission, would particularly be driven by rainfall predictions. In Australia, climate science still has only broad-based projections of future shifts. Farmers had an interest in improving the carbon content of their soils as it typically improves productivity, he said. Planting legumes, for instance, can bolster carbon levels but landholders would have to consider the trade-offs. “Can farming businesses still be viable when the system is trying to put carbon into the ground?” Baldock said. Guardian Australia approached Angus Taylor, the federal emissions reduction minister, and Matt Kean, the NSW treasurer and environment minister, for comment. Chris Bowen, Labor’s federal climate spokesman, said “transparency and accountability are not things generally associated with the Morrison government”. A Labor government would “commission a short and sharp review” of the Australian Carbon Credit Unit framework, including how they applied to farms, he said. His NSW Labor counterpart Jihad Dib said the Natural Resources Commission report underscored the need to “listen to the science” if the land sector is to play an important role in lowering emissions. “The only way to guarantee emissions reduction is to legislate the emissions reduction and have a clear and transparent plan to deliver it,” Dib said. Labor’s net zero emissions bill would create a Net Zero Commission to develop and monitor emissions cuts in NSW. “This bill has passed the upper house, the NSW government should support it in the parliament in the new year,” he said.There’s a scene in Netflix’s series Maid when protagonist Alex (Margaret Qualley) enters the family court to fight her abusive ex-partner Sean (Nick Robinson) for custody of their three-year-old daughter. The camera switches between quick shots of the proceedings to lingering closeups of Alex’s face, her eyes wide in fear. She’s dressed awkwardly in clothes borrowed from another woman staying at the domestic violence shelter; her eyelashes are thick and dark. The perspective switches and we see through her eyes, as the words stop making sense to her: for many victims of domestic abuse, family court is their first experience of the legal system and they are blindsided by languages and processes they have no way of navigating. “Your honour Ms Russell has failed to legal, legal, legal,” she hears Sean’s lawyer say, “and she’s legally legal, we ask the court to legal, legal, legal.” Alex, who didn’t have a lawyer, loses custody for a week. She stares blankly as her violent ex-partner carries their daughter through the security gates in a wonderfully underplayed moment of tragedy that contrasts with the satire. Back at the shelter, she lies rigid on the carpet beneath the “creepy” gaze of a herd of plastic toy ponies. It’s an exquisite merging of the two emotional tones that define the show: comedic and infuriatingly sad. Being so distraught you can’t get off the carpet isn’t funny. Domestic abuse and the patriarchal system that supports it isn’t funny. But Maid, a 10-part word-of-mouth hit which came out earlier this year, weaves bleak humour through harsh realities to invite the viewer to look closely at complexities they might otherwise turn away from: in particular, issues facing victims of domestic abuse in a system that doesn’t serve them. After Alex flees Sean, the catastrophes pile on; the series explores intergenerational violence, financial abuse, poverty, alcoholism, PTSD and society’s minimisation of coercive control as an abusive behaviour. When Alex tries to explain the isolation and financial abuse she has suffered, her mother Paula (played by Qualley’s real-life mother Andie Macdowell in an acclaimed performance) dismisses it: “Can I name 450 things men have done to me that are worse than balancing a chequebook? Yes, I can!” But it’s the financial abuse that has made Alex’s life so precarious. After fleeing, she sits at the social services office with her toddler on her lap. “I need a job to prove that I need daycare, in order to get a job? What kind of fuckery is that?” she asks the social worker, who nods like she’s heard it all before. When Alex finds a possible employer, she asks if she can take her daughter. “To a job interview?” the social worker replies with a quizzical look. The catch-22 is funny to me because I know it’s true. Domestic violence is a trap, but leaving it can feel like a trap too; I’ve done it myself. When Sean takes custody, Alex is told she likely won’t get it back if she can’t find a house and a job. She sits on the bus and fills out more inscrutable forms, whose text transforms on screen again to the message she believes she is being sent: Go fuck yourself, cry me a river, nobody cares, you’re gonna lose, you’re gonna lose. Moments of respite – like Sean agreeing to shared parenting – are short-lived as the story circles back again and again to the problems of post-separation abuse and inadequate support systems, the narrative arc mirroring the toxic cycle of an abusive relationship while keeping humour as a thread throughout. The show would be a tough ride without it. The ability to laugh wryly alongside Alex is vital not just for comic relief but to help the viewer see her as a fully rounded human being: strong, funny, flawed. After a patronising court-ordered parenting class where the teacher droningly lists fruits they can feed their children, Alex declares: “If it helps me get Maddy back I’m gonna be the fucking valedictorian of Bad Mom School.” Gallows humour is a way for victims to cope. I know I wouldn’t have survived without it. I made jokes to friends during my own experiences not because I didn’t take it seriously, but because I had to find a way through it. I appreciate the humour in Maid because I recognise it in myself. I hope that others will let the comedy introduce them to the “fuckery” that is domestic abuse and the flawed system that overcomplicates the lives of its survivors because this is something people need to stop turning away from. This is something people need to see.Religious Australians will be given greater freedom of speech than non-religious expressions of conscience under the Coalition’s bill, a leading academic has warned. Prof George Williams raised the issue in a submission to the human rights committee inquiry into the religious discrimination package. The bill faces an uncertain future with two inquiries running over summer and some religious organisations threatening to withdraw their support over the Morrison government’s deal with four Liberal moderates to strengthen protections for gay students at religious schools at the same time. Williams submitted the bill should “not be enacted in its current form”, in part because those protections have not yet been included in the bill. Williams argued the bill was “inconsistent” with international human rights law which “does not separate out religious speech for protection”, while the Australian Lawyers Alliance has warned it could be unconstitutional because it curtails other rights. The bill states that “statements of belief” do not breach discrimination laws, including a statement of a religious belief or “a belief that the person genuinely considers to relate to the fact of not holding a religious belief”. Williams argued that this “only protects statements connected to religious belief” not “other beliefs, such as matters of conscience”, giving religious statements an “elevated status”. “The consequence of this is that a person may make a statement, perhaps about another group or expressing a belief such as pacifism, but the statement will only receive protection if it has a religious basis,” he said. “A person making exactly the same statement as a matter of conscience without a religious basis will receive no protection.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Williams said prioritising religious speech was “deeply problematic in a secular nation” and has “no basis” in the international law the bill purports to implement. Williams called for a “comprehensive law” to protect freedom of speech and religion and, failing that, prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of religion in the same way other attributes are protected. The ALA submitted that there was “significant doubt” about the constitutionality of key sections of the bill. Although freedom of religion, thought and conscience is protected in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the ALA submitted there is “no hierarchy of human rights” allowing religion to override other rights. The ALA submitted the “external affairs power” could not be used to give constitutional power for sections of the bill, because it interferes with other rights protected by the ICCPR. The ALA warned the bill overrides state discrimination laws, meaning those who make “statements of belief” are “immune from legal consequences under those laws”. “[The bill] is effectively legislating bigotry, by enabling religious statements of belief to be used as a cloak for sexism, racism, homophobia and other prejudices,” it said. The ALA also noted the clause allowing religious educational institutions to preference people in employment due to their religious belief would also override state laws, potentially allowing indirect discrimination against teachers because of their sexuality or gender identity. “The only circumstances in which a religious school should be able to discriminate in employment decisions is when a particular religious belief is an inherent requirement of the role,” it said. Earlier in December the Victorian government passed laws limiting schools’ ability to discriminate to instances where “religious belief is an inherent requirement of the job”. The Victorian attorney general, Jaclyn Symes, has accused the Morrison government of seeking to “entrench discrimination in federal laws”. Symes has said she is “disappointed” by the federal bill and would “very firmly oppose” any attempt to override Victoria’s anti-discrimination laws, including through a possible high court challenge. Labor has yet to decide its final position on the religious discrimination bill, but it has said it will be guided by principles including that prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of religion should not remove protections against discrimination on other attributes.A proposed federal veto power over certain types of native forest regeneration has met with mixed reaction from farmers and industry, citing concerns it will stifle their opportunity to diversify their income in a changing climate. The Emissions Reduction Fund veto would apply to new or expanded human induced regeneration (HIR) and native forest managed regrowth (NFMR) projects that make up more than a third of the farm and are larger than 15 hectares. The changes would give the agriculture minister the right to reject carbon projects where there is evidence that the project would have an adverse impact on agricultural production or communities. The agriculture minister, David Littleproud, said the changes were designed to avoid “perverse” outcomes seen in north-west New South Wales and south-west Queensland where passive investors bought properties and “simply walked away” without managing the landscape. “I don’t want to see our prime agricultural regions turned into native vegetation behind locked gates,” Littleproud said. He said as a result, not only was the productive capacity of the land being taken away, but neighbours were left “footing the bill” of addressing pests and weeds emanating out of these properties. The minister for energy, Angus Taylor, announced that his department would open the last consultation period on these new ERF rules on Friday as part of his address at the Carbon Market Institute’s eighth Australasian Emissions Reduction Summit. However, Louisa Kiely, the director of Carbon Farmers of Australia, says carbon farming is not about shutting up the property, but rather about managing them for forest regrowth. Kiely said carbon farming was about changing the management of the land so the native forest would regrow, with opportunities to bring farm land back into productivity, particularly on land of more marginal productive activity where the soil was thinner and the rainfall lower. “HIR projects actually improve not only the productivity on the farm but also the resilience of the country to withstand drought and climate change,” Kiely said. She said when it came to issues such as fire management, the industry as a whole was highly regulated, while weeds were a successional plant that receded as forest cover improved. Kiely said the government’s announcement was part of previously unannounced concessions given to the Nationals to get the 2050 net zero emissions target through. James Jackson, the president of the NSW Farmers Association, believes there is merit in the proposed veto powers. “One of the big concerns is that carbon farms don’t require a workforce and don’t spend money in town,” Jackson said. Karin Stark, a farmer and director of Farm Renewables Consulting, believes NSW Farmers’ support for these changes to the ERF is inconsistent with the stance that the organisation has taken in their campaign to back the “Right to Farm”. That campaign supports the right of a farmer to decide what they do with their land, including hosting solar and wind projects, because it is a business opportunity. Stark said a local shop owner in her town of Narromine said the impact of the drought was far worse than the lockdown in Sydney, leading to less city tourism. “This brings home the importance of a secondary income for farmers and the benefits this provides to small regional towns, whether the income is from the ERF or from hosting solar and wind,” Stark said. James Schultz, the CEO of GreenCollar, Australia’s largest environmental markets investor and project developer, said the negative adjustment of the terms of trade was what was hurting rural communities. He said carbon, biodiversity and water projects are all about getting money through the farm gate and reversing that trend. “If I go to the Bourke and Cobar region, people will tell you the thing that has kept the community thriving through the drought over the last decade has been carbon projects. The reason we’ve got labour back on farm, increases in jobs, we’ve got activity in town you’ve haven’t seen for a generation, it’s because of the carbon projects,” Mr Schultz said. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter He said his organisation is very supportive of wanting to manage perverse outcomes, but that there should be flexibility and options for landholders to make those decisions, particularly when most of these properties are family held farms. “What is very important to make sure is that wherever we do end up, we end up with a set of policies that doesn’t stifle development, because you do want to be incentivising these kind of activities. We need projects to hit our emissions reduction targets.” Peter Yench, a cattle, lamb and feral goat farmer south of Cobar in Western NSW, also uses 22,000 of his 122,000 acres for carbon farming. Yench said carbon farming is beneficial as it gives him the chance to make some of his rougher country productive, which he normally wouldn’t earn any income off. He values it especially as a continuous, guaranteed income – which also enables farmers to use the income to make the property more viable. Wes Lefroy, the senior agriculture analyst at Rabobank, said buying farmland for the purpose of carbon farming is still a very small segment of the market. “I’m only aware of a handful of examples, particularly in the lower rainfall pastoral lands,” Lefroy said. However, Kiely said there were new methods and business models being developed to allow more farmers to benefit from carbon farming, such as the development of a farmer led mutual, especially as a rising carbon price allows more properties to take part. Angus Taylor’s office was approached for comment. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityFemale candidates are overrepresented for marginal seats at the next federal election, while safe seats for both major parties remain dominated by males, an analysis by Guardian Australia shows. While the major parties are yet to finalise all candidates for the forthcoming federal election, an analysis of those preselected so far for parliament’s 35 marginal seats shows that about 60% of the candidates across both major parties are female. But amid the ongoing push to increase the number of women in parliament, the federal election will also see at least six incumbent female MPs being challenged by male candidates in marginal seats. This includes Coalition candidates challenging sitting Labor MPs in Lilley, Cowan and most likely Gilmore, while Labor men are challenging sitting Liberal women in Bass, Robertson and Lindsay. Labor, which has preselected 34 of the 35 lower house seats with margins of 5% or below, has a total of 22 women running and 12 men – including incumbents. The Coalition, which is yet to finalise preselections in New South Wales and in some Queensland and Victorian seats, has preselected 15 women and 10 men. Excluding incumbent MPs, Labor has preselected 10 new female and seven male candidates, while the Coalition has preselected nine and five respectively. But while women outnumber men for marginal seat contests, the analysis shows that when safer seats have come up for grabs, men have been more likely to secure preselection. For the Coalition, male candidates have prevailed in the Queensland seats of Bowman, Flynn and Dawson – all held on margins of more than 8% – which have been left vacant by the departure of Liberal Andrew Laming, and Nationals Ken O’Dowd and George Christensen. Henry Pike, the new candidate for the seat of Bowman, was successful over four female candidates and was the sole man who nominated for the seat. In Victoria, the Liberal party has chosen Keith Wolohan to run for the safe Victorian seat of Menzies, which is held on a 7% margin and is being vacated by long-serving MP Kevin Andrews. The Coalition is yet to decide who will take over the seats of Flinders and Nicholls in Victoria, and Hughes and Bennelong in NSW, all of which are being vacated by male MPs. The NSW Liberal party has endorsed a target of 50% female candidates for the federal election, but despite the prime minister, Scott Morrison, saying he is “determined” to boost the number of women in his ranks, factional negotiations are still under way. While Labor has boosted the number of women preselected in marginal seats, it has preselected men for the safe seats of Spence in South Australia and the newly created seat of Hawke in Victoria. In both seats, which boast margins of more than 10%, women had sought preselection. In Spence, Alice Dawkins, the daughter of Keating minister John Dawkins, accused the party of undermining its own rules for female quotas in winnable seats, while in Hawke, former Labor state secretary Sam Rae was chosen despite a push from Labor women in the state for the prized seat to go to a woman. In the House of Representatives, Labor has 17 women in seats with margins higher than 5%, compared to 32 men. For the Coalition, it has just eight women in these safer seats, compared to 48 men. The attempt by both major parties to increase the number of women in parliament comes after sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, undertook a review into the culture of Parliament House that found gender inequality was a key driver of bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault within commonwealth parliamentary workplaces. Jenkins recommended that to address the problem, both major parties should adopt new targets to achieve gender balance among parliamentarians “as part of a 10-year strategy designed to advance gender equality, diversity and inclusion”. In the current parliament, there are 104 male MPs and 47 female MPs – representing just 31% of the House of Representatives. According to a parliamentary library paper published in November, just 24 of the Liberal party’s 90 federal MPs and senators are women, representing 26.7%. For Labor, 46 of its 94 federal parliamentarians are women, accounting for 48.9%. Just six out of 21 National party parliamentarians are female, as are six of the Greens 10 parliamentarians.Jam Land, the company part-owned by the energy minister Angus Taylor and his brother Richard, illegally poisoned critically endangered grasslands and should restore native habitat, a ministerial review of the original investigation has concluded. The decision, published late Friday, follows an 18-month review of the original determination which ordered Jam Land to restore 103 hectares of grasslands on a property in the New South Wales Monaro region. It comes more than five years after the company poisoned the grasslands, known as the natural temperate grassland of the south-eastern highlands, on a property in Corrowong. Richard Taylor, one of Jam Land’s directors, said the company was considering whether it would appeal the decision in the federal court and accused the department of agriculture, water and environment of sitting on the outcome for the past nine months. “We’re obviously very disappointed but also annoyed that the department, having sat on this for nine months, have delivered it to us two weeks before Christmas and we’ve only got 28 days to lodge an appeal with the federal court,” he said. “We would like to do that but we’ve just got to make sure we can resource it. “For us, it’s a matter of principle.” In May last year, Jam Land sought a ministerial review of the federal environment department’s determination that the company illegally cleared about 30 hectares of the grasslands in late October 2016. The original determination ordered the company to undertake restoration work – including weed management, erecting stock-proof fences and avoiding broad-acre application of herbicides or fertilisers – on a separate area of the property to the cleared land. Angus Taylor is a shareholder in Jam Land, via his family company Gufee. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Jam Land investigation has been controversial because Angus Taylor sought meetings with senior environment officials about the grasslands while it was under way. The office of the then environment minister, Josh Frydenberg, subsequently sought advice about whether laws protecting the grasslands could be changed. A delegate to the environment minister, Sussan Ley, upheld the original decision in the case on Friday. The statement said the initial investigation found the poison had a significant impact on the critically endangered grasslands. Clearing without first seeking approval carries a maximum penalty of $11m for a body corporate. “In responding to the contravention of the Act, a delegate to the minister made a remediation determination, requiring Jam Land as the landholder to mitigate the damage by managing and enhancing the natural ecological values of 103 hectares of native grasslands on the property,” the statement says. It is the first time in the history of the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act that a ministerial review of a remediation order has been sought. Richard Taylor said the company believed it had undertaken a best practice environmental assessment when it commissioned an ecologist to assess the property before the clearing in 2016. That assessment was done in accordance with the relevant state legislation, he said, and the broader community had been unaware the grasslands were also listed under federal laws. Taylor said the department had not consulted the community about the listing, something the department disputes. In a briefing released to Guardian Australian under freedom of information laws in 2019, department officials wrote there had been public consultation at the time of the original listing in the 2000s and again when it was upgraded to critically endangered in 2016. The latter had exceeded the statutory requirements of the Act and included emails to councils, local land services and the National Farmers’ Federation and NSW Farmers Association. Taylor said as a result of the assessment of the property, Jam Land had fenced off a larger, separate area that was identified as having high conservation value and managed it for conservation “at our own expense and we’ve had no credit for that”. He said about 30 to 40% of his land holdings in the Monaro region were being managed for conservation and this was also typical of other farmers. “The way the department is behaving, that goodwill has just vaporised not only for us but throughout the district,” Taylor said. He said he was unhappy with the way the department had handled the investigation with multiple delays since it was referred to them five years ago. “They’ve strung this out I believe for political purposes. It’s been very politically charged,” he said. A department spokesperson said the matter was complex in nature and “the department considered the issues raised by Jam Land to enable the delegate to determine whether to affirm, vary or set aside the determination to ensure natural justice was provided.” The spokesperson said the department sought Jam Land’s engagement throughout the process and the decision to affirm the remediation order was made in accordance with compliance policy. A Guardian Australia investigation in 2019 revealed Angus Taylor met with senior environment officials and the office of the former environment minister Josh Frydenberg in March 2017 about the listing of the grasslands while the investigation was under way. Frydenberg’s office sought advice from his department about whether protection for the grasslands could be weakened in secret. Departmental emails also showed Frydenberg sought urgent information about the investigation after it was raised in parliament by an unnamed person. Angus Taylor has repeatedly stated that he sought the meeting with departmental officials on behalf of constituents in Hume who were concerned about the grasslands listing. He has previously said “I did not make any representations to federal or state authorities in relation to any compliance action being undertaken.” A spokesperson for the department of environment and energy said officials “did not discuss the compliance matter with Taylor”. Both Taylor and Frydenberg have said the meeting was focused on the “technical aspects” of the grasslands listing. Comment was sought from Angus Taylor.Australia’s eight planned nuclear submarines will cost $70bn at an “absolute minimum” and it’s “highly likely” to be more than that, defence analysts say. With inflation, the cost could be as high as $171bn, according to a new report from the Australian Strategic Policy Institute. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The thinktank’s report contained a series of estimates ranging from low to high and conceded that estimating the final cost of the project is necessarily an “extremely assumption-rich activity”. Under the low range, for a smaller submarine with a more efficient build, the “constant” cost (not including inflation) would be about $70bn. Including inflation (the “out-turned” cost), it would be $116bn. Under the high-range scenario, the constant cost would be $79bn and with inflation it could cost up to $171bn if the schedule stretches out, further compounding the effect of inflation. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has said the planned nuclear-powered submarines, part of the Aukus deal with the United States and the United Kingdom, would likely cost more than the scrapped plan for conventional submarines, which would have cost $90bn. The Aspi report co-author Dr Marcus Hellyer said there was some confusion about the cost of the deal signed with France’s Naval Group. After initially announcing it would cost $50bn, defence officials said that was the out-turned cost, but eventually it was revealed that was the cost before inflation. Australia will partner with either the US or the UK to buy their boat designs, and a nuclear-powered submarine taskforce is working through the details. “We haven’t determined the specific vessel that we will be building, but that will be done through the rather significant and comprehensive program assessment that will be done with our partners over the next 12 to 18 months,” Morrison said in September. “Now, that will also inform the costs that relate to this, and they are yet to be determined.” The authors of the Aspi report, Implementing Australia’s Nuclear Submarine Program, wrote that while the Aukus deal has seemed to move fast, the enterprise would still be “a massive undertaking and probably the largest and most complex endeavour Australia has embarked upon”. “The challenges, costs and risks will be enormous. It’s likely to be at least two decades and tens of billions of dollars in sunk costs before Australia has a useful nuclear-powered military capability. “At an absolute minimum, an eight-boat [nuclear-powered] program will cost around $70bn … However, it’s highly likely that it will cost substantially more once the cost drivers are more clearly understood. To channel [former US defence secretary] Donald Rumsfeld, there are things we know we don’t know, and things we don’t know we don’t know; both will drive up the estimate.” The French were furious at the decision to end the contract for 12 Barracuda-class submarines in favour of the Aukus deal. The federal government said the decision was made because of the superior technology that the US and the UK would now share with Australia. Hellyer told Guardian Australia the government needed to work out its priorities and would need to balance capability needs, scheduling and the Australian industry content. He emphasised that picking which submarine to build was “secondary” to picking a strategic partner. The US is building submarines at a rate 10 times higher than the UK, he said. “Who has the capacity to ramp up to help us? If we want one every three years, the UK would have to double their production. The issue is which partner has the capacity to help us get there.” The report outlines a range of options for how the build could progress. The government has said boats will be built at Adelaide’s Osborne shipyard, but Hellyer said there is some wriggle room to start the build overseas while training Australian workers before transitioning the work here. Another option is a collaborative build, like the “Joint Strike Fighter on steroids”, he said, referring to the air combat program. Australian industry is part of the JSF supply chain, but the final assembly happens in the US. “That could make a huge difference to the schedule. It could aim for the early 2030s instead of the late 2030s or even early 40s,” Hellyer said. The report canvasses other issues that will need to be resolved. There are likely to be legislative changes needed to allow nuclear reactors in Australia. The government should consider appointing an internal nuclear regulator, an inspector general of nuclear safety, and how it will responsibly dispose of radioactive waste once the reactors that power the submarines reach the end of their useful lives. The report also warns of a capability gap as the existing six Collins-class submarines might have to retire before the new submarines are in the water. “We may have already reached the point at which it’s impossible to avoid a serious and potentially enduring decrease in submarine capability,” the authors wrote.The election next year will be redolent with spin and obfuscation. Unfortunately, this will be most evident in relation to climate change policy. So let us prepare by outlining the reality of where we are at, and what the future holds. First the good news: 2021 is on target to be the coolest year since 2014. The latest Nasa figures to October has 2021 on track to be around 1.1C above the late 19th century average. The bad news is this “cool” year is still warmer than any year on record before 2015, and it marks the seventh consecutive year of the planet being more than 1C warmer than the late 19th century average. The worse news is the year is so “cool” because the first half was in La Niña and had abnormally cool temperatures; but the second half of the year has been almost as warm as 2019 and 2020: If the graph does not display please click here So no, climate change has not stopped, and political parties still need a climate change policy. This brings us to the spin and obfuscation. The government, which is facing challenges from independents over a lack of action on emissions, is trying very hard to make it sound like it has actually done something. Their big boast – such as that by Tim Wilson – is that they are “so proud emissions are down by 20% off 2005 levels. Other countries talk big, we deliver! Now we need other countries to follow our leadership!” Firstly, leadership? Excuse me while I stop my eyes rolling so hard they dislodge from their sockets. At the recent Glasgow conference, the Morrison government was mainly leading in inaction and was named the “climate fossil” of the conference by the Climate Action Network. But secondly, the only reason Australia’s emissions are down from 2005 levels at all is due to two things – the end of massive land-clearing in Queensland, and the pandemic: If the graph does not display please click here The cut in emissions from land use is purely because in 2005 there was massive land-clearing in Queensland, and now there is not. Including land use makes Australia’s emissions reductions look good, which is why Australia has always fought to be able to count it: If the graph does not display please click here The pandemic also caused a massive drop in emissions – mostly through reduced transport. Prior to the pandemic, Australia’s emissions excluding land use were still above 2005 levels, and even now, they are a mere 2.9% below 2005: If the graph does not display please click here But this talk about the past is designed to make us not worry about the future, and what needs to be done. The government currently projects emissions (including land use) by 2030 to be 30% below 2005 levels. While the government’s 24%-26% target has not changed, I am content to use this projection as its current path. The problem, as I have noted in the past, is that the big issue with climate change policy is not 2030 targets or net zero, but how much we emit before getting to net zero. We can only emit a certain amount before temperature rises above 1.5C or 2C are inevitable. The Climate Targets Panel estimated earlier this year that Australia’s share of the global 1.5C carbon budget was 7,760m tonnes of CO2 from 2013-2050 and 10,400m tonnes of CO2 to stay under 2C. That means from 2020 onwards we can only emit 6,113Mt CO2 to keep within or 2C budget and 3,473m tonnes to stay within the 1.5C budget. The government’s path will use up our 1.5C carbon budget by 2028, and the 2C budget by 2034. The ALP’s plan to cut emissions by 43% below 2005 levels will also breach the 1.5C budget in 2028, and it breaches the 2C budget (assuming a path to net zero by 2050) by 2037: If the graph does not display please click here Given limiting temperatures to a 1.5C rise appears gone, the focus needs to be on the 2C budget. Under the government’s path, to stay within the 2C budget we would need to get to net zero by 2037 not 2050: If the graph does not display please click here Similarly, the ALP’s policy of a 43% cut by 2030 means we would need to get to net zero by 2041. In this coming election there will be a lot of spin about what has been done and what needs to be done to limit temperature rises. Upon hearing the 20% cut claim, journalists should note that it is due to land-clearing changes which had nothing to do with the federal government, and drops in emissions during the pandemic, which are now being reversed. And all focus should be on the carbon budget – journalists should be asking all parties what they are doing to keep cumulative emissions below the levels needed to limit warming to 2C, and what that means for cuts after 2030. Everything else is just spin.The late writer Nora Ephron (whom I have quoted in this series before and will quote again) famously declared, “I hate my purse” in an essay of the same title. She described being bad at purses, how hers would accumulate loose Tic-Tacs, lipsticks without tops and Kleenex that either had or had not been used. She said, for a period, she gave up on purses and wore an overcoat with large pockets to avoid having to carry one and went out at night with only a lipstick, a $20 bill and a credit card tucked into her bra. This week, we compiled some expert advice on how to take care of your handbag so you can avoid ending up with one as chaotic as Ephron’s. Protect and nourish the leather According to Jenny Velakoulis, the owner of Evans Leather Repair in Melbourne’s Royal Arcade, the first thing you have to do is protect your bag by spraying it with a waterproofing spray, the inside and outside. Then after waiting for 24 hours, condition the leather with a nourishing cream like this mink oil. The creative director of Oroton, Sophie Holt, is also a “big believer in spraying your handbag with a protectant, to give the leather or canvas a protective layer against the elements”. She says a protectant “will also help prevent stains or scratches”. Make sure bottles are firmly closed Velakoulis says she often sees bags that have been water damaged because “people put a water bottle back in their bag without sealing it properly and the water has leaked through the bag, leaving marks and changing the character of the leather”. She says it can be even more of a disaster if perfume, oil or something with alcohol in it (like hand sanitiser) leaks. These substances can discolour the leather so it’s important to act quickly and clean your bag thoroughly. If the spill was extensive, she suggests taking your bag to a professional straight away. If you feel confident you can handle the spill yourself, Holt recommends using a quality leather conditioner to clean the bag. She suggests doing this on a regular basis anyhow “to give your handbag a protective layer, remove stains, nourish the leather and add gloss”. Storage helps your bag live longer Another thing that will increase the longevity of your handbag is proper storage. Holt says: “Store your bag in a dust bag … somewhere away from direct sunlight and humidity to prevent any discolouration.” Proper storage will help your bag keep its structure. “They usually give you tissue paper that’s stuffed inside when you buy it,” Velakoulis says. “Put this back in when you store it, it will help the bag to keep its shape.” She says it’s also important the bags have enough space and aren’t squashed up against other things. Look for quality and structure When you’re shopping for a bag there are a few things to look out for. Holt says: “I look for bags made from gorgeous soft buttery leathers that are designed with care and consideration … I always make sure the bag sits comfortably on my shoulder without sliding off or crossbody without feeling too bulky or heavy.” For Velakoulis, a bag with good structure and lots of compartments is a sign of a bag that will last a long time. “Look out for something that’s structured and can take that weight,” she says. “The use is really important. Make sure the bag has compartments to separate your things.” If you’re looking at vintage bags, she advises paying attention to how much the leather has dried with age. If dry leather gets caught in the rain, it will crack and deteriorate, so it’s even more important to nourish vintage bags. Don’tcarry your whole life Although it’s often tempting to load up your bag with everything you might need for the day, Velakoulis warns to be careful because doing so “causes stresses on handles, and when the leather starts stretching, pretty soon it will break”. She says to be particularly aware of this happening with larger bags. “The bigger the bag, the worse it is, because we think this is a great bag for work, I can put whatever I want in it, like my computer.” Your bag will appreciate it if you are selective with what you carry.When Tony Hunter first shakes your hand, he holds your gaze a long time, calmly sizing you up, perhaps looking for a common bond. His outback New South Wales drawl is slow, but his mind feels fully engaged. Tell him he looks a lot younger than his 69 years and he looks sceptical: “I lost 10 years to alcohol in there.” Twenty-seven years ago Hunter and his partner, Melinda Bonham, were sitting on the porch of their house in Shalvey, a suburb of Blacktown, when Hunter fell silent, lost in thought. It was 1994, and the local Aboriginal community had endured a long cycle of drug and alcohol addiction, trauma and premature death. After a while, Hunter spoke: “I’ve gotta do something to help my people.” The headquarters of Marrin Weejali in Sydney’s west Marrin Weejali Aboriginal Corporation was born out of that thought. As Hunter strolls around Marrin Weejali’s crowded two-storey building in Blackett, near Mount Druitt, he introduces Rob and Brian, drug and alcohol counsellors. Another man, Drew, simply walks up, shakes hands, and identifies himself as a recovering alcoholic: “I can’t say enough for what Marrin has done for me,” he says. An outsider cannot easily tell counsellors from clients, which is not surprising, since six of the centre’s 10 counsellors, along with Hunter, were once addicts themselves. In the back courtyard, Hunter introduces another worker, Steve. “I found him on the side of the road chasing a lizard,” Hunter says. The reference is mysterious to all but Steve, who laughs, and lingers to chat. No one is in a hurry; everyone seems to have time, and to have come through a great trial. Established by Hunter and Bonham in 1996, Marrin Weejali is Sydney’s only Aboriginal-run drug and alcohol service. In Wiradjuri, the most widely spoken Aboriginal language in NSW, marrin means body and spirit, weejali means essence. The goal is to unite these two in the one person. Marrin’s core philosophy grows out of the therapeutic community model and programs such as Narcotics Anonymous and Alcoholics Anonymous, which are built on the belief that people sharing their common experience can solve their common problem. Michael, Chris and Brian chatting with counsellor Brian Hunter at Marrin Weejali Groups meet to discuss not only addiction but mental health, family planning, anger management, and domestic violence. While some are for Kooris only, others are open to all; Marrin Weejali takes anyone who walks through the door. While 80% to 90% of clients are Indigenous, others have white, Islander and South Sudanese backgrounds. “We can’t say no to these non-Aboriginal people, because they grew up with Aboriginal people,” Hunter says. “If you went to school with an Aboriginal fella and he comes in here, where are you going to go? You become part of the Aboriginal community.” ‘From riverbanks to Sydney’ In 1823, governor Macquarie established a native institution in the area in order to effect what he called “the civilisation of the Aborigines of NSW”. It was one of the first public policies “aimed at eliminating Aboriginal cultural traditions and enforcing assimilation with a European way of life,” according to the Blacktown Native Institution Project. In time, people called the place Blacktown. The local government area of Blacktown city contains nearly 400,000 people – 40% of them born overseas. Residents come from 188 countries and speak 182 languages, according to the Blacktown city council website. What makes Blacktown exceptionally diverse is that it also holds Australia’s largest urban Indigenous population: more than 10,000 people, and nearly 5% of the population in Mount Druitt, which is part of Blacktown local government area. For Aboriginal people, Blacktown marks a place of sorrow, of being severed from their ancient life. In these times of statue-toppling and cancel culture, of renaming places and recasting the past in light of present values, the name of Blacktown might have been considered a candidate for the chop. Far from it. Blacktown is one of the most culturally diverse places in Australia In 2015, Liberal Party members of Blacktown council campaigned to change the name of the municipality to western Sydney. Councillor Jess Diaz told Guardian Australia that Blacktown should be “a modern metropolis which people will embrace, aspirational people. The branding of Blacktown is a negative for many developers. I think we should try and give the city a positive name.” Leaders of the Darug people, on whose land Blacktown stands, fiercely objected. They liked the name and the link with their history, however tragic, and it turned out that the people of Blacktown agreed. In a council survey of more than 3,000 residents, 80% voted against changing the name. Blacktown’s Indigenous residents comprise the Darug and a larger group – made up of Wiradjuri people and others who moved from country NSW – and their descendants. It is one of Australia’s great migration stories, rarely told. In the 1960s, many Aboriginal people saw an opportunity to leave behind the oppression of the missions and small towns of outback NSW, and to start a new life in the city. Aboriginal leader Chicka Dixon called it a mass migration “from the riverbanks to Sydney”. These journeys were no less difficult, in many ways more so, than those made by newcomers from overseas, writes Western Sydney University sociologist George Morgan. Many of these migrants arrived in Mount Druitt just as the state government opened the area to public housing. A Housing for Aborigines program was established in 1969. The modernist planning principles of the time sought to clear what were seen as the cramped and unhygienic slums of the inner cities. In new outer suburbs, more spacious houses, quiet streets and big backyards with trees would lead to better lives. But as early as 1969, a local state MP warned that population was running way ahead of planning. “There are thousands of children in the area, no playing fields, no meeting places, nothing for teenagers to do, and inadequate transport facilities to take them anywhere.” These problems dog the area even today. Marrin Weejali client Michael has been attending the centre for more than three months Many families did see their material conditions improve. But there was a catch, writes Morgan. “Prospective housing commission tenants from all social backgrounds – Anglo working class, migrant, Indigenous – had to demonstrate they were capable of living in a manner deemed respectable by those petty officials who assessed their applications.” These pressures fell especially heavily on Indigenous people, Morgan writes. Having been told for generations that their culture and ways of life were worthless, most “naturally felt exposed and inadequate when they moved into suburban housing”. Neighbours watched them closely; the commission discouraged visits by relatives; a woman was twice threatened with eviction because her lawn was not cut. Morgan writes of women, whose male partners were often absent, who succeeded beyond expectations. “They struggled assiduously to keep their houses cleaner than those around them. They dressed their children neatly and respectfully. They were strong and held families together.” One of the Aboriginal women who moved to Sydney and into Mount Druitt public housing was Connie Hunter, along with her son Tony, then 20, and his seven siblings. On a warm Wednesday in April, Hunter sits down to tell his story. He speaks very slowly, laughing sometimes, pausing often, occasionally closing his eyes and remembering. ‘There’s no ticking boxes here, mate’ Hunter and his brothers and sisters grew up in a tin humpy on the banks of the Barwon River, in Brewarrina, or Bree, in far western NSW. In the 1930s, when Connie was just a girl, welfare officers removed her from her family on Angledool Station in the far north of NSW, and brought her to the Brewarrina mission. People think, ‘if Tony can beat his addiction, I can too,’ Tony Hunter says Two of Connie’s sisters had lost all their children to the welfare officers. Whenever the welfare cars came into view, the Hunter children would jump into the river and swim to the other side. Hunter took to Sydney life. He worked as a welfare office for an Aboriginal organisation, then as a foreman for a meat company in Chullora. But in the 1970s, marijuana and amphetamine use were adding to alcohol problems in Mount Druitt, Hunter says. “They caused a lot of division among the Aboriginal people, a lot of thieving. A lot of people were burying their children. The grieving was horrific. And there weren’t any programs for Aboriginal people to help them, counsel them.” Calmly, he lists the casualties in his family. “My old [step] dad, he went first, he died in 77. Then my sister in 84; she was hit by a truck while on the drink. He didn’t stop, and they never found him. Then a young brother died in his sleep with an enlarged heart, alcohol related. Then another brother, then another, all from the alcohol and the speed. These three brothers didn’t see 35 years of age.” In 1989, at the age of 54, Connie had a stroke. She died two years later – in part, Hunter believes, of grief. “By this time, after burying them all, I’m hittin’ the drink pretty heavy by now,” he says. “I was trying to sedate pain, but it was everywhere. I didn’t want to live, and I didn’t want to die.” Hunter can name the date when everything changed: 7 January, 1992. He had been caught drink driving. “My probation officer knew a bloke named Les Beckett. One of those tall Queensland Aboriginal fellas. Now Les Beckett, he had lived an hour and a half from Bree over the border. I’d known him since I was 11 or 12. He’d gotten sober about three years before. The probation officer said, ‘Take this paper over to Les, he’s going to take you to AA meetings, and you tick them off on this form’.” Hunter says he had already been drinking that morning when he took a cab to Beckett’s place in St Mary’s, just west of Blacktown. “Les came out of his house and put his arms around me. He cuddled me. And he said, ‘Tony. I knew God would bring you back to me.’ And I said to myself, ‘Oh no, don’t tell me. He must have done Bible studies. He must have turned a Christian.’” Inside his house, Beckett read the form Hunter had brought from the probation officer, then threw it in the bin. “He said, ‘Tony, there’s no ticking boxes here, mate. There’s a meeting on at St Mary’s at half past 12. Come with me. You might be able to get sober.’” They went to the Alcoholics Anonymous meeting. People stood up and told their stories of fighting the grog. Hunter hated and scorned every minute of it. But at the end of the meeting, “they’re all coming up shaking my hand, all these whitefellas, saying: ‘Hello Tony, how are you mate?’” The men went back to Les’s place. “We sat around a big table, and they were just constantly talking to me. It was a windy, cloudy sort of day, and I was looking up at the sky thinking about all the people I’ve lost. I was grieving so much, looking at the clouds, and the tears were rolling out of my eyes. These guys didn’t pull any punches with me. They said, ‘Tony, there’s a way out, mate. You don’t have to drink to have a good life.’ I felt the spiritual part of it through these guys. They were living it. And they were interested in my future, my life. I’d never felt this before.” Hunter went to more meetings. He began to see a counsellor who had also been an alcoholic. “It was like I got this new awakening. I just rocketed out of the dead zone, the evil spirit, where I was pinned down by alcohol.” Melinda Bonham in Plumpton Park, Plumpton ‘Marrin is a sacred protected site’ Hunter and Bonham were a good fit for creating Marrin Weejali: his storytelling power, her gifts in organisation. They consulted addiction specialists, other rehabilitation centres; both did diplomas in drug and alcohol counselling. The organisation began with meetings in a church, then a cottage provided by the housing commission, before federal funding enabled Hunter and Bonham to open a much larger centre in Blackett. But it took eight years to build. The locals fought hard against having an Aboriginal drug and alcohol centre in their midst. Protestors tried to challenge the move in the state land and environment court. After the centre was opened, an old man would walk past and throw dog faeces over the fence. A woman who lived out the back would fire her hose over the fence and drench a group of men sitting in the backyard doing a 12-step program. Slowly, however, Marrin Weejali put down roots. Bonham says attitudes changed when the federal government asked them to be a drop-in centre for filling out the 2011 census. The goal was to address an undercount of Indigenous people in 2006, but any local was able to fill out the form at the centre. “White people would come in, hesitate – ‘What am I going to walk into?’. Our staff would say, ‘Hello, how are you, would you like a cup of tea?’. That really broke down a lot of barriers. Some of those people still drop in today.” Marrin Weejali’s open door policy has taken it beyond its original mission. Locals use its optometrist, and the centre distributes government vouchers to help low-income people pay their energy bills. Young people can volunteer at Marrin Weejali to pay off fines for misdemeanours such as travelling on a train without a ticket. A counsellor, Lesley Strickland, says Aboriginal people see the centre’s phone service as “like the Black Yellow Pages: have you got number for this doctor? Where can I get my cat desexed?” “Marrin Weejali has never been broken into,” Hunter says. “It tells me that the community has taken ownership of this centre.” He laughs: “Marrin is a sacred protected site.” The original Marrin Weejali centre, a cottage provided by the housing commission Bonham says she still sees racism towards young Aboriginal people by some local police. “Strip searching, out in the open, pull them over for no reason, harassment. It’s disgusting.” On the other hand, police use Marrin Weejali’s rooms for meetings, as do corrections officers and other public servants. The centre employs a Vietnamese psychologist and works with a Chinese doctor. “I think there’s still racism in this community but there is quite a bit of learning and blending,” Bonham says. Most important is the long connection Hunter and Bonham have to the Mount Druitt community. People think, “If Tony can beat his addiction, I can too,” Hunter says. The six Aboriginal counsellors at Marrin Weejali are all from Mount Druitt and “all defeated the drug ice”. Bonham says Aboriginal people make good counsellors. “With the sorrow and trauma you understand other people’s journey better. Non-Aboriginal people feel that walking in the door.” One of these counsellors is Brett Moran. In 2009 he was 26 and facing a long jail term. He had been getting high on marijuana and amphetamines – and in and out of custody – since he was 12 years old. When he was charged again, an Aboriginal Legal Service court support officer in Penrith got him referred to Marrin Weejali. “The moment I walked through those gates I felt welcome, I felt comfortable, I didn’t feel judged,” he says. Kicking his addiction was not immediate; it required time in a rehab residential centre, and many hours of sitting in a group with other men, talking about the struggles that had brought them to Marrin Weejali. But on 10 May 2010 – Moran knows the date by heart – he stopped using drugs and has been clean ever since. He now runs the same groups at Marrin Weejali he once joined as a client. “At the end of every day I lie on my pillow and feel grateful for the day I’ve just had,” Moran says. For that he thanks his wife, Kristy, his three young daughters, and Marrin Weejali. “Marrin is a sacred place for me. Thanks to Uncle Tony, Mel, everyone here, I have my family, my freedom, my life.” The steady federal funding Marrin Weejali receives – $2.4m a year at present – is both a measure of its effectiveness, and of the need. “The demand for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander substance misuse … services is appalling,” states a Marrin Weejali annual report. That demand has only grown over the past 10 years with the ravages of the state’s methamphetamines epidemic. Bonham and Hunter are seeking funding to open residential services for men and women who need a home while they try to recover from addiction. Hunter also wants to develop programs that take Aboriginal people back to the bush, “and have people meet them, and walk with them, and say, ‘This is where your family comes from – this is why they left’. To create that opportunity for reflection, to lift their spirit. Some of the stories are sadder than mine. They bring tears to my eyes.” There are heartening stories, too. Hunter tells of a girl from far north Queensland who was using ice. She tapped “Aboriginal” and “drug and alcohol” into Google, and found Marrin Weejali. Staff found her sitting in the foyer with a suitcase and a three-year old child. “She’s living in a nice unit now, she’s working, four or five years sober. She still comes to the NA meetings here on a Friday.” ‘People of understanding’ Brian Hunter has worked at Marrin Weejali for two-and-a-half years The Aboriginal journey from the bush brought gains as well as losses. It led to the development of urban Indigenous organisations, what Morgan calls a “pan-Aboriginal culture and politics”. The work of the late Maria Lane, an Indigenous academic from South Australia, has shown how the postwar migration from the missions has been critical to the surge of Indigenous university students to 20,000 today, twice as many as 10 years before. Some of these students come from Blacktown. But the journey was not kind to Connie Hunter. “I think she regretted leaving her homeland,” her son says. “Down here, there were nice big hotels where she and her friends went to have lunch. I think she joined the Rooty Hill RSL Club, the hospitality she really enjoyed. But it was a different world.” It has become her son’s world. “I’ve been here for 50 years and survived,” Hunter says. Although he and Bonham have moved to “a lovely home” in Windsor, on Saturday mornings, he skips the local shops and drives for half an hour to have coffee at a Greek café in Mount Druitt. “Once you learn to sleep with one eye open, Mount Druitt is a great place. There’s a lot of people that have come here from the fringes of town, from the world of decency. Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people. The Tongan community – I talk to some of their elders. You look in their eyes when you talk to them – they’re beautiful people. People of understanding. Want to work together, live together.” Hunter sees us out through the Marrin Weejali courtyard, where two men are making coffee. “This is where people have a cigarette together, where a lot of yarns happen. “Healing can begin with a handshake,” he says. “It knocks down the barrier, reflects straight back into here.” He points at his chest: “The spirit is right here, between our rib cage. Let’s shine a little bit of light and hope in here.” This article is based on a narrative paper on Blacktown written for the Scanlon Foundation Research Institute.What a difference a week can make. Ten days ago Newcastle lost their season opener 3-1 to Sydney FC, a Cortnee Vine-led contest which served as both a reminder of the Sky Blues’ talent and the Jets’ inconsistencies. Four days later the club signed Emily van Egmond, and two days after that did a 5-1 number on Wellington. “It would have been great to have had her last week,” coach Ash Wilson said after Friday’s rout. “You can’t deny the influence she had just with her calmness on the ball and her ability to find things.” Van Egmond’s short-term contract with the Jets is one which suits both player and club. The 28-year-old’s return to her hometown side ensures regular game time before she joins the Matildas at the Asian Cup in India in January. For the team, it could yet mean, at the very least, an improved season at most a return to the finals for the first time since 2017-18 – incidentally the last time van Egmond represented the Hunter region. The lack of Australian internationals left in A-League Women naturally render the performances of those who do remain more striking. But it was clear on Friday just how influential a single player can be. Van Egmond, returning from stints with West Ham in the Women’s Super League and Orlando Pride in the NWSL, was deployed more creatively by Wilson than she is for the national team. Her presence brought out Newcastle’s breadth of scorers as Kirsty Fenton, Norwegian Marie Dølvik Markussen and Sophie Harding all celebrated maiden league goals and club stalwart Tara Andrews added a brace. “That’s one of the big reasons we signed her,” Wilson said. “She’s here and she’s wanting to play and she’s a local girl, but she gives so much in terms of her experience and her quality. She worked really hard in attack to try and make forward runs, and defensively she was solid, and I think that had a really big impact on what other players were doing around her too. “Other players were stepping up, the midfield worked really hard, the wingers were looking to get in behind as much as possible knowing they had people on the ball who could find them. That’s definitely what she was able to bring, and what you could see in terms of our performance.” Newcastle, perhaps out of necessity given their stretched financial position, have drawn heavily from their youth ranks and emphasised junior development. The fruits of that approach are apparent through Fenton, who has been in the club set-up since under-13s started playing for the Jets at an under-13 level. The presence of an import for the first time since 2018-19, in Norwegian international Dølvik Markussen, has helped too. The long-term effect of this combination is yet to be seen but the signs are encouraging, and this Friday’s fixture against the ailing Western Sydney could provide a platform of further confidence ahead of tougher tests further down the road. Wilson has been careful to manage expectations, to keep her players optimistic but also in the present. Past seasons have proved little can be gained from doing otherwise, and it has been some time since the Jets have put together a full season. The 2020-21 campaign ended in eighth place from the nine-team competition with two wins from 12 rounds. This year’s introduction of the Phoenix and expansion to 14 regular-season rounds means teams have a little more room for early season error. However, with defending champions Melbourne Victory and runners-up Sydney already top with a perfect two from two, the fourth-placed Jets will slide quickly unless results keep coming. “The performance shows the potential that we have,” Wilson said. “I think we need to be more consistent, we need to have more performances like that before we can start to jump the gun, but if we can put together performances like that. “If we can be clinical, we’ll definitely be very competitive, and if we do make those finals we’ll hopefully be a handful. But it’s very early, there are a lot of good teams, and we need to make sure we’re putting those performances together week in, week out – that’s been a challenge for us in the past.”Passenger numbers on London Underground and rail stations around the country have dropped about 20% in the morning peak time after some – but far from all – took government advice to work from home. Almost 1m entries or exits to the capital’s tube system – Britain’s busiest public transport network – were recorded before 10am, about 220,000 fewer trips than the previous Monday, as official guidance to work from home where possible came into effect. Following the measures announced last week by Boris Johnson to curb the spread of the Omicron variant, Network Rail said footfall in the largest city stations it manages was down about 20-25% from a week ago, with the biggest drop, of 38%, at London’s Cannon Street, serving the City. Leeds station recorded 35% fewer passengers, Birmingham 24% fewer, while numbers in Glasgow – in Scotland, where guidance was already to work from home where possible – were down 7%. There were 17% fewer people at Manchester Piccadilly, and 30% fewer passengers on Manchester’s Metrolink tram system, according to Transport for Greater Manchester. Bus travel in London was down less sharply, with 6% fewer passengers travelling before 10am. Tube usage started to fall back in the second half of last week after the government’s plan B announcement, with passenger numbers down between 3% and 5% on the previous week’s mornings. The morning rush hour has now fallen back to below half of pre-pandemic levels, at 46% of normal. However, a greater proportion of people are now using Transport for London’s services later in the day, for work and leisure, possibly attending still-permitted Christmas parties and shopping. The reduction in passengers will further hit TfL’s battered finances. On Monday, the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, confirmed to the Commons a week-long extension to the government’s financial support for the capital, after talks over longer-term funding failed to reach agreement before the weekend deadline. Shapps said the decision would provide “continued support to and certainty to Londoners while we work with TfL on their funding needs”. Data unavailable for train or bus travel nationwide. Provisional rail figures from the start of December suggested weekday travel has started to decline from a 2021 peak of just over 70% of normal levels, although weather-related delays as well as fears over renewed Covid transmission were a factor. Despite the fall in numbers in rush hour on Monday, early retail data suggested that plenty of people – working from home or otherwise – were still managing to reach UK shops. Retail figures showed a rise in footfall in UK high streets, up 11% week on week, particularly in market towns, which have smaller, more local high streets and were 25% busier than last Monday. However, central London was a less appealing prospect for some, with footfall in the capital’s shopping districts down 10% week on week. Diane Wehrle, insights director at Springboard, which compiled the data, said the drop in London demonstrated “the size of the office working population, and the impact of the reduction of this on activity in the capital”. While the figures overall remain some way below 2019 levels, the new instructions on home working may have boosted some shops ahead of Christmas, Wehrle said. “Despite plan B restrictions coming into force today, UK footfall [across all retail destinations] over the period up to 12pm on Monday is higher than last week (+5.2%). “It appears that despite the working from home guidance, footfall is being insulated by Christmas shopping – indeed, it may actually be due to the working from home guidance that footfall has risen, as shoppers feel less nervous in visiting stores and destinations as they anticipate locations won’t be as crowded,” she said.Name: Zoombies. Age: They are products of our times. Appearance: Pale blue talking heads, dead behind the eyes. I remember them – they lived on an island and needed rescuing. You’re thinking of Zoombinis, the children’s video game. Yeah, maybe. My brain is fried. We’re talking about Zoombies – the exhausted, zombie-like survivors of back-to-back Zoom meetings. This sounds like a pandemic thing. It is – part of a new tide of office jargon coined for a workforce that hasn’t visited an office in almost two years. I love working from home. I’ve only got dressed from the waist up for almost two years. Nevertheless, remote working has consequences. Zooming recreates all the stress of the office without the mitigating compensation of actual human contact. It’s dispiriting and exhausting. I had a Zoom meeting this morning, and everyone was bright-eyed and totally focused on work. If you can’t spot the Zoombie in the Zoom meeting, then the Zoombie is probably you. Everyone did keep asking if I was OK. I’m just tired, I guess. Have you been polyworking, by any chance? No, I’m married. “Polyworking” is another new term: it means seizing the opportunity of home working to perform two or more jobs. You mean people are working harder at home than they would in the office? What is wrong with this country? You know what they say: if a thing is worth doing badly, it’s worth doing two things badly for twice the money. I confess I’d not heard that one. What other jargon is arising from employment in the time of Covid? “Blursday” is a word coined to evoke the idea that the days of the week have lost their significance in the new paradigm. That’s very 2020. And 2021 too, come to think of it. Give me another. Workers now talk about “synchronous communication”, when they just mean speaking to each other in real time. Not in my Zoom meetings they don’t. What else? Are you familiar with the acronym RTO? It rings a bell. It stands for “return to office”, and relates to timings and strategies for the gradual reintegration of a remote workforce into fully synchronous, in-person employment. I’m starting to think we might not need that one. You may be right. Email me asynchronously about it. Do say: “The account manager Zoom-bombed our hybrid team meeting today, which was unprecedented.” Don’t say: “Sorry, I need to take this – it’s my other boss.”Headteachers are warning of “chaos” in England’s schools as Omicron sweeps across the country, with high levels of staff and pupil absences and reports that parents are planning to keep children home to avoid the virus before Christmas. School leaders and unions urged the government to introduce more protective measures, including masks in classrooms, better ventilation and tougher isolation rules to try to slow the spread of the virus before the holidays. In areas with high infection rates, some year groups are being sent home to study remotely because not enough teachers or supply teachers are available, and a small number of schools have been forced to move online until the end of term. In some schools up to half the teaching workforce is unavailable for work due to Covid-related absence, according to the NASUWT union, which is calling for a staggered start to the new term and additional on-site testing facilities in January. Dr Patrick Roach, the NASUWT general secretary, wrote to the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, on Monday calling for immediate action. “We ask you to avoid a repeat of the confusion and chaos which last year impacted negatively on public and parental confidence and hampered the hard work of teachers and school and college leaders in their preparations at the start of 2021,” he said. “An immediate announcement from the government on additional measures for schools and colleges is, we believe, essential before the majority of schools and colleges close for the Christmas break.” Last year the government took legal action against Greenwich council in London to try to force schools to remain open in the run-up to Christmas. It was forced into a U-turn in January, closing schools in England to all but key worker and vulnerable children as the pandemic continued to take its toll. On Monday Zahawi called for high booster uptake to help protect education. He added: “There is no evidence to suggest we are going to need to close our schools and colleges.” Speaking on LBC, however, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, admitted the government could not guarantee schools would remain open. Paul Whiteman, the general secretary of National Association of Head Teachers, welcomed “a bit of realism”. He said: “It is already chaos in some schools as the Omicron wave hits. Delaying action until vaccination can take hold may actually keep children away from school longer in the long-term. “The government must act now to deliver ventilation solutions, sensible and effective isolation protocols, and lift the unnecessary pressure of inspection and other bureaucratic burdens. That way we can concentrate on keeping children where they should be.” Pupils at two schools in Bury St Edmunds began home learning this week after two suspected cases of the Omicron variant were identified. Abbots Green academy and Sybil Andrews academy, both part of the Unity Schools Partnership, made the decision following consultation with Suffolk’s public health team and the UK Health Security Agency, the East Anglian Daily Times reported. Unions, meanwhile, have been told that some parents are planning to keep their children out of school to avoid infection ruining Christmas. “That’s by no means widespread, but it shows the level of concern out there,” a union representative said. Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said the omens were not good. “The situation varies wildly from school to school but high numbers of students absent from the classroom are being compounded by significant numbers of teachers who are also at home ill. “We know schools are trying their very best to minimise the impact but, in extreme cases, these two factors have resulted in whole year groups being sent home as there are simply not enough teachers to cover all classes.” A Department for Education spokesperson said: “We have already taken action that will help manage the Omicron variant, including asking older students and staff to wear face coverings in communal areas and asking secondary schools to offer on-site testing at the start of the spring term. “We strongly encourage everyone to keep testing regularly and get their jabs as soon as possible to help further protect education.”Earlier today I set you three questions from a Russian maths competition used to promote the International Congress of Mathematicians, which will be held in July next year in St Petersburg. 1. Pet swap A cat is sitting on the table and a tortoise is crawling on the floor directly beneath it. The distance from the cat’s ears to the top of the tortoise’s shell is 170 cm. Alena switched her pets around. Now the distance from the cat’s ears to the top of the tortoise’s shell is 130 cm. What is the height of the table? Solution: 150 cm Put the table from the first picture on the table from the second picture so that the tortoises are aligned. Then the distance from the ears of the bottom cat to the ears of the top cat will be 130 + 170 = 300 cm. This distance is equal to twice the height of the table, hence the answer is 150 cm. 2. Circular thinking Volodya is running around a circular track at a constant speed. At two of the points on the track are two yellow marks. When he started his run, Volodya was closer to the first yellow mark for 2 minutes, then he was closer to the second yellow mark for 3 minutes, and then he was closer to the first yellow mark again. How long does it take Volodya to run one full circle? Solution 6 minutes. Denote the first and second yellow marks as A and B. Let points C and D mark a diameter such that every point on CD is equidistant from A and B. What you are doing is cutting the circle in half such that all points on one side are closer to A and all points on the other are closer to B. If he is closer to B for 3 minutes, this must mean that he runs the CBD arc in 3 minutes. Consequently, he runs the entire circle in 6 minutes. The fact that Volodya was closer to the first mark for the first two minutes is not necessary to determine the time in which he runs a full circle. 3. Path of glory Olga must walk through the 3x3 gird below left, moving either horizontally or vertically from cell to cell, and not entering any cell more than once. Below right shows one possible path. If Olga writes down the digits she passes in order during this path, she would get the number 84937561. What is the largest number possible it is possible for Olga to write down during a path through the grid? Solution 573618492. First, note that a nine-digit number will be larger than a number with fewer digits. So, we will look for the answer among the nine-digit numbers. Next, it is clear that the highest number is the one that starts with the highest digit. If the square is colored as a chessboard as shown left then the colour of the cells should alternate when walking on the chosen path. Since we have five white cells and four black cells, the walk must start with a white cell. The largest number in the white cells is 5. At each step you need to maximize the next digit position, that is, go to the cell with the largest possible digit. This principle determines the following numbers, 7 and 3. The maximum number among the neighbors of number 3 is 9. But if you go to cell 9, you will not be able to complete the path – the square will break into two unconnected areas. You can’t go from 3 to 8 for the same reason. So, you have to go to 6. The way forward is unambiguous: 573618492. Thanks to the ICM 2022 for letting me use the puzzles. You can find more about the event here. Sources: 1: Maths clubs folklore. 2. Moscow Mathematics Olympiad 2015 3. Math Fest 2012. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. I also give school talks about maths and puzzles (restrictions allowing). If your school is interested please get in touch. I’m the author of several books of maths and puzzles, most recently The Language Lover’s Puzzle Book, all of which would make fantastic Christmas gifts!The Golden Globes nomination list has been announced with a solemn introduction from the Hollywood Foreign Press Association’s president Helen Hoehne, to the effect that the Globes’ much-criticised controlling body was “trying to be better” and that its constituent membership was more diverse than at any other time in its history. Which is better, I suppose, than being less diverse than at any time in its history. At any rate, leading the pack are Belfast, Kenneth Branagh’s unashamed heartwarmer about the home town of his early childhood, with seven nominations and Jane Campion’s stark, twisty western-Gothic psychodrama The Power of the Dog, set in 1920s Montana with Benedict Cumberbatch as the troubled, angry cattleman who begins a toxic duel with his new sister-in-law played by Kirsten Dunst and her sensitive teenage son, played by Kodi Smit-McPhee. Campion’s brilliant, haunting drama has the amplitude and seriousness which may well convince the Globe voters that this is a major movie – which I think it unquestionably is, as it takes the tropes and forms of the western and contorts them with novel ideas about sexuality and dysfunction. And it has what so few movies of any sort have – a really satisfying and unexpected ending. Branagh’s Belfast, which coolly declines to conform to the accepted expressions of anger and misery long considered essential in dramatising the Troubles, got itself some social media mockery from some. But its heartfelt generosity and tenderness won my heart and I am not at all surprised, and rather pleased, to see it in a commanding position. Coming up behind, the story is a little different. It is a bit heartsinking to see Adam McKay’s extremely moderate apocalyptic climate-crisis satire Don’t Look Up pick up four nominations, ahead of so many superior movies. It is the beneficiary of the Globes’ “musical or comedy” category which, though a good thing in and of itself, is probably very generous to a movie that thinks it’s funnier and more meaningful than it actually is. And I have to say I am a bit baffled by Aaron Sorkin’s strained Being the Ricardos getting three nominations, with its imagining of backstage office politics in the production of the 50s TV classic I Love Lucy with Nicole Kidman conscientiously but implausibly impersonating Lucille Ball. On the other hand Steven Spielberg’s West Side Story is such a wonderful movie, though hampered by some critical meh-ing and disappointing box office news. I’m hoping that some of its four nominations will be converted into wins, though in the best musical or comedy category it is up against one of my favourite films at the moment, one that I could imagine watching every day for the next six months: Paul Thomas Anderson’s miraculous 70s LA age-gap comedy romance Licorice Pizza. I wouldn’t bet against Will Smith getting the best actor Globe for his starring role in King Richard: a rich, smooth and effortlessly charming true-life drama about the formidable and driven Richard Williams, coach and dad to the legendary tennis sisters Venus and Serena Williams. Smith, however, is up against really tough opposition in the form of Mahershala Ali who gives a very thoughtful and absorbing performance in Benjamin Cleary’s Frankenheimian sci-fi mystery Swan Song, as well as Denzel Washington as Macbeth in Joel Coen’s stark monochrome reading of the Shakespeare play. Further down the list, I am disappointed to see David Lowery’s superb prog-rock Arthurian fantasy The Green Knight get zero nominations and there might also be some critical tearfall over a similar snub to Mike Mills’s C’mon C’mon– though I was less impressed than others by this self-consciously sensitive film. There might be some eyebrows raised (like mine) over Ruth Negga (justifiably) getting a nomination for her excellent performance in Rebecca Hall’s Passing, but not her co-star Tessa Thompson. On the best actress – drama list my betting is on the outrageous Lady Gaga in House of Gucci. Nobody brings the drama like LG, but this film should really have been in the musical or comedy category – though perhaps putting it with the serious films perpetuates the joke. Kristen Stewart is tipped for silverware by many for her role in the entertaining if fundamentally silly drama Spencer, imagining Princess Diana’s dire final Christmas with the royals. Olivia Colman is superb in The Lost Daughter, and this could be another triumph for her. So a very reasonable Globes list, with the oddest of odd couples, Campion and Branagh, poised to clean up.Walk-in booster centres everywhere open all hours (Report, 12 December)? As of Sunday evening there is only one in Birkenhead for the whole of Wirral. Currently, the city of York has none. The NHS is brilliant, and let’s hope it can do it, but even in panto season genies are in short supply. Dr Colin J Smith West Kirby, Wirral • Reading The Small House at Allington by Anthony Trollope (1864), I have just encountered “Sir Omicron”. Other characters in the novel are Sir Raffle Buffle and Major Fiasco – plus ça change. Susanne MacGregor Tonbridge, Kent • It is all very well for those who refuse to be vaccinated to cite their “freedom” to make their choice. If they are hospitalised with Covid they may well be taking a bed away from someone waiting for a cancer operation. What about their freedom? There is only a finite amount of freedom available. David Kirshner Tealby, Lincolnshire • I can well believe that wine from Dorking represents “Rest of the world” in Gerrard Raven’s local store (Letters, 12 December). I once searched for Worcestershire sauce in a local store and tracked it down in “Foods of the world”. Anne Liddon Tynemouth, Tyne and Wear • Michael Bulley (Letters, 12 December) is right – you can’t record something that isn’t live. But “live recording” is a shortcut way of saying, “recording of a live performance”, as opposed to a studio recording that will have been extensively edited. It’s a useful distinction, in context. Simon Townley Toddington, Bedfordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.When I was a teenager, my grandfather, who was born and bred in Liverpool, took me to a site close to the place where the new law courts are now (Letters, 12 December). The tarmac had been removed and large rectangular blocks of stone were exposed. They formed a circular pattern. He told me that it was the site of a slave pen. He spoke as if it was common knowledge in his generation, but I did not ask him how he knew. I have never forgotten looking down at those foundation stones and imagining the misery they once enclosed. It is right and proper that a memorial to those poor people should be erected in the great city of Liverpool, which profited so much from their enslavement. Michele McGrath Edwin Bride, Isle of Man • Footnote added 3 January 2022. Laurence Westgaph, the historian in residence at National Museums Liverpool, has written a letter of response, saying there is currently no evidence that any such purpose-built structures existed in Liverpool. • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your report on the Capita takeover of the Turing exchange scheme from the British Council (Report, 8 December) raises interesting questions about privatisation. As a former British Council officer with direct experience of the tendering of council services, I recognise the advantages of seeking competitive pricing for government-funded schemes. But student exchange is a core area of British Council work, where it has an unbeatable international network of contacts and experience. Privatisation of those services may achieve financial savings, but at what cost? You comment on Capita’s shortcomings in past contracts, but the issue is much wider than that. Must we have to continue experiencing the kind of failings that we have encountered in the probation and prison services, the chaos of the privatised gas industry, the unacceptable mess in electricity services, the rip-off of Covid testing, the railway muddle, to mention but a few? When will we realise that privatisation is an avoidable evil, requiring judgment rather than dogma? Roger Iredale Emeritus professor of international education, University of Manchester • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.A cousin asked me what I did when teaching domestic science in the 1960s (Letters, 12 December), commenting: “I thought you taught girls how to make buns.” As he was, and still is, a dear relative, my reply was restrained. Anyone teaching domestic science in the 1950s and 60s will tell you that the syllabus for each year was carefully thought out and rigorously followed, so that at the end of three years children had covered almost every aspect of home cooking. Nutrition was always included at every stage, and having a balanced diet was our mantra. When your correspondent walks past frozen Yorkshire puddings in a supermarket, does she not feel a frisson of pleasure that thanks to those toad in the hole lessons, her Yorkshires are far superior? Jennifer Kennerley Retired home economics teacher, Norwich • Maggie Owen should realise that her “unhealthy stodge” is only unhealthy stodge when other people are eating it. If you are eating it yourself, it’s comfort food. Pete Bibby Sheffield • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.It is hard to disagree with John Harris’s devastating assessment of Boris Johnson (Boris Johnson’s crises boil down to one thing: contempt for the rest of us, 12 December). Except, perhaps, when he writes that Johnson is “so arrogant and thoughtless that he sometimes seems almost amoral”. Surely, his amorality is proven beyond all reasonable doubt? It was on display on Sunday night when, not for the first time, he contemptuously bypassed parliament with his pre-recorded, question-avoiding “national address” on television. It was Boris the wannabe president, not a primus inter pares prime minister. Whether or not one regards his latest restrictions as too little, too much or just about right, it also reeked of diversion and distraction designed to try to diffuse his “partygate”, “curtaingate” and revolting Tory MPs crises. Not to mention his plunging personal poll ratings. The only reaction of those of us who wrote and broadcast that the Johnson we knew was unfit to be prime minister (well in advance of him achieving his obsessive ambition) is to say: “Quelle surprise.” But those senior Tory politicians who privately confided (for a book I co-authored just as Johnson became prime minister) that they only voted for him as party leader while holding their noses because of his “campaigning magic” but dreaded his integrity and ability in a major crisis, have serious questions to ask themselves. It involves accepting that the fabled Teflon flak jacket has worn dangerously thin and the time to finally pierce it beyond repair has come. Paul Connew St Albans, Hertfordshire • To the many charges laid against the prime minister (of incompetence, corruption, duplicity, misogyny, racism and now John Harris’s clinical dissection of his contempt for the rest of us), we can add a hypocrisy so fundamental and all-encompassing that it defies belief. He has chosen to bet everything on vaccination and yet more reliance on the NHS. This ignores a rational approach to a pandemic that would also have included prevention of disease and a comprehensive programme of testing and contact tracing. The first, a public health approach, has been effectively impeded by a decade of austerity and cuts to local services. The second has been transfigured into the shambles of bad management and outsourcing. Meanwhile, Johnson’s party has spent the last 10 years dismantling the NHS, leaving it short of 100,000 staff and 17,000 beds, and adding to the insult of clapping its heroic staff by denying it a pay rise. It has also, unbelievably, under Sajid Javid, blamed doctors for the very problems caused by the Tories. Johnson boasts that we were the first country in the world to counter Covid with a vaccination programme. He failed to add that his party has been the first to destroy our public health service, hamper a Covid prevention programme through cronyism, contract health supply to a former pub manager, and go on holiday instead of undertaking emergency planning. It won’t be good enough to get rid of him to solve the nation’s various crises; his party and ideology are rotten to the core. No amount of boosting will stifle the anger felt towards their contemptible wickedness. Kevin Donovan Birkenhead, Merseyside • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Nearly a third of British companies that import goods from the EU are “not at all prepared” for full post-Brexit customs checks, according to a survey of business leaders, sparking fears of increased congestion at ports and worsening supply chain disruption. From 1 January 2022, companies that import goods will no longer be able to take advantage of a temporary six-month grace period allowing them to delay making customs declarations to HMRC and paying any tariffs due. They will from that date have to do so immediately. Three in 10 of the leaders of firms that import from the EU polled by the Institute of Directors (IoD) said they were not at all prepared for the change, with 37% of small businesses and nearly a quarter of large ones saying they were not ready. Kitty Ussher, chief economist at the IoD, said: “In just three weeks’ time, significant changes to our customs arrangements are going to be introduced, for which a large portion of businesses are either unprepared or simply unaware. “This will exacerbate existing supply chain problems, leading to further congestion at ports, as well as extra costs from accidental non-compliance for many businesses. Government needs to ramp up an awareness and advertising campaign around these changes, simplifying the guidance, so that all importing businesses feel confident they know how to keep supplies flowing into the new year.” Amanda Barnes, chief executive of media and events business Faversham House, said the upcoming changes were already causing problems. “Our issue with import controls is more from the perspective of how it is affecting our overseas and UK exhibitors who are trying to bring pieces of equipment and machinery into the UK to exhibit at our shows,” she said. “There is loads of confusion out there and the costs of temporarily importing goods to show at exhibitions has become so prohibitive that some of our exhibitors are downsizing their stands or trying to cancel. “The paperwork too is putting them off. I think it will be a real barrier to trade in the short term at least.” The IoD surveyed 580 of its members and after removing those firms that said the EU import rule changes were “not applicable” to them, the results were based on the responses of the remaining 250 business leaders. Members were also asked what they would most like to see improved about the business environment they face. The UK’s new trading relationship with the EU was the number one issue, with 16% of votes, with skills shortages second at 15% and the UK’s economic situation third with 12%. A government spokesperson said: “Overall trader readiness for the introduction of import controls is strong. The government is also on track to deliver new systems, infrastructure and resourcing needed for these controls. “We have been running a targeted campaign across print, radio and online to signpost businesses to the relevant information – and officials across government are leading a series of sector-based webinars to help traders and hauliers get ready. “Recognising that the global pandemic has affected supply chains in the UK and across Europe, we announced earlier this year that we will be introducing import controls in phases throughout 2022 in order to give businesses more time to prepare.”The new Omicron variant is coming at us like an express train. If cases double every two and a bit days – three times in a week – that means eight times as much infection after one week, 64 after two, 512 times after three … It now seems Omicron is highly efficient at evading two doses of vaccine. What we don’t know yet is how likely it is to cause serious disease and death. Given that hospitalisations lag after infections and deaths after hospitalisations, it is simply too early to tell. However, even if Omicron were only a half or a quarter as serious as Delta in terms of hospitalisations, that would still lead to enough admissions to overwhelm a fragile NHS. This is an NHS already depleted by 10 years of austerity, with staff burnt out by two years of dealing with Covid and, since “freedom day” on 19 July, dealing with consistently high levels of Covid admissions. To do nothing right now and stand by as cases spike would be akin to playing Russian roulette. While you just might get lucky and cases might not translate into hospitalisations, and a creaking NHS might stay standing, there are plenty of chances that this will not be the case, and it really isn’t a good idea to play such a lethal game with public health. When it comes to what precisely we should do to slow down Omicron, it is important to avoid serious confusion. Omicron must be slowed down to buy time to vaccinate people. As well as making people safer, we should also be acting fast to make environments safer by, for instance, ensuring that all classrooms, workplaces and leisure spaces are properly ventilated. But vaccination is not the means of achieving the slowdown right now. That is because the rollout takes time, and after we get boosters it takes a couple of weeks for the benefits to kick in. So there are other things we must do to achieve an immediate effect. First, we must be clear in communicating that there is a direct relationship between the number of contacts we have and the spread of infection. This makes things very simple. You want less infection? You need to have fewer contacts. You can try to do it by persuasion. You can do it by legislation. That is a difficult debate. But there is no question that it needs to be done. Because if we want Christmas, we must meet up less before Christmas. When we are in contact with each other, we need to make that contact safer. That means distancing, mask-wearing, ventilating or (preferably) meeting up outdoors. It also means testing to make sure we don’t meet others if we are infected. Doing a lateral flow test before going into any public venue or meeting up in private is not a perfect solution. These tests are not a green light to say “abandon all caution”. But they are an important additional protection. If we do test positive, or if we have been in close contact with someone who has tested positive, we must isolate. That should be the most basic rule of all. It is the only way to take infected people out of circulation and break the chain of transmission. For these various things to be happen, we need a government that has the competence to communicate these messages clearly and consistently. We need it to have the moral courage to institute policies and to tell us unwelcome truths we might not like to hear. Putting on a Santa hat and telling everyone to party like there’s no tomorrow might be what the public wants the prime minister to do, but it is the mark of good leadership to tell the public instead, “I’m very sorry, but don’t party or else there will be no tomorrow.” We also need a government that has the moral authority to ask us to act responsibly because it takes its own responsibilities seriously. If our leaders ask us to get tested and to self-isolate, they need to ensure that we can afford to find out we are infected and to isolate ourselves. They have never done that. Support for self-isolation has always been hard to get. It has been too little. It has been too narrow. It is now more important than ever to set that right. But right now, clarity, competence, moral courage and moral authority are hardly the first things that come to mind when describing our present prime minister and his government. Our politicians have created a sense of “them and us”. Still worse, their actions have created a perception of contempt for the poor public who have been obeying the rules. When a government comes to be seen as a toxic other, trust and influence are squandered. The public mood becomes one that says, “They have no right to tell us what to do.” So it all seems pretty bleak. Just as we need an urgent national response to a new crisis, we lack the leadership to coordinate it. But there is a silver lining, and we see it more clearly if we look back to the effects of the Dominic Cummings fiasco. That, too, replaced any sense of unity between public and government with a division between “them” and “us”. That, too, led to a catastrophic loss of trust in Westminster politics specifically. That, too, undermined adherence to the rules – or at least gave those already inclined to break the rules an excuse to do so. At the same time, though, many people – especially those most angry at Cummings – adhered more in order to show that they weren’t like the government, to show that they followed the rules and cared for their community. This explains an otherwise puzzling fact. Despite the fact that after the Cummings revelations trust in the government in London plummeted while trust in the devolved administrations stayed largely constant, levels of adherence to Covid measures around the UK did not change. The reason for this is simple. The government is just one of many sources people listen to around Covid. They also listen to scientists and medics and to each other. Indeed, our own data shows that trust in scientists is more important than trust in government, and this is reflected in the fact that, by and large, people are “following the science” more than the government – becoming cautious and supporting the introduction of Covid measures as cases rise. Equally, a wealth of data shows that the norms of one’s peers and of the groups one identifies with are a critical determinant of attitudes and behaviours around Covid. Throughout this pandemic, there has been a question mark over the public’s ability to put up with the measures necessary to control Covid – as if the public are the weakest link and are holding back the ability of government to protect us. Time and again the evidence points to the opposite: that a resilient public are being let down by their government. Right now, we remain largely resilient. We continue to adhere despite clear anger at our prime minister’s behaviour. But this can only constitute partial consolation. In the midst of the greatest challenge of our generation, our government – by its own actions – has compromised its own ability to play a part in keeping the public safe. That is the true cost of Downing Street’s Christmas parties. And it is we, the people, who are paying that cost. Stephen Reicher is a member of the Sage subcommittee advising on behavioural scienceThere were some people on the pitch. Some Pokémon too and some bunnies and some bears. Lots and lots of bears. Lots of goals, too. At half-time in Real Betis’s final home game of 2021, on the night when they sang and danced and hugged and finished the year in a position higher than they have finished any season since 1935, a party breaking out in Heliopolis, it started raining cuddly toys. An annual tradition now, fans had been asked to bring theirs to the ground – no bigger than 35cm please, and no batteries included – and throw them from the stands, flying through the air onto the grass below. Or into blankets waiting to catch them, as if all those stuffed minions and their mates were leaping from a burning building. Everywhere, it was raining cats and dogs, and sheep and dinosaurs. On the night when Betis presented Alba, an eight-year-old who overcame leukaemia, as their “star signing”, 52,158 people were in the stands at the Benito Villamarín, the place packed and over 19,000 cuddlies were on the pitch, literally sack-fulls of the things, gathered up and given to kids for Christmas. Which they had to do fast: there was still half a game to play, and that turned out pretty special too. “Pfff,” Marc Bartra said. “A great night when it all came together, from a football and fan point of view, one of the best I’ve experienced here.” One that ended with the Benito Villamarín belting out the club’s anthem. “Here we are to sing you a song,” it begins, “… and even if you were last, you’d be champions in our eyes.” Betis are not last. They’re not champions either, and they’re not going to be, but they’re a lot closer than anyone expected. One up at half-time, they had struggled. Their goal was another gift, Real Sociedad goalkeeper Alex Remiro leaving his goal and almost the pitch for a ball he didn’t need to chase way out near the touchline and allowing Alex Moreno to roll into an open goal from 20 yards, like a golfer sinking a long putt. La Real striker Cristián Portu alone had five chances, not unjustly insisting afterwards “we were much better than them in the first half”. And even Betis coach Manuel Pellegrini admitted he “didn’t like” the opening 45 minutes. But in the second, they had let loose, Juanmi, Nabil Fekir and Moreno scoring three more and now the place was bouncing, arms around shoulders all around the stadium as they sang. “Spectacular,” Fekir called it afterwards. “We’re very lucky to have fans like this and we try to do all we can to thank them.” Oh, they had done that, all right. It was not just that they had won 4-0, that the second half was “brilliant” in their manager’s words; it was that he said the whole year had been and he wasn’t wrong. It was that Betis, invariably fun to watch, had just defeated the team that had led the league for a month, many suggesting they could actually be contenders; that in one night they had scored almost a quarter of the goals Real Sociedad had conceded all season. And that by the end of weekend in which attention had been on the capital, where there was a derby and you couldn’t help wondering if Madrid had wrapped up the title, it was Seville that had two teams in the top three – the only clubs still within single digits of the league leaders. For Sevilla to be second is not so unusual; for Betis to be third is. They have only ever finished higher once in their history and that was when Patrick O’Connell led them to the title, 86 years ago. Only twice more have they ever finished this high and if it may not be realistic to stay there, the crisis at Barcelona means that fourth place and Champions League qualification might just be plausible. The cushion currently stands at four points, nine above Barcelona – who they beat at the Camp Nou last week. “And it’s not chance,” Bartra says. Betis don’t tend to do things quietly – this is a big, loud, laughing kind of place – but this time they have. Which does tend to be Pellegrini’s way, not least because he thought it had to be. Volcanic as a player, he took a conscious decision to be calm as a coach, aware too that the ‘attention had to be the players’. “A man who never takes to the stage,” in the words of Jorge Valdano, who signed him – and then was forced to sack him after just one season – as coach of Real Madrid. “If you give Pellegrini time he makes good teams,” said the Bernabéu’s former sporting director a little pointedly on Sunday night and at Betis he certainly has. Pellegrini took over after a difficult 2019-20 season in which they sacked coach Rubí with eight games to go and eventually finished 15th. He had a difficult start but then, although they drew too often – seven of their last 10 last season – took them on a run in which they lost just one of the 26 games they played since the turn of the year and finished sixth. This season, combining domestic football and the Europa League, where they tend to rotate, they have lost four in the league: to Villarreal, Madrid, Atlético and Sevilla, which may say something about their level or even their limitations but certainly says something about their consistency. Sunday night was their fourth win in a row, local paper Estadio Deportivo calling them a “Champions League cyclone”, the Diario De Sevilla claiming that they were living in a “state of nirvana”, a team that “delights”. They could say that again, and so they did, spewing out a cascade of eulogies for a team they called: “a delicious generator of football”. Betis’s own website took a different approach. “We could make this match report more beautiful with loads of superlative adjectives, but there’s no point,” it read. “You have to experience it for yourself, live Betis.” It’s not bad advice. Always watch Betis. The fourth goal in particular was gorgeous. Only Madrid have taken more shots or scored more goals. No one is as enjoyable to watch as Fekir, a player so outrageously talented, so good, so silly at times that he makes his teammates laugh. Sunday night’s goal was typically superb, consistency now added to his quality. Sergio Canales, once that teenage revelation, may be better than ever at 30 having come through terrible injuries. Juanmi certainly is, fast becoming a cult hero. “Oh, Juan Miguel, we all want a goal from Juan Miguel,” they sing to the tune of Ay Mamá Inés and most weeks they get one as well. At least they do these days: seemingly half way out in the summer, he’s just one behind his best season total. A lot of that is down to the manager: “He knows me well. He’s a coach with very clear ideas, a very recognisable style that he is laying down at Betis,” he says. “There are lots of players who have had low moments, who are playing well now.” “It’s a footballing conviction, an idea that the players carry out without doubting,” Pellegrini said on Sunday night. Bartra explains: “I’ve had some great coaches and Manuel is definitely one of them. He has three or four very clear ideas. He tells every player exactly what they need, no more and no less. It’s simple, nothing out of this world, but he’s very intelligent in how he tells you. We believe in what we’re doing and you can see that. When you’re about to go out, everyone knows exactly what they have to do. The ball has to be ours, everyone has a space, but with [some] freedom, the offensive movements are worked through. We’re very compact, in a 4-2-3-1 where the positioning is very important but there is some freedom within that and all of us defend: it can’t be just four. Solidarity is the word I would use. The idea doesn’t change and there is stability now, which is important.” “He is very even-tempered: when you win you’re not the best in the world and when you lose you’re not the worst,” Bartra adds. “And honestly, there’s no euphoria inside. We know how bad things can get, how fast they can get worse.” For now, though, they just keep getting better. “What I take with me is the win and the way the fans enjoyed it. It’s been a brilliant year in every sense,” Pellegrini said at the end, embracing Moreno, scorer of two goals, when the whistle went. There were tears in the full-back’s eyes on Sunday night when at last he stopped running up the left wing and looked up at the fans still there and still singing, sacks of cuddly toys lined up around the pitch. “I’m super-emotional,” he said. “This was one of the happiest days I’ve had. I just hope there are many more ahead.”Colombian police were responsible for the deaths of 11 protesters during anti-police protests that swept the capital in September 2020, according to a report published on Monday after an independent investigation backed by the mayor of Bogotá’s office and the United Nations. “It was a police massacre,” wrote Carlos Negret, a former ombudsman of the South American country who led the investigation, in the scathing and lengthy report published on Monday. “A decisive political and operational leadership, based on rights, was needed at national and local levels to avoid this happening.” Protests swept Bogotá and the suburb of Soacha in September last year, after footage went viral that showed police officers pinning down and tasering a father of two who had been detained for breaking Covid restrictions. “Please, no more!,” he can be heard begging in the clip. He died shortly later from injuries sustained in custody. The incident was compared to the police killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis in May 2020, footage of which also went viral and triggered widespread protests. Ordoñez’s death prompted protests which were met by a violent response by police officers who used “less-lethal” rounds, billy clubs and teargas while protesters set dozens of police kiosks ablaze across the city. Alongside 14 protesters killed – 11 of whom were killed by police – hundreds of demonstrators and officers were injured. Most of the deaths occurred in poorer neighbourhoods of the city, leading investigators to conclude in Monday’s report that “there exists a criminalization of poverty by the state forces, which unleashed authoritarian and illegal actions against residents of certain social sectors.” “The most representative and generalized practice during these days of protest was the illicit use of force on the part of members of the national police,” the report found. “This investigation concludes that the national police openly abandoned the principles of proportionality.” The investigation was carried out at the request of Bogotá’s mayor, Claudia López, and was supported by the UN development program. “Who should assume political responsibility?” asked López in a response included in the report. “Me, to begin with, but also the police and president [Iván Duque].” At the time of the protests, López called on Duque to calm the police, who answer to the defense ministry. The president had painted protesters as “urban terrorists”, borrowing talking points from the country’s decades-long civil war against leftist insurgents. Alejandro Lanz, co-director of Temblores, a local police violence watchdog, said the report showed systemic failures in the justice system which have allowed responsible police officers to escape prosecution and punishment. “The most worrying thing is that the vast majority of police officers involved in the massacre still patrol the streets of our city,” said Lanz. “It’s surprising that only four police officers have been charged, and only one of them has been deprived of their liberty, and that is just under house arrest.” “It’s extremely alarming to see the difference in how the attorney generals’ office and the justice system behaves in cases when the police are the presumed perpetrators, and when it is people that have participated in protests,” Lanz went on to say. Protests in Colombia continue to be met by police violence. In April this year, the police response to nationwide anti-poverty demonstrations was similarly brutal, with at least 20 people killed by police officers in the ensuing months of unrest, according to Human Rights Watch. “The response of the state was characterised by an excessive and disproportionate use of force, in many cases, including lethal force,” Inter American Commission on Human Rights president Antonia Urrejola said during a press conference in July.Nearly a third of British companies that import goods from the EU are “not at all prepared” for full post-Brexit customs checks, according to a survey of business leaders, sparking fears of increased congestion at ports and worsening supply chain disruption. From 1 January 2022, companies that import goods will no longer be able to take advantage of a temporary six-month grace period allowing them to delay making customs declarations to HMRC and paying any tariffs due. Instead, they will have to do so immediately. Three in 10 of the leaders of firms that import from the EU polled by the Institute of Directors (IoD) said they were not at all prepared for the change, with 37% of small businesses and nearly a quarter of large ones saying they were not ready. Kitty Ussher, chief economist at the IoD, said: “In just three weeks’ time, significant changes to our customs arrangements are going to be introduced, for which a large portion of businesses are either unprepared or simply unaware. “This will exacerbate existing supply chain problems, leading to further congestion at ports, as well as extra costs from accidental non-compliance for many businesses. Here are today’s main stories: Goodnight. GW Royal Mail has said it is facing high levels of sickness that mean almost double the number of employees are absent than in 2018, before Covid-19 was identified. The postal service said deliveries were operating as normal across most of the country but that a small number of local offices may not be able to deliver six days a week at present. The Royal Mail online service update identified 21 offices out of 1,200 that were experiencing delays. A spokesperson said the difficulties related “to local issues such as Covid-related self-isolation, high levels of sick absence, resourcing or other local factors”. They said “targeted support” was being offered to those offices affected in order to restore the service. NatWest has been fined more than £264m after admitting breaching anti-money laundering regulations. The Bradford jeweller Fowler Oldfield’s predicted annual turnover was £15m when first taken on as a client, but it deposited £365m with the bank over a five-year period, including £264m in cash, some of which was brought to a branch in bin bags. NatWest, part of the Royal Bank of Scotland group, pleaded guilty in October to three offences under the Money Laundering Regulations 2007, between 8 November 2012 and 23 June 2016. At Southwark crown court on Monday, Mrs Justice Cockerill fined the bank £264,772,620, ordered it to pay £4,297,466 in costs, and made a £460,047 confiscation order. Some late news. The Bank of England is to consult about scrapping a requirement for mortgage borrowers to be able to afford a 3 percentage-point increase in interest rates. The BoE said that it believed that a requirement for most mortgages to be limited to 4.5 times a borrower’s income, combined with separate affordability rules from Britain’s Financial Conduct Authority, would be sufficient. The move could help home-buyers to win approval for a home loan from lenders, after the jump in prices since the pandemic began made it harder to get onto the property ladder. The Bank of England’s latest financial stability report has also concluded that major UK banks are strong enough to keep supporting households and businesses, even in severe scenarios. It says: Banks’ capital and liquidity positions remain strong. The FPC continues to judge that banks are able to support UK businesses and households as we recover from Covid. Our latest stress test shows that the banking sector is resilient to even very challenging economic scenarios. This tested the largest UK banks’ and building societies’ ability to cope with another severe economic shock, on top of the economic shock from the pandemic. The BoE also singles out cryptoassets, saying its financial policy committee are vigilant to the financial stability risks they could pose: Cryptoassets currently pose limited direct risks to UK financial stability. However, they will present a number of financial stability risks if they continue to grow at their current rapid pace, and as they become more interconnected with the wider financial system. European stock markets have closed in the red, with the FTSE 100 index losing 60 points or 0.8% to a one-week low. Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst, says news of the first Omicron death in the UK knocked the market: “News that at least one person has died from the Omicron variant sent London markets plunging after what had been a rather directionless morning. All those stocks that rely on consumer confidence have unsurprisingly borne the brunt of today’s sell off. Airlines and travel shares tumbled with British Airways owner IAG topping the fallers on the blue-chip index and over on the FTSE 250 Wizz Air and easyJet also came under pressure. Then there’s the reality of the work from home mandate. Trainline and office provider IWG joined the swelling sea of red, hospitality deepening the crimson hue as investors accepted this variant will give UK economy another Covid kicking. Sir Richard Branson has given Virgin Atlantic a cash injection in a £400m funding round to support the airline, as the pandemic threatens further disruption. Branson’s Virgin Group, which owns 51%, has invested £204m, while US carrier Delta Air Lines has committed £196m - keeping its 49% stake in the airline. The new funding agreed on Monday is meant to help Virgin Atlantic as the outlook for the travel sector darkens, just weeks after the US reopened its borders. Virgin had hoped that a rapid rebound in transatlantic demand would drive a recovery, but the omicron variant has caused people to delay booking flights, with governments imposing fresh restrictions. In a statement, CEO Shai Weiss said: “Virgin Group and Delta Air Lines, and our creditors, have been a source of unwavering support.” Over in New York, stocks are heading lower too. The Dow Jones industrial average has dropped by 345 points, or 0.96%, to 35,625. Aircraft maker Boeing are the top faller on the Dow, down 4.2%, reflecting concerns over demand in the travel sector. The broader S&amp;P 500 has dropped 0.8%, with cruise operators Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings and Carnival Corp both sliding around 7%. Tech stocks are also weaker, with Tesla dropping 5%. Here’s Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, on today’s falling travel and hospitality stocks: “Worries about plunging confidence amongst the travelling public and concerns about future travel restrictions being imposed due to the spread of the Omicron variant have led to fresh volatility for airline stocks and companies reliant on the industry. Investors have had to buckle up for yet another burst of severe turbulence affecting the sector. It comes amid reports that British Airways owner IAG and Ryanair have asked for government assistance to help them through another bleak winter. Shares in both companies fell sharply on Monday with losses accelerating towards the end of the working day after it’s feared new testing requirements will cause severe repercussions in terms of booking rates over the coming months. News that Air France and KLM may seek a fresh capital raise is also weighing on the sector which has pushed Rolls Royce and Melrose lower, given how reliant both companies are on the health of commercial aviation. There has been further downward pressure on the oil price following the recovery last week, putting pressure on Shell due to concerns the rapid spread of Omicron and reduced effectiveness of vaccines will lead to lower global demand as countries batten down the hatches and wait for a fresh wave of infections to hit. However mining stocks are higher with investors looking to the prospects of better growth in 2022 with the news that Beijing stands prepared to turn on the stimulus taps next year to help with the recovery, by cutting the amount of money it requires banks to hold in reserve as a share of deposits.” Back in the City, travel and hospitality shares have dropped deeper into the red as concerns over Omicron ripple through the markets. The FTSE 100 index of blue-chip share has now lost 55 points, or 0.75%, to 7236, the lowest in around a week. IAG, the parent company of British Airway, has dropped by 5.2%, with Rolls-Royce (which makes and services jet engines) down 4.8%, hours after the UK airline industry appealed for more support. Hotel groups Whitbread (-3.1%) and InterContinental (-2.8%), have also lost ground, on concerns that the hospitality sector will suffer from the latest Covid-19 restrictions. Banking group Lloyds have dropped by 4%, on expectations that the Bank of England is less likely to raise interest rates as quickly as thought (higher interest rates are good for bank profit margins). Oil stocks are also weaker, on concerns that demand for energy could be hit. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets says: European markets have undergone a subdued start to the week, initially opening higher, however as the day has progressed sentiment has gradually deteriorated, with the FTSE100 rolling over predominantly down to weakness in travel and leisure and the energy sector, as investors trim positions ahead of a big week for central bank meetings. Later this week we get to hear from the Federal Reserve, European Central Bank, Bank of Japan, and the Bank of England, who are all set to make key policy decisions, though only the Federal Reserve is set to announce a significant alteration in its policy settings. Some early week weakness in oil prices is weighing on the likes of BP and Shell, while the new restrictions that are due to start this week is prompting further weakness in the likes of airlines with IAG, easyJet, Ryanair and Wizz Air all sharply lower, after calling for further government support as they look to ride out the effects of the latest set of restrictions. Rolls-Royce and Premier Inn owner Whitbread are also under pressure for the same reason. The founder of Wetherspoons, Tim Martin, has criticised restrictions designed to curb the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 as “arbitrary”, warning that the pub chain’s first half profits could be wiped out by what he called “lockdown by stealth”. In an update to the stock market, JD Wetherspoon told investors that “uncertainty, and the introduction of radical changes of direction by the government, make predictions for sales and profits hazardous”. The company, which consistently reported soaring sales before the pandemic, suffered a £105.4m loss in the year to July 2020 followed by a record £195m deficit the year after, as coronavirus restrictions took their toll. It had been hoping to rebound from the impact of the pandemic this year but told investors that the government’s plan B for tackling Omicron, including guidance to work from home where possible, meant it was likely to be “loss-making or marginally profitable” for the first half of its financial year. Passenger numbers on London Underground were down almost 20% in the morning peak on Monday as some – but far from all – took government advice to work from home. Almost exactly 1m entries or exits to Britain’s busiest public transport network were recorded before 10am, about 220,000 fewer than the previous Monday, as the official guidance to work from home where possible came into effect. Around 30% fewer people than last Monday also tapped in on Manchester’s Metrolink tram system, according to Transport for Greater Manchester, following the measures announced last week by Boris Johnson to curb the spread of the Omicron variant. Bus travel in London was down less sharply, with 6% fewer passengers on board before 10am. The vacuum cleaner maker Dyson has told many of its UK employees to continue working in the office, claiming that large portions of its business are impossible to carry out from home. Dyson’s billionaire owner, Sir James Dyson, has consistently opposed working from home and the company has stuck to that line despite the rise of the Omicron coronavirus variant, stoking concern among some employees. All Dyson offices should remain open, according to an internal message sent to all UK staff last week after the prime minister announced the new plan B guidance advising work from home. Here’s the full story, by my colleagues Jasper Jolly and Rob Davies: Shopper numbers at UK retailers fell by 1.1% last week, as people kept away from the high street. Research group Springboard reports that footfall at UK high streets fell by 2.7% in the week to last Saturday (11th December). That’s partly due to bad weather last Tuesday, when shopper numbers dropped sharply. But the anticipated uplift on Saturday did not occur, with a drop in footfall of -1.2%, suggesting that concerns over Omicron kept people away. Springboard say: Although Plan B restrictions had not yet come fully into force, the first effects were already being felt last week with a drop in footfall from the week before of -3% in Central London, -5.3% in Springboard’s Central London Back to the Office benchmark and -1.6% in other regional cities, versus a rise of +1.5% in market towns. Goldman Sachs is asking its UK staff to return to working from home, Financial News reports, joining many of its banking rivals in rolling back its return to office programme. FN say: The US investment bank, which started a widespread return to office programme in September, has told its 6,000 staff in its Plumtree Court headquarters to work from home if they can, Goldman Sachs International chief executive Richard Gnodde told employees on 10 December, according to a person familiar with the matter. Goldman has also just launched a programme to start training apprentices directly on its London trading floor for the first time next year. It will combine paid on-the-job training with study over four years, offering students a chance to gain hands-on experience. The scheme could feed into wider efforts to boost social mobility across the UK’s financial sector, by helping candidates from less-affluent backgrounds. More here. Pharmaceuticals giant Pfizer has struck a $6.7bn deal to buy Arena Pharmaceuticals, a company developing treatments for several immuno-inflammatory diseases. Pfizer has agreed to pay $100 per share for Arena, double Friday night’s closing price - sending Arena’s shares soaring 95% in pre-market trading. Arena is developing several treatments for gastroenterology, dermatology and cardiology. Its lead candidate, etrasimod, is being tested in a late-stage study in ulcerative colitis, as well as a mid-to-late stage study in Crohn’s disease. Mike Gladstone, global president &amp; general manager, Pfizer Inflammation and Immunology, says: The proposed acquisition of Arena complements our capabilities and expertise in Inflammation and Immunology, a Pfizer innovation engine developing potential therapies for patients with debilitating immuno-inflammatory diseases with a need for more effective treatment options. “Utilizing Pfizer’s leading research and global development capabilities, we plan to accelerate the clinical development of etrasimod for patients with immuno-inflammatory diseases.” Major British airlines have called on the government to remove testing rules for vaccinated passengers and provide economic support for the battered sector. In a letter to prime minister Boris Johnson, the leaders of UK airlines say they are deeply concerned about the “haphazard and disproportionate approach” to travel restrictions since the emergence of the Omicron variant. All passengers arriving in the UK now have to take a pre-departure Covid test because of fears about the spread of the new variant, and must also take a PCR test after arriving. The letter urges the government to remove “all emergency testing for fully vaccinated passengers” at the formal review on 20 December. It also calls for “a package of bespoke economic support measures” to be provided immediately to help the sector through this crisis. The letter, signed by the bosses of British Airways, easyJet, Ryanair, Loganair, Virgin Atlantic and Jet2.com, the managing director of TUI UK &amp; Ireland, and the CEO of trade body Airlines UK, says: Only the UK requires pre-departure and post-arrival PCR tests, irrespective of vaccination status. Whilst we have heard much talk of cracking down on the ‘rip-off’ testing regime – charging up to £399 for a PCR test – we’ve seen precious little action, despite repeated promises. We have also seen immediate problems with red list arrivals, with many customers booking hotels which either were not ready or had been double booked, requiring them to rebook and pay again. Many people are stranded abroad through no fault of their own, due to a policy that cannot be executed properly. We and our customers feel sincerely let down, having believed a more pragmatic, evidence-led approach to travel, in line with the rest of the world, had been achieved and agreed by all concerned just a few months ago. Instead, the layering of additional travel restrictions, introduced at short notice without consultation or discernible strategy, have disrupted Christmas plans and severely undermined customer sentiment just before the crucial Christmas and New Year booking season (up to 30% of tickets are sold). Shares in travel and hospitality companies are coming under pressure today, amid concerns over the Omicron variant. British Airways parent company, IAG, is now down 4%, making it the top faller on the FTSE 100 index, followed by jet engine maker and servicer Rolls-Royce (-3.5%). Whitbread, which owns the Premier Inns hotel chain, are down 3%, with Intercontinental Hotels off 1.7%. Commercial property group British Land (-2%), and banking group Lloyds (-2.1%) are also in the fallers. On the smaller FTSE 250, budget airline easyJet’s shares have dropped 4.3%, with Wizz Air down 3.2%, and ticketing group Trainline down 5.3%, on concerns that the travel sector could be hit by more restrictions. And JD Wetherspoon’s shares are now down almost 4% at their lowest level in over a year, after its Covid warning. Back in the UK, pub chain JD Wetherspoon has flagged that uncertainty over Covid-19 and the government’s new restrictions will hit its sales. In a trading update, Wetherspoons says that it may be “loss-making or marginally profitable” in the first half of its financial year (which runs from late July to late January 2022). The company says the restrictions announced last week will hit the hospitality sector, making it hard to predict sales and profits, with some customers, especially older patrons, “understandably cautious”. Wetherspoons told the City: Last week the Government announced the implementation of “Plan B”, which involves additional restrictions, including advice to work from home. Many hospitality companies, trade organisations and economists have highlighted the negative implications for pubs and restaurants. The uncertainty, and the introduction of radical changes of direction by the Government, make predictions for sales and profits hazardous. Chairman Tim Martin adds that the government’s ‘arbitrary changes of direction’ are hurting trading, saying: “In spite of reports of labour shortages and supply difficulties, Wetherspoon pubs, with few exceptions, are fully stocked and fully staffed. However, the repeated warnings and calls for restrictions, mainly from SAGE members and academics, combined with arbitrary changes of direction from the Government, invariably at short notice, affect customer sentiment and trade. “In effect, the country appears to be heading towards a lockdown by stealth. Shares in JD Wetherspoon are down 2.6% so far today, with other hospitality firms also suffering from Covid-19 worries. Turkey’s central bank intervened today to support the lira, after it dropped close to a record low of 15 to the US dollar. It’s the fourth recent intervention, as Reuters explains: The Turkish Central Bank said on Monday it was directly intervening in the foreign exchange market, selling dollars due to “unhealthy price formations” in exchange rates, after the lira weakened to fresh record lows against the dollar. At 1000 GMT, the lira stood at 14.3000 versus the U.S. currency, firming from an all-time low of 14.99 earlier. The currency is still some 3% weaker than Friday’s close. It was the fourth time the bank has announced intervention in two weeks. At one stage, the lira was down almost 7%, hit by worries over President Tayyip Erdogan’s economic policies and the possibility of another another interest rate cut on Thursday. A Reuters poll last week found that investors expect Turkey’s central bank cut its policy rate by 100 basis points to 14% this week. But the current volatility could make that difficult. Ipek Ozkardeskaya, senior analyst at Swissquote Bank, says: “Honestly I don’t think they can carry out another 100 bps cut this week. The lira has been very volatile for the past few weeks, and S&amp;P has downgraded to a negative outlook. The markets will have very little tolerance to such a move.” The Turkish lira has plunged to fresh record lows today, after ratings agency S&amp;P cut its outlook on Turkey late last week. The lira, already the worst performing emerging market economy, crumbled through 14 lira to the US dollar for the first time, down 2.8% at 14.2 lira/$. The slide puts more pressure on Turkey’s central bank, which traders fear could cut interest rates again this week, despite the deepening currency crisis. On Friday, S&amp;P Global Ratings lowered its outlook on Turkey’s sovereign credit rating to negative, pointing to the lira’s recent weakening and the jump in inflation to 20%. S&amp;P warned: “The negative outlook reflects what we view to be rising risks to Turkey’s externally leveraged economy over the next 12 months from extreme currency volatility and rising inflation, amid mixed policy signals.” It added that Turkey could be downgraded if the currency crisis continues: “We could lower the ratings if Turkey’s economic policy mix further undermined the exchange rate of the lira and worsened the inflation outlook, heightening the risk of banking system distress and thereby implying potential contingent liabilities for the government.” Turkey’s central bank has cut interest rates several times in recent months, down to 15% (updated). It has faced persistent prompting from president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan who insists high interest rates cause inflation (most economists argue they curb it). The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey meets on Thursday, and could lower rates again -- despite the slump in the lira which will push up import costs. Meanwhile, Turkey’s treasury &amp; finance Minister Nureddin Nebati has told Haberturk newspaper that the country’s economy will “rapidly improve”, without the need to raise interest rates. New analysis from the New Economics Foundation shows the top 5% of families have gotten richer by £3,300 a year since the December 2019 election, while the poorest 50% have had their incomes squeezed by £110. As a result, it says, there are 300,000 more families in poverty than two years ago, putting them in greatest risk from the cost of living squeeze. And with incomes in London and the south-east rising six times faster than in red wall regions since Boris Johnson’s 2019 election victory, the government’s ‘levelling up’ agenda in doubt, it warns. While measures such as the furlough scheme protected the earnings of workers, there was less support on average, for the poorest, leading to more inequality. Alfie Stirling, director of research and chief economist at NEF, explains: “These results show that the government’s handling of the pandemic has led to the richest families and regions getting richer, while the poorest families are even poorer. With prices expected to continue increasing, the threat of a rise in interest rates and ongoing effects of Brexit, things could get a lot tougher for families that have already suffered most. “In the long run, any agenda to tackle these issues needs to grasp the fundamental drivers of regional inequalities for places, people, and industry. But in the short term, more should be done to help families through the social security system. NEF’s proposal for a Living Income would ensure an income floor that reflects the true cost of living for families.” The report found that: Families in the top 50% of disposable incomes have seen their living standards improve across the board, though fastest in London and the south-east. Meanwhile families in the poorest 50% have seen incomes fall everywhere except for London and eastern England. Losses are concentrated to those outside of work but even within workless families there’s large variation across regions, with average losses of more than £200 per year in Yorkshire and the Humber and the north-west and Merseyside, compared with small gains in the south-east and south-west. Single parents were the worst affected families across all regions, with single parent families in Yorkshire and the Humber and the north-west and Merseyside seeing their incomes fall by around 15 times as much as in London. NEF have tweeted some of the key points: Britain’s antitrust regulator is taking a look at Microsoft’s $16bn takeover of artificial intelligence and speech technology firm Nuance Communication. The Competition and Markets Authority says it is considering whether the deal would lead to a “substantial lessening of competition” within UK markets. It’s inviting comments from interested parties by 10th January (details here). Nuance, is known for its pioneering speech technology, and Microsoft plans to use its voice-recognition tools to improve its cloud-computing offerings to healthcare and business customers. The Nuance deal is Microsoft’s second-largest ever, after the $26bn purchase of LinkedIn. On Friday, Reuters reported that Microsoft was set to secure unconditional EU antitrust approval for the deal. After a frenetic year, UK house prices dipped by 0.7% this month, according to Rightmove. It reports that asking prices have seen their usual “December dip”, down £2,234 to £340,167 on its index. But 2022 is likely to still be busy, with Rightmove predicting prices will rise 5% in 2022 due to strong buyer demand, with more homeowners apparently getting ready to sell. UK factories aren’t the only ones lifting their prices. Over in Germany, manufacturers have hiked the cost of their wares by 16.6% in November, compared with a year ago. That’s the biggest annual rise in wholesale prices since the survey began in 1962, and suggests consumers face paying more for German-built goods. The Federal Statistics Office explained: The high rates of change for wholesale prices in annual comparison derive from increased prices for raw materials and intermediate products. Mineral oil producers hiked their prices by 62% year-on-year -- underlining how energy prices have soared. Gas prices are rising this morning, as Europe’s energy crunch continues. The day-ahead price for UK gas has risen by 7% to 281p per therm, its highest level since prices spiked in early October. The UK wholesale gas contract for January has jumped 8% this morning, while the benchmark Dutch contract for February is up over 10%. Gas prices have been pushed up by the possibility of the US imposing economic sanctions on Russia, as the military buildup on its border with Ukraine continues. Electricity prices are also sharply higher again today, as colder weather drives up demand. European stock markets have risen in early trading, as investors remain hopeful that Omicron will not badly disrupt the economic recovery. The pan-European Stoxx 600 is up 0.4%, with Germany’s DAX jumping by 0.7%. But the UK’s market is lagging, with the blue-chip FTSE 100 gaining just 0.1%. Mining stocks are higher, after China signaled it will focus on keeping growth stable next year. But travel companies are lower, such as airline group IAG (-1.4%) and ticketing group Trainline (-2.7%). Traders are shrugging off last Friday’s surge in US inflation to 6.8%, its highest in almost 40 years. Mark Haefele, chief investment officer at UBS Global Wealth Management, says: We view the relatively muted market reaction to Friday’s data as justified, with the S&amp;P ending Friday up 0.95%. We believe markets can continue take a higher inflation reading in their stride, though additional volatility remains a risk.” The pound could come under more pressure in the coming weeks, warns Bloomberg: Sterling fell 0.4% to $1.3225 as of 7 a.m. in London, approaching a one-year low after Prime Minister Boris Johnson warned of a “tidal wave” of virus cases that threatens to overwhelm the country’s health system. The message added to fears about the country’s sputtering recovery and forcing traders to pare back bets on a Bank of England rate hike on Thursday -- which just weeks ago looked like a done deal. Mizuho Bank Ltd., MUFG and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce see a deeper decline toward $1.30 or beyond in the coming weeks, while sentiment in the options market is close to the most bearish in 12 months. The pound has dipped this morning, after Boris Johnson warned the UK faces a “tidal wave” of Omicron infections. Sterling has dropped by half a cent to $1.3225, near last week’s one-year lows, as traders assess the risk of new restrictions, and the impact on the economy. Shafiq Shabir, head of electronic trading at Intertrader, says uncertainty over the pandemic will make it harder for the Bank of England to raise interest rates on Thursday. There’s no doubt that inflation is causing a persistent headache for central bankers, but with increased uncertainty around Covid-19, it may well be the case that the Bank has missed its opportunity to act. In reality, it is still early days with the emergence of Omicron, and we won’t know its economic impact for some time, while labour shortages continue to persist. It’s easy to see the MPC taking a “wait and see” approach until more evidence emerges. Should we see a rate rise, it would no doubt send a seismic shock through jittery financial markets – quite the turnaround from November.” A third of UK small businesses are planning to make staff redundant over the next few months, rising to more than four in 10 in London, according to a new survey. In a clear sign of the financial stress felt by many owner-run businesses as they head into a potentially difficult new year period, many also said they would be forced to raise prices -- which will fuel the wage squeeze. The poll of 442 businesses found many were struggling with repaying the debts they racked up to get them through the pandemic as well as grappling with other challenges from supply chain disruption to shortages of key staff such as drivers and chefs, and high energy costs. More here: A record number of UK manufacturers are raising their prices as inflation accelerates, which could intensify the cost of living squeeze facing families. Make UK, which represents the UK manufacturing industry, reports that a balance of +52% of factories raised prices in the current quarter, with +58% expecting to hike them in Q1 2022. These are the highest readings since the question was first asked back in the year 2000, and sharply higher than before Covid and Brexit. Make UK says: To give an indication of just how sharply inflation has bitten, and how manufacturers have responded, the equivalent balance in Q4 2019 before the onset of the pandemic and leaving the EU was just +5%. [A balance of 0% would mean an equal number of factories planned to either raise or lower prices]. Factories have faced a surge in commodity costs, with some also raising wages to attract and retain staff. James Brougham, Senior Economist at Make UK, says these costs are being passed on: “While manufacturers will be able to enjoy some festive cheer this year, their spirits will be tempered by the eye watering impact of escalating cost pressures which are leading an increasing number to pass these on to the consumer. Given the global nature of some of these pressures there is little sign that they will abate anytime soon. However, they will hope as we enter a fresh year that these will gradually unwind, with the compensation being that demand prospects among their major markets continues to look reasonably strong.” Here are the main findings from the Make UK/BDO Q4 Manufacturing Outlook: Prices increased for the fourth quarter in a row, and expected to continue into 2022 Output volumes and orders suggest a slowdown but growth remains strong Domestic market orders outpace export orders, but both slowing Employment growth stable, investment still positive but scaling back slightly Expectations for Q1 2021 remain positive, but manufacturers expect further slowing Manufacturing output growth forecast for 2021 at 6.9% and 3.3% for 2022 Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. UK workers are facing their toughest Christmas wage squeeze in a decade, as wages fail to keep up with rising prices in the shops, trade unions warn today. The Trades Union Congress (TUC) has warned that pay is lagging behind inflation, creating a cost of living storm. It estimates that in the final quarter of this year, pay growth (+0.8%) will rise at just half the speed of inflation (+1.6%). That means the largest fall in real wages since 2012 and the second worse since comparable records began 2000. Families are being hit by surging energy costs and rising food bills, while manufacturers have been passing on their increased costs to customers. And with the economy barely growing in October, firms may struggle to lift wages even as they scramble to attract workers. TUC general secretary Frances O’Grady is urging the government to intervene and work with unions to boost pay across the economy: “People should be able to look forward to Christmas without having to worry about how they’ll pay for it. “Millions are facing a cost of living storm as bills soar and real pay falls. After more than a decade of wage stagnation, this is the last thing working families need. “The government can’t sit this crisis out. We need a proper plan to get pay packets rising across the economy, or the squeeze on household budgets will continue. Ministers should get around the table with unions and employers now and work out fair pay agreements for every industry. That’s the best way to boost living standards and ease the pressure on households.” In October, UK inflation surged to a 10-year high of 4.2%, and is expected to hit 5% next year. Wage growth has slowed recently, though, with underling earnings growth estimated at 3.4%-4.9% for the July-September quarter. Also coming up today European markets are set to open higher, as investors await monetary policy decisions from the US Federal Reserve (on Wednesday) and the Bank of England and the European Central Bank (Thursday). The Bank of England must assess whether to raise interest rates to tackle inflation, or resist until it knows more about the Omicron variant. Sanjay Raja, chief UK economist for Deutsche Bank, predicts the BoE will raise borrowing costs - although other City voices predict no change. Raja says: Fundamentally, news of the Omicron variant has changed little on the medium-term economic outlook. The labour market remains as tight as it has been in recent memory, in spite of the furlough scheme ending on 30 September. And inflation continues to outpace staff forecasts, despite a sizeable upward revision in the November Monetary Policy Report. Moreover, the potential disruption from Omicron may lead to even more inflationary pressures in the medium term, with supply chain bottlenecks and labour shortages/mismatches further exacerbated by rising restrictions, both domestically and globally. It’s a finely balanced, decision, though, he adds. Later today the Bank of England will release its assessment of the strength of the UK financial system, and the results of its annual stress tests on banks. These are expected to show that banks have strong capital cushions, which could clear the way for more lending to support the economy through the pandemic. According to the Mail on Sunday, the BoE is also preparing to dilute the UK’s mortgage rules, loosening affordability restrictions to make it easier for borrowers to take out larger home loans. And millions of office workers could be working from their home offices, attics or kitchen tables again, as the government asks people in England to work remotely “if you can”. The agenda 5pm BST: Bank of England publishes Financial Stability Report 5pm BST: Bank of England publishes results of its 2021 Solvency Stress Tests on the UK banking systemThe budget airline Ryanair has divided opinion on social media with a barb aimed at the UK government’s latest travel restrictions and Covid-prevention measures. In a widely shared tweet, Ryanair posted a chart that mocked the government’s own Covid alert graphics, comparing the rising Covid alert status as a result of the threat of the Omicron variant to rising levels of partying among government figures. The Ryanair partying levels start at “small gathering with wine and cheese”, a reference to the hospitality offering at the alleged Downing St party on 18 December last year, and rise to a second level of the prime minister hosting a pub quiz – pictures of which appeared to emerge over the weekend. The graphic suggests that higher levels of partying could include Michael Gove in charge of refreshments, Boris Johnson topless, and Jacob Rees-Mogg crying in a corner asking for nanny. Gove is reputed to be no stranger to a party, having been spotted dancing in a nightclub in Aberdeen in a fashion described as “merry” in September. Inevitably, there were those who considered it an ill-judged move, although it seems unlikely that a tweet like this would not have been signed off by senior management, rather than being an off-the-cuff response. There were also those gently poking fun at people who had been sanctimonious about the airline’s joke tweet. However, for a corporation to pointedly criticise the government’s pandemic response in this way is a risky reputational business, fraught with potential backlash. Ryanair’s own behaviour during the pandemic has also come in for criticism on social media. It has been a vocal critic of travel restrictions, but has also been accused of running “ghost flights” to destinations that have imposed restrictive travel measures in order to avoid having to pay out refunds. A viral tweet from a few days previously gained a new lease of life in the wake of Ryanair’s social media attack on the government. The airline is no stranger to publicity stunts. It has previously suggested selling standing-only tickets and charging passengers to use in-flight toilets in order to keep fares artificially low. Still, the Ryanair tweet didn’t quite conjure up quite as graphic a picture of the Downing Street parties as some did after Johnson’s TV address on Sunday.Sergio Agüero is due to announce his retirement from football on Wednesday because of a heart condition, six months after Manchester City’s record scorer joined Barcelona as a free agent. The 33-year-old experienced chest problems and breathing difficulties during the first half of Barcelona’s 1-1 draw with Alavés on 30 October. Agüero fell to the turf at the Camp Nou clutching his chest and was treated for several minutes before being able to walk off. He was admitted to hospital for cardiological tests, the club later stating that he would be out for three months and would undertake a “diagnostic and therapeutic process”. Agüero, though, is unable to resume a glittering 18-year-career that began at Independiente, when he became Argentina’s youngest top-flight debutant. After three years the striker moved to Atlético Madrid in 2006, before signing for City in 2011. His first season at the club ended in a career highlight when his 94th-minute winner against Queens Park Rangers snatched top spot from Manchester United and gave City a first title since 1968. A decade at the club saw him score 260 goals in 390 appearances, 184 of which were in the Premier League, a record for one team. His final City appearance ended in the heartbreak of a Champions League final defeat by Chelsea, with another career low point being the 2014 World Cup final loss to Germany. In five matches for Barcelona Agüero scored once, in a 2-1 defeat by Real Madrid. He found the net 41 times in 101 games for Argentina.Few people played tennis as beautifully as Manuel Santana. And few have played a greater role in popularising their sport in a major nation. It is not an exaggeration to say that millions of people play tennis in Spain today because Santana, who has died aged 83, won Wimbledon in 1966. It was not just that a Spaniard won Wimbledon, although he was the first to do so, but that he was the son of a groundskeeper at a tennis club in Madrid. He was a ball boy. He came from the working classes who, in the days of the dictator Francisco Franco, were not supposed to play rich men’s sports. And tennis in Spain, right up to the 1960s, was a sport reserved for those who could afford to belong to a country club. More so than in most European nations, you had to be almost connected to the aristocracy to wield a racket. The immensity of Santana’s achievement was enhanced by the fact that he ended up being the frequent squash partner of the former king, Juan Carlos. And, for that, the beguiling, delightful Manolo could thank his charm as much as his talent. The moment Franco reacted to the national outpouring of happiness for their new humble hero by clutching Santana to his chest when he returned from Wimbledon, the class wall that separated the game from the masses came down. Santana had been honoured by Franco before because Wimbledon was not the first of Santana’s grand slam triumphs. He had won the French title in 1961 and 1964, and the US in 1965. But Wimbledon stood head and shoulders above every other tennis tournament in public awareness at that time, and his victory over Dennis Ralston in the final flipped a switch with sports fans in Spain. Tennis was suddenly a sport everyone wanted to play. The children who used to grab 10 minutes to hit leftover balls with dilapidated rackets were given proper opportunities to play. Almost immediately the next generation started to come through, led by the talented Manuel Orantes, a Catalan from a poor family, and soon after that José Higueras, a ballboy at the upper-crust Real Club de Barcelona, who eventually settled in California because he still found it difficult to mingle with the members when he became No 1 in Spain. “We owe everything to Manolo,” said Higueras, referring to Santana: “He opened the door.” Born in Madrid, to Mercedes Martínez and Braulio Santana, an electrician, Manolo (Manuel) left school when he was 10, and began working as a ballboy at Club Tenis de Velázquez. At the age of 13, he won the club’s ball boys’ tournament. After Braulio died when Manolo was 16, he was supported by Gloria Giron and her family. “By then I was beginning to play a little but I could only continue to do so because a family who were members of the club helped my mother with expenses, not just for my tennis but for my education,” he explained. His natural ability, highlighted by exquisite touch, quickly became obvious and by the time he played at Roland Garros, reaching the quarter-finals in 1960, he was developing a first serve of considerable power and a forehand that was becoming one of the game’s great strokes. The following year he announced his arrival at the top of the game in tremendous style, beating Roy Emerson and Rod Laver on the way to the final, where the reigning champion, Nicola Pietrangeli awaited him. “Nicola had been my idol growing up,” said Santana. “To play him in the final of the French and then to beat him in five sets was very emotional for me. I wanted to jump the net but I was scared so I climbed under the net as I had always done as a ball boy and there was Nicola with his arms wide open. I fell on his shoulder crying.” For this reporter it remains one of the great sights of sport – the new champion being consoled in the arms of the champion he had just defeated. They would remain lifelong friends. After winning Roland Garros for a second time in 1964, Santana made a brave, career-changing decision. “Tennis in those days was dominated by the Anglo-Saxon world and their preferred surface – grass,” Santana recounted when we spoke in Madrid several years ago. “Three of the grand slams were played on grass in those days and I knew I had to win on the surface to be taken seriously. So, in 1965, I decided not to play in Paris so that I could tune my game to the faster courts.” At Forest Hills that year, he claimed the US title by beating Cliff Drysdale in the final and was carried to the clubhouse on the shoulders of his cheering supporters. At Wimbledon, Emerson, the champion for two years and hot favourite to win again in 1966, crashed into the umpire’s chair after chasing a shot hurt his shoulder. The Australian struggled on but could not serve and was beaten by the left-handed Owen Davidson, a great doubles player with a modest singles record. Nevertheless, Davidson nearly made the most of his own good fortune by taking Santana to 7-5 in the fifth in the semi-final. For the Spaniard, the final proved easier. He beat Ralston, the American Davis Cup star, 6-4, 11-9, 6-4. Meanwhile, Santana had been busy becoming one of the most successful Davis Cup players of all time. With 92 singles and doubles victories in 46 ties, he cemented a position at No 3 behind Pietrangeli (120 wins) and Ilie Nastase of Romania (109) as the player with the most wins in the history of the competition. Largely as a result of his efforts, frequently supported by Juan Gisbert, Orantes and the Arilla brothers, Spain reached the Davis Cup Challenge Round twice, in Sydney in 1965 and Brisbane in 1967. But on grass Australia were virtually invincible in those days and the likes of Emerson, Laver and John Newcombe ensured easy victories. Retiring from the game in 1970 without the fortune now accrued by top stars, Santana, who spoke excellent English, was hired as a public relations officer by Philip Morris in Madrid and worked for the company for many years. He became Davis Cup captain for a spell in the late 90s, but had been replaced by the time Spain finally won the cup against Australia in Barcelona in 2000. Later, he established himself with his third wife, Otti Glanzelius, a Swede, as owner of the Manolo Santana Racquet Club in Marbella after several years as director of tennis at the nearby Puente Romano hotel. After testing the water by running a Europe v Latin America team match in Madrid in the 70s, Santana assumed the role of tournament director of the ATP Masters Series event in Madrid (2002) and the WTA Championships at the same venue (2006-08). He was latterly diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease. Santana’s first three marriages ended in divorce. In 1962 he married Maria Fernanda González-Dopeso, with whom he had a daughter and two sons. He also had a daughter with his second wife, Mila Ximenez, a journalist, and another from a relationship with Bárbara Oltra. In 2013 he married his fourth wife, Claudia Rodríguez. • Manuel Santana Martínez, tennis player, born 10 May 1938; died 11 December 2021A friend and carer of Steve Bronski, the co-founder of 1980s pop trio Bronski Beat, has revealed that he died in a fire at his flat in central London last week. News of Bronski’s death emerged on Thursday when fellow band member Jimmy Somerville announced on Twitter that he was “sad to hear Steve has died”, describing him as “talented and a very melodic man”. The cause of his death has not been officially confirmed and Somerville’s agent said he did not have any more information about it. But Josephine Samuel, who had cared for Bronski after a stroke, said he lived in a flat in Berwick Street that was the scene of a fatal fire on Tuesday. Samuel told the Guardian that she had visited Bronski at the address the day before the fire and has since returned to lay tributes to him. She said: “Because he had suffered a stroke, it was difficult for him to get up. He died from smoke inhalation.” Cards, flowers and photographs of Bronski and other members of the band have been laid at the entrance to the flat. They include a card left by Samuel and one card addressed to her that said: “Dear Josephine, My sincere condolences on your loss. Steve started the beat and it will never stop. Bronski Beat for ever. With very best wishes and deepest sympathy, a Small Town Boy. xx” Samuel, a 51-year-old gospel singer, said: “I remember him as gentle, quiet and kind, and a talented musician. I was mentioned in some of the songs he wrote but never released. “I cared for him all through his difficult time – about three years ago he suffered a stroke. I counselled him through depression. He treated me like a sister and I treated him as an older brother. We were very close.” Samuel, who had known Bronski for 16 years, added: “I came to visit him the day before he died. His death is like a nightmare to me, because I’ve been by his side for years. We are waiting to register the death before his body is taken to Scotland for burial.” On Tuesday a man was rescued from a first floor flat at the scene by firefighters wearing breathing apparatus. He died later in hospital, according to a spokesperson for London fire brigade, but she would not confirm his identity. A spokesperson for the Metropolitan police said that as the fire was deemed “non-suspicious”, the force could not confirm who died in the blaze. An office worker who works in a neighbouring building said he called the fire brigade when he saw smoke coming from the flat. He said: “Fire engines and ambulances came very quickly and we were moved to the end of the road.”Organisers of the Paris 2024 Olympics have unveiled a spectacular and audacious plan for the biggest opening ceremony in history, with a 6km parade of athletes in boats along the River Seine watched by more than 600,000 people. The athletes, who will be in more than 160 boats, will pass by Paris’s most iconic monuments, bridges and cultural institutions, including Notre Dame, the Louvre and the Eiffel Tower. Along the length of the Seine, the emblematic river in the heart of the city, dozens of artistic performances are expected to take place, including BMX stunt riders leaping high over bridges. The ceremony will then conclude with a final show at the Place du Trocadéro, which faces the Eiffel Tower. Not only will the opening ceremony be bigger than ever before but, for the first time, most of it will be free to spectators. Tony Estanguet, the president of the Paris 2024 organising committee, told the Guardian it would be the most “audacious and accessible” opening ceremony in the Games’ history. “It’s not the easiest way to deliver the Games, but it is our duty to be really ambitious,” he said. “It is the launch of the Olympics. It has to send a strong message that those Games will be unique. “One billion people will watch the ceremony. We want them to feel the best of France. It will be a unique combination of a sport and cultural moment, with the entire city turned into a vast Olympic stadium.” No director has yet been confirmed for the ceremony. However, in announcing the proposals in Paris on Monday evening, Estanguet promised the ceremony would be a “true moment of marvellous madness”. “The Seine represents the track, and the quays the spectators’ stands,” he said. “We want to ensure that we will showcase the best of sport, the best of culture, and offer a good show with music. The potential is unlimited. And over 600,000 people will have access – about 10 times more people than if it was staged in a traditional stadium. It will be a spectacular show.” The organisers’ plan is part of a wider policy to reimagine the Games, and take it to new audiences, with sports like breaking. Competitions will also be staged in the heart of the city, including beach volleyball at the foot of the Eiffel Tower, and equestrian sports at the Chateau de Versaille. Mass participation cycling and running events will also be staged on the Olympic courses during Paris 2024. Estanguet said he had the 10,000 participants at the Paris 2024 Games in mind when coming up with such innovative opening ceremony proposals. “I’ve been an Olympic athlete and it’s been magical,” he said. “But it’s also right to say that many athletes don’t participate in the opening ceremony because of the constraints of standing for hours and also getting back quite late to the village. “But with the boat parade they will have the choice to go back to the village if they want to go to bed early, or to stay for the second part of the ceremony in a mini stadium by the Trocadero in the face of the Eiffel Tower. Another part of our thinking is that we wanted to use the existing landmarks of Paris, not build them within the stadium.” Estanguet, a former canoeist and the only French athlete to have won a gold medal at three Olympic Games, also confirmed that organisers were working on announcing plans for the mascot and torch relay. “To be honest with you, I’m very comfortable with the way this project is going,” he said. “We have set and maintained the right level of ambition. We are still on budget. We are still on time. We will have difficulties to face over the coming years, because that always happens. But touch wood: so far, so good.”Real Madrid have emerged as the favourites to sign Antonio Rüdiger after positive talks with the Chelsea defender about joining on a free next summer. Rüdiger is yet to make progress with Chelsea over renewing his contract and the possibility of his leaving is a worry for Thomas Tuchel, who is dealing with uncertainty surrounding four defenders. César Azpilicueta, Andreas Christensen and Thiago Silva are also out of contract at the end of the season, although Silva is expected to agree a one-year extension soon. Tuchel has said that he does not want to lose Rüdiger, who played a key role in Chelsea winning the Champions League last season. The 28-year-old, who can start negotiating a pre-contract agreement with foreign clubs from 1 January, turned down Chelsea’s opening offer of £140,000 a week and is believed to want closer to £200,000 a week. The Germany international, who earns about £90,000 a week, has been in outstanding form this season and believes he should be on a similar level to the club’s top earners. There has been no breakdown in Rüdiger’s relationship with Chelsea, with both parties understood to view the situation as amicable, but the club’s hierarchy remains reluctant to return with an improved offer. That has opened the door for Madrid, who are leading the race to sign the centre-back. Paris Saint-Germain and Bayern Munich are interested in Rüdiger, but talks with Real Madrid are understood to have progressed at an encouraging pace. Rüdiger is one of the biggest personalities in Chelsea’s dressing room and underlined his importance by winning two penalties in last Saturday’s 3-2 win over Leeds. His attractiveness to Madrid is obvious; La Liga’s leaders would not have to pay a fee for one of the best defenders in the world and are willing to meet his demands. Chelsea have been left frustrated by Christensen changing his mind after twice reaching an agreement over a new deal. However there is confidence the centre-back will eventually commit himself to Chelsea. There is even more optimism over Silva. The Brazilian has impressed since joining on a free from PSG in 2020 and wants to stay with the club for another season. The 37-year-old remains in good shape and hopes to play at the World Cup in Qatar. Tuchel values Silva’s leadership and he has similar respect for Azpilicueta, who joined Chelsea from Marseille in 2012. Azpilicueta has been a hugely reliable figure and the expectation remains that the club captain will commit to another year, although there is strong interest in the 32-year-old Spain right-back from Atlético Madrid and Barcelona. Atlético could need to replace Kieran Trippier, who wants to return to England, and Barcelona’s financial position means they are on the hunt for free transfers. Azpilicueta is happy at Chelsea despite often sitting on the bench this season, but he could decide that this is a good time to return to Spain.California governor Gavin Newsom has pledged to empower private citizens to enforce a ban on the manufacture and sale of assault weapons in the state, citing the same authority claimed by conservative lawmakers in Texas to outlaw most abortions there after only around six weeks of pregnancy. “We will work to create the ability for private citizens to sue anyone who manufactures, distributes, or sells an assault weapon or ghost gun kit or parts in California,” the governor’s office said in a statement on Sunday. For three decades, California has banned the manufacture and sale of various assault-style weapons. However, in June, a federal judge overturned that ban, much to the ire of Democrats and gun-control activists, saying: “Like the Swiss army knife, the popular AR-15 rifle is a perfect combination for home defense weapon and homeland defense equipment. Good for both home and battle.” California’s ban remained in place while the state appealed. Newsom’s move draws inspiration from a controversial Texas law that allows private citizens to enforce the ban on abortions after the earliest fetal cardiac activity is detected, thus empowering them to sue abortion clinics and anyone else who “aids and abets” with the procedure. Last Friday, the US supreme court ruled that Texas abortion providers can sue over the state’s ban on most abortions, but allowed the law, the strictest such regulation in the US to date, to remain in effect, causing outrage within the court’s liberal-leaning minority and among pro-choice advocates. Newsom condemned the ruling, saying: “I am outraged by yesterday’s US Supreme Court decision allowing Texas’s ban on most abortion services to remain in place … But if states can now shield their laws from review by the federal courts that compare assault weapons to Swiss Army knives, then California will use the authority to protect people’s lives, where Texas used it to put women in harm’s way.” The governor added that he has directed his staff to work with California’s legislature and its Democratic attorney general to pass a law that would let private citizens sue to enforce California’s ban on assault weapons. Newsom said people who sue could win up to $10,000 per violation plus other costs and attorney fees. Newsom’s declaration is a fulfilled prophecy for some gun rights groups who had predicted progressive states would attempt to use Texas’s abortion laws to restrict access to guns.A former pastry chef at Heston Blumenthal’s Fat Duck restaurant has claimed she was left with crippling repetitive strain injury from placing sweets into bags using tweezers and hand-making chocolate playing cards and about 550 whisky wine gums a day, court documents show. Sharon Anderson, 30, who worked at the three Michelin-starred restaurant in Bray, Berks, between 2014 and 2015, claims she is now plagued by constant wrist pain, and is suing for £200,000 damages. Her work included putting 400 sweets a day into small bags using tweezers, racing against time to make chocolate playing cards before the chocolate set too hard, and administering hundreds of tiny fingertip pinches to mushroom logs, court documents state. Last week her lawyers told a high court judge that the “fast, arduous and repetitive” tasks meant she was effectively working on a factory floor as she made the concoctions dreamt up for the celebrity chef’s kitchen. “She was essentially on what was effectively a production line,” her barrister, Joel Kendall, said. The company denies liability, claiming the work she did was routine for a pastry chef in a “fine dining restaurant” and that she was given sufficient breaks. Lawyers acting on behalf of the restaurant claim there was a stark lack of medical evidence provided by Anderson. Anderson, of County Donegal, Ireland, claims her injury was caused by being made to perform work that was “too fast, arduous and repetitive for her.” In court documents, she states that her role included wrapping and packing about 400 individual sweets into cellophane bags from 7-11am, before she switched to creating chocolate playing cards from 11.30am to around 4pm. The chocolate playing cards were made in moulds of metal and plastic, while each mould could create 12 cards and weighed over a kilogram. The completed mould weighed about 2kg, it is claimed, and Anderson aimed to produce around 180 cards a day. “The process had to be carried out under time pressure as it had to be completed before the chocolate set in each mould,” her lawyers claim in court papers. Anderson went with the restaurant when it moved to Melbourne, Australia, in January 2015, while the Bray premises were renovated. From February 2015, her work followed a similar pattern to life in Bray, she claims, although she was under pressure to handle even more moulds, due to wastage caused by cards melting faster in the warmer climate. Her kitchen shift then switched to making whisky wine gums between 4pm and 6pm, she says, and she would produce around 550 by hand. She now suffers “significant wrist pain” even after carrying out normal manual tasks, court documents state. The injury means she has recurring problems with daily tasks such as heavy lifting, driving and – crucially – cooking, her lawyers said. They claim the restaurant failed to allow sufficient rest periods or support, and “required her to work under time pressure throughout the day”. After a brief court hearing, Judge Victoria McCloud adjourned the dispute, directing a case management conference for May 2022 ahead of a trial of her compensation claim.Survivors of disgraced former USA Gymnastics doctor Larry Nassar have reached a $380m settlement with USA Gymnastics, the US Olympic &amp; Paralympic Committee and their insurers after a five-year legal battle. The settlement was confirmed during a hearing in a federal bankruptcy court in Indianapolis on Monday. “This settlement is the result of the bravery of hundreds of survivors who, despite legal obstacles, long odds and the best corporate legal talent money can buy, refused to be silent. The power of their story eventually won the day,” John Manly, an attorney for the plaintiffs, said on Monday. The settlement will cover claims brought by hundreds of women. They include Olympic gold medalists Simone Biles, Aly Raisman and McKayla Maroney, all of whom are among the most high-profile survivors of Nassar’s sexual abuse. All three women testified about the abuse they suffered during a Senate hearing this year. At the hearing, they attacked USA Gymnastics and Olympic officials for failing to stop Nassar, and they took the FBI to task over its botched investigation into Nassar‘s actions. Rachael Denhollander, the first woman to publicly accuse Nassar of abuse, said she was relieved to have reached a conclusion to the battle for compensation. “This chapter is finally closed. Now the hard work of reform and rebuilding can begin. Whether or not justice comes, and change is made, depends on what happens next,” Denhollander tweeted on Monday. However, Denhollander added that the settlement would not completely heal the wounds of the women Nassar abused. “Justice has been done insofar as it can be, and it is good that we rejoice in that. But remember that tomorrow everyone wakes up still living the consequences. Don’t lose that reality in the midst of sober rejoicing in the truth,” she wrote. USA Gymnastics also agreed to set up a restorative justice program as part of the settlement. Under those terms, survivors will have a significant say in how USA Gymnastics deals with future allegations of sexual abuse. “The restorative justice process that’s part of this plan, you can’t buy that,” said attorney Mick Grewal, who represented dozens of women in the case. “It will be the gold standard for every institution that has a sexual assault problem.” Nassar, who had been the main doctor for Olympic gymnasts, was sentenced in federal court in 2017 to 60 years in prison on charges of possessing child sex abuse material. The following year, he was also sentenced to up to 175 years and up to 125 years, respectively, in two separate Michigan courts for abusing female gymnasts under his care. Monday’s settlement was reached after TIG Insurance agreed to pay a large portion of the money, the Wall Street Journal reported. USA Gymnastics filed for bankruptcy in 2018, after Olympic bronze medalist Jamie Dantzscher had filed a lawsuit and additional claims were filed on behalf of a growing number of survivors of Nassar’s abuse. It has since taken more than three years to reach a settlement. In 2018, Michigan State University, where Nassar taught and practiced medicine from 1997 until 2016 and where much of the abuse took place, reached a settlement of $500m with survivors of his abuse.Your starter for 10 … Sajid Javid audibly bristled. Ever since the photo of Boris Johnson hosting the Downing Street quiz night appeared at the weekend, cabinet ministers have become even more tetchy about being asked questions. So the health secretary was on the defensive throughout the morning media round and made little attempt to disguise the fact that he was appearing under duress. His return to cabinet has not been nearly as much fun as he had hoped. But with the Omicron variant spreading at breakneck speed, the Saj had little choice but to turn up to explain why the government had yet again been caught on the hop. How come, said Justin Webb on Radio 4’s Today programme, the government hadn’t accelerated its booster programme last week – or the week before – given the Omicron threat? And, come to think of it, why had Johnson installed such a hopeless deadbeat as Maggie Throup as vaccines minister? Someone charisma-free who could be relied on to take an age to do next to nothing. Wasn’t that a sign the government had rather taken its eye off the ball in regard to Covid? Even though the possibility of a new variant appearing – as it had in the form of the Alpha variant last year – was always on the cards, Boris had acted as if the worst of the pandemic was over. Javid sighed heavily. Typical BBC to put a negative spin on the superb efforts of the government. It’s now become axiomatic in Boris circles that the BBC should be condemned for failing to do the jobs the prime minister had been unable to do himself. It was the magic of Christmas, Javid said, for the government to be caught out twice in the same way by the coronavirus. An Xmas miracle that would have taken anyone by surprise. Apart from all those doctors and epidemiologists who had widely predicted it. Try to concentrate on the upside, the Saj continued. Everyone over 18 was going to be offered a booster jab by the end of the year. And as he was effectively offering them the jab now, this was one promise the government could claim to have delivered more than two weeks ahead of schedule. So how about some applause for that? But if nitpickers like Webb were going to insist the target meant actual jabs in arms, then he would promise that as well. Even though that meant administering well north of a million vaccines a day when our previous best for a week had been under 600,000 a day back in May. Now it was Webb’s turn to be taken by surprise. Surely this meant the NHS would struggle to cope with its ordinary caseload and that more people would die of non-Covid conditions? “People who feel they have cancer will be treated,” the Saj said gnomically. No one had a clue what he meant. You’ve either got cancer or you haven’t, and you almost always need specific tests to determine whether a specific symptom is cancer or not, and Javid had done little to reassure anyone they would get the treatment they need. As so often, it felt as if the health secretary was winging it. “Let’s talk about Boris Johnson,” said Webb. “Why bother?” snapped Javid. Er … because he’s the prime minister and he’s up to his neck in trouble over the exponential spread of Downing Street parties. “What are his qualities?” Webb persisted. Other than that he’s a liar and raging narcissist. The Saj paused. Trying to dig up just one positive thing to say. “Er … I think people who watched the prime minister’s TV address will have seen someone focused on the nation’s challenges.” Or not. Most will have seen a wreck of a human in his late 50s with the haircut of a 10-year-old who had wandered into a skunk farm with a pair of secateurs by mistake. Someone who was too scared to do a press conference in case he was asked any difficult questions. “The prime minister works every minute of every day,” Javid concluded. Though obviously not including the times when he’s hosting parties – it’s a wonder any work was done in Downing Street last Christmas – or having babies. Come to think of it, if this is Boris working 24/7, we might be better off with him taking more time off. Johnson did briefly appear in person around lunchtime to do a news clip from the vaccination centre. Apart from talking up what a brilliant job he had done on Omicron – it was a mystery why we had run out of lateral flow tests – his main contribution was to say that he hadn’t broken any Covid rules last Xmas. No, it was just everyone else in Downing Street who had, and he didn’t give a toss what happened to them. Loyalty was for wimps. Besides, he couldn’t possibly be held accountable for what went on in his place of work. Or indeed his flat. How could he possibly have known that most of his staff were pissed when he was busy thinking up trick questions, such as “Have you had assurance you have not knowingly broken the lockdown rules?” It was left to Javid to make a second public appearance – this time in the Commons – to give a statement on everything the prime minister had already announced over the past 24 hours. Though not before the Speaker called out Johnson for not having the grace or guts to make the statement in person. When it comes to quizzes, it turns out that these days Boris is much happier setting the questions than asking them. In reply, the shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, took issue with some of the details of Javid’s statement on the availability of tests, but said Labour would never play politics with public health and would thus be supporting the booster programme. His only slightly fanciful moment came when he asked the prime minister to be straight with the country. Boris has never been straight with anyone, so why change the habit of a lifetime? Streeting then got a grip and said it was up to everyone else to show leadership in the absence of any from Johnson. Javid had to actively restrain himself from agreeing. The health secretary has nearly had enough of cleaning up Boris’s shitshows. What followed was all quite reasonable and amicable. A measure perhaps of how much Omicron has spooked MPs on all sides of the house. Even Mark Harper, who seldom resists the chance to preen his defiance to any measure that might save lives, sounded conciliatory. The one awkward moment came for Javid came when Andrea Leadsom wondered what he might say to her constituent who was now more scared of government intrusion into civil liberty than Covid. The Saj was noncommittal. Though he could have said: “See if she feels the same way when she or a relative are on life support.” • This article was amended on 14 December 2021 because an earlier version referred to the Delta variant emerging last year, rather than Alpha. • A Farewell to Calm by John Crace is published by Guardian Faber, price £9.99. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.A woman accused of helping to topple the statue of the slave trader Edward Colston told police it was “an abhorrent offence” to the population of Bristol, a court has heard. Rhian Graham was one of four people to go on trial at Bristol crown court accused of criminal damage of the 125-year-old bronze statue, which was pulled from its plinth during Black Lives Matter protests last year, and thrown in the River Avon. The jury heard that Graham said in a police interview: “I accept that I helped cause the damage to the statue. “But whether it is criminal or not I think is up for debate, because of all the context around the statue, and the fact that people have campaigned to take it down and it is just an abhorrent offence to a lot of the population of Bristol.” Opening for the prosecution, however, William Hughes QC told the jury of six men and six women that the fact that Colston was a slave trader was “wholly irrelevant” to the case before them. Graham, 30, was accused alongside Milo Ponsford, 26, Sage Willoughby, 22, and “others unknown” of helping to tie ropes around the statue’s neck that were used to pull it to the ground. Jake Skuse, 33, was accused of helping to roll it to Bristol harbour, where it was thrown into the River Avon. Hughes said that at 2pm on 7 June last year a peaceful march had begun in the city as part of the worldwide Black Lives Matter demonstrations after the murder of George Floyd by Derek Chauvin, a police officer in Minnesota. While the bulk of the 10,000-strong crowd proceeded on a route agreed by organisers, a “small number of individuals” gathered around the statue of Colston in the city centre, which became their “focus of attention”, Hughes said. “Using ropes brought to the scene, the statue was pulled down from its plinth by members of this small group, who included the first three defendants,” he argued. “After being daubed with paint, spat on and being struck with implements, the statue was then rolled through the centre and thrown into the harbour at Pero’s bridge. “The fourth defendant – Mr Skuse, the crown say – was involved in this later activity of rolling the statue from its original place to where it was thrown into the water.” There were cheers and applause from the public gallery when video played to the jury showed the moment Colston was felled, prompting a warning from the judge, Peter Blair QC, the recorder of Bristol. Hughes said the video clearly showed the defendants taking part in the actions that damaged the statue. Hughes told the court: “The prosecution accept and make clear Edward Colston himself was and remains a divisive figure among the people of Bristol and beyond. It is common ground that he was a slaver and gained much of his fortune from the slave trade. “In later life, it appears Colston was also something of a philanthropist. This prosecution is not about justification of him or his vilification; the prosecution’s position is that it is wholly irrelevant to the issues you have to decide in this case. The defence position is the contrary – that it is relevant.” All four defendants were interviewed by police in the weeks after the protest. Skuse and Ponsford answered no comment to all questions, while Graham and Willoughby admitted the role they played but argued it was justified. Hughes said that when the statue was pulled out of the River Avon four days later it was estimated that the cost of repairing it would be about £3,750, and that a further £350 worth of damage was caused to the railings by Pero’s bridge. Bristol city council have since chosen not to repair the damage to the statue, and it now lies, still broken and daubed with paint, in a museum in the city. Skuse, Graham, Ponsford and Willoughby all deny criminal damage. The case continues.I like to think of myself as a generous person with pockets of tightness, rather than a tight person with a blind spot in pubs. One of these pockets is around grocery delivery services. You know: you need a green pepper, a gale is blowing outside, so you get some poor kid on a bike to go to the supermarket for you and, by some miracle of modern capitalism, your pepper is only 30p more expensive than it would be normally, as long as you also order ice-cream. It’s not the money that bugs me, just the underlying Marxist truism – that if some of us refuse to do any of our own menial tasks, others will end up doing all menial tasks for everyone. Plus, we live next door to a supermarket and I’m not even exaggerating, except by a small amount. Mr Z, on the other hand, loves a grocery service. To give him his right of reply, he would argue that I outsource more menial tasks than he does, to which I would reply … no, wait, I can’t give myself a right to reply to his imaginary reply. Anyway, we have this argument at least twice a day, so it was only a matter of time before we would have it in a cab and I would want to bring the driver into it. “My husband,” I intoned with a certain amount of seriousness, “really likes Gorillas, while I disapprove.” “You disapprove of gorillas?” he asked, baffled. I paused to disambiguate, as they say on Wikipedia. “This is like that penguin in Japan,” the driver observed, once he had got to the bottom of our beef. “He goes to the fish shop every day and they give him a fish. He has a backpack.” We broke off to find the penguin on the internet. By the time we had watched as Lala, a 10-year-old king penguin, went shopping on his own, we had arrived at our destination. There was a question mark over who the driver had been agreeing with. According to me, me: if a penguin can go to the shop on his own, a human can buy its own stupid green pepper. According to Mr Z, him. Or rather, how can you argue about a thing like this when a miracle penguin exists? Genius diplomacy by the driver, in other words: five stars. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistAn Instagram user with the handle @metaverse last month found herself blocked from her account, which featured a decade of her life and work – after parent company Facebook changed its corporate name to Meta. On 28 October, Facebook, which owns Instagram, kept the social media platform Facebook so named but changed its umbrella corporate name to Meta – signaling an effort to reflect the virtual world that the tech giant considers the future of the internet. On 2 November, Thea-Mai Baumann, an Australian artist and technologist, suddenly found her account disabled, the New York Times first reported. A message flashed on her screen: “Your account has been blocked for pretending to be someone else.” Baumann said she tried to verify her identity with Instagram over the next few weeks but received no response. “This account is a decade of my life and work. I didn’t want my contribution to the metaverse to be wiped from the internet,” Baumann told the outlet. “That happens to women in tech, to women of color in tech, all the time,” the artist, who is of Vietnamese descent, added. Baumann started her Instagram account in 2012 to document her life as an arts student in Brisbane and the augmented reality company that she went on to create, called Metaverse Makeovers. According to its website, describing wearable “appcessories”, the company’s Metaverse Nails offering “is the only product in the world that allows you to adorn your digital and physical self with customisable holograms. It’s glam wearable tech.” A month after Baumann first appealed to Instagram to get her account restored, the New York Times contacted Meta on 2 December to ask why Baumann’s account had been shut down. According to an Instagram spokesperson, the account had been “incorrectly removed for impersonation” and would be restored, which it was, two days later. “We’re sorry this error occurred,” the company added. Despite getting her account back, Baumann remains worried about the future of the metaverse, a still-mostly-hypothetical virtual world accessed by special virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) technology. “Because I have been working in the metaverse space for so long, 10 years, I just feel worried.” She is afraid that its culture could be “corrupted by the kind of Silicon Valley tech bros who I feel lack vision and integrity”, she said.The first episode of Squid Game, the South Korean dystopian drama that became not only the year’s biggest TV show but Netflix’s most popular series of all time, has plenty of hooks: an underdog protagonist, an intriguing high-stakes mystery, the thrill of watching a widely recognizable childhood game rendered a matter of life and death. But the real kick of the series arrives in the second episode: the players, each facing financial ruin for various reasons, vote to quit the eponymous game and return to their lives, only to find the allure of a gamble preferable to the crushing weight of debt. By the end of the second episode, everyone has chosen to return to Squid Game, with a money pot of 45.6 billion won ($40m) literally hung from the ceiling. It’s an incredibly bleak message – that people find the odds of surviving a sadistic game more favorable than achieving financial stability outside it – that struck a chord with millions living through our bleak, highly inequitable times. Squid Game’s unsparing brutality was a good match for a year in which the 745 wealthiest Americans alone made enough money to fund more than half of Biden’s beleaguered social spending plan, in which billionaires took their dick-swinging contest to space, and in which Fox News spun an attempted coup into Republican orthodoxy (and profit). Though the bloodiest, Squid Game is not the only popular show this year to present a dire reflection of our economic system: The White Lotus, HBO’s breakout summer hit about a week at a decadent and morally decaying resort in Hawaii, sent up wealth privilege and its attendant self-delusion with sharp teeth and lush visuals; the third season of HBO’s Succession, arguably the buzziest drama on TV right now, found its media mogul family (loosely based on the Murdochs, owner of Fox News) once again being miserable, ruining each other with malice and American democracy without a thought, and always evading accountability. Strip all three of these shows of their incisive barbs or sexual tension or meticulous set-dressing, and you’ll find the same molten black core: an economic system so stratified and broken as to be inescapable, invincible (in the timeline of these stories), and toxic from top to bottom. In each, emotional misery is a given, and ultimately preferable to ceding any privilege. The American dream and much of American media has long idealized the pursuit of money and the whims of the rich, but there is absolutely nothing enviable or aspirational about the wealthy in these shows. Dark parables or portraits of capitalism are, of course, not unique to 2021 – in western media, see: The Hunger Games series, the popularity of Bong Joon-ho’s Parasite, or the loony satire of Sorry to Bother You. Nor is the idea that money cannot buy happiness new to television – HBO has practically created a sub-genre for rich white people being miserable and/or terrible, from Big Little Lies to The Undoing. But what’s striking about this year’s crop of shows is just how little redemption they offer, just how few comforts they find in the capitalist status quo. The contestants in Squid Game scrap and form loyalties and betray each other – the foibles of human morality under pressure – for (minor spoiler) the sport of ultra-wealthy Americans, no one character able to stop the crushing wheel of the game. The White Lotus loops through a merry-go-round of emotional exploitation that doesn’t spare even the most sympathetic characters, and ends more or less where it started: a new round of expectant guests arrives as the former depart, combustions and revelations having made little difference. It’s easier to fixate on the perceived slight of a barely smaller hotel suite, or cover infidelity with $70,000 bracelets, or to stay in a clearly terrible new marriage, than to change. Succession’s somewhat frustrating third season has wheel-spun through the same dynamics of emotional abuse it has honed since its first season, but wealth remains the trump card. Nothing sticks to Waystar Royco – not a scandal over coverups of sexual assault in its cruise division, not the threat of a hostile takeover by their main rival, not a federal investigation over corporate malfeasance, not even political headwinds. The justice department comes for Waystar, and even that’s not enough – patriarch Logan Roy directs his channel, a stand-in for Fox News, to pressure the Republican president, a former ally referred to derisively as “The Raisin,” forcing him to abandon plans for a second term. The characters on Succession are each sad and pathetic in their own way, but the world is set up so the Roys, and especially Logan, never take a true loss. These shows aren’t so much anti-capitalist (they’re on Netflix and HBO after all, and none imagine a different way, though that’s admittedly a lot to ask of entertainment) as fiercely down on the present, which appears not to be working for anyone – not the resort staff and vacationers bound in an awkward compact, not the billionaire media heirs whose wealth isolates them from human emotion, and certainly not the ordinary debtors who would prefer to try their odds in a perverse tournament than face the struggle of scraping by in the real world. To be clear, I loved each of these shows for their own reasons, laughed more at their sharp writing than at many comedies. But sometimes I wonder if we’ve reached the bottom of the barrel with television bleakness. It can be gloriously refreshing to watch television that dares to acknowledge things are very, very bad, and in 2021, some of the best shows dressed this black pit of late-stage capitalism with deliciously deranged dialogue, edge of your seat suspense, gorgeous Hawaiian vistas, Halloween costume– worthy outfits, a Jennifer Coolidge performance for the ages. But they’re still staring the pit down, sparing no one the poison. Hope, collectivism, the imagination of a different way? Maybe that’s for 2022.At about 1pm in Paternoster Square on Monday, four placid, Christmassy eyes gazed at the trickle of workers emerging from the London Stock Exchange in search of lunch. “PLEASE DO NOT TOUCH THE REINDEER,” a sign on the enclosure said. “THIS IS TO PREVENT THE TRANSMISSION OF CORONAVIRUS.” “I remember when you could stroke them,” said a passing trader. “It’s so depressing. I wish I’d stayed at home now.” Although a small crowd had gathered around the main attraction of the square’s Christmas market, the vast majority of workers in the area were at home on Monday, in line with the new official advice: “Work from home if you can.” That phrasing sounds softer than last year’s instruction that “everyone must work from home unless they are unable to do so” – leading some banks and brokerages to take a less stringent line than they have in the past. Many say workers can come in if they wish to. PwC, Deutsche Bank, JP Morgan, and KPMG were among those reported last week to be keeping their offices open. Even so, the City still felt roughly as sleepy as those reindeer. That would appear to be in line with data from Transport for London, which said passenger journeys during the morning peak were down by just under 20% on the previous week – and still drastically down on pre-pandemic levels, at about 46% of the old normal. Harry, who is on a placement at Bank of America, said that his nearby office was much quieter than usual – four people on his floor as opposed to “a couple of dozen” last Monday – and staff had been told they were to decide whether they would prefer to work from home or the office. “My manager and I decided we still wanted to be coming in,” said Harry – who, like many of the junior City workers approached by the Guardian, asked to use a pseudonym. “At the start of my placement I was working from home full-time and, while it was nice, I definitely didn’t get to make the kind of connections you need.” Cautious about the risk of bringing the virus with him if he were to leave London at Christmas, he is sacrificing his usual trip home this year. “You just want to be careful,” he said. Paul Chapman, a managing director at Tysers insurance brokers, said his company was “desperate to do the right thing”. He added: “We’re very keen not to ruin anybody’s Christmas.” He said that approach was typical across the City. At the same time, Chapman said, he saw inconsistencies in the government’s advice. “I went to the theatre, and it was absolutely rammed. I was in the Ned [a hotel and members’ club] last night and it was absolutely rammed. And yet the train is empty, and the City was empty this morning.” In Canary Wharf, most lunch stalls said they had seen a significant drop-off, with several saying they were at about 20% of their usual trade. “Normally by 1pm we’d have about £500,” said Catarina Ferreira, working at Rudie’s Jerk Shack. “Today it’s £98. It’s easily the worst day for three months.” David, vaping outside Citibank in the rain, said his office was “a good bit quieter”. He said the company’s advice had been “basically, keep going as you are – if you want to work from home you can do that, if you need to work from the office or you want to because it helps with your mental health, you can do that”. Citibank confirmed that was its approach, noting that it required staff to take a lateral flow test three times a week. Asked whether he felt the advice from the government had been sufficiently clear, David said firmly: “I don’t think I need clarity from the government about what I should be doing. I think I’m an adult.” That robust view – perhaps representative of a wider and unsurprising distaste for state intervention among the City’s enthusiastic capitalists – was echoed by Nila, on her way back to HSBC. “I’m so tired of politicians telling us what we should be doing,” she said. Others took a more critical view of the government’s approach, arguing that official advice without help for small businesses that were affected by the loss of commuter footfall was unfair. “I find it sad,” said Nicola Bowyer, who works at a printing company near the Bank of England. “I just feel for the sandwich bars and restaurants. They get no support. It’s crap, isn’t it?” Her enthusiasm for any further imposition of new rules would be significantly dampened by the messengers, she added. “I’m so over it,” she said. “I just think, I’m sorry, but why should we listen to what these idiots tell us? I shall be doing what I want to. Within reason.”Late update: The UK Health Security Agency has been in touch to offer final confirmation as to what Sajid Javid meant when he told MPs earlier that “the current number of daily infections are around 200,000”. He did mean that it is estimated that 200,000 people are getting infected with the Omicron variant every day. That is what we thought originally, but we took down the headline on the post (see 4.19pm) after it was suggested he meant something else, and it has taken a while to get clarity from officials. A UKHSA spokesperson said Javid was “referring to the number of new infections today [13 December] based on modelling, not the number who are currently infected”. I have amended the wording in the summary as a result. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, has told MPs that around 200,000 people are getting infected with the Omicron variant per day and that it now accounts for 20% of Covid cases in England. (See 4.19pm and 6.19pm.) At least one person in the UK had died with the Omicron variant, Boris Johnson has said as he refused to rule out imposing further restrictions across England in the run-up to Christmas. Johnson has said that he personally broke no Covid rules in Downing Street last year - implying the inquiry by Simon Case may concluded that some of his staff did. (See 2.15pm.) Headteachers are warning of “chaos” in England’s schools as Omicron sweeps across the country, with high levels of staff and pupil absences and reports that parents are planning to keep children home to avoid the virus before Christmas. Lateral flow home test kits have become unavailable online and NHS England has advised people attempting to book a Covid booster jab to try later or on Tuesday as extremely high demand overwhelmed the government’s website. Bookmakers have made the Liberal Democrats the favourites to win this week’s North Shropshire byelection, odds that if reflected in Thursday’s vote would deliver a significant fresh blow to Boris Johnson’s authority. That is all from me for today. But our coverage continues on our global Covid blog. It’s here. All eligible adults in Wales are to be offered an appointment for a booster jab by the end of this month. But this does not mean that everyone who wants one will actually get the jab by 31 December becausee some will take place in January. The Welsh administration has not gone as far as the UK, which has said that the aim is for all adults to get a booster before the end of the year, not just to be able to book one. Welsh ministers believe their ambition is more realistic than the UK’s. In a televised message to Wales on Monday evening, the first minister, Mark Drakeford, will hint that more restrictions may not be far away, saying: We have already taken some steps to increase protections in Wales and we may need to take some further steps to keep Wales safe. Drakeford is to say: We must be prepared for omicron cases to rise quickly and very steeply – just as they have in other parts of the UK. We are still learning about this new form of coronavirus. All the information we have tells us we are facing a very serious situation. By the end of the month, omicron will have become the dominant form of the virus in Wales, bringing a new wave of infections and illness. This could then translate into a large number of people needing hospital treatment just at a time when the NHS is already under significant pressure. The Welsh government will do everything we can to protect people’s health and keep Wales safe. We have already increased the speed of the roll-out of our booster programme. New clinics have been opened and operating hours extended. Urgent efforts are now underway to accelerate the programme even further so we can offer all eligible adults an appointment by the end of this year if possible. Drakeford is urging people to come forward for a booster. “Please make getting a booster a priority.” A health source has clarified what Sajid Javid meant in the Commons when he implied Omicron infections were running at 200,000 per day. (See 4.19pm and 5.2opm.) Javid was indeed referring to Omicron infections, not Covid infections. But he was speaking about a UK Health Security Agency estimate for the total number of people currently infected with Omicron, not the number who are catching the infection for the first time every day (ie daily new cases). UPDATE: Later the UK Health Security Agency said the figure was actually for the number of people being infected with Omicron for the first time on a given day (today). See 7.46pm. The Scottish parliament has again cancelled an evidence session with Nicola Sturgeon this week after the authorities reduced in-person hearings because of the fresh Covid crisis. The decision means the first minister has avoided around four potential witness sessions on her policies due to restrictions imposed during the pandemic. The first minister was due to be quizzed by all Holyrood’s committee convenors on Wednesday, in a session which has previously lasted several hours. These sessions are supposed to take place every six months: the last was in November 2019. In a statement, Holyrood said: Due to the decision by the Scottish parliament corporate body to move committee meetings to a virtual format, the conveners group has decided to postpone Wednesday’s session with the first minister. Instead, the conveners group has determined that they would prefer to question the first minister in person and will look to reschedule the meeting at a time when it can go ahead safely. During his statement in the Commons Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said he wanted strict travel rules for people arriving in the UK eased given the spread of Omicron already in this country. Labour’s Ben Bradshaw called for the “very draconian, costly and complex” travel rules introduced only recently to try and stop Omicron arriving in the UK to be dropped. Javid replied: I think [Bradshaw] makes a very good point, given that we already know that the Omicron variant is fast becoming the dominant variant in our capital city, spreading rapidly throughout the country, the justification for having those rules is minimised. It’s something that I’ve already raised with my colleagues in the Department for Transport and I do hope that we can act quickly. Getting booster jabs to all Scots aged 18 and above by the end of this year will be a “monumental challenge”, Nicola Sturgeon has conceded. PA Media says: With the vaccination programme being accelerated in a bid to combat the new Omicron variant of the virus, the first minister said she did not underestimate the scale of the challenge. But as she stressed vaccination was the “best line of defence” against Omicron, Sturgeon said: “We’ve got to bust a gut to get this programme done as quickly as possible.” To meet the ambition of offering all eligible adults a booster dose of vaccine by the end of December means that more than 70,000 Scots a day will need to get jagged, it has been estimated. Sturgeon, who has previously warned Omicron could lead to a “tsunami” of new infections, told BBC Scotland that government officials were currently working with local health boards to speed up the programme. The first minister said they were considering “all of the possible options to build capacity in a system that is already operating at a very fast pace”. This will be done by a combination of bringing in additional staff to give the injections, increasing the number of appointments at vaccine centres and looking at opening up new centres. NHS leaders in England have told MPs that they would be “irresponsible” not to approve the government’s Plan B when parliament votes on its provisions tomorrow. Matthew Taylor, chef executive of the NHS Confederation, said: Given the rapidly rising infection levels from Omicron and how much pressure the NHS is under already, we are urging MPs to vote in favour of the government’s plan b interventions. We may find that these measures are not enough but with independent modelling suggesting that Omicron could cause up to 75,000 deaths in England and over 490,000 hospitalisations by the end of April, it would be irresponsible not to give them a go. Failing to put in place measures to slow the spread of coronavirus could lead to much tougher restrictions being introduced next year, Taylor added. The NHS Confederation represents NHS care provider organisations in England and Wales. Taylor went on: If Omicron is allowed to spread out of control then the worry is that far stricter interventions will be needed in the new year and no one wants tougher measures when it is clear they can have a devastating impact on people’s health and wellbeing. The NHS is working at lightning speed to ramp up the booster programme and our members expect parliament to use its position of influence to send a strong statement in the national interest. In his opening statement Sajid Javid seemed to be talking about there being 200,000 Omicron infections per day, but he may have been talking about 200,000 Covid infections per day. The Department of Health and Social Care have been asked to clarify this, and an official is due to call me back. In the meantime I have taken down the headline on the post at 4.19pm. Recorded Covid cases are running at around 50,000 per day - today’s figure is 54,661 - but many people who are ill do not do a test, and many people get infected asymptomatically. The ONS Covid surveillance report published last week estimated that more than one million people in the UK had the virus, but that was covering the week ending 1 December. Mark Harper, chair of the lockdown-sceptic Covid Recovery Group, asked for an assurance that the government would recall parliament over Christmas if it wants to tighten regulations. He has been asking this question repeatedly in recent days without getting an assurance MPs would get a vote. And Javid did not give him one today. He just said there were no plans for further restrictions over the recess. The i’s Paul Waugh says that, judging by Sajid Javid’s comments in this statement, now seems keen to argue that the plan for Covid passes, or passports, isn’t really about these documents at all. Iain Duncan Smith (Con) asked if the government would get rid of the rule requiring people to wait in a clinic for 15 minutes after getting a Pfizer or Moderna jab. (See 3.37pm.) Javid said this was being “very actively looked at” and an announcement would be coming soon. In his opening statement Sajid Javid also announced that once all adults have had a reasonable chance to get a booster, the Covid pass rules will change so that only people who have had the booster count as fully vaccinated That means early in the new year, presumably, given the govrenment wants all adults to have the chance to get a booster before the end of the month. The Labour MP Ben Bradshaw says almost all Tory MPs in the chamber this afternoon are wearing a mask. At the afternoon lobby briefing Downing Street indicated schools in England would only be closed in “the direst ... emergency”. The PM’s spokesman said: Throughout we’ve always sought to keep face-to-face schooling open and have only restricted it in when there’s the direst public health emergency. There’s certainly no plans to do that. We think we’ve got the right balance through plan B and our big uptick in boosters. Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, said that Labour supported the target of getting vaccinations up to 1m per day. He said this may prove impossible, “but we applaud the ambition”. He went on: If anyone can do it, the NHS can and the whole country will be willing them on and will not knock them for trying. But he suggested Javid was “living on a different planet” if he thought lateral flow tests were easily available. And he ended with what he said were words aimed directly at members of the public. He said: We realise on these benches the prime minister has tested patience by asking people to follow the rules when ... the prime minister’s actions in recent weeks have undermined trust at a critical moment. So I say to people feeling let down or lied to ... I do trust the chief medical officer. I do trust the chief scientific adviser and I do trust the NHS. The prime minister might not lead by example, but the rest of us can. We, the Labour party, trust you, the British people, to do the right thing to protect yourselves, to protect the ones you love and to protect the NHS. Javid says we have also learned that a booster jab provides strong protection against Omicron. He repeats what Boris Johnson announced last night about the booster rollout being speeded up. To meet the target of every adult getting a booster, vaccinations will have to take rate at a much faster rate than before. Until now the highest number of jabs that we’ve delivered in a single day in the UK was over 840,000. We’ll not only need to match that but we will need to beat that every day. He says people who have had Covid recently should wait 28 days until after their infection before getting the booster. He confirms that non-urgent medical appointment are being postponed. He says MPs are voting on the new restrictions tomorrow. Even with plan B, we still have far fewer restrictions in place than Europe. And he says from tomorrow a fully-vaccinated contact of an Omicron case will be able to take a lateral flow test every day, instead of having to self-isolate. He says the Covid pass for international travel will be rolled out for 12- to 15-year-olds. And he says, “with a heavy heart”, the government is limiting visits to people in care homes to just three nominated visitors, not including nominated care-givers. Sajid Javid says no variant has spread as fast as Omicron. He says that infections are estimated to currently be running at 200,000 per day. There are now 4,713 confirmed cases of Omicron in the UK. And the UK Health Security Agency estimates that the current number of daily infections are around 200,000. While Omicron represents over 20% of cases in England, we’ve already seen it rise to over 44% in London and we expect it to become the dominant Covid 19 variant in the capital in the next 48 hours. UPDATE: See 7.46pm for clarification of what Javid meant. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, starts by expressing his disappointment that Boris Johnson is not making this statement himself. He says given the PM made a TV statement last night he should have been here in person. He says he is really, really disappointed TV is taking precedence over the Commons. UPDATE: Hoyle said: Before I call the secretary of state for health and social care I want to put on record my disappointment the prime minister is not here to make this statement. Can I say, last night when the secretary of state called me to say that the prime minister felt the need to make the announcement to the country yesterday, I am surprised that he did not therefore think it appropriate to come to this House to answer questions to announce it today. I have got to say I have respect for the secretary of state for health but I am really, really disappointed that once again this house has become second runner-up to TV news. Not acceptable. If this is a game we are going to play, we are going to have to play hardball. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, is about to make a statement to MPs about Covid. These are from two journalists reporting bad experiences with vaccine walk-in centres. From the Sunday Times’ Shaun Lintern earlier From my colleague Nicola Davis now There’s been a fantastic start to the Guardian and Observer 2021 charity appeal, with readers donating more than £100,000 to our Climate Justice campaign during its opening weekend. This year the appeal is supporting four great charities tackling the human impact of climate crisis and extreme weather: Practical Action, Environmental Justice Foundation, Global Greengrants Fund UK, and Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. The focus of the appeal is on projects helping individuals and communities in some of the world’s poorest countries who find themselves bearing the brunt of the climate emergency. As the Guardian’s editor-in chief Katharine Viner explained in her introduction to the appeal: The richest countries pollute most but it is in the poorest where climate change is most harshly felt, through extreme poverty, food and water insecurity and the displacement of millions of people from their homes. The appeal runs until early January. You can find out more about our charities here. Donations can be made online by credit card, debit card or PayPal, or by phone on 0151 284 1126. Layla Moran, the Lib Dem MP who chairs the all-party parliamentry group on coronavirus, has said the website problems people have been having today with ordering lateral flow tests or booking booster jabs suggest little planning went into Boris Johnson’s announcement last night. She said: Both the British public and the NHS are stepping up to play their part in the fight against Omicron and people are understandably asking why they are being turned away after the prime minister’s prime-time address last night. These critical failures are adding weight to accusations that last night’s announcement was all about politics but lacked the necessary plan or preparation from the government, leaving the NHS to pick up the pieces yet again. Fraser Nelson says the Spectator’s tally of Tory MPs who are set or likely to rebel in the vote on the new Covid measures tomorrow has reached 77. Nelson says this is two of 79, the government’s current working majority. But the government is in no danger of losing tomorrow, because Labour is voting for the measures. And, in a division where all the opposition parties are voting against, the majority total is a red herring; only half that number plus one (40 Tories) would have to vote with the opposition parties for the government to lose. Ipsos Mori has published its latest monthly political monitor polling survey, and it suggests that, in the wake of the partygate controversy, Boris Johnson’s ratings have slumped, and Keir Starmer is now ahead of him by 13 points on the question of who would make the most capable prime minister. The firm says this is the first time a Labour leader has been ahead on this measure since January 2008. Dylan Spielman from Ipsos Mori says John Major is the only PM to have worse approval ratings at this stage in his premiership. But Margaret Thatcher’s ratings were almost as low at this point in her premiership, Spielman points out, and she went on to win two more elections. Jim Reed, the BBC’s health reporter, says the government is planning to drop the requirement for people to stay in a vaccine centre for 15 minutes after having a Pfizer or Moderna jab to make sure they don’t suffer an adverse reaction. Prof Azeem Majeed, professor of primary care at Imperial College London, said earlier that this change would speed up the through-put at vaccination clinics. The UK Health Security Agency has also released a little more information about the 10 patients hospitalised with a confirmed case of Omicron in England, one of whom has died. (See 11.55am.) The Conservative MP Marcus Fysh told the BBC earlier today that he would not be voting for the introduction of Covid passport for large venues in England because he did not want to live in a “papers please” society. Displaying a cavalier disregard for Godwin’s law, Fysh told Radio 5 Live. This is not Nazi Germany ... It’s the thin end of an authoritarian wedge. NHS Digital says 290,000 people have now booked a vaccine appointment on its website. In response to questions about why the website has been overwhelmed with demand, a spokesperson said: The vaccine booking service is facing extremely high demand and is operating a queuing system to manage numbers. We would advise people currently unable to book to try again later today or tomorrow. The UK Health Security Agency has said the number of confirmed Omicron cases in the UK has risen by 1,576 from yesterday and is now 4,713. That is a 50% increase. Here is the clip of Boris Johnson responding to questions about his participation in a Downing Street Christmas quiz on 15 December last year when he was interviewed this morning. In it, he clearly said that Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, would be able to look at this event in his review of No 10 parties, and whether they broke lockdown rules. But as Sky’s Beth Rigby, who interviewed Johnson, points out, the PM also seems to have shifted his line on wrongdoing at No 10 last Christmas. He is now stressing that he personally broke no rules. “I certainly broke no rules,” he said. Until now the line from No 10 has been that no rules were broken last year. Now Johnson seems to be implying that perhaps others did break the rules. Case was looking into “all these things’, Johnson said. Dominic Cummings, the PM’s former chief adviser who, since his departure from No 10, has become one of his most vehement critics, thinks this means Johnson is preparing to dump the blame for partygate on others. Almost half of “outstanding” schools in England have been downgraded by Ofsted following inspection this term, with more than one in 10 dropping to “requires improvement” or even “inadequate”, according to data published today. Outstanding schools were until recently exempt from regular inspection, so many have not been visited by the schools inspectorate for up to 10 years or more. They are however likely to feel aggrieved at being downgraded at a time of widespread disruption in schools due to Covid. Data published by Ofsted today shows that during the three months up to the end of November 47% of schools previously rated outstanding have lost their top rating following inspection this term. Ofsted said the data relates to 99 previously outstanding schools visited by inspectors during the autumn term. According to Ofsted, 36% of these schools were downgraded to “good”, 9% went down two rankings to “requires improvement” and 2% were judged “inadequate” which is the lowest possible ranking. The overall grade profile for schools has, however, improved overall, Ofsted said, with 83% of schools judged good or outstanding between September and November this year, compared with 77% between September 2019 and March 2020 when inspections were suspended due to the pandemic. This is from Humza Yousaf, the Scottish government’s health secretary, on the lateral flow test supply problems. The Downing Street lobby briefing was dominated by questions about Covid this morning. Here are the key points. No 10 said that lateral flow tests had not run out, and that people could not order them today because of postal problems that were being addressed. (See 1pm.) Downing Street said “further capacity” was being added to make it easier for people to book booster appointments on the NHS website. Asked about the problems being encountered today (see 10.46am), the PM’s spokesman said: Across the programme we are increasing our capacity, be it making sure there is further capacity on the site to adapt to the increased demand, or indeed capacity on the ground. The spokesman also said 110,000 people booked a booster before 9am this morning. The spokesman did not rule out the government introducing tougher restrictions over Christmas during the parliamentary recess. He said that all options were kept under review and that “in extremis” the government could introduce public health measures without a vote in parliament first. He said that the government’s aim was for all adults to get a booster jab before the end of the year, not just to be able to book one. He said booster jabs should be available on Christmas Day. He said: My understanding is that there will be appointments available on Christmas Day, and obviously the NHS will monitor what the demand is. Last year vaccines were available on Christmas Day, he said, although “we didn’t see a huge demand”. The spokesman said around 750 troops had been mobilised to support the booster programme, as well as 50 military planning experts working centrally. He said the government was still waiting for approval from the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency before going ahead with vaccines for under-12s. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, has claimed the problems people are having ordering lateral flow tests from the government website today show Boris Johnson has got his priorities wrong. This is what the UK Health Security Agency said about the problems people are having today ordering lateral flow tests from the government’s website. A spokesperson said: Everyone who needs a lateral flow test can collect test kits – either at their local pharmacy, some community sites and some schools and colleges. Due to exceptionally high demand, ordering lateral flow tests on gov.uk has been temporarily suspended to fulfil existing orders. Information about how to collect a lateral flow test from a nearby pharmacy is available on the NHS website here. In the Commons a Home Office minister will respond to an urgent question from Labour’s Dame Margaret Hodge at 3.30pm about the Met failings in the Stephen Port case. That means the Sajid Javid statement on Covid will start at about 4.15pm. The number of people using 16 major railway stations in England and Scotland between 6am and 9.30am on Monday was down compared with the previous week, PA Media reports. PA says: According to Network Rail, the stations with the largest week-on-week reductions were Cannon Street (38%), Leeds Central (35%), Waterloo (34%), Kings Cross (28%), Liverpool Street (26%) and Euston (25%), Reading (25%) and Bristol (25%). Other stations that experienced a drop in usage include Birmingham New Street (24%), Charing Cross (23%), Paddington (20%), Manchester Piccadilly (20%), Liverpool Lime Street (17%), Edinburgh Waverley (11%), Victoria (8%) and Glasgow Central (7%). Stations are London, unless otherwise stated. Today the new advice in England to work from home if possible came into effect. Nigel Farage, the former Ukip and Brexit party who is now a GB News presenter, but who claims to be mulling over a politcal comeback, claims that Boris Johnson is just talking up the threat from Omicron as a “cynical ploy” to save his career. At the Downing Street lobby briefing the prime minister’s spokesman said that a shortage of postal slots, not a shortage of lateral flow tests, has been the reason for people not being able to order lateral flow tests on the government’s website this morning. (See 11.29am.) The spokesman said: There is no shortage of lateral flow tests. We have more than sufficient supply. What we are seeing is, because of the heightened demand today, those available to be posted out today, those slots have been filled already. We are working with the postal service and others to further increase slots. But it is important for people to understand if they do encounter trouble, they can go to their local pharmacy. The slots refresh daily. I will post more from the briefing soon. The Scottish parliament is to suspend all in-person committee meetings after the Christmas and New Year holidays, in a preemptive measure to limit the expected surge in Omicron cases. Instead, Holyrood will shift to remote committee meetings unless MSPs believe there is a compelling reason to meet in person or in hybrid form, the parliament’s business bureau has decided. The new rules will come into force on 17 January, when Holyrood resumes business after the holidays. A parliament spokesperson said that staging chamber business, including first minister’s questions, in hybrid form will remain under close review. The Holyrood authorities plan to make hybrid meetings the norm in future, and are investigating options for a more sophisticated system after procedural problems emerged during FMQs last week. Alison Johnstone, the presiding officer, had to repeatedly warn Scottish National party MSPs in the chamber to stop interrupting opposition speakers working remotely, particularly Douglas Ross, the Scottish Conservative leader, who was self-isolating at home after coming into contact with a positive case. The current hybrid system means the public cannot see or hear what is being said in the chamber if an MSP working remotely is talking. Johnstone believes making hybrid meetings and remote voting permanent will improve Holyrood’s flexibility. Here is a summary of the news lines from Boris Johnson’s pooled TV interview this morning. Johnson said at least one patient in the UK has now died with the Omicron variant. (See 11.55am.) He urged people to “set aside” reports that Omicron is a milder version of coronavirus than Delta. He said: I think the idea that this is somehow a milder version of the virus, I think that’s something we need to set on one side and just recognise the sheer pace at which it accelerates through the population. So the best thing we can do is all get our boosters. He was not denying reports that Omicron is milder than previous variants. There is evidence from South Africa suggesting it is. Instead, he was making an argument about the threat it poses because of its ability to spread so quickly. He repeatedly refused to rule out introducing further Covid restrictions before Christmas. He said: Throughout the pandemic I’ve been at great pains to stress to the public that we have to watch where the pandemic is going and we take whatever steps are necessary to protect public health. We think the steps that we are taking - so plan B, combined with a hugely ambitious acceleration of the booster campaign, bringing it forward by a month so we offer a booster to every adult by the end of the year - we think that’s the right approach. He said there was no shortage of lateral flow tests. Although they have not been available for order on the government’s website (see 11.29am), Johnson said: We do have a ready supply of lateral flow tests. If you can’t get one online for any reason, then there are ample supplies in the shops. Commenting on the demand for tests, he said: “What I think, if I may say so, what that also shows is that people are doing the sensible thing, and getting tests as well.” He urged Tory MPs to vote for the new Covid measures tomorrow, saying they were “balanced and proportionate” and that there was “no room for complacency”. He claimed he “certainly broke no rules” in relation to events at No 10 last Christmas. And he indicated his participation in a No 10 quiz event last Christmas might be included in the investigation by Simon Case, the cabinet secretary. He went on: If I may respectfully say to you ... of course, all that must be properly gone into - you’ll be hearing from the cabinet secretary about it all. He said Case would report back as soon as “reasonably” possible. He went on: But frankly, when I look at what we’re trying to do now, the crucial thing is that people understand the challenge that is posed by Omicron. But also understand that this is a challenge that collectively we can meet. What I’m focused on, frankly, is the vaccine rollout. He claimed that by tomorrow Omicron would be the dominant variant in London. He said: Here in the capital [Omicron] probably represents about 40% of the cases. By tomorrow it’ll be the majority of the cases and it’s increasing the whole time. The Northern Ireland first minister, Paul Givan, said this morning - perhaps more realistically - that Omicron is already dominant in London. (See 11.48am.) Johnson praised those delivering the booster rollout. He said: We now want to hit warp speed and we’ll have to attain a pace and a number of daily booster doses that will exceed anything that we’ve done before. But I’ve got no doubt at all that we have the people, we have the enthusiasm, we have the fundamental optimism about what we can do, which we’ve learned from the experience of the last 18 months. And I know that people are going to rise to this. As expected, Sajid Javid, the health secretary, will make a statement to MPs this afternoon. Boris Johnson has confirmed that at least one patient in the UK has now died with the Omicron variant. In an interview during a visit to a vaccination centre in London, he said: Sadly yes Omicron is producing hospitalisations and sadly at least one patient has been confirmed to have died with Omicron. So I think the idea that this is somehow a milder version of the virus, I think that’s something we need to set on one side and just recognise the sheer pace at which it accelerates through the population. So the best thing we can do is all get our boosters. I will post more from his interview shortly. Earlier Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said around 10 people were in hospital with confirmed cases of the Omicron variant in England. (See 9.31am.) Paul Givan, the Northern Ireland first minister, has said Northern Ireland must prepare for a “storm” of Omicron cases. He told BBC Radio Ulster: I think there’s certainly a storm coming our way. You need to make preparation for that because we can see what’s happening in London, where this new variant is now the dominant strain of new cases, that has increased rapidly over the past three to four weeks. Similarly in Scotland that is the case as well, and with the movements that take place across the common travel area, we have already a number of small cases in Northern Ireland, but the expectation is the same trajectory that is happening in Great Britain is likely to occur here in Northern Ireland. As PA Media reports, Northern Ireland’s Covid certification scheme became legally enforceable today. The scheme requiring people to prove Covid status to gain entry to a range of hospitality venues and larges attendance events was introduced late last month with a two-week grace period to allow businesses adjust. Patrons wishing to enter nightclubs, pubs, restaurants and other licensed premises will need proof of vaccination or a negative lateral flow test or evidence of a previous Covid-19 infection. On Friday the UK Health Security Agency released a report (pdf) saying that 41% of Covid cases in London were Omicron. That was was double the rate for the region with the next highest Omicron levels, the south-east, where they accounted for 21% of cases. But those figures were from 6 December. Given the doubling rate of Omicron, it is now thought to be dominant in London. Here is my colleague Jamie Grierson’s story about lateral flow tests not being available for order on the government’s website in England. ITV’s Paul Brand says the Met is still not planning to investigate parties as No 10, despite the picture published yesterday of Boris Johnson taking part in a quiz night. Here is the Met statement on this from last week. Boris Johnson’s TV address to the nation last night was watched by more than 12 million people, Darren McCaffrey from GB News reports. BBC One will broadcast a pre-recorded address to the nation from Keir Starmer at 7pm in response to Boris Johnson’s own remarks on coronavirus booster vaccines, Labour has said. Today is the first day that people aged 30 to 39 can officially book a booster jab in England. Although the website has been overwhelmed (see 10.46am), NHS Digital says more than 140,000 people have managed to book vaccine appointments this morning. James Fransham from the Economist thinks it was unrealistic of Boris Johnson to offer all adults in England a booster jab by the end of the year. He explains why in a Twitter thread starting here. And some people in England are also finding it impossible to order lateral flow tests through the government’s website. This is what showed up when I tried just a few minutes ago. Following Boris Johnson’s announcement last night, the NHS in England is being overwhelmed by people trying to book a booster appointment online. A reader has sent me this screenshot telling them there were number 3472 in the queue. The NHS is now advising people, on Twitter, to try again later, or tomorrow. Tomorrow MPs will vote on the plan B Covid measures for England announced last week. According to the Spectator, which has been keeping probably the most comprehensive tally of likely rebels, there are now 75 Tories who have said they will vote against, or indicated they are likely to. These are from Fraser Nelson, the Spectator editor, with quotes from some of the latest additions to the list. These figures suggest Johnson is on course for by far the biggest rebellion of this parliament. The previous biggest came on 1 December last year, when 53 Tories voted against the government’s plan for tougher Covid tiering rules for England, with another two Conservatives acting as tellers for the rebels. And this is what Sajid Javid said in his morning interviews about Boris Johnson and partygate. Javid said he expected Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, to extend his investigation into parties in No 10 to include the participation of Boris Johnnson in a quiz night. Asked about the story, Javid said. I saw the photo of that quiz, like anyone else. What I can see is it’s a virtual quiz with the prime minister sitting at his desk. I don’t know all the details. What I can see [is] it’s a virtual quiz. And Simon Case has been given a broad remit to investigate anything that he thinks ... any type of gathering in Downing Street that should be looked at on any particular day he wants to. And so if he wants to look at this he will - that’s going to be a decision for him. It’s not right, I think, for a minister to tell him what he should or should not investigate. According to Oliver Wright in the Times (paywall) Case has already decided that the quiz night will be included in his investigation. “[Case] said originally that he would look at credible allegations of other gatherings and you can’t really say that a photo of the prime minister is not a credible allegation,” a government source told Wright. Javid claimed that Johnons is working “every minute of the day” for the public. Asked if the PM has the right qualities to handle the Covid crisis, Javid said: [What I see from] the prime minister, especially since I’ve been back in the government as health secretary, is one that is working every minute of the day, literally every minute of the day. I don’t think he gets any time to rest whatsoever. Totally and utterly focused on the nation’s challenges. But especially, I would say, over the last few weeks with the emergence of this variant, thinking about everything we can possibly do to make sure that we stay ahead in the race against this virus. That’s what I see. And that’s what I think the nation saw from the prime minister yesterday - that he couldn’t be working harder to secure the future of this country.” This is from Prof Susan Michie, a psychologist who has participated in Sage meetings but who is a leading member of Independent Sage, a group of scientists who have published their own advice to government and who have been critical of the government for not imposing tougher Covid restrictions, responding to what Sajid Javid said about cancer patients this morning. (See 9.01am.) Here are some more lines from what Sajid Javid said about Omicron and the booster jabs rollout in his morning interviews. Javid, the health secretary, said that he could not confirm that anyone has died from the Omicron variant in England. There are about 10 people in hospital with the variant, he said. But he dismissed claims this meant it was not a threat. “There is always a lag between infection and then hospitalisation and then, sadly, death,” he told Sky News. He also pointed out that a huge rise in infections would lead to more people going to hospital, even if most cases were mild. He refused to rule out schools having to close in response to the Omicron wave. Asked if he could ruled this out, he told LBC that he did not want to see it happen. But he also said: If you are asking me for guarantees, I will just say… as the health secretary, there are, when it comes to our fight against this pandemic, there are no guarantees. He said it “should not be the case” that people die because they can’t get treatment on the NHS during the Covid booster drive. On Times Radio he was asked: “Will anyone sadly die because they can’t get the treatment they need in the NHS?” Javid replied: Well, that certainly should not be the case at all because as well as focusing on this, there will be a focus on any urgent need and any, of course, emergency care. He said that he was personally responsible for the success of the booster rollout programme. He was responding to a question on the Today programme about who was in charge given that Maggie Throup, the vaccines minister, does not seem to have the clout of her predecessor, Nadhim Zahawi, who attended cabinet. He said he thought people should go ahead and spend Christmas with family and friends, but that they should be cautious too. He was planning to see family, he said. But he said when he was entertaining friends at home this weekend, he asked them to take a lateral flow test first. He said it was “completely unfair” to suggest the AstraZeneca vaccine was not as good as once thought in the light of evidence last week suggesting two doses offer very little protection against Omicron. He said AstraZeneca had “played a phenomenal role in protecting our country”. Good morning. Boris Johnson has set a target for the government to offer all adults a booster vaccine by the end of the month. Here is our overnight story reporting the announcement. This morning Sajid Javid, the health secretary, has been giving broadcast interviews, and he has admitted that, as GPs and hospitals in England focus on this target over the next few weeks, non-urgent appointments will be postponed. He told the Today programme: It does mean that, when it comes to primary care, for the next couple of weeks that our GPs will only be focusing on urgent needs and vaccinations. And it also means that non-urgent appointments and elective surgeries may have to be postponed into the new year. Javid insisted that this would not affect people wanting to see a doctor about cancer symptoms. That would count as an urgent appointment, he said. Asked what hospital appointments might be postponed, Javid replied: It will be anyone who’s got some elective surgery planned, for example, that can be postponed until the new year. So that might mean, for example, a knee operation or hip operation, something that sadly someone has probably been waiting [for] for a long time in any case, but the hospital concerned would have the right to postpone it if it meant they would get a lot more booster jabs done. Javid said these decisions were “not easy”. But there was limited capacity in the NHS. Asked if this would mean people dying who would not have died if these appointments had not been posptponed, Javid said: “What will lead to real harm is if we don’t do this.” I will post more from his interviews shortly. Here is the agenda for the day. Morning: Boris Johnson is visiting a vaccination centre, where he is expected to give a TV interview. 11.30am: Downing Street holds its lobby briefing. 3.30pm: Sajid Javid, the health secretary, is expected to make a statement to MPs about the vaccine booster programme. 4pm: Antonia Romeo, permanent secretary at the Ministry of Justice, gives evidence to the Commons public accounts committee about the courts backlog. 4.30pm: Max Hill QC, director of public prosecutions, gives evidence to the Commons home affairs committee about rape prosecutions. Also today Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, will be meeting foreign ministers from the Balkans. I will be largely focusing on UK Covid-related issues today, but there is much more coverage on our global Covid live blog. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comAn independent review has uncovered evidence of structural racism at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) and found the institution’s colonial legacy continues to have a negative impact on students and staff of colour. Though the LSHTM has a higher proportion of staff of colour than the UK sector average, they are under-represented at senior levels, have less success at promotions, and are more likely to be on short-term and fixed-term contracts than their white peers, the review found. Over the past two years the LSHTM has enjoyed a high-profile role in the global battle against the Covid pandemic. Among its many notable alumni is Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England. The damning review, published on Monday, found however that the culture and practices at the university “still too often disadvantage people of colour”, that the curriculum is Eurocentric, and that the leadership has been too slow to act on issues of colonialism and racism. It found staff and students of colour feel “unsupported” when experiencing or trying to address racist behaviours and “do not have equitable experiences or opportunities to progress at LSHTM”. It also said “behaviours” by senior staff had gone unaddressed because of their “influence” in the institution. The university council commissioned the review last year to look into racism and inequality at the university in response to the Black Lives Matter movement and concerns raised by the institution’s own students and staff. The report highlighted the LSHTM’s well-documented colonial history. It was founded by the UK government’s colonial office and its current success as a leader in global health and research, the report said, can be attributed in part to its role in British colonialism. “Many staff have dedicated their lives to advancing public health globally and LSHTM’s world-leading research has benefited a great many people worldwide, but the colonial attitudes inherent in LSHTM’s historical mission negatively impact students and staff of colour today,” the report said. The university has made a series of recommendations aimed at strengthening leadership, changing culture and behaviours, improving outcomes and experiences for staff and students of colour and improving the complaints and reporting processes. Liam Smeeth, who took over as LSHTM director in August, said: “This independent review found evidence of racism and inequalities which point to deeper, more structural problems within LSHTM that have negatively impacted the experiences of those within our organisation. “We understand that these experiences have had very real and painful human consequences. We deeply regret this and apologise sincerely to everyone affected. While the conclusions of the review are difficult to confront, facing up to them is an essential step towards creating an environment where everyone’s contributions and perspectives are valued. We are determined to do better. “We are committed to LSHTM being a place of anti-racist education, employment, research and partnerships. Racism has no place in our school or society, and will not be tolerated at LSHTM.” Dr Mishal Khan, associate professor of health policy and systems research and a member of the governing body that commissioned the review, added: “The report makes for painful reading, but I see it as a positive that LSHTM’s governing council had the foresight to commission such an independent review and unanimously accept the findings. There is a lot of work to do.”Premiership clubs are facing tighter Covid-19 restrictions in light of the spread of the Omicron variant with new measures expected to be finalised this week. As of September, clubs have been permitted to relax restrictions and effectively abandon social-distancing measures during training and on matchdays provided they meet the 85% threshold of players and staff having received two vaccinations. It is understood, however, that the Professional Game Board is expected to implement updated measures after the health secretary, Sajid Javid, revealed on Monday that the Omicron variant already makes up 20% of all Covid-19 cases in England. That in turn raises the possibility of Eddie Jones’s England squad facing tighter measures when they convene next month for the 2022 Six Nations. Bubble fatigue was cited by numerous players as a key reason for England’s dismal fifth-place finish earlier this year. It was also referenced in the Rugby Football Union’s subsequent review. “The necessary stringent protocols, in some cases greater than other unions, had a significant impact on coaching and support staff as well as the playing squad cohesion,” read the union’s statement last April. In the shorter term the hope will be to avoid a repeat of last season, when 10 Premiership matches were cancelled because of Covid outbreaks and a two-week “circuit-breaker” was introduced in January after two rounds of European fixtures were wiped out. The second round of the Champions Cup is this weekend but a number of clubs are already dealing with outbreaks. Wasps lost their opening match against Munster – who were also badly affected by the pandemic – having been forced to make wholesale changes to their side following a number of positive tests last week. After the match the Wasps director of rugby, Lee Blackett, who is also without a raft of players because of injury, conceded he did not know whether the fixture against Toulouse on Sunday would go ahead with the results of this week’s Covid tests set to prove decisive. In addition, Leinster opted on Monday to postpone training after they were hit with an outbreak on Friday, 24 hours before their comfortable win against Bath. To compound matters for the tournament organisers, who have already seen the Scarlets forfeit their trip to Bristol last Saturday, Montpellier – Leinster’s opponents on Friday – have also registered a handful of positive cases. Clermont, La Rochelle, Northampton and Cardiff have all also been affected.