Dentists’ leaders have said mandatory jabs for healthcare staff will have a “calamitous” impact on dental services in England, as a survey revealed that one in 10 dentists have not been double-vaccinated. MPs voted this week to approve regulations requiring NHS and social care staff to be vaccinated by April next year. All frontline health and care staff must be fully jabbed with two Covid-19 vaccines before 1 April or risk losing their jobs. But the British Dental Association (BDA) said compulsory vaccination risked “dropping a bomb on a service already stretched to breaking point” because it meant that thousands of dental workers would quit. The mass exodus would have devastating consequences for millions of patients, it said. The stark warning comes after a survey of high street dentists by the BDA found that 9% had not had a single dose of a coronavirus vaccine. The poll found a further 1% had only had one jab. The survey of 1,642 dentists in England conducted this month found 10% had received two doses, while 78% had a booster. The remaining 2% of dentists declined to reveal their vaccination status. Fewer than half (48.4%) of dentists estimated all nurses operating in their practices were fully vaccinated, with 58% saying the same for hygienists, according to the survey. The poll found that 30% of dentists estimated dental nurses based at their practices would leave as a result of the mandate, with 14% of dentists saying they themselves were likely or extremely likely to quit. The BDA said the NHS had not kept track of the number of dentists who were not vaccinated, because of the focus on hospitals and social care. Neverthless, the mandate will also include dentists and dental nurses. The BDA said current standard operating procedures, which include twice-weekly Covid tests for staff, already set a gold standard for protecting patients and staff. Eddie Crouch, chair of the BDA, said: “Mandatory vaccination risks dropping a bomb on a service already stretched to breaking point. We now face a grim new year where thousands of dental team members will walk as result of choices made by government, leaving thousands of vacancies that will never be filled. “Dentists have supported the vaccine rollout, with many downing drills to play their part, but this is a road ministers must not go down. Dental services are already operating to a gold standard on safety. This mandate is a blunt instrument, which will have devastating consequences for millions of patients across this country.” Dental patients are already struggling to access care and some have been told they may need to wait years for an appointment. In some parts of the country, patients have taken matters into their own hands as they struggle to access dental care, with reports of patients pulling out their own teeth while others have used DIY filling kits.Coal power is on track to hit a new global record this year after an economic rebound that could drive worldwide coal demand to an all-time high in 2022, according to the International Energy Agency. The amount of electricity generated from coal power plants has soared by 9% this year after a surge in fossil fuel demand to fuel the recovery from Covid lockdowns, a report by the watchdog says. Coal power fell by 4% in 2020 as the pandemic caused a global economic slowdown, but the IEA found that demand for electricity this year had outpaced the growth in low-carbon sources, leading many wealthy economies to rely more heavily on fossil fuel power plants. The global gas supply crunch, which has caused record-high prices worldwide, has also helped reignite demand for coal, the IEA report says. The agency found that global demand for coal, including cement and steel making, rose by 6% overall this year. Although the total falls short of record levels of demand for the fuel in 2013 and 2014, the IEA warned that without a policy intervention that high could be surpassed next year. Fatih Birol, the IEA executive director, said: “Coal is the single largest source of global carbon emissions, and this year’s historically high level of coal power generation is a worrying sign of how far off track the world is in its efforts to put emissions into decline towards net zero. “Without strong and immediate actions by governments to tackle coal emissions – in a way that is fair, affordable and secure for those affected – we will have little chance, if any at all, of limiting global warming to 1.5C.” The report comes weeks after the conclusion of the Cop26 climate talks, which ended in a fierce disagreement over a pledge to abandon coal. A last-minute intervention by India successfully watered down the language of the pact from “phasing out” to “phasing down”. After the talks, held in Glasgow last month, the Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, said India and China would “have to explain themselves to poor nations” after watering down the Glasgow climate pact, adding that their actions had left him “deeply frustrated”. He told the Guardian: “We are on the way to consigning coal to history. This is an agreement we can build on. But in the case of China and India, they will have to explain to climate-vulnerable countries why they did what they did.” The IEA report found India was on track to grow its coal-fired electricity generation by 12% this year, while China’s use of coal plants was forecast to increase by up to 9% despite a sharp slowdown in recent months. This would mark an all-time high in both countries, despite an “impressive” rollout of solar and wind power projects, the IEA said. In the US and the EU, coal power generation is expected to rise by 20%, from low levels in 2020, which is likely to keep power plant use below the levels recorded in 2019. The use of coal plants is expected to go back into decline next year as electricity demand slows and the expansion of renewable energy alternatives continues. In the UK, where coal power has been in steady decline in recent years, the owners of the last remaining coal power stations were paid record sums to help keep the lights on this year as electricity prices reached new highs after record gas market prices and one of the least windy summers since 1961.The BBC could be forced to replace expensive high-end dramas and natural history shows with cheaper programmes owing to government-imposed funding cuts. The broadcaster is required to make deep and continued spending cuts due to successive Conservative governments reducing its licence fee income, according to a report by the National Audit Office. At the same time, the cost of making hit shows such as Line of Duty and David Attenborough’s nature programmes has increased rapidly, with competition from Netflix and Amazon driving up prices for talent and studio space. The BBC is also likely to cover fewer sporting events in the coming years as a result of rising costs and reduced budgets. It has already dropped its Formula One coverage and reduced the number of Six Nations rugby matches it shows. In the future, channels such as BBC Two and BBC Four will operate on substantially reduced budgets, often showing repeats, with money diverted to shows for BBC One and BBC Three. Meg Hillier, the chair of the public accounts select committee, said forthcoming cuts to on-air programming could make people less willing to pay the £159 a year licence fee. “Almost half of its forecast savings will come from cutting back on the amount of programmes [the BBC] makes, meaning it will have to churn out more repeats to fill TV schedules,” she said. “The BBC faces a significant challenge in the battle for viewers. It must be wary of the risk that reducing content may lead to yet more people jumping ship and choosing not to pay the licence fee.” The BBC has been required to cut its spending by £1bn a year between 2017 and 2022 as a result of a licence fee settlement imposed in summer 2015 by the then chancellor, George Osborne. Until now most of these savings have come by reducing spending on behind-the-scenes staff and improving productivity. Now the National Audit Office says there is little extra left to cut behind the scenes, meaning future BBC savings will have to come from programme budgets and the corporation’s news division. These changes are much more likely to be noticed by audiences. Popular shows also risk being cancelled if the BBC thinks the money could be better used elsewhere to reach younger or diverse audiences who have deserted the national broadcaster. While the longrunning drama Holby City continued to attract large audiences, it was cancelled because they were mainly people who already consumed other BBC content. According to the BBC, the cost of making an hour of drama increased by about 20% from 2015-16 to 2019-20, and the pandemic has since increased production costs by a further 10% to 30%. Hundreds of BBC journalists have taken redundancy as part of an ongoing restructure of the news division. The report highlights how this has caused low morale among staff, with those journalists who remain bracing for another round of cuts. Ministers have not yet agreed how much the BBC can charge for the licence fee from April 2022 onwards. A deal on funding had been close until the appointment of a new culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, forced a reappraisal. No settlement is expected this side of Christmas, giving the corporation just a few months to prepare the public for a potential fee increase – and work out what shows will need to be taken off air for budget reasons.The UK is to change tack in negotiations over the Northern Ireland Brexit protocol and will push for an “interim” deal to avert any further deterioration of political stability in the region. Brexit minister David Frost is set to propose a new approach based on a “staged solution” with a deal on customs declarations and physical checks on goods a priority to address the immediate impact on people’s lives and livelihoods. He will also suggest a new solution for governance, softening the UK’s demand that the European court of justice should be eliminated from dispute resolution entirely. Instead it believes an arbitration proposal in the wider withdrawal agreement – which allows disputes to be settled in the political arena in the first instance – could work in the Northern Ireland context. Under this scenario, the ECJ would only be invited to give its opinion on a matter of EU law if the dispute was unresolved and went to a second stage of an arbitration panel. A UK government source said: “Since the EU won’t address all the issues we put on the table now, we are willing to look at interim solutions which deal with the most acute problems. But any such interim agreement must put a stop to the ECJ settling disputes between us and the EU, now and in the future.” The change will be interpreted as a significant stepping back from the brink by Lord Frost who has threatened to blow up talks on several occasions by using article 16 of the Northern Ireland protocol, which would allow it to suspend parts of the deal. But it appears that fears the Stormont devolved government could collapse before the assembly elections in May have brought a renewed focus to issues. On Friday, Frost and the EU’s Brexit negotiator, Maroš Šefčovič, will meet virtually for the second time in a week. Frost is expected to announce talks will continue into the new year instead of coming to an abrupt halt due to article 16. The EU will also announce plans for legislation to remove barriers for the supply of medicines in Northern Ireland. Cambridge professor of EU law Catherine Barnard said the suggestions floating around Whitehall for a solution over the European court of justice had merit and would effectively mean swapping article 12 of the Northern Ireland protocol for articles 169 to 174 of the overall withdrawal agreement. “I’ve always thought this is a sensible compromise. But it requires compromise on both sides,” she said. “It would require the UK to recognise that there is some role for the ECJ but it would also require a big compromise for the EU because it would mean they didn’t have the full application of the EU remedy system to use in disputes,” she added. It would also require rewording part of the withdrawal agreement which the EU has been vehemently opposed to.That’s all for today’s Covid blog. We will be closing this live feed down but please follow along with all the latest coronavirus developments on our new blog here. There’s been a flurry of new developments over the past 24 hours so here is a snapshot of the key stories. CDC advisers recommend Pfizer and Moderna vaccines over Johnson &amp; Johnson. The panel cited the risk of rare but sometimes fatal cases of blood clotting as well as a lower level of effectiveness against Covid in the J&amp;J shot. The European Commission says it has struck a deal with US pharmaceutical company Moderna to speed up delivery of its Covid vaccine, particularly with a view to supplying Germany with 10 million doses in December. Denmark broke its daily Covid record for the fourth day running, warning new restrictions were on the horizon. The UK recorded its highest tally of lab-confirmed Covid cases since the pandemic began – for the second day running – with almost 90,000 new infections. Independent SAGE said it’s urging a circuit-breaker lockdown until 24 December. England’s chief medical officer Chris Whitty told MPs hospital admissions could peak above levels seen last winter, before the vaccine roll-out, given Omicron’s infectiousness. Italy reported its highest Covid case rate since 12 March, with 26,109 cases, jumping 90% on three weeks ago. Germany’s health minister Karl Lauterbac warned the country is lacking millions of Covid vaccine doses, imperilling the country’s defence against the highly-mutated Omicron strain. Poland reported its first case of the Omicron variant. In the UK Queen Elizabeth II has cancelled plans for a pre-Christmas family lunch. The R number for Omicron in the UK is estimated to be between 3 and 5, Dr Susan Hopkins, chief medical advisor at the UK Health and Security Agency, said. Indonesia is urging people not to travel abroad after the country detected its first Omicron case. Sweden is to end vaccine pass exemption for its Nordic neighbours. France is banning British tourists from Saturday amid concern over Omicron cases in the UK. Travel to and from the UK without “compelling reasons” – which does not include travel or business – will be banned. Israel says it is donating 1m Covid vaccines to the UN-backed COVAX program to reach African countries. New Zealand detected its first case of Omicron in an isolation facility. The Welsh government will bring in new restrictions including closing nightclubs and imposing a 2-metre social distancing rule in offices from 27 December UK prime minister Boris Johnson attended a pizza party in No 10 Downing Street during the May 2020 lockdown, a joint investigation by the Guardian and Independent reported. US president Joe Biden says the unvaccinated face “a winter of severe illness and death” After receiving a briefing on the pandemic from advisers, Biden said the Omicron variant is “now spreading and it’s going to increase”. Biden urged Americans to get vaccinated and get their boosters as soon as possibl, saying:. For the unvaccinated, we are looking at a winter of severe illness and death.” A wave of new Omicron cases is beginning to surge in America and could peak as early as January, the Centers for Disease Controls (CDC) has warned, as states are scrambling to prepare for overloaded hospitals. The Omicron variant accounted for nearly 3% of Covid cases in the US as of Saturday – up from only 0.4% the week before, according to data from the CDC. The variant is expected to continue rising rapidly, based on the experiences of other countries and could be dominant within weeks. “I suspect that those numbers are going to shoot up dramatically in the next couple of weeks,” said Céline Gounder, infectious disease specialist and epidemiologist at New York University and Bellevue Hospital, on Wednesday. She expects an Omicron wave to peak in late January and then come down sometime in February. “We are not locking down”, British prime minister Boris Johnson says while denying warnings amount to lockdown by stealth. Johnson said he will not impose a lockdown despite the rapid spread of the Omicron variant. He has insisted the situation in the UK is different from last year because of the widespread availability of vaccines and tests. “The sensible thing to do is to get a test and to make sure that you’re being cautious,” Johnson said, adding that businesses should remain open. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog as my colleague Tom Ambrose takes a well-deserved break. I’ll be reporting to you from Sydney so let’s dive in with some Covid numbers out of Australia. The country’s most populous state of NSW has recorded a record 2,213 new Covid cases and one death while Victoria recorded 1,510 cases and 7 deaths. Here’s what we know so far about Omicron’s spread in Australia. The Welsh government will bring in new restrictions including closing nightclubs and imposing a 2-metre social distancing rule in offices from 27 December to try to combat the Omicron variant and has issued “strong guidance” over how to stay safe over Christmas. The first minister, Mark Drakeford, said the new legally enforceable regulations were needed to counter what he called the most serious development in the pandemic to date. Drakeford is strongly advising people to celebrate the festive season only with their nearest and dearest, saying a “smaller Christmas” will be a safer one. From the day after Boxing Day, Wales will introduce fresh legal restrictions, including a 2-metre social distancing rule in offices and putting extra measures in place to protect customers and staff, such as one-way systems and physical barriers. Nightclubs will also close and the government is to make up to £60m available to support businesses affected by the new restrictions. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has started distributing free Covid home test kits to international travellers, the agency said. The CDC said it began distributing the kits on Wednesday and is giving them out at Minneapolis-St Paul, Miami and Chicago O’Hare and will soon add Dallas-Fort Worth. It plans to add four additional unidentified international airports in the coming weeks. The CDC encourages - but does not mandate - international air travelers to get a new Covid test upon arriving in the United States. New rules took effect on 6 December to require nearly all people flying to the United States to obtain a negative test within one day of travel. A panel of advisers to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have voted to recommend Americans choose to receive one of the other two authorised Covid vaccines over Johnson &amp; Johnson’s shot, due to rare but sometimes fatal cases of blood clotting. Reuters reported: The CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization voted unanimously to make the recommendation. The regulator still needs to sign off on the guidance. Cases of thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome (TTS), which involves blood clots accompanied by a low level of platelets, have previously been reported in recipients of the J&amp;J vaccine. The highest reporting rates are in women under 50. The CDC said that the rate of such incidents is higher than previously estimated, both in women and men. At least nine people have died following the blood clotting incidents in the United States, the CDC has said. Members of the panel also said J&amp;J’s vaccine is less effective in preventing COVID-19 than the other two authorized vaccines. In a presentation to the committee, a leading J&amp;J vaccine scientist said the vaccine generates a strong and long-lasting immune response with just a single shot. Read The Guardian’s view on the Omicron surge. The government is doing too little to head off soaring Covid infections – and too little to compensate the businesses and workers already suffering. Read the full opinion piece below. The rapid spread of Omicron across the UK has led public health officials and ministers to warn that, without action, the country will see 1 million infections a day by the end of the month. The consequences of the Omicron “tsunami” are far from clear, but a picture is beginning to take shape. My colleague Ian Sample has put together this useful Q&amp;A, covering how the NHS plans to deal with this scenario and what the next few weeks may look like... In the UK, the London venue Printworks is the latest in the events industry to postpone shows that had been scheduled for this weekend. In a statement posted on Facebook, a spokesperson said: Due to the current public health status we have evaluated the potential impact of shows for our guests, staff, artists and partners. Given the time of year, it’s also important to take into account the potential impact on festive celebrations for individuals and families, especially those who were impacted last year. For that reason, we have had to make the unfortunate decision to postpone this weekend’s Printworks shows. The wellbeing of those who attend our venue and those who work at our venue is of paramount importance to us. The emergence of the Omicron variant has made it clear the pandemic won’t be over until it is beaten everywhere. But there has been a vast and continuing inequality in the global Covid vaccine rollout. This mirrors other rollouts, such as the vaccine for diphtheria, pertussis (whooping cough), and tetanus, which has a vaccination rate as low as 41% in some countries. In the case of Covid, inequality has been compounded by wealthy nations buying up doses, and the need to ramp up adult vaccination programs in countries that hadn’t had them before. This map shows how the Covid vaccine rollout has progressed globally, showing the number of doses administered per 100 people over time. The Metropolitan Police are to contact two people who attended a pre-Christmas party at the Conservative Party headquarters in London during lockdown last year in relation to alleged breaches of coronavirus regulations. The force said it was aware of a gathering at an address in Matthew Parker Street in London, where the Conservative party headquarters is based, on 14 December 2020. The party was organised by Shaun Bailey’s London mayoral campaign team. On Wednesday, Bailey stepped down from an official role in the London assembly after a photograph emerged of him joining a throng of people at the party amid the Covid lockdown in December last year. Bailey has apologised “unreservedly” for the event. The Met did not say who they were seeking to contact. In a statement, the force said: “Officers will be making contact with two people who attended in relation to alleged breaches of the health protection (coronavirus restrictions) regulations.” The Met also said it is looking into staff gatherings at 10 Downing Street and the Department for Education in November and December 2020 and is in contact with the Cabinet Office, but will not open an investigation at this time. Here’s a round-up of today’s international developments on Covid and Omicron. ICU capacity in Ontario, Canada could be overwhelmed by Omicron within weeks without action, a panel of experts said. Denmark broke its daily Covid record for the fourth day running, with the prime minister Mette Frederiksen warning new restrictions were on the horizon. The UK recorded its highest tally of lab-confirmed Covid cases since the pandemic began – for the second day running – with almost 90,000 new infections. Independent SAGE said it’s urging a circuit-breaker lockdown until 24 December. England’s chief medical officer Chris Whitty told MPs hospital admissions could peak above levels seen last winter, before the vaccine roll-out, given Omicron’s infectiousness. Italy reported its highest Covid case rate since 12 March, with 26,109 cases, jumping 90% on three weeks ago. Germany’s health minister Karl Lauterbac warned the country is lacking millions of Covid vaccine doses, imperilling the country’s defence against the highly-mutated Omicron strain. The European Commission said it reached a deal with Moderna to accelerate its vaccine delivery, particularly with a view to supplying Germany with 10 million doses in December. Malawi announced new restrictions to beat back its rising cases and announced a vaccine mandate for frontline workers such as healthcare staff. France reported 60,866 new Covid cases, up 45% from three weeks ago. The government also announced a ban on non-essential travel to and from Britain to try and block the spread of Omicron. Palestine detected its first three Omicron cases in the occupied West Bank, the health ministry said. AstraZeneca said its Evusheld antibody cocktail appears effective against Omicron in the first study conducted. Portugal said it will extend border restrictions beyond the initial 9 January deadline, mandating negative tests for entry even for double-vaccinated travelers. UK prime minister Boris Johnson attended a pizza party in No 10 Downing Street during the May 2020 lockdown, a joint investigation by the Guardian and Independent reported, with members of a group for bereaved families attacking Johnson’s attendance as “disgusting.” Poland reported its first Omicron case from a 30-year-old woman who flew in from southern Africa. She currently feels well but is in hospital isolation. The UK’s Queen Elizabeth II cancelled a pre-Christmas lunch with her family over surging Omicron cases, despite palace insiders insisting on Tuesday the event would go ahead. Scotland’s first minister Nicola Sturgeon also urged the Scottish public to stay home. Sweden is to end a vaccine pass exemption for its Nordic neighbours, authorities said. Indonesia’s president Joko Widodo urged people not to travel abroad after the country detected its first Omicron case. That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew here in London, for today. I’ll be back on Sunday – drop me an email or message me on Twitter with tips and stories for then. Now I’m handing over to my colleague Tom Ambrose for the next few hours. The UK campaign group Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice has said that it is “disgusting” that prime minister Boris Johnson attended a pizza party in Downing Street on 15 May last year while the UK was still under lockdown. “I remember 15 May 2020 very well. That’s because while Boris Johnson was at this party I was sitting in a hospital with my dad dying in intensive care,” said Hannah Brady, a spokesperson for the group. “We had to fight to see Dad and sat there for 5 hours with him. We just didn’t want him to die alone. When he stabilised we were told to go home. He died the next day.” “To know that I was sitting in the hospital while the prime minister and his colleagues were drinking at a party, breaking the same rules the rest of the country were following, just makes me sick to my stomach”, she said. It comes after a joint investigation by the Guardian and Independent revealed Johnson had attended the event for 15 minutes, sources allege, while rules then said only two people from different households could meet outside, at a distance of 2 metres. The group have become staunch critics of the British government’s handling of the pandemic and are seeking “core participant” status in the public inquiry that will take place under Baroness Hallett. Brady added: “My dad was only 55 and he was fit and healthy. He worked in the Heinz factory, and he carried on working during lockdown because he was proud to be a key worker helping to keep the UK fed. I wanted some good to come of his sacrifice. But when me and other Covid-bereaved families called for a rapid review inquiry over summer 2020 – so that lessons could be learned to protect other families ahead of the second wave – we were told again and again that staff were too busy tackling the virus. Now we know what that looked like.” “What makes it hurt even more is that when I met the prime minister some months later, I showed him a photo of dad in the hospital, taken on the same day that we now know this party took place. The prime minister looked me in the eye and told me he’d ‘done everything he could’ to protect my Dad. It’s disgusting.” France reported 60,866 new Covid infection in the past 24 hour, down slightly on yesterday but climbing 45% from 33,464 three weeks ago today. A further 165 people died from Covid-relates causes on Thursday, jumping 129% from 72 daily deaths three weeks ago. It comes after France banned non-essential travel to and from Britain from Friday at 11pm GMT to reduce the spread of the Omicron strain. As of Wednesday France had reported 170 Omicron cases. “Our strategy is to delay as much as we can the development of Omicron in our country and take advantage to push ahead with the booster drive,” government spokesman Gabriel Attal told local media. An update on two antibody treatments, potentially useful tools in the box against Omicron and future mutated variants. AstraZeneca on Thursday said a lab study showed its antibody cocktail, Evusheld, retained neutralising activity against Omicron, the first such data for the treatment. The picture was less rosy for Regeneron, which said on Thursday its Ronapreve therapy is less effective against Omicron, though it is still active against the Delta variant. It comes after the UK’s antiviral taskforce chair Eddie Gray said on Thursday the country will have access to both Merck’s molnupiravir and Pfizer’s paxlovid treatments over winter. Scientists say antibody therapies, alongside vaccines, regular testing and social distancing measures, will be an important weapon in the arsenal fighting the latest Covid wave. In the US the Omicron variant has surpassed Delta in collections taken from wastewater samples in Orange County, Florida, officials said. Despite few confirmed clinical infections, wastewater samples showed the new variant is now the dominant strain. Omicron represented almost 100% of strains from wastewater facilities in a sampling this week, Orange County Utilities spokesperson Sarah Lux told AP. Orange County is home to tourist attractions such as Walt Disney World and Universal Orlando. Italy reported 26,109 new Covid cases on Thursday, its highest daily number since 26,790 new infections on 12 March. Today’s tally is a 90% surge on Italy’s 13,756 new cases three weeks ago. A further 123 people died from Covid-related causes in the past 24 hours, rising 73% from 71 deaths on Thursday three weeks ago. The health minister, Roberto Speranza, tightened restrictions to try to halt the new wave on Tuesday, announcing mandatory Covid testing for all arrivals from the European Union and a five-day quarantine for the unvaccinated. The measures come into effect from 16 December until 31 January. UK prime minister Boris Johnson joined staff for a party in his official residence in Downing Street during lockdown in May last year, sources allege, raising questions over a culture of flouting the rules. It comes after Johnson was accused of hosting an indoor quiz last year during another lockdown, which has rocked his authority in the nation and in his own Conservative party. The prime minister spent about 15 minutes with staff at the alleged social gathering on 15 May 2020, telling one aide they deserved a drink for “beating back” coronavirus, a joint investigation by the Guardian and Independent was told. Rules at the time allowed only two people from different households to meet outside, at a distance of 2 metres. Earlier that evening, Matt Hancock, then health secretary, had urged people to “stay at home as much as is possible”. Read my colleagues’ full story here. The highly-mutated Omicron variant could swamp intensive care capacity in Ontario, Canada within weeks without action, a panel of experts said on Thursday. “This will likely be the hardest wave of the pandemic. There is still some uncertainty but there is an undeniable urgency,” said Adalsteinn Brown, co-chair of Ontario’s Covid advisory group. “Waiting to take action means waiting until it is too late to take action.” Canada reported 5,810 new Covid cases on Wednesday, an 85% jump from 3,146 infections two weeks beforehand. The panel said vaccination alone would not tackle Omicron. Instead, it called for public health measures – such as restrictions on indoor gatherings – to cut peoples’ contacts by 50% and accelerate booster doses. Ontario province, which contains Toronto, has about 600 ICU beds according to the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, with a further 500 surge capacity, but 300 patients will cause knock-on impacts across the health system. Palestine has detected its first three cases of the highly transmissable Omicron variant in the occupied West Bank, the health ministry said. All cases were individuals who’d recently returned from abroad, health ministry spokesman, Kamal Al-Shakhrah. said in a statement. The UK detected a record 88,376 new Covid cases on Thursday, almost 10,000 more than yesterday’s record-breaking tally of 78,610 and jumping 67% from 53,067 two weeks ago. It comes amid warnings from scientists that the UK will keep breaking records as the highly-transmissable Omicron variant rips through the population. A further 146 people died with the virus in the past 24 hours, up from 141 two weeks ago. “In terms of the speed at which things are changing it’s like March 2020, I think you will see policy changing every few days as it grapples to catch up,” Christina Pagel, director of UCL’s Clinical Operational Research Unit and an Independent SAGE member, told me. “We’re going to be breaking records every day for a week at least now – unless we do something.” Pagel and Independent Sage are calling on the government to implement a circuit-breaker lockdown until 24 December. She admits this prospect is unlikely with Christmas imminent and after the backbench rebellion to prime minister Boris Johnson’s Covid measures on Tuesday. “But now is the time we can affect the peak,” she said. “It’s burning through the population.” Pagel said that, despite an early study from the University of Hong Kong suggesting Omicron’s weakened severity, the UK’s outlook is grave. “Even if it’s half as severe it’s moving four times as fast, so you can overwhelm the NHS just from that,” she said. But she does not predict deaths reaching as high as last January, when the population faced surging cases with no wall of immunity. Daily hospital admissions may peak above levels seen last winter, before the vaccine roll-out, England’s chief medical officer Chris Whitty told MPs on Thursday. The 88,376 figure only counts lab-confirmed PCR cases. Pagel said the actual figure is likely to be in the region of 200,000 new daily cases. Malawi said it was tightening restrictions and would make Covid vaccines mandatory for frontline staff like healthcare workers after a jump in coronavirus cases. The government limited gatherings to a maximum of 100 people indoors and 250 people outdoors, Reuters reported. The country recorded 318 confirmed Covid infections on Wednesday, up from 5 cases three weeks ago. Malawi also reported its first Omicron cases last week. About 3% of the population is double-vaccinated. The frontline worker directive will commence on 20 December and also includes journalists. Khumbize Kandodo Chiponda, the health minister, said today: “Uptake of vaccines has not been high enough towards reaching our goal of vaccinating at least 60% of eligible Malawians by the end of next year. The vaccine remains our best preventive tool. “Accumulating data is continuing to indicate that the majority of those being admitted to our emergency treatment units or losing their lives to Covid-19 have not been vaccinated.” Another brilliant dispatch from Ed Yong at the Atlantic published this morning, as the US stares down rising Omicron cases. Read the full story here. Even if Omicron is milder, greater transmissibility will likely trump that reduced virulence. Omicron is spreading so quickly that a small proportion of severe cases could still flood hospitals. To avert that scenario, the variant would need to be substantially milder than Delta – especially because hospitals are already at a breaking point. Two years of trauma have pushed droves of health-care workers, including many of the most experienced and committed, to quit their job. ... The Omicron wave won’t completely topple America’s wall of immunity but will seep into its many cracks and weaknesses. It will find the 39% of Americans who are still not fully vaccinated (including 28% of adults and 13 percent of over-65s). It will find other biologically vulnerable people, including elderly and immunocompromised individuals whose immune systems weren’t sufficiently girded by the vaccines. It will find the socially vulnerable people who face repeated exposures, either because their “essential” jobs leave them with no choice or because they live in epidemic-prone settings, such as prisons and nursing homes. Omicron is poised to speedily recap all the inequities that the US has experienced in the pandemic thus far. In England, Saturday’s Premier League football match between Manchester United and Brighton has been postponed because of Covid outbreaks. A small number of United players and staff returned positive rapid tests on Sunday, reported by the Athletic. Brighton has been dealing with “three or four” positive tests among its squad. The Premier League is likely to face further postponements as the Omicron variant takes hold in the UK. Sport is being disrupted across the world as coronavirus cases rise in many jurisdictions. In the US, an NBA Bulls game was postponed on Monday over an outbreak, Axios reported, and the NFL said it had a record 37 players testing positive on Monday. Denmark’s prime minister, Mette Frederiksen, said on Thursday “new measures will be needed” to break “very high” infections after the country breaks its daily Covid case record for the fourth time in a row. Denmark’s State Serum Institute said 9,999 cases were recorded in the last 24 hours, a record high, a 128% increase on 4,390 cases three weeks ago. “The infection is – unfortunately, as expected – very, very high. Authorities will provide a status later today. And I have no doubt that new measures will be needed to break the chains of infection,” Frederiksen said on Facebook. “The Epidemic Commission is preparing, and as soon as we can say more, of course we will. The most important thing is still getting 3 [vaccines]. The sooner the better,” she added. It comes after the UK reported record daily case numbers on Wednesday. The Sundhedsstyrelsen health authority will hold a press conference at 5.30 pm local time, expected to focus on Omicron, the Copenhagen Post reports. BERLIN — Germany’s new health minister, Karl Lauterbach, has warned the country is lacking the millions of doses of coronavirus vaccine considered necessary to keep the population’s defences up over the winter, especially with the predicted rise of the new variant. Lauterbach said that Germany was on schedule to receive just 1.2m doses of the BioNTech/Pfizer vaccine to distribute to vaccine centres and doctors’ practices across the country next week, 800,000 the following week and a further 1.2m the week after. “But this is far less than the amounts which doctors are asking for every week.” He said Germany was scraping the barrel of its reserves. “The campaign has to roll ... but there is literally no more than this there,” he said. His warning came as the country’s vaccine campaign, seen to have flagged in recent months, picked up a pace, with a record number of 1.5m doses having been administered on Wednesday, bringing up to 70% the number who are now double-vaccinated, and to almost 28% those who have received a booster jab. Currently the Delta variant is making up around 90% of German infections. However, the more infectious Omicron variant has been detected and is expected to spread widely next month. Lauterbach, an epidemiologist, who as the health spokesman for the Social Democrats was an active and much relied upon commentator on the pandemic before taking over as health minister from the Christian Democrats’ (CDU) Jens Spahn this month, said he was seeking “as an emergency to buy back” millions of unused vaccine stocks from eastern European countries. His ministry has confirmed reports that it plans to spend ¢2.2bn on 80m BioNTech doses, via official European Union procurement channels, and to buy a further 12 million doses directly, to ensure, it said, “that we can start the new year in a sensible manner”. The first cases of the new, far more infectious Omicron variant have been detected in Germany, but the new wave it is not expected to sweep the country until next month. Bulgaria reported 1,725 new covid cases in the last 24 hours, according to local media, a 15% decrease from 2,018 two weeks ago. Bulgaria saw a spike in cases in late-October that has since declined. A further 83 people died from Covid-related causes on Thursday, falling 27% from 114 to weeks ago and taking the country’s total death toll to 29,847. Here’s another look at yesterday’s staggering UK case jump in context. The European Commission said on Thursday it had struck a deal with the US pharmaceutical company Moderna to speed up delivery of its Covid vaccine, as the continent scrambles to boost the antibodies of citizens to roadblock the Omicron variant. Some European Union member states, , in particular Germany, are facing a short-term need amid the rapid spread of the highly transmissable strain. Moderna agreed to deliver 10m doses to Germany in December, and 25m extra doses to Germany in the first quarter of 2022. A study published by the LKS Faculty of Medicine at The University of Hong Kong said Omicron grows 70 times faster in the bronchus than the Delta variant, but the virus replicated less effectively in lung tissue, suggesting less severe disease. (The study is still being peer reviewed.) A European Commission statement said: “In view of the rapid increase in infections due to the Omicron variant, and the need to scale up vaccination, including boosting, the Commission is working with vaccine manufacturers to further accelerate the delivery of vaccine doses to Member States that need additional doses in the short term.” Ukraine recorded 9,590 new Covid infections in the past 24 hours, the health ministry said, a 46% drop from 17,873 cases three weeks ago. The country experienced spiking cases in late-October and early-November. The prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said on Wednesday the country’s “adaptive quarantine”, the lowest yellow level of its red-orange-yellow restrictions system which places some rules on public gatherings, would be extended to 31 March 2022, Ukrinform reports. About 40% of adults were vaccinated, Shmyhal said, with a target of reaching 70% before restrictions are relaxed. A further 355 people died from Covid related causes in the past 24 hours, down 46% from 655 three weeks ago. Russia reported 28,486 positive Covid infections on Thursday, down from 29,701 on the same day last week and continuing the country’s gradual decline after its November spike. Daily deaths remain high, above 1,000, as they have since late-October. A further 1,133 people died from Covid-related causes in the past 24 hours, down slightly from 1,147 deaths a week ago. Russia’s total excess death count since the start of the pandemic is over 810,000, the Moscow Times estimates. Border controls in Portugal will be extended beyond their planned end on 9 January to limit spread of the Omicron variant, the prime minister, António Costa, told reporters on Thursday. Portugal requires a negative test for all passengers on arriving flights. (Previously this was not required for double-vaccinated people.) Flights for citizens from some southern African countries have been banned. The country recorded 5,800 new Covid cases on Wednesday, jumping 54% from 3,773 on the same day three weeks ago. A further 11 people died from Covid-related causes on Wednesday, taking the country’s total death toll to 18,698. Poland has reported its first case of the highly mutated Omicron strain, according to the state-run Polish Press Agency. The infected person, a 30-year-old woman from Lesotho, is said to feel well but is currently in hospital isolation in the Polish city of Katowice. The case was found in a sample examined in Katowice. The ministry tweeted Thursday that the 30-year Lesotho citizen feels well but has been put in hospital isolation. The country reported 22,097 new Covid in the past 24 hours, according to the health ministry, down 20% from 27,459 a week ago. Cases have begun to gradually decline after the country’s daily case rate jumped above 25,000 a day in late-November and early-December, but deaths remain high. A further 592 people died from Covid-related causes on Wednesday, up 6% from 561 on the same day last week. In the UK Queen Elizabeth II has cancelled plans for a pre-Christmas family lunch. It’s a sign of how fast the virus is spreading in the UK, after sources inside Buckingham Palace assured The Sun on late Tuesday night “there is no way the Queen wants to let anything get in the way of a family event like this”. The UK on Wednesday recorded its highest rate of confirmed positive infections since the pandemic began, with 78,610 new positive results. Hello from London. This is Jem Bartholomew taking over The Guardian’s international Covid blog for the next eight hours. Feel free to get in touch with tips or to share your story! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email me here. Get in touch on Twitter here. There are 15 confirmed people in UK hospitals with the Omicron variant, but the actual number is likely to be “much bigger.” Susan Hopkins, chief medical adviser of the UK Health Security Agency, told the Commons Health and Social Care Committee: The released numbers that we released yesterday are 15. However we are constantly working on data linkage to improve that, and we will release new numbers this afternoon But England’s chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, said: “The real number will be much bigger than that. That is simply the number who are proven, just to be clear.” Hopkins added that the UK is only likely to see reliable data on the spread of Omicron in late December or early January. The Indonesian president, Joko Widodo, has urged people - including government officials - not to travel abroad after the country detected its first Omicron case. The patient, who has no symptoms, is a cleaning worker at a hospital in Jakarta, reports the Associated Press. The person is being quarantined at the Athlete’s Village emergency hospital, where they work. Sweden is to end vaccine pass exemption for its Nordic neighbours, authorities said today. From 21 December, people from Norway, Finland, Denmark and Iceland will no longer have an exemption and will have to show their vaccine passes to enter the country. Poland has recorded its first Omicron case. The deputy health minister, Waldemar Kraska, reportedly made the announcement today. France has called on people who had planned to visit the UK to “postpone their travel”. British tourists are to be banned from France from Saturday amid concern over Omicron cases in the UK. France is banning travel to and from the UK without “compelling reasons” – which does not include travel or business – from Saturday morning. A UK government scientific adviser has said that only about half of people who have Covid ever get tested and predicted that Omicron would lead to “a huge wave of infection”. Prof Andrew Hayward, a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), told BBC Breakfast: “Only about half or maybe even fewer of people who do have Covid ever get tested.” Labour has called on the government to work out a deal to help the struggling hospitality industry amid soaring cancellations as UK covid infections hit a new record high. Shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, told ITV’s Good Morning Britain that chancellor Rishi Sunak and business secretary Kwasi Kwarteng should meet with businesses and trade unions to offer them more assistance. Care minister, Gillian Keegan, has said Britain’s new year booster target is “very ambitious” but that they plan to “throw everything at it”. She told Sky News that the situation is “hard right now”, but added that with the booster programme: “Hopefully we’ll be through the other side of this quite quickly.” That’s it from me for today. Thanks for reading. Handing over now to my colleague Jem Bartholomew. The Indonesian president, Joko Widodo, has urged people – including government officials – not to travel abroad after the country detected its first Omicron case. The patient, who has no symptoms, is a cleaning worker at a hospital in Jakarta, reports the Associated Press. The person is being quarantined at the Athlete’s Village emergency hospital, where they work. Widodo said: “I ask people and state officials to refrain from traveling abroad until the situation subsides.” As of yesterday, Indonesia had recorded over 4.2m Covid cases and more than 143,000 deaths. Following the announcement of travel restrictions from the UK by the French government, the ferry operator DFDS said: Passengers are able to transit through France to other countries without having to quarantine as long as the transit is less than 24 hours. We are continuing to run our ferry services as usual, with up to 55 sailings per day running between Dover, Calais, and Dunkirk. We expect our services to be busy on Friday as people prepare to get away for Christmas to see family and friends before the restrictions come into effect. We have plenty of capacity for those who wish to travel with us. It added: We hope that these short-term measures in response to the spread of the Omicron variant will be lifted in the New Year. Sweden is to end vaccine pass exemption for its Nordic neighbours, authorities said today. From 21 December, people from Norway, Finland, Denmark and Iceland will no longer have an exemption and will have to show their vaccine passes to enter the country, reports the Associated Press. Sweden’s social affairs minister, Lena Hallengren, also encouraged all travellers to be tested for the coronavirus upon entry due to a “deteriorating” public health situation. “The spread of infection is increasing sharply. The new virus variant Omicron makes it difficult to predict the spread of infection in the future,” she said. So far, the Swedish government has not resorted to lockdowns or business closures during the pandemic, with authorities instead emphasising individual responsibility. Hallengren said that it was acceptable for people who are fully vaccinated and healthy to celebrate Christmas with friends and relatives, but told them to “be prepared to cancel if you get symptoms.” She urged Swedes to “choose a smaller party” for celebrating New Year. Germany administered 1.5 million vaccine doses yesterday, bringing the total number of people who are vaccinated to 58.2 million, or 70% of the population, reports the country’s health ministry. However, of those who have been vaccinated, only 22.9 million – 27.6% – have also had a booster. Poland has recorded its first Omicron case, reports Reuters. The deputy health minister, Waldemar Kraska, reportedly made the announcement today. France has called on people who had planned to visit the UK to “postpone their travel”. In a statement, released today, the French government said: In the face of the extremely rapid spread of the Omicron variant in the United Kingdom, the government has chosen to reinstate compelling reasons for travel to and from the United Kingdom, and to strengthen the requirement for testing on departure and arrival. In the UK government’s own words, the UK will face a ‘tidal wave’ linked to the Omicron variant in the coming days. Thus, from midnight into Saturday, the following rules will apply for travel between the United Kingdom and France: A requirement to have a compelling reason to travel to or from the United Kingdom, for unvaccinated and vaccinated people. These reasons are indicated [here]. They will not allow travel for tourism or business reasons. However, these compelling reasons will not apply to French nationals and their spouses and children who are still able to come to France. It added: Vaccinated people must present a negative test (PCR or TAG) of less than 24 hours, which is in line with the rules already in place for unvaccinated people. An obligation for all travellers from the United Kingdom to register, prior to their trip, on a digital platform and provide the address of their stay in France. This platform will generate prefectural orders for all travellers, whether unvaccinated as vaccinated, to isolate in a place of their choosing. This isolation requirement may be lifted after 48 hours, subject to proof of a negative test (PCR or TAG). Controls will be organised to ensure the proper implementation of these measures. The government also calls on travellers who had planned to visit the United Kingdom to postpone their travel. Here’s more from AFP on the French travel ban on UK visitors, which will come into force from midnight on Saturday (or 11pm GMT on Friday). It comes after the UK yesterday reported a record 78,610 Covid cases as Omicron spreads rapidly. France will ban non-essential travel to and from Britain from the weekend to slow the spread of the Omicron Covid-19 variant that is causing record numbers of cases on the other side of the Channel, the government said Thursday. From midnight Saturday (2300 GMT Friday) there will be a “requirement to have an essential reason to travel to, or come from, the UK, both for the unvaccinated and vaccinated ... People cannot travel for touristic or professional reasons,” the government said in a statement. “Faced with the extremely rapid spread of the Omicron variant in the UK, the government has chosen to reinstate the need for an essential reason for travel from and to the UK,” the statement said. It added that French citizens and EU nationals could still return to France from the UK. “We will put in place a system of controls drastically tighter than the one we have already,” the government spokesperson, Gabriel Attal, told BFMTV channel. Attal said the policy was aimed at “tightening the net” to slow down the arrival of Omicron cases in France and give time for the French vaccination booster campaign to make more ground. “Our strategy is to delay as much as we can the development of Omicron in our country and take advantage to push ahead with the booster drive,” he said. In addition, returning travellers will need a negative test less than 24 hours old, and a blanket quarantine would be enforced on return to France. “People [coming back] will have to register on an app and will have to self-isolate in a place of their choosing for seven days – controlled by the security forces – but this can be shortened to 48 hours if a negative test is carried out in France,” he said. The closure of the French border to tourists is “devastating” for UK citizens who work in the French ski and seasonal businesses sector. Charlie Owen, director of the Season Business in Travel, said: The news coming from France around further travel restriction for UK-France is devastating for the UK Ski Industry. After 21 months of being closed due to the Covid pandemic, this is yet another hammer blow to the industry. The UK government urgently needs to engage with industry leaders and introduce support measures immediately. Ferry operator Brittany Ferries has said the new ban on British citizens travelling to France is a “hammer blow” to its Christmas season. A spokesperson added: In the context of an Omicron variant that is passing through the French population as it is in the UK, further border controls seem as unnecessary as they are unwelcome. The president of Indonesia has addressed the country after it identified its first Omicron case (see also 03:57). In a public address, Joko Widodo said the government was working hard to stem the spread of the new variant and urged people to follow health protocols and for local governments to speed up testing and contact tracing, reports Reuters. The new restrictions on travel between the UK and France will allow British citizens to go to the country only for “compelling reasons” and travellers will be required to present a negative PCR test from within 24 hours before they leave. Grant Shapps, the UK transport secretary, said hauliers would be exempt. Despite this, Reuters reports “several miles of trucks” queued up on a main road towards Dover. Sky is reporting that hauliers would be exempt from French controls on travel from the UK (see also 08:40), but that lorries are forming queues in Dover. The French government has released a press release on the new restrictions: Agence France-Presse has a few more details about the move to bar UK tourists from entering France: France is to tighten restrictions on travel from Britain to slow the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 that is causing record numbers of cases on the other side of the Channel, the French government has said. “We will put in place a system of controls drastically tighter than the one we have already,” the government spokesperson Gabriel Attal told BFM television, saying the office of the prime minister, Jean Castex, would issue a statement on the new measures in the coming hours. He said travellers coming to France would need a negative test less than 24 hours old, a blanket quarantine would be enforced on return to France, and trips for tourism limited. “We will reduce the validity of the test to come to France from 48 hours to 24 hours,” said Attal. “We will limit the reasons for coming to France from the UK, it will be limited to French nationals and residents and their families. Tourism or business trips for people who do not have French or European nationality or are residents will be limited. “People [coming back] will have to register on an app and will have to self-isolate in a place of their choosing for seven days – controlled by the security forces – but this can be shortened to 48 hours if a negative test is carried out in France.” Brentford FC manager, Thomas Frank, has called for football fixtures in the coming days to be postponed in the UK due to Covid cases, reports Sky News. British tourists are to be banned from France from Saturday amid concern over Omicron cases in the UK. France is banning travel to and from the UK without “compelling reasons” – which does not include travel or business – from Saturday morning, reports Sky News. French nationals and their spouses will be exempt from the new rules. It comes after the UK yesterday reported its highest number of Covid cases since the start of the pandemic. A UK government scientific adviser has said that only around half of people who have Covid ever get tested and predicted that Omicron would lead to “a huge wave of infection”. Prof Andrew Hayward, a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), told BBC Breakfast: “Only about half or maybe even fewer of people who do have Covid ever get tested.” He said the doubling rate of new variant Omicron would lead to an “extraordinary number of cases” and “a huge wave of infection”. He added: If you think about getting a year’s worth of rain over a month, then you’re going to get flooding and potentially severe flooding, no matter how much you’ve shored up your defences. And that’s the concern here - that that huge wave is going to cause lots of people to be off work having to isolate, which is going to cause disruption, and it’s going to spill over into people going into hospital. Now the rate at which it spills over is uncertain because we don’t know exactly how severe it is yet, but we’ve no particular reason to think that it’s less severe than previous strains. We know that Covid is always going to be less severe if you’ve been immunised but it may be that rather than the strain itself that’s making a lot of cases look less severe. He said that by Christmas or new year there should be more data about the severity of the new variant, but said that by then it would be too late to take action. Asked about current restrictions, he said: I think the scale of the potential problem that we’re looking at here does mean that we need to bite the bullet and we need to tell people that there’s two really important things here. One is to get boosted, the other if we want to slow it down now... Then what we need to do is reduce the number of contacts that we have, we need to avoid crowded spaces with lots of people in and unfortunately, yes, that does mean parties etc. And so that’s a difficult message. Wes Streeting, the UK shadow health secretary, has also been on Times Radio, where he said the chancellor should “get himself on a flight back and get a grip on the situation” following reports that he was in California. It comes after the Daily Mirror reported that Rishi Sunak was on a four-day official trip to the US. Streeting said Sunak should come back to the UK to help businesses suffering as a result of soaring Covid cases. He said: We understand the Chancellor is currently out of the country in California. So perhaps he might want to get himself on a flight back and get a grip on the situation because businesses need certainty and confidence now. Labour has called on the government to work out a deal to help the struggling hospitality industry amid soaring cancellations as UK covid infections hit a new record high. Shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, told ITV’s Good Morning Britain that chancellor Rishi Sunak and business secretary Kwasi Kwarteng should meet with businesses and trade unions to offer them more assistance. He said: The chancellor and the business secretary need to get business leaders around the table with trade union leaders to hammer out a deal to help hospitality because, you know, they really need us right now. He added: Those businesses are having a hard time at the moment and we want government to be by their side. He said he was rethinking his own Christmas plans in response, saying he was “not sure what Christmas is going to be like in my house” and that it was a “real dilemma”. I’m going to try and strike the right balance on this I think by, you know, still going out and still trying to enjoy Christmas, still going to see friends and family, but just taking some sensible precautions to do so safely. Turkey has declared it will join countries accelerating the schedule for vaccine booster shots to fight the spread of the Omicron variant. Turkey’s health minister Fahrettin Koca said that as a “precaution,” citizens and residents who received their second dose three months ago can now register for boosters. Over 82 percent of Turkish residentshave received two doses of a vaccine according to the Turkish government, primarily Pfizer-Biontech. Turks who were previously vaccinated with Sinovac-Coronavac were offered additional shots of Pfizer-Biontech earlier this year. Turkish officials reported the first cases of the Omicron variant last Saturday, one in Istanbul and five in the southern city of Izmir. The governor of Izmir, Yavuz Selim Köşger, told journalists that none of those infected had “connections abroad,” indicating community spread. Chef Tom Kerridge has accused the UK government of “mixed messaging and confusion” on Covid and called on them to “step up” to help a struggling industry. He told Sky News they had 654 cancellations at one restaurant over six days, adding: “That was a reflection of the industry.” He said cancellations are “coming in thick and fast” and that the industry needs government support. He asked whether Boris Johnson is “playing politics with the hospitality industry and the future of it” and accused the government of being “reactive rather than proactive”. “Where is Rishi Sunak?” he asked. Care minister, Gillian Keegan, has said Britain’s new year booster target is “very ambitious” but that they plan to “throw everything at it”. She told Sky News that the situation is “hard right now”, but added that with the booster programme: “Hopefully we’ll be through the other side of this quite quickly.” She said the government is not planning to introduce any more Covid restrictions before Christmas and that is up to indivduals to “make a sensible choice for yourself” on Christmas parties. Over 24million people have already been boosted, she said. She said she is “confident” that with the introduction of a second dose for 12-15-year-olds schools will reopen as normal in January and urged teachers to get boosted. Hi, I’m looking after the blog for the next few hours. Please get in touch with any tips or suggestions: miranda.bryant@guardian.co.uk South Africa’s National Coronavirus Command Council (NCCC) has retained the coronavirus lockdown at ‘adjusted level 1’, or the lowest of a five-tier system of restrictions, in the battle on the Omicron variant, health authorities said on Thursday, Reuters reports. “The Council has directed the department to closely monitor the rising Covid-19 infections,” the health department said in a statement, adding that it would also track hospital admissions, mortality and recovery rates. These levels were all largely driven by the Omicron variant, which was contributing to South Africa’s fourth wave of infections, it added. The decision followed deliberation by the Council on safety measures recommended by the health department in a bid to prevent any surge in infections during the festive period, it added. The Israeli government says it is donating 1 million coronavirus vaccines to the UN-backed COVAX program. The Foreign Ministry said the AstraZeneca vaccines would be transferred in the coming weeks, a decision that was part of Israel’s strengthening ties with the African countries, Reuters reports. Foreign Minister Yair Lapid said: I am delighted that Israel can contribute and be a partner in eradicating the pandemic around the world.” The announcement said the vaccines would reach close to a quarter of African countries, though it did not provide a list. Israel has close ties with a number of African nations, including Kenya, Uganda and Rwanda. Israel also established relations with Sudan last year as part of a series of US-brokered accords. If you’ve just joined us welcome to our live blog covering all the latest coronavirus developments. Here is a quick snapshot of the leading Covid news stories. Covid cases have risen sharply at some UK universities as students head home, prompting fears that the mass migration could fuel the spread of the virus. Malaysia has announced new Covid-19 restrictions, including banning mass gatherings and requiring booster doses for high-risk groups, as it reported its second case of the Omicron coronavirus variant. Germany is reporting another 56,677 new daily coronavirus cases and 522 deaths, according to the Robert Koch Institute. South Korea has just released its daily Covid report. Another 7,622 confirmed coronavirus cases have been recorded over the last 24 hours with 62 Covid-related deaths. Japan has officially approved Moderna Inc’s Covid-19 vaccine for its booster shot programme that began this month. Malaysia is now requiring all travellers arriving from the United Kingdom to undertake Covid tests everyday during quarantine. Indonesia has just identified its first case of the Omicron coronavirus variant, health minister Budi Gunadi Sadikin said on Thursday. Australia’s cricket captain, Pat Cummins, has been ruled out for the second Ashes Test after being identified as a close contact of a positive Covid-19 case. New Zealand has detected its first case of the Omicron Covid-19 variant in a Christchurch managed isolation facility. Thousands marched in New Zealand’s capital Wellington on Thursday to protest against Covid vaccine mandates and lockdowns, as the country announced 90% of its eligible population has been fully vaccinated. The Dutch family family has apologised after it last week invited a reported 21 people to celebrate the 18th birthday of Princess Amalia, the future queen, in breach of coronavirus health guidance. Apple Inc is delaying its return to office plans indefinitely, Bloomberg News reports. People in England have been told to cut down on socialising in the lead-up to Christmas. New Zealand’s health regulator Medsafe has granted provisional approval for the Pfizer Inc Covid-19 vaccine for children aged 5 to 11 years old. South Korea will reinstate social distancing rules and a 9pm curfew for restaurants and cafes to combat spiralling numbers of new infections and hospitalisations. South Africa reported its highest daily tally of new coronavirus cases since the start of the pandemic with 26,976 infections and 54 deaths recorded on Wednesday. The number of Covid cases has risen sharply at some universities as about a million students begin to head home for the Christmas break, prompting fears that the mass migration could fuel the spread of the virus. Students have been urged to take Covid tests before they leave their university to travel to see their families – the vast majority on public transport – and again before they return in the new year, as well as getting their booster vaccinations. But with case numbers increasing rapidly on some campuses, including Omicron infections, there are reports that students have decided to leave early to limit the risk of having to isolate over Christmas away from home. Loughborough University and Imperial College London have moved learning online for most students for the last few days of term after a significant uptick in cases. Elsewhere, universities have urged staff and students to either cancel or scale back planned Christmas celebrations to limit mixing. Read the full story from our reporter Sally Weale here. Malaysia has announced new Covid-19 restrictions, including banning mass gatherings and requiring booster doses for high-risk groups, as it reported its second case of the Omicron coronavirus variant. To curb potential Omicron risks, mass New Year gatherings will be banned and those attending private New Year and Christmas celebrations must undergo Covid-19 self-tests, Khairy said. Malaysians over 60, and all adult recipients of the Sinovac Covid-19 vaccine, are required to get a booster dose by February to keep their status as “fully vaccinated”, Khairy said. Singapore is considering a similar policy. Malaysia has also temporarily banned the entry of foreign travellers from eight countries and designated nine countries as “high-risk”, including Britain, the United States, Australia and India. All arrivals from these countries must undergo mandatory quarantine and be fitted with digital tracking devices, regardless of their vaccination status. Those from Britain will also be required to conduct daily self-tests during quarantine, Khairy said. Germany is reporting another 56,677 new daily coronavirus cases and 522 deaths, according to the Robert Koch Institute. South Korea has just released its daily Covid report. Another 7,622 confirmed coronavirus cases have been recorded over the last 24 hours with 62 Covid-related deaths. The numbers are a slight decrease on the 7,850 cases and 70 deaths reported from the day before. Japan has officially approved Moderna Inc’s Covid-19 vaccine for its booster shot programme that began this month. The move followed a recommendation from health ministry experts on Wednesday that Moderna’s mRNA shot could be used as a third booster shot for those aged 18 or older. It is the same standard that was applied to the shot developed by Pfizer Inc and BioNTech, which has so far been given out about 71,000 times as a booster, or just 0.1% of the population. After a relatively late start, Japan has fully inoculated almost 80% of its population, the highest among Group of Seven economies. The country has about 31 million doses left between the Pfizer and Moderna shots, with deals in place to get 170 million more in 2022. New coronavirus infections in Japan have slowed dramatically since a fifth wave that peaked in August. Experts say the fact that Japan started its vaccine push later may be helping keep Covid-19 cases low, as immunity from the shots for most people has not yet waned. Health minister Shigeyuki Goto said last week that boosters should be given as soon as possible. Malaysia is now requiring all travellers arriving from the United Kingdom to undertake Covid tests everyday during quarantine. “Due to the Covid-19 Omicron variant spread in the community, travellers arriving from the United Kingdom must now self-test everyday during quarantine. All self-test results (positive, negative or invalid) must be reported,” the ministry of health said in a statement on Thursday. The country also confirmed a second case of the Omicron variant while another 18 suspected cases are currently awaiting genome sequencing for confirmation. Indonesia has just identified its first case of the Omicron coronavirus variant, health minister Budi Gunadi Sadikin said on Thursday. The case was detected on Wednesday evening and is believed to be an employee at the Wisma Atlet hospital in Jakarta who had no history of overseas travel. There is so far believed to be no community transmission, but another five Omicron cases are suspected, including two Indonesians who had recently returned from the United States and from Britain, and three Chinese nationals currently in quarantine in Manado, North Sulawesi. The government is waiting for genomic sequencing for confirmation. Some disappointing news just in for cricket fans. Australia’s captain, Pat Cummins, has been ruled out for the second Ashes Test after being identified as a close contact of a positive Covid-19 case. Just hours before Thursday afternoon’s toss in Adelaide, it emerged that Cummins was dining at a restaurant in the city on Wednesday night when a person at the next table was identified as a positive case. Cummins left the venue immediately and promptly informed cricket authorities, but the exposure was deemed sufficient for the fast bowler to be forced into isolation for seven days, under South Australia Health protocols. Our reporter Mike Hytner has the full story here. New Zealand has detected its first case of the Omicron Covid-19 variant in a Christchurch managed isolation facility. On Thursday afternoon, the director general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield said: This is a person who is in managed isolation in Christchurch. The person arrived in New Zealand on a flight from Germany via Dubai that landed in Auckland...the people on that flight were transferred to Christchurch on a chartered domestic flight trip with all our usual protocols. We fully expected we will find a case of Omicron and in fact, we are treating every border related case as if it were Omicron until proven otherwise. We have good protocols in place that are designed to stop the virus getting across the border.” Everyone who travelled on the same international and charter flights as the case are being treated as close contacts, as are those staying on the same floor of the MIQ facility. Bloomfield said health authorities are considering advice over reducing the interval period between second and third doses of the Pfizer vaccine, to help combat Omicron’s spread and effect. Stock markets in Asia have swatted aside any negativity around the escalating Covid situation in advanced economies and followed the US indices into positive territory in Thursday’s session. The Nikkei in Tokyo is up 1.6%, Shanghai is up 0.4%, and even Seoul is up the same amount despite South Korea imposing new dining curfews. The only main straggler is the ASX200 in Sydney where the market has been dragged down 1.6% by a selloff in one of its biggest companies, the biotech firm CSL. All this despite the US Federal Reserve announcing a much quicker normalisation of monetary policy on Wednesday, pencilling in three rate hikes for next year. That could raise the pressure on central banks such as the reserve Bank of Australia to start raising rates earlier, even if Omicron is seen as an obstacle to recovery in the coming months. Thousands marched in New Zealand’s capital Wellington on Thursday to protest against Covid vaccine mandates and lockdowns, as the country announced 90% of its eligible population has been fully vaccinated. The government has so far mandated vaccinations for teachers, workers in the health and disability sectors, police and other public service sectors. Protesters, mostly unmasked, marched through the central business district of Wellington and gathered in front of the parliament building, know as the Beehive. Some at the peaceful demonstration held placards with messages like “Freedom over fear”, “lockdowns destroy lives” and “Kiwis are not lab rats”, Reuters reports. Others had signs with the “Make America Great Again” slogan of former US President Donald Trump. Under mounting pressure, prime minister Jacinda Ardern eased most restrictions ahead of the Christmas break, abandoning her long-standing strategy of eliminating the coronavirus for a new “traffic light” system of living with the virus through higher vaccinations. However, the island nation’s international borders remain shut to the outside world and will only be gradually opened from next year. The Dutch family family has apologised after it last week invited a reported 21 people to celebrate the 18th birthday of Princess Amalia, the future queen, in breach of coronavirus health guidance. At present, people in the Netherlands can receive a maximum of four guests over the age of 13 in their homes. Dutch prime minister Mark Rutte wrote in a letter to parliament on Wednesday: “The family strived to treat the coronavirus rules responsibly with this outdoor gathering and by taking precautions” including tests and social distancing. “The king informed me that on reflection it was not a good idea to organise [the gathering].” Read the full story here. Apple Inc is delaying its return to office plans indefinitely, Bloomberg News reports, while the company said it has temporarily closed three stores in the US and Canada after a rise in Covid cases and exposures among the stores’ employees. The company’s employees were previously set to return to offices on 1 February, according to the report, citing a memo sent by Chief Executive Officer Tim Cook. Google told its employees they would lose pay and eventually be fired if they did not follow the company’s vaccination rules, according to a report, while JP Morgan Chase &amp; Co has asked its unvaccinated staff in Manhattan to work from home. Apple’s store closures in Miami, Annapolis and Ottawa come a day after the company reinstated its policy requiring all customers at its stores in the US to wear masks. All the employees at the three stores will be tested before the stores are reopened, the company said. People in England have been told to cut down on socialising in the lead-up to Christmas. Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, urged people not to “mix with people you don’t have to”, amid mounting concern over the rapid spread of the Omicron variant. He advised the public to “prioritise social interactions that really matter to them”, suggesting work parties may be ill-advised. Whitty’s comments were in stark contrast to messaging from Boris Johnson, who has previously said he does not want people to cancel Christmas parties. Watch the briefing in the video below. Fewer than one in three patients who have ongoing Covid symptoms after being hospitalised with the disease say they feel fully recovered a year later, according to a study that offers new insights into potential treatments. As the pandemic has unfolded, a growing body of research has revealed that Covid not only causes health problems in the short-term, but also has long-term effects. Now a study has revealed many of those who had ongoing symptoms after hospitalisation are showing little improvement, with their condition similar at about 12 months after discharge to seven months earlier. “Only one in three participants felt fully recovered at one year,” said Dr Rachel Evans, one of the co-leads of the post-hospitalisation Covid-19 study – or Phos-Covid – which is led by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Leicester Biomedical Research Centre, although the team says missing data means the figure could be as low as two in 10 or as high as six in 10. Read the full story from our reporter Nicola Davis here. New Zealand’s health regulator Medsafe has granted provisional approval for the Pfizer Inc Covid-19 vaccine for children aged 5 to 11 years old, the health ministry said in a statement. The provisional approval is for two doses of the paediatric Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine, given at least 21 days apart, it said. If approved by the cabinet, the introduction of the paediatric Pfizer vaccine is expected to start in New Zealand no later than the end of January 2022, the ministry said. South Korea will reinstate social distancing rules and a 9pm curfew for restaurants and cafes to combat spiralling numbers of new infections and hospitalisations. Curbs will return from 18 December to 2 January, limiting social gatherings to no more than four people - as long as they are vaccinated. Restaurants, cafes and nightly entertainment facilities will also need to close by 9pm and movie theatres and internet cafes by 10pm, prime minister Kim Boo-kyum announced on Thursday. Unvaccinated people will only be able to dine out alone, or use takeout or delivery services. The measures came a day after South Korea reported another new daily record in Covid cases. More than 94% of South Korean adults are fully vaccinated, but the number of new cases has surged nearly five-fold and the number of serious cases tripled since the rules were eased last month, adding to strains on the country’s medical system. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog as we go through all the latest coronavirus developments. Let’s start with the news that South Korea will clamp down on social gatherings, reducing the maximum private gathering size to four people, and cut the hours of some businesses to fight a record-breaking surge of Covid infections that has led to a spike in hospitalisations and deaths. Curfews of 9pm on restaurant and cafe business hours will also be restored, prime minister Kim Boo-kyum said on Thursday. The new measures are set to be in effect from 18 December until 2 January, Yonhap News reports. South Africa has reported its highest daily tally of new coronavirus cases since the start of the pandemic with 26,976 infections and 54 deaths recorded on Wednesday. The previous record of 26,485 on 3 July came at the height of the country’s third wave caused by the Delta variant. On that day, 108 Covid deaths were reported. Here is a snapshot of the latest key developments: Covid cases in the UK reached record levels, with 78,610 new cases reported on Wednesday, as the Omicron variant continues its rapid spread. England’s chief medical officer warned people not to mix with others unless they have to in the run-up to Christmas after Britain recorded its most daily cases since the start of the pandemic. French President Emmanuel Macron said it was possible the Covid-19 vaccine would eventually be made compulsory in France, but said it was not the priority for now. A US appeals court revived the Biden administration’s vaccine mandate for healthcare workers in 26 states. US Secretary of State Antony Blinken cut short his trip to Southeast Asia due to a Covid-19 case among his travelling party. Moderna will start a trial of its Covid-19 vaccine across eight African countries to determine its efficacy in people who are HIV positive, Bloomberg News reported. Early data suggests Omicron is more transmissible than Delta, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. Canadians advised against all non-essential international travel. The Omicron variant has been found to multiply about 70 times quicker than the original and Delta versions of coronavirus in tissue samples taken from the bronchus, the main tubes from the windpipe to the lungs, a study found. Covid cases in the UK reached record levels, with 78,610 new cases reported on Wednesday, as the Omicron variant continues its rapid spread. Ukraine will extend Covid restrictions for another three months, to 31 March from the end of December, because of low levels of vaccination, the prime minister Denys Shmyhal said. Italy tightens restrictions for arrivals from the rest of the EU, requiring Covid tests of everyone and a five-day quarantine for those who are not vaccinated. The Crown Princess of Denmark tested positive for coronavirus on Wednesday.It was not, perhaps, the image Kim Jong-un would have wanted to project in his first public appearance as the latest authoritarian leader of North Korea in 2011. As wailing citizens exhibited their grief along the snowbound streets of Pyongyang, Kim, then only in his late 20s, cut a forlorn figure. Dressed in a long black coat, Kim walked with grim purpose alongside the hearse carrying his father, Kim Jong-il, one hand resting on the bonnet of the 1970s Lincoln Continental, the other executing an awkward salute. He was later seen crying and drying his eyes at the burial service, in footage broadcast on state television. The younger Kim’s sudden ascent to lead an unpredictable, nuclear-armed nation on 17 December 2011 offered little indication of how – and for how long – he would rule the secretive state. Some observers predicted an early political demise for a young man who had yet to earn the loyalty of the inner circle of the ruling Korean Workers’ party and the generals of the country’s million-strong army. The state machinery, observers predicted, would use the succession to exploit Kim’s inexperience, plunging the country and the world into unprecedented uncertainty. Just two days into Kim’s leadership, Victor Cha, the former White House Asian affairs director, wrote: “Whether it comes apart in the next few weeks or over several months, the regime will not be able to hold together after the untimely death of its leader, Kim Jong-il.” Others, more in hope than expectation, predicted a new style of leadership under the “cosmopolitan” Kim Jong-un, who had been educated at an exclusive Swiss boarding school and professed a love for NBA basketball. In the best-case scenario, its new, free-spirited leader would address the regime’s nuclear ambitions and appalling human rights record. Now, as he embarks on a second decade in power, Kim leads a country assailed by international sanctions, natural disasters and the unprecedented challenges posed by Covid-19. A year that began with him being named general secretary of the Workers’ party – his late father’s title – has ended with fears over food shortages, the pandemic and the economy, with a return to nuclear talks only a distant possibility. In October 2020, Kim offered an extraordinary public apology to the people of North Korea, tearfully acknowledging that he had failed to guide the country through difficult times. Faced with food shortages and more economic pain caused by the Covid-enforced closure of the border with China, he called on his people to embark on another “arduous march”, appearing to compare the situation to a 1990s famine during which hundreds of thousands of people died. And yet, predictions that his regime is in danger of collapse are as hopelessly wide of the mark now as they were a decade ago. A ruthless leader-in-waiting Thirteen days after the death of Kim Jong-il, his youngest son was formally declared supreme commander of the Korean People’s army, a year after he had been briefly introduced at a military parade. That appearance confirmed that the then 26-year-old was preferred ahead of his older half-brother, Kim Jong-nam, who had fallen out of favour in 2001 after an embarrassing encounter with Japanese immigration officials. “It was a mistake for some people to assume that he would be a reformer,” says Duyeon Kim, adjunct senior fellow at the Center for a New American Security. “Being educated in the west does not automatically mean one will subscribe to democratic values. At the end of the day, it’s all about ensuring the Kim dynasty lasts forever, so it is only natural that Kim will do anything to maintain a firm grip on absolute power. “Kim has maintained his grip on power through a combination of the regime apparatus, keeping the elites happy who help sustain a Kim family leadership system, and employing brutal practices to enforce loyalty and eliminate threats.” Addressing the first major party congress in decades, Kim in 2016 outlined his byongjin policy – a vision of a North Korea that married economic development with acquiring status as a genuine nuclear power. He also revealed a “tempestuous” side that, according to Kim Jong-il’s former sushi chef, had marked him out as a leader-in-waiting when he was still a child. In 2013, he ordered the execution of his own uncle, Jang Song-thaek, the once-powerful adviser who had walked immediately behind him as they mourned three years earlier. Jang would be just one of dozens of officials purged or executed by Kim, whose determination to tighten his grip on power had made him deeply distrustful of many of those around him, including his own family. Sixteen years after his unsuccessful attempt to visit Tokyo Disneyland, Kim Jong-nam was waiting to check in at Kuala Lumpur airport when two women – groomed by North Korean agents – smeared an oily substance on his face that turned out to be the nerve agent VX, one of the most deadly chemical weapons in the world. Twenty minutes later, he was dead. Few believe the assassination could have happened without the approval of Kim Jong-un. Kim Jong-nam and Jang Song-thaek were not the regime’s only high-profile victims. In 2017, the world reacted in horror after the death of Otto Warmbier, an American student who had been detained in North Korea, reportedly after attempting to steal a poster as a memento of his visit. Although details of his death remain murky, we do know that the 22-year-old university student was medically evacuated from North Korea on 13 June that year and flown to the US, where he died on 19 June. North Korea’s 24 million people have also suffered under Kim, whose human rights abuses include the torture, humiliation and sexual assault of criminal suspects and the use of a network of gulags for the politically “impure”. Many of the defectors who have made it to the South during Kim’s time in power said they had been motivated by worsening poverty and malnutrition. The regime’s response – according to high-profile defectors, including Thae Yong-ho, a senior diplomat at the North Korean embassy in London – was to resort to executions and killings as a form of “terrorism” to crush dissent. The Seoul-based human rights organisation the Transitional Justice Working Group said it had identified hundreds of sites where witnesses say North Korea carried out public executions and extrajudicial state killings as part of an arbitrary and aggressive use of the death penalty designed to intimidate its citizens. Meeting Trump the ‘dotard’ At the end of 2016 the world held its breath with the election of a US president every bit as idiosyncratic as his North Korean nemesis. Fears grew that tensions fomented during the Obama administration could spill over into a military conflict as Donald Trump spent the first months of his presidency trading insults with the “little rocket man” in Pyongyang, who responded in kind with public denunciations of the “dotard” in the White House. Having exhausted their arsenal of insults, the two men embarked on an unprecedented round of nuclear summitry, in Singapore in 2018 and Hanoi in 2019, as well as a historic meeting at the demilitarised zone, the heavily fortified border that dissects the Korean peninsula. Kim had embarked on a furious round of diplomacy that included three summits with the South Korean president, Moon Jae-in, six meetings with Chinese leader Xi Jinping and one with Russian president Vladimir Putin. The Singapore summit marked Kim’s debut as a statesman and ended with a loose agreement to “denuclearise” the Korean peninsula. The Hanoi summit, however, ended in ignominy after the two leaders failed to agree on how North Korea would be rewarded for dismantling its nuclear weapons. To date, Kim has not abandoned a single nuclear weapon, and only this month, satellite imagery showed the regime continuing to produce nuclear-grade plutonium at its main Yongbyon plant. At around the same time, Kim was in a strong enough position to begin crafting the North Korean state in his own image, albeit one that stylistically borrowed heavily from his grandfather, from his dark Mao suits and short-back-and sides to his visible weight gain. He has since stepped out of the shadow of his predecessors, using a constitutional revision in 2019 to expunge all mention of his father’s songun “military-first” policy. South Korean media reported this month that portraits of former leaders have been removed from meeting rooms, while officials now use the term “Kim Jong-un-ism” to underline the break with the ideologies of his predecessors. “Kim has manipulated the strategic levers of power to survive and thrive,” says Patrick Cronin, chair for Asia-Pacific security at the Hudson Institute in Washington. “He revived party power and discipline, co-opted elites, opened more markets, developed strategic arms, and balanced outsider powers.” Kim’s greatest test Much of what the outside world knows about North Korea comes from satellite imagery, brave citizen journalists equipped with contraband mobile phones, recent defectors, South Korea’s spy agency, the North’s state-run media and, inevitably, a degree of guesswork and speculation. That applies as much to Kim’s health as it does to his nuclear weapons. Official photos offered watertight proof that he piled on the pounds in his first few years as leader and that his weight had caused him occasional discomfort. Prolonged absences from public life triggered speculation he was suffering a serious illness. A three-week absence in 2020 sparked rumours of heart surgery, with some reports suggesting he had died. A more plausible theory – that he had simply been isolating as a precaution during the pandemic – emerged after Kim reappeared, apparently in good health. More recent photos suggest the leader has been advised to make lifestyle changes and has subsequently lost enough weight to tighten the strap on his favourite $12,000 watch. Little is known about his diet or drinking habits – we know his father was fond of Hennessy cognac – but he has frequently been photographed with a cigarette in his hand. South Korean intelligence officials recently told MPs that an apparently healthy Kim had lost 20kg, and dismissed reports a body-double had been enlisted to make public appearances. In the 10 years since he shed tears beside his father’s corpse at the Kumsusan Palace of the Sun mausoleum, Kim has turned North Korea into a nuclear power, withstood unprecedented economic pressure from the UN security council and cemented North Korea’s role as a constant source of geopolitical frustration for three US presidents and counting. His greatest test, though, could be largely home-grown, says the Hudson Institute’s Cronin. “The biggest unknown for Kim remains the true impact of Covid, which has stifled North Korean progress and may yet undermine the regime in ways not yet visible to the outside world,” he says. Some analysts expect Kim to mask pandemic and economic shortcomings by bolstering his reputation as a friend of the people, an image nurtured during photo opportunities with children and “ordinary” civilians, and public appearances with his wife, Ri Sol-ju, with whom he reportedly has three children aged between four and 11. While drawing heavily on traditional methods of quashing dissent, Kim’s public persona “is that of a loving supreme leader who cares most about his people’s welfare and putting on a human face by openly acknowledging policy failures and even crying to tug at his people’s heart strings, while trying to show the world that he is a normal leader of a normal state,” says Duyeon Kim. With UN security council sanctions still in place, warnings of more economic hardship and the prospect of an unvaccinated population facing another wave of Covid, North Korea’s situation is anything but normal. But having defied the odds for so long, the consensus is that Kim Jong-un is here to stay. As Cronin says: “More likely than not, North Korea will be celebrating 20 years of ‘glorious’ leadership under Kim.”Meet two enterprising founders determined to make a difference. With support from Westpac Foundation, their organisations measurably improve the lives of some of Victoria’s most vulnerable people. Fighting youth homelessness for the long term The 2016 census reported more than 24,000 people under 25 experiencing homelessness – almost a quarter of all rough sleepers. Nick Pearce is hoping to drive that number down. He’s the CEO and co-founder of HoMie, a street fashion label with a difference. Its mission? To empower these young people to thrive and keep thriving. “We look at it as being a launching pad for young people who are in a tough spot to acquire fundamental soft skills and a real confidence boost to help them realise their potential,” Pearce says. Unemployment and income scarcity are major contributing factors to homelessness. As HoMie’s website says, finding a job is made more difficult by stigma, not having a fixed address, and lacking job-hunting essentials such as CV writing skills and work experience. Recognising the need to break the cycle, HoMie runs a pathways program designed to equip young people with the skills and confidence to gain employment and take charge of their futures. “We need to look after people comprehensively, in a really concerted manner,” Pearce says. “Employment is a really important part of that. It’s not everything, but it’s a really critical piece of the puzzle.” Every year, up to 12 young people spend eight months engaging with major Australian and global brands, youth homelessness services and educators. By the end of the program, participants will have earned a certificate III in retail operations, practical – and paid – work experience, paid personal development training and a permanent place in the alumni community. But the long-term impact goes even deeper. “We’re educating these workplaces and challenging the stigmas that may have previously existed within them,” Pearce says. “We’re providing genuine value to them and changing the perception of a young person from being a burden to an actual asset.” Giving young carers the support they’re missing Not-for-profit Little Dreamers takes a holistic approach to supporting young carers for the long term. Its founder, Madeleine Buchner, understands these needs exactly – she was a young carer herself, and created the organisation when she was just a teenager. Now, Little Dreamers helps about 5,000 young people every year, some as young as four, who provide or intend to provide care for a family member affected by disability, chronic or mental illness, addiction or frail age. “One in 10 kids in Australia grow up as a young carer,” Buchner says. “Of the kids we work with, there’s a very high proportion who struggle with school or are unemployed. For example, young carers are up to a year and a half behind in their Naplan testing scores at year 9 level.” Supporting these kids isn’t a matter of removing their caring responsibilities. They need help with a range of development that might have been missed, from academic lessons to social engagement. Little Dreamers runs eight different direct support programs, from one-off dream experiences to six-month personal leadership programs, both online and off. “We have a tutoring program, which helps directly with schooling,” Buchner says. “We have an in-school support program, which provides professional development opportunities for teachers. So, we’re able to provide wraparound support in a variety of areas, so that young carers have support from multiple people in their lives.” This type of early intervention is crucial. “If we don’t support vulnerable young people, they’re going to end up becoming older vulnerable people,” Buchner says. “If we can catch them at an age where we can still shape that and proactively support them rather than reacting to higher risk factors, we can change young people’s lives rather than just making them better.” Growing with support from an Australian institution Little Dreamers and HoMie have both received Westpac Foundation Community Grants, a program that Pearce and Buchner say has helped them with both funding and support. This year alone, $2.95m in grants has been awarded to social enterprises and local community organisations across Australia, helping to create opportunities for people overcoming disadvantage. Ross Miller, chief customer engagement officer at Westpac, says: “We’re advocating for a more inclusive Australia. One of the ways we can get there is by supporting local organisations like Little Dreamers and HoMie. The work they do and impact they have is incredible – and we’re proud to be associated with social enterprises that are giving back to their local communities in such a compassionate way.” Pearce says HoMie’s involvement with Westpac Foundation is instrumental in making a difference: “The foundation truly understands that [our work] is time and resource intensive, which is really why it yields positive long-term outcomes. What’s been so wonderful for us is that it’s enabling us to do what we do best and deliver really quality outcomes.” Buchner also credits Westpac with providing ongoing impact beyond funding. “The beautiful thing about Westpac Foundation is that they don’t just say, here’s a grant, we’ll chat to you in 12 months,” she says. “The financial support helps us to actually deliver the impact, but the additional support helps us to create new opportunities, support our staff and provide things that we never would have had access to otherwise.” Find out more about Westpac Foundation and the social enterprises and community organisations it supports.Americans should receive the Pfizer or Moderna coronavirus vaccine rather than the Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine, a panel of outside advisors recommended to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine has been linked to rare but serious blood clots and the two-shot Pfizer and Moderna vaccines have shown to be more effective in preventing infection. US hospitals are bracing for another potential surge in coronavirus cases as the Omicron variant spreads across the country. Omicron now accounts for nearly 3% of all Covid cases in the US as of Saturday – up from only 0.4% the week before, according to data from the CDC. After getting a briefing on the pandemic from advisers, Joe Biden said the Omicron variant is “now spreading and it’s going to increase”.“For the unvaccinated, we are looking at a winter of severe illness and death,” he said, urging Americans to get vaccinated and get their boosters as soon as possible. The supreme court has returned the case involving Texas’ six-week abortion ban to a federal appeals court. Much to the disappointment of abortion rights advocates, the case was sent to a court that has twice upheld the controversial law. The US Food and Drug Administration said it would permanently ease restrictions on abortion pills, allowing patients to receive the medication without having to go to a clinic or doctor’s office in person. The medications are used to end pregnancies in the early stages, up to 10 weeks’ gestation. The policy comes as the date of abortion rights remains uncertain in the hands of the supreme court. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer said he wants to pass a voting rights bill “in time for the 2022 elections,” per CNN. As of now, the Democratic leader does not have the votes to pass voting rights legislation because centrist Senator Kyrsten Sinema remains opposed to altering the filibuster to clear the way for such a bill. Centrist Senator Joe Manchin’s concerns about the Build Back Better Act have stalled negotiations, essentially eliminating the possibility of Democrats passing the bill before the end of the year. Manchin has reportedly expressed concern about the cost of the bill’s provision to continue the expanded child tax credit program. – Joan E Greve and Maanvi Singh Joe Biden has conceded that his Build Back Better plan is unlikely to pass this year. In discussions, Joe Manchin “has reiterated his support for Build Back Better funding at the level of the framework plan I announced in September. I believe that we will bridge our differences and advance the Build Back Better plan, even in the face of fierce Republican opposition,” Biden said in a statement. Centrist Manchin’s concerns about the Build Back Better Act have stalled negotiations. Most recently, he has reportedly been concerned about the cost of expanding the child tax credit program, a provision of the legislation. “My team and I are having ongoing discussions with Senator Manchin; that work will continue next week. It takes time to finalize these agreements, prepare the legislative changes, and finish all the parliamentary and procedural steps needed to enable a Senate vote. We will advance this work together over the days and weeks ahead; Leader Schumer and I are determined to see the bill successfully on the floor as early as possible,” he said. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) said it would permanently ease restrictions on abortion pills by mail, allowing patients to receive the medication by mail without having to go to a clinic or doctor’s office in person. The medications are used to end pregnancies in the early stages, up to 10 weeks’ gestation. The policy change from the FDA comes as the US Supreme Court considers an abortion ban in Mississippi at 15 weeks. During oral arguments this month, justices signaled they are open to rolling back or gutting Roe v Wade, the landmark decision that established the right to abortion in the US. The FDA initially temporarily lifted restrictions on getting the pill mailed during the pandemic when it was risky for patients to visit doctor’s offices and clinics in person. The US postmaster appointed under Trump is still raising alarm – but can he be stopped? Jake Bittle reports: Joe Biden this month took another step toward the removal of the controversial postmaster general Louis DeJoy, even as the Trump-era appointee continues to make his mark on the embattled postal service, rolling out new plans to slow down delivery and close postal stations around the country. DeJoy, a Republican logistics executive, caused a national furor last year over his attempts to slow down mail delivery before the 2020 presidential election, in which millions of Americans voted by mail. Biden has not said outright whether he wishes to oust DeJoy, although his press secretary, Jen Psaki, has said she is “deeply troubled” by his leadership. Even so, the president lacks the authority to dismiss the postmaster general. That power rests with the USPS Board of Governors, a nine-member panel that can remove DeJoy with a majority vote. There were three vacancies on the board when Biden took office, and he filled those vacancies with Democratic allies earlier this year. Now the president has taken a further step toward reshaping the board by nominating two new governors to replace those whose terms are expiring. His decision not to renominate the Democratic board chairman, Ron Bloom, is significant, since Bloom was one of DeJoy’s biggest allies on the board and earlier this year said he considered DeJoy “the proper man for the job”. Indeed, the postmaster general bought as much as $305,000 in bonds from Bloom’s asset management firm earlier this year, according to DeJoy’s financial disclosure paperwork. Bloom has said he doesn’t benefit from the purchase. The asset purchases and Bloom’s continued support for DeJoy led some Democratic senators to say they wouldn’t support Bloom’s renomination. Even as Biden appears to inch closer to ousting DeJoy, the embattled postmaster general has begun to leave his mark on the agency. DeJoy abandoned his initial attempts to slow down mail delivery ahead of the 2020 election after he faced lawsuits and backlash, but soon after he announced a significant reduction in the agency’s 60,000-member administrative workforce. DeJoy also released in April a 10-year plan for revamping postal operations. Some provisions are supported by unions and postal advocates, such as a $40bn investment in the agency’s vehicle fleet and logistics network, and modernizing thousands of retail post offices. The plan also calls for an end to a mandate that requires the USPS to fund retiree health benefits decades in advance, which postal management has decried for years as an unnecessary burden on its finances. DeJoy’s plan would attempt to fill the postal service’s $160bn funding hole through a wide variety of cost-cutting measures. Read more: Melody Schreiber reports: A wave of new Omicron cases is beginning to surge in America and could peak as early as January, the Centers for Disease Controls (CDC) has warned, as states are scrambling to prepare for overloaded hospitals. The US has passed 800,000 deaths, including 1 in 100 Americans over the age of 65. The Omicron variant accounted for nearly 3% of Covid cases in the US as of Saturday – up from only 0.4% the week before, according to data from the CDC. The variant is expected to continue rising rapidly, based on the experiences of other countries and could be dominant within weeks. “I suspect that those numbers are going to shoot up dramatically in the next couple of weeks,” said Céline Gounder, infectious disease specialist and epidemiologist at New York University and Bellevue Hospital, on Wednesday. She expects an Omicron wave to peak in late January and then come down sometime in February. In a meeting with state health leaders on Tuesday, the CDC presented two scenarios, based on models, for how the variant might drive infections in the next few weeks and months. Omicron and Delta cases could peak as soon as January or a smaller surge of Omicron could happen in the spring. It’s unclear which variant, Delta or Omicron, will dominate in the next few months or if they will coexist, Gounder said. Regardless, “we anticipate an increase in hospitalizations, an increase in deaths and an increase in the burden on the health care system over the next couple of months”. The US was already in the grips of a Delta wave that began before the Thanksgiving holiday, and officials fear that travel and gatherings over holidays like Christmas and New Year’s could add explosive growth to an already strained situation. Schools across the US are seeing rises in cases, and some are closing early or cutting back on in-person activities. In New York, Cornell University reported 903 cases among students this week – many of them cases of the Omicron variant among fully vaccinated people. The school closed early and went virtual. In several states, hospitals are already close to being overwhelmed. In Michigan, hospital workers are now volunteering to work for free in ICUs, one doctor reports. Read more: After getting a briefing on the pandemic from advisers, Joe Biden said the omicron variant is “now spreading and it’s going to increase”. “For the unvaccinated, we are looking at a winter of severe illness and death,” he said, urging Americans to get vaccinated and get their boosters as soon as possible. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Americans should receive the Pfizer or Moderna coronavirus vaccine rather than the Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine, a panel of outside advisors recommended to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine has been linked to rare but serious blood clots, and the two-shot Pfizer and Moderna vaccines have shown to be more effective in preventing infection. US hospitals are bracing for another potential surge in coronavirus cases as the Omicron variant spreads across the country. Omicron now accounts for nearly 3% of all Covid cases in the US as of Saturday – up from only 0.4% the week before, according to data from the CDC. The supreme court has returned the case involving Texas’ six-week abortion ban to a federal appeals court. Much to the disappointment of abortion rights advocates, the case was sent to a court that has twice upheld the controversial law. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer said he wants to pass a voting rights bill “in time for the 2022 elections,” per CNN. As of now, the Democratic leader does not have the votes to pass voting rights legislation because centrist Senator Kyrsten Sinema remains opposed to altering the filibuster to clear the way for such a bill. Centrist Senator Joe Manchin’s concerns about the Build Back Better Act have stalled negotiations, essentially eliminating the possibility of Democrats passing the bill before the end of the year. Manchin has reportedly expressed concern about the cost of the bill’s provision to continue the expanded child tax credit program. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. A panel of outside advisers to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has voted to recommend that Americans receive the Pfizer or Moderna coronavirus vaccine rather than the Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine. The AP reports: The strange clotting problem has caused nine confirmed deaths after J&amp;J vaccinations — while the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines don’t come with that risk and also appear to be more effective, advisers to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. It’s an unusual move and the CDC’s director, Dr. Rochelle Walensky, must decide whether to accept the panel’s advice. Until now the U.S. has treated all three COVID-19 vaccines available to Americans as an equal choice, since large studies found they all offered strong protection and early supplies were limited. J&amp;J’s vaccine initially was welcomed as a single-dose option that could be especially important for hard-to-reach groups like homeless people who might not get the needed second dose of the Pfizer or Moderna options. The news comes amid intensifying fears of a potential surge in US coronavirus cases linked to the Omicron variant, which has already been reported in at least 36 states. A reporter asked Karine Jean-Pierre whether Joe Biden would support separating the expanded child tax credit program from the Build Back Better Act. “We don’t have 60 votes in the Senate to do that as a stand-alone,” the deputy White House press secretary said. The question comes as reports indicate Joe Manchin has voiced concern about the cost of the expanded program if it is continued for the next decade, although the current version of the Build Back Better Act only extends it for one year. The principal deputy White House press secretary, Karine Jean-Pierre, was asked whether Joe Biden believes Senate Democrats should focus on voting rights before passing the Build Back Better Act. The question comes one day after Biden told reporters, “If we can get the congressional voting rights done, we should do it. If we can’t, we got to keep going. There’s nothing domestically more important than voting rights. It’s the single-biggest issue.” “Protecting the cornerstone of our democracy should not be a partisan issue, but sadly what we’re seeing is that has been the case,” Jean-Pierre said. “There is nothing more urgent than passing voting rights and getting that done.” But Jean-Pierre did not specifically say whether the Build Back Better Act should take a lower priority than voting rights as Democrats continue to negotiate over both issues. Deputy national climate advisor Ali Zaidi expressed confidence that the Biden administration will have the resources to replace millions of lead pipes in the US, even though the final infrastructure bill included significantly less funding than the White House initially sought. Zaidi noted that $3bn of the $15bn for lead pipe replacement in the infrastructure law will be sent out over the course of the next year. Asked when the first lead pipes might be replaced, Zaidi said, “It’s already making a difference in communities right now.” The principal deputy White House press secretary, Karine Jean-Pierre, is now holding the daily briefing with reporters, and she is joined by deputy national climate advisor Ali Zaidi. Zaidi outlined the Biden administration’s plans to replace lead pipes across the US, which he described as a “centerpiece of the bipartisan infrastructure law”. The climate adviser noted that Kamala Harris met with child health advocates and labor leaders today to share the White House’s pledge to eliminate lead pipe and lead paint threats. She is married to former US president Donald Trump but now you, too, can stare into the “cobalt blue eyes” of Melania Trump at the touch of a button and with your very own piece of trendy, digital art. The former first lady has jumped into the latest internet craze by launching a non-fungible token (NFT) just in time for Christmas. It puts Melania right in the middle of a fashion frenzy in hi-tech art circles – though critics may regard it as the latest attempt by the Trump family to cash in on political success. An NFT is a digital asset – typically pictures, songs or videos – bought in an online marketplace and stored on blockchain, a secure public ledger. Blockchain allows anyone to verify the NFT’s authenticity and keeps a record of who owns what. In Melania’s first public venture since leaving the White House almost a year ago, an NFT named Melania’s Vision can be bought between 16 and 31 December with the SOL cryptocurrency or an old-fashioned credit card. An irony-free statement from her office says it is “a breathtaking watercolor art by Marc-Antoine Coulon, and embodies Mrs Trump’s cobalt blue eyes, providing the collector with an amulet to inspire.” “The limited-edition piece of digital artwork will be 1 SOL (approximately $150) and includes an audio recording from Mrs Trump with a message of hope.” Joe Biden will attend South Carolina State University’s commencement ceremony tomorrow, the White House has just announced. In its advisory, the White House said the president will travel to Orangeburg, South Carolina, to celebrate the graduates of the historically Black university. Biden is expected to deliver remarks, and House majority whip Jim Clyburn, who graduated from the university in 1961, will participate in a ceremonial march during the ceremony. The Washington Post explains: In December 1961, James E. Clyburn was a 21-year-old at South Carolina State University who had completed all his credits and was set to graduate. However, because the school at the time allowed only one commencement ceremony a year — usually in the spring — Clyburn received his diploma in the mail instead of marching alongside his classmates. He could have returned to walk in the 1962 ceremony, but by then he was busy with a new teaching job in Charleston. Sixty years later, Clyburn, now an 81-year-old Democratic congressman from South Carolina and the House majority whip, will get the opportunity to experience the pomp and circumstance of the college graduation ceremony he never had. And a special guest will hand him his diploma: President Biden, who is giving the commencement address at the school on Friday. ‘It means a great deal to me,’ Clyburn said Thursday on MSNBC’s ‘Morning Joe.’ Joe Biden posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor to Army Sergeant First Class Alwyn Cashe, and the medal was received by Cashe’s widow, Tamara Cashe. The medal was also posthumously awarded to Army Sergeant First Class Christopher Celiz, whose wife Katherine and daughter Shannon accepted the award on his behalf. Army Master Sergeant Earl Plumlee received the award for “acts of gallantry and intrepidity above and beyond the call of duty on August 28th, 2013,” when he was serving in Afghanistan. The Medal of Honor was also awarded to Sergeant First Class Christopher A. Celiz of the US Army and Master Sergeant Earl D. Plumlee of the US Army, both of whom served in Afghanistan. According to a White House statement, Celiz participated in a July 2018 mission during which he “voluntarily exposed himself to intense enemy machine gun and small arms fire to retrieve and employ a heavy weapon system, thereby allowing U.S. and partnered forces to regain the initiative, maneuver to a secure location and begin treatment of a critically wounded partnered force member”. He later died of injuries sustained during the mission. Plumlee was recognized for his actions in Afghanistan in August 2013, when he “instantly responded to a complex enemy attack that began with a massive explosion that tore a sixty-foot breach in the base’s perimeter wall,” according to the White House. Joe Biden is now awarding the Medal of Honor, America’s highest military award to valor, to three troops who fought in Iraq and Afghanistan. The three troops receiving the award are: Sergeant First Class Alwyn C. Cashe, United States Army Sergeant First Class Christopher A. Celiz, United States Army Master Sergeant Earl D. Plumlee, United States Army Biden noted that Cashe, who was killed in Iraq in 2005, is the first African American to receive the Medal of Honor since the Vietnam War. According to a statement from the White House, Cashe’s squadron was attacked on October 17, 2005, during a nighttime patrol in Iraq. Cashe sustained second- and third-degree burns trying to help his teammates reach safety, and he selflessly insisted that other injured troops be evacuated before he was. His actions saved several lives and cost him his own. The supreme court has returned the case involving Texas’ six-week abortion ban to a federal appeals court, but much to the disappointment of abortion rights advocates, the case was sent to a court that has twice upheld the controversial law. The AP reports: Justice Neil Gorsuch on Thursday signed the court’s order that granted the request of abortion clinics for the court to act speedily. But the clinics wanted the case sent directly to U.S. Judge Robert Pitman, who had previously though briefly blocked enforcement of the Texas abortion ban known as S.B. 8. When Pitman ordered the law blocked in early October, the appeals court countermanded his order two days later. Texas has said it will seek to keep the case bottled up at the appeals court for the foreseeable future. The supreme court ruled last week that abortion providers can move forward with their lawsuit over the ban, but the court, which skews six to three in favor of conservatives, allowed the law to remain in effect for now. Republican political fixer Roger Stone is going to appear tomorrow before the House special committee investigating the insurrection at the US Capitol on January 6 by extremist supporters of Donald Trump, but Stone will plead the fifth, according to reports. The committee issued a subpoena last month for Stone and others, demanding documents and testimony to expand the select committee’s inquiry focused on the planning and financing of the rally at the Ellipse, near the White House, by Trump on January 6, at which he exhorted his supporters to go to the Capitol and try to stop the certification by Congress of Joe Biden’s election victory. Now the panel members faced with the prospect of Stone sitting down with them but deflecting all of their questions, exercising his constitutional right to protection against self-incrimination. Joe Biden has officially signed the bill raising the debt ceiling by $2.5tn, averting a default that would have had disastrous effects on the domestic and global economy. In a statement, the White House noted that Biden also signed a bill awarding the Congressional Gold Medal to the US troops who were killed during the Kabul evacuation mission earlier this year. The House approved the debt ceiling bill yesterday in a vote of 221 to 209, sending the legislation to the president’s desk. The House vote came after Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer and minority leader Mitch McConnell reached an agreement to approve a temporary rule change allowing Democrats to end a Republican filibuster of the bill with just 51 votes. The debt ceiling bill ultimately passed the Senate in a vote of 50 to 49. The one-time change to the filibuster has led to suggestions from some Senate Democrats that the chamber should be able to make similar adjustments to approve a voting rights bill. “We think it’s so important that we change the rule in order to save the economy,” Senator Raphael Warnock told NBC News this week. “Well, the warning lights on our democracy are blinking right now, and we seem unwilling to respond with the same urgency to protect the democracy that we have to protect the economy.” Tommy Vietor, who previously served as National Security Council spokesperson under Barack Obama, criticized Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer for his new deadline to pass a voting rights bill before the 2022 elections. “I don’t understand making pronouncements like this without any discernible path to success,” Vietor said on Twitter. “I would love for the Senate to focus on and pass voting rights legislation, but this just feels like lurching from one rhetorical cul de sac to another.” As of now, Schumer does not have the votes to pass a voting rights bill because centrist Senator Kyrsten Sinema remains opposed to altering the filibuster, which would be necessary to approve such a bill. Here’s where the day stands so far: Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer said he wants to pass a voting rights bill “in time for the 2022 elections,” per CNN. As of now, the Democratic leader does not have the votes to pass voting rights legislation because centrist Senator Kyrsten Sinema remains opposed to altering the filibuster to clear the way for such a bill. Centrist Senator Joe Manchin’s concerns about the Build Back Better Act have stalled negotiations, essentially eliminating the possibility of Democrats passing the bill before the end of the year. Manchin has reportedly expressed concern about the cost of the bill’s provision to continue the expanded child tax credit program. US hospitals are bracing for another potential surge in coronavirus cases as the Omicron variant spreads across the country. Omicron now accounts for nearly 3% of all Covid cases in the US as of Saturday – up from only 0.4% the week before, according to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Chuck Schumer, the senate majority leader, said Thursday that he wants to pass Democrats’ two sweeping voting bills in time for the 2022 election. But that looks increasingly more difficult the longer Democrats delay. Advocates don’t think the window to do anything about the 2022 elections has passed, but it is rapidly closing. In Texas, a state that has some of the most gerrymandered maps in the country, the period for candidates to file for office next year ended on Monday. Overseas voters will begin to get mail-in ballots for the state’s 1 March primary in January. And the state’s voter registration deadline is 31 January. Those fast-approaching deadlines puts Democrats at a huge disadvantage. Courts will likely be more hesitant to step in and make sweeping election changes now that the election process is well underway since doing so could potentially mean changing ballots and risk voter confusion. Several provisions in the Freedom to Vote Act would require states to make significant overhauls to the way their elections are run, including implementing systems for same-day and automatic voter registration. Those changes take time to implement, and while it’s not impossible, would be increasingly difficult to do ahead of fast approaching spring primaries. “I think that it’s doable. But if we want to ensure that it’s done correctly and well, it’s going to take some time and definitely some resources,” Tammy Patrick, a senior adviser at the Democracy Fund, said back in November. “So the sands in the hour glass are slipping away and it is not something that if it’s not passed relatively soon, I don’t think there are ways in which many facets of the bill would be able to be implemented well.” Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer is now saying Democrats want to pass a voting rights bill “in time for the 2022 elections,” according to CNN. There had been signs that Democrats were hoping to approve filibuster rule changes and pass a voting rights bill before the end of the year, as negotiations over the Build Back Better Act have stalled. However, centrist Senator Kyrsten Sinema has indicated she is still opposed to amending the filibuster, leaving Schumer with no path to pass a voting rights bill this month. If Sinema remains staunchly opposed to filibuster reform, Schumer will also not be able to pass a voting rights bill next year, as he needs all 50 members of his caucus on board to approve any rule changes. Even fully vaccinated Americans may not be protected against the Omicron variant, particularly if they have not yet received their booster shots. Ed Yong writes in the Atlantic: As a crude shorthand, assume that Omicron negates one previous immunizing event—either an infection or a vaccine dose. Someone who considered themselves fully vaccinated in September would be just partially vaccinated now (and the official definition may change imminently). But someone who’s been boosted has the same ballpark level of protection against Omicron infection as a vaccinated-but-unboosted person did against Delta. The extra dose not only raises a recipient’s level of antibodies but also broadens their range, giving them better odds of recognizing the shape of even Omicron’s altered spike. In a small British study, a booster effectively doubled the level of protection that two Pfizer doses provided against Omicron infection. But, but, but: those who have received booster shots should not assume they are entirely immune from contracting Omicron. Yong notes: In South Africa, the variant managed to infect a cluster of seven people who were all boosted. And according to a CDC report, boosted Americans made up a third of the first known Omicron cases in the U.S. Governments are bracing for high coronavirus case counts as the Omicron variant spreads around the world. More than 75 countries have now reported cases of Omicron, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said yesterday. The New York Times reports: The news over the past few days — both scientific studies and real-world data — has added to the evidence that Omicron is more contagious than any previous version of the Covid-19 virus. In South Africa, where Omicron was first identified, the recent rise has been steeper than during any previous surge. ‘When Omicron enters a community, the increase in case numbers looks like a vertical line,’ Dr. Paul Sax of Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston said. Joe Biden and Kamala Harris are scheduled to receive a briefing from the White House pandemic response this afternoon to hear the latest updates on the spread of Omicron. France will dramatically tighten restrictions on travel from Britain to slow the spread of the new Omicron variant, effectively banning all non-essential journeys. The government announced in a statement that incoming travellers would require “an essential reason to travel to, or come from, the UK, both for the unvaccinated and vaccinated” from midnight on Saturday (11pm GMT Friday). “People cannot travel for tourism or professional reasons,” it said, adding that the British government had itself said that the UK would face “a tidal wave” of new infections fuelled by the Omicron variant. France had therefore “chosen to reinstate the need for an essential reason for travel from and to the UK”, it said. In addition, all arrivals from the UK will need a negative PCR or antigen test taken within the previous 24, rather than 48 hours, and will have to quarantine in France for seven days – reduced to 48 hours if they can produce a new negative test. Despite the growing concerns over the Omicron variant, Dr Anthony Fauci expressed hope that families will still be able to gather for the holidays if people are vaccinated and boosted. “If you and your family are vaccinated and boosted hopefully, you should feel comfortable about having a holiday situation where you have dinners and gatherings in your own home with family and friends,” the president’s chief medical adviser told “Good Morning America” today. Fauci added, “But that will only be safe if people get vaccinated.” As of now, 65% of the Americans aged five or older are fully vaccinated against coronavirus, according to data compiled by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. But only 30% of American adults have received booster shots as of now. A wave of new Omicron cases is beginning to surge in America and could peak as early as January, the Centers for Disease Controls (CDC) has warned, as states are scrambling to prepare for overloaded hospitals. The US has passed 800,000 deaths, including 1 in 100 Americans over the age of 65. The Omicron variant accounted for nearly 3% of Covid cases in the US as of Saturday – up from only 0.4% the week before, according to data from the CDC. The variant is expected to continue rising rapidly, based on the experiences of other countries and could be dominant within weeks. “I suspect that those numbers are going to shoot up dramatically in the next couple of weeks,” Céline Gounder, infectious disease specialist and epidemiologist at New York University and Bellevue Hospital, told reporters on Wednesday. She expects an Omicron wave to peak in late January and then come down sometime in February. In a meeting with state health leaders on Tuesday, the CDC presented two scenarios, based on models, for how the variant might drive infections in the next few weeks and months. Omicron and Delta cases could peak as soon as January or a smaller surge of Omicron could happen in the spring. Although Joe Manchin’s criticism is the most significant issue in the Build Back Better negotiations right now, it is far from the only hurdle that the bill faces in the Senate. Punchbowl News reports: Democrats are fighting among themselves over [the state and local income tax deduction] and immigration. That’s not Manchin’s fault. And the parliamentarian hasn’t finished scrubbing the bill for possible Byrd Rule problem. And that isn’t Manchin’s fault. So let’s be real. It’s not just Manchin. He’s a big problem for the leadership and White House, easily the most high profile headache, but hardly the only one. They don’t have the text of the legislation finished. The parliamentarian is still grinding away. [Centrist Senator Kyrsten Sinema] hasn’t publicly endorsed the package, which makes some Senate Democrats uneasy. According to reports, Joe Manchin has expressed criticism of the proposal to continue the expanded child tax credit program through the Build Back Better Act. The coronavirus relief package that Joe Biden signed in March included changes to the program, such as allowing families with children to receive monthly checks (rather than an annual lump sum after filing taxes) and making the credit fully refundable (so more low-income families could access the benefit). Democrats want to continue the expanded program for one year through their $1.75tn spending package, but Manchin has reportedly expressed concern about the cost of doing so. The main issue is that Manchin believes all the programs in the bill should be viewed on a 10-year basis, even though some of them expire after just a year or a few years. And if the expanded child tax credit program were extended through the next decade, which the current version of the bill does not call for, it would require significantly more funding than the bill allocates. But the expanded tax credit is a point of pride for Biden and other Democrats from the relief bill, so they will likely be very hesitant to cut it from the spending package. The negotiations continue, so stay tuned. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Senate Democrats had initially hoped to pass their Build Back Better Act before the end of the year, but that deadline is slipping away, as talks between Joe Biden and Joe Manchin drag out. Politico reports: The legislation looks increasingly likely to stall over the impending holiday break, prompting Biden himself to bemoan the slow pace. And Manchin (D-W.Va.) grew frustrated on Wednesday when questioned about whether he opposes a provision in the bill to extend the expanded child tax credit, deeming those queries ‘bullshit’ and denying that he wants to end the $300 monthly check many families receive for children. ... ‘The talks between [Biden] and Manchin have been going very poorly. They are far apart,’ the source said. Because of the stalled negotiations, Democrats were instead looking to pass a voting rights bill this month, by approving changes to Senate rules to circumvent a Republican filibuster on the issue. But now Kyrsten Sinema is putting the brakes on that idea as well. Here is Politico again: The Arizona moderate is making clear that she intends to keep protecting the Senate’s 60-vote requirement on most legislation and she isn’t ready to entertain changing rules to pass sweeping elections or voting legislation with a simple majority. ... In a statement to POLITICO, a spokesperson said that Sinema ‘continues to support the Senate’s 60-vote threshold, to protect the country from repeated radical reversals in federal policy which would cement uncertainty, deepen divisions, and further erode Americans’ confidence in our government.’ This centrist opposition means that Biden’s hopes of ending his first year in office with a significant legislative accomplishment are quickly disappearing, along with Democrats’ agenda. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.In a world first, New Zealand leopard seals have been found to feed on sharks, making them part of a tiny and exclusive club of marine predators that do so. The study, led by Krista van der Linde of leopardseals.org, found shark remains in the scat of leopard seals, and visible signs of struggle with sharks on seals’ bodies, indicating the marine mammals predate on sharks, rather than scavenge their remains. “We were blown away to find that sharks were on the menu,” Van der Linde said. “But then we also found elephant fish and ghost sharks were also being hunted by the leopard seals. These fish have large spines to help protect them from predators and sure enough there were wounds on the leopard seals, sometimes even big spines embedded in their faces. One leopard seal had at least 14 such wounds.” Van der Linde is uncertain why the seals are targeting sharks, especially given how risky it is to hunt them. “There could be something nutritionally about sharks that makes them desirable, it could be sort of a treat for [the seals].” Leopardseals.org was set up by Van der Linde and Ingrid Visser, an orca expert, to better protect, educate and research the seals. It has the largest collection of leopard seal scat in the world, gathered by researchers and volunteers who comb the coastline collecting it for the project, in a bid to learn more about the rare animals. In 2019, a still-working USB stick was found in a one-year-old frozen scat sample. “When we founded leopardseals.org, I knew we were going to find some interesting things, but this is the next-level of incredible,” Van der Linde said. Leopard seals are already known as apex predators, who feed on penguins and other seals, but this is the first time evidence has been produced of them hunting sharks. The leopard seals that arrive on New Zealand’s shores are originally from Antarctica. Their presence in the country’s waters is becoming more common, and research is trying to ascertain whether this is new, or whether more frequently reported sightings give the illusion there are more. The new diet research raises questions for Van der Linde over whether the seals are coming to New Zealand because there is more variation in the diet, and whether climate change could be affecting food sources farther south. The researchers are still in the process of trying to determine whether leopard seals have always feasted on sharks, or if this is also new. “It kind of indicates to us so far that leopard seals are opportunistic predators that are coming to New Zealand and feasting on whatever they can get their jaws on.” Van der Linde said it is very rare to see predators feeding on other predators, and that could have implications for the food chain. “A top predator feeding on another top predator is quite interesting in itself. If the leopard seals do keep increasing in the numbers and then that affects the shark populations, we really don’t know how that will affect things.”The Queensland government has quietly approved applications from energy company Origin that could lead to the extraction of fossil fuels across 225,000 hectares of Queensland’s channel country – part of one of the world’s last major free-flowing desert river systems. Environmentalists and traditional owners said drilling in the fragile environment would threaten rivers, unique wildlife and could compromise the region’s organic beef industry. There are fears that the controversial technique known as hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, could also be used. The Queensland government said Origin would now need to gain environmental approvals before it could begin any exploration works. The company said the project was in its “early days”. The Guardian revealed in January Origin had submitted petroleum applications in 10 areas across the channel country – part of the vast Kati Thanda-Lake Eyre basin. Angus Emmott, a channel country grazier and naturalist, said the granting of the leases was “totally unacceptable” and the state government had promised at the last three elections to protect the region. “Now they’ve gone and done this. These are the last free-flowing desert rivers on the face of the earth and we need governments with the guts to protect them.” Environment groups believe Origin is targeting shale oil from the region, but the company says until exploration starts it will not know what kind of fossil fuels are there. Ellie Smith, of environment group Lock the Gate Alliance, said there had not been meaningful consultation with the community before the leases were granted. She said: “Communities who rely on the free-flowing desert rivers of the region will suffer tremendously if Origin Energy now builds industrial-scale, polluting shale oilfields. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Exploiting this unique and spectacular part of Queensland for shale oil will also release a carbon bomb at a time when the world desperately needs to rein in its addiction to fossil fuels to mitigate the climate crisis.” Riley Rocco, a spokesperson for the Western Rivers Alliance, a group of conservationists, graziers and traditional owners, said they were “deeply concerned” and feared Origin would use controversial hydraulic fracturing techniques. Rocco said the government had committed to consulting with traditional owners and stakeholders “to ensure this world renowned river and wetland system is protected”. “The Lake Eyre basin rivers and wetlands are rich in wildlife and cultural heritage,” Rocco said. “The channel country’s profitable organic beef industry relies on the floodplains being naturally irrigated from unhindered clean water flows. To allow new oil and gas mining here is to put the local community and wildlife at risk.” Traditional owners are worried about the potential impact of drilling, pipelines and infrastructure on waterways and that this could also interfere with traditional songlines that are based on the routes of the rivers. Karen Monaghan, a Wangkangurru Yarluyandi traditional owner and member of Lake Eyre Basin Traditional Owners Alliance, said: “The channel country is my mother’s Country. “I grew up swimming in these rivers and I don’t want them fracked for oil or gas, dried out or dammed.” A statement from Origin Energy said no work had been carried out on any of the petroleum leases. “It’s very early days with regards to any proposed exploration activity in these permit areas,” a spokesperson said. “The nature of exploration is to firstly determine what resources are in that particular area and whether they are recoverable. “As is the case with all our operations, we would put in place approved management plans, procedures and controls to protect the environment and waterways, as well as areas of cultural significance.” A statement from the Queensland Department of Resources said: “Any resources project must stack up environmentally, socially and financially and are assessed against strict criteria.” Origin Energy must be granted an environmental authority before it could carry out exploration works, the statement said. The department said traditional owners that held a native title claim were notified and consented prior to the approval of the petroleum leases. An independent report commissioned in 2019 by the Queensland government, but not made public until last year, called for a ban on unconventional gas exploration in the region. The report, which was leaked and later tabled in parliament, recommended gas wells and ponds be excluded from areas which frequently flood, and unconventional petroleum and gas production should be designated “unacceptable use” in an area that overlaps with some of the Origin lease applications. The Guardian has approached the state’s environment department for comment.Ten people who risked their lives to save others during the 2019 Christchurch mosque massacres have been honoured in New Zealand’s most prestigious bravery awards. “The courage demonstrated by these New Zealanders was selfless and extraordinary. They have our deepest respect and gratitude for their actions on that day,” said the prime minister, Jacinda Ardern. “Each of them put their life on the line to save others. If not for their collective actions, the loss of life could have been even greater.” The list includes two awards of the country’s highest bravery honour, the New Zealand Cross – an acknowledgment akin to the New Zealand Victoria Cross for gallantry. On 15 March 2019, a white supremacist gunman killed 44 people at al Noor mosque during Friday prayers before driving to the Linwood mosque, where he killed another seven. Dr Naeem Rashid was posthumously awarded the New Zealand Cross, after he disregarded his own safety to challenge the attacker in al Noor mosque. As the gunman came into the main prayer room and began firing shots, the congregation attempted to flee, but Rashid ran at the gunman. “In so doing, he enabled others to escape and paid the ultimate price with the loss of his own life. I want to acknowledge Dr Rashid’s wife and family particularly, who will know all too well that his acts that day were a reflection of who he was as a person,” Ardern said. Rashid’s wife, Ambreen Naeem, said in a statement she was grateful for the award. “Today we can’t see him, but he has spread his message of peace and love, all over the world.” Abdul Aziz was also awarded the New Zealand Cross for also displaying great courage and bravery challenging the gunman. Aziz shouted provocations at the gunman to get him to refocus his attention on him, with the intention of preventing further loss of life. Aziz’s actions deterred the gunman from re-entering the Linwood Islamic Centre and ultimately forced him to flee the mosque. “To be honest with you, I couldn’t even have the time to think about anything, I just wanted to get that guy, that coward,” Aziz told RNZ on Thursday. While Aziz hoped no one would ever have to get an award again for helping save their community from terrorism, he acknowledged it felt good to be honoured. “It means a lot to all our community and all the Muslims and for me too, because all those times we’ve been the target, and this shows that people are with us. “It feels good, like you’ve done something good in your life.” There were also four awards of the New Zealand Bravery Decoration and four of the New Zealand Bravery Medal. Senior constables Scott Carmody and Jim Manning were awarded the New Zealand Bravery Decoration for their exceptional courage in apprehending the gunman. Canterbury District Commander Superintendent John Price said: “Jim and Scott are incredibly humble, but these awards are an important symbol of much more of than two heroic individuals, they say something about who we are as New Zealanders”. Ziyaad Shah’s bravery shielding another worshipper with his body in al Noor mosque, while the gunman shot at them, hitting Shah twice, was acknowledged with the New Zealand Bravery Decoration. Liam Beale, also awarded this decoration, had been driving past al Noor mosque but left his vehicle as he heard gunshots and people screaming. He stopped people from heading to the mosque, and then helped victims. Lance Bradford, Wayne Maley, Mark Miller and Mike Robinson were awarded the New Zealand Bravery Medal. “They placed their lives at risk, bravely searching for victims, assisting them and moving them to safety, while the gunman was active in the area,” Ardern said. “On a day of such terrible loss and suffering, the actions of these 10 individuals demonstrated the humanity, decency and compassion that New Zealanders value and hold dear.” • This article was amended on 17 December 2021. An earlier version said the New Zealand Cross was “an acknowledgment akin to the Victoria Cross, the UK’s most prestigious award for bravery”. The Victoria Cross is equal in stature to the George Cross in the UK honours system. In addition, the New Zealand Cross is primarily for civilians; in terms of direct comparisons with the UK, it is most similar to the George Cross.“The job snobs who refuse to work,” screamed the headline on page one of the Daily Telegraph. On social media the claims were even more dramatic: “Job snobs snub $100k bar work”. “Young Australians should have their welfare cut to force them off the sofa and into hospitality jobs, industry figures say,” the Tele reported. But inside Murdoch’s Sydney tabloid there was no evidence of a job offering $100,000 for bar work, no “job snobs” and no “industry figures” calling for an end to the dole. There were, however, two politicians happy to prop up the Tele’s dole-bashing article. “One Nation MP Mark Latham said: ‘Ending the dole would force the bludgers into work, fill the labour shortage and eliminate unemployment in Australia’.” “‘This is a one-off opportunity that the government has blown by returning to big immigration numbers to fill the vacancies’.” And then there was Liberal MP Jason Falinski, from Sydney’s northern beaches, who said the staff shortage was “our chance” to axe welfare payments. So what about the $100,000 job that has failed to attract workers and has allegedly led to the Aria restaurant having to close at lunchtime? The company, Solotel, told Weekly Beast there is no $100,000 job on offer and they were unaware the angle of the story was about cutting welfare payments. It’s a $100,000 pool of incentives, such as $1,000 sign-on bonus for new employees. Hendo’s ABC obsession Weekly Beast relies on a brave operative to read Gerard Henderson’s excruciatingly long and tedious media column in the Australian each Friday and compile annual statistics on which outlets attract his ire. No prizes for guessing Hendo’s Media Watchdog, also published on his Sydney Institute blog, is obsessed with the ABC, but the extent of his interest is extraordinary. The annual Sydney Institute Media Watchdog stats show a remarkable consistency with previous years, with 58.8% of all articles published in Media Watchdog being on the ABC. In 2021 Hendo mentioned the ABC 269 times. This is in stark contrast to channels 9, 7 and 10, about which he wrote just three times in total. Guardian Australia and Sky News Australia were mentioned 11 times each. The Nine papers – the Sydney Morning Herald and the Age – were mentioned 58 times, while News Corp mastheads – which dominate the media landscape – appeared just four times. The only shift over the years has been on the personalities he focuses on. The majority of the references to individuals are on ABC broadcaster Norman Swan, Sydney Morning Herald columnist Peter FitzSimons, veteran commentator Mike Carlton and the New Daily columnist Paul Bongiorno. Guardian Australia’s David Marr and human rights advocate Julian Burnside appear less frequently these days. In the 20 August edition, Hendo wrote without a hint of irony: “The way the [Sally] Neighbour/[Sarah] Ferguson pursuit of Donald Trump is going they run the risk of giving obsession a bad name. Can you bear it?” Entente cordiale While we were checking out Hendo’s stats, we noticed he has coined a new phrase: “the Guardian/ABC axis” and intends to feature said axis on a regular basis. “Amanda Meade’s fawning coverage of Gaven Morris’ ABC exit” was the first instalment. “Talk about the ABC/Guardian Axis in action,” Hendo told his readers. “Comrade Meade accepted Comrade Morris’ assertion that the ABC has set the standard for reflecting the full diversity of modern Australia in its workforce and content. This despite the fact that, for eons, Comrade Morris presided over the ABC’s Conservative Free Zone – where there is not one conservative presenter, producer or editor for any of its taxpayer-funded public broadcaster’s prominent television, radio or online outlets. Not one.” To Hendo diversity means one thing: more conservatives. Tick treatment The ABC’s tougher social media policy – which requires staff to take the “ABC” out of their Twitter handle – has had unintended consequences for Antony Green, the ABC’s election analyst. As he documented on the platform, when he changed his handle, Twitter deemed him no longer important and took away his blue tick of verification. But the new name @AntonyGreenElect had its own issues. “Sorry to those who follow Twitter on small mobiles and found the screen truncated version of my Twitter name offensive,” Green said to those who imagined they saw “AntonyGreenErect”. Then someone reregistered the old handle @AntonyGreenABC and “started posting false stories about the NSW local government elections”, Green says. “After a complaint it’s now been suspended.” Eventually, after an endorsement from the Australian Electoral Commission no less, Twitter saw sense and reinstated the blue tick. Sex sells but buys trouble Sex, sexuality and nudity depicted in commercials on free-to-air television were the most complained about advertising this year, according to the self-regulatory body Ad Standards. Complaints about ads that breached health and safety rules were next in line, followed by those deemed to discriminate and vilify. There were more than 4,500 complaints in 2021, with more than 300 advertisements assessed by Ad Standards. The most complaints – 300 – were received about a Crazy Domains ad that showed a man relieving himself in public. The regulator deemed it “illegal, unhygienic behaviour” that breached the Australian Association of National Advertisers code of ethics. Advertisements for a burger chain, financial services and an adult toy also made the top 10, and more than 80 were found in breach of one or more of the advertising rules. An ad for Grill’d was in breach because of its violent sexual content – it featured an animated clown in an alleyway standing facing two children and opening his trench coat to reveal toys. A shopfront ad for lingerie boutique Honey Birdette, which featured a woman wearing a black bra and a black collar and pulling on the collar, attracted 59 complaints and was found in breach. A memorable TV ad for Libra sanitary products – which featured a jingle that says “wear, bleed, wash, repeat” – received 29 complaints but they were dismissed. News according to Cory Since leaving parliament, Cory Bernardi has found a berth at Sky News Australia, albeit on the graveyard shift on Fridays. The former South Australian senator has also monetised his “commonsense” rhetoric in a $10-a-month newsletter for subscribers. Bernardi, who has previously been accused of promoting “quack medicines” by former PM Kevin Rudd, shares more questionable medical information in the newsletter which might see him in trouble were he to repeat it on TV or on YouTube, which earlier this year banned Sky for a week for breaching its COVID-19 medical misinformation policies. “Since when have medical professionals not used every weapon in their toolkit to keep people healthy?” Bernardi asked. “Historically, they have always done whatever they could to reduce symptoms and minimise risk to life. Until Covid-19 that is. Covid is the only potentially fatal disease where upon diagnosis you are sent home and told to wait and see if it goes away. “Doctors won’t provide any agent that has some effectiveness (like Ivermectin) because in Australia they have been banned from doing so.” Ivermectin has yet to be proven as an effective Covid treatment, and with studies that claim it is effective having faced serious criticism for being either poorly conducted, too small for their findings to be applied more widely or outright faked.It didn’t take long. Now it’s happening. The Omicron variant is accelerating a new Australian wave of Covid-19. On Friday, daily infection rates in New South Wales hit a new record for any state, at any time during this pandemic at 2,213. The NSW health minister Brad Hazzard is predicting 25,000 new cases a day by the end of January. Hospitals have been put on “red alert”. Omicron is an unstoppable force. But when it comes to lockdowns, the prime minister and NSW premier are immoveable objects. “My simple message to Australians is to go about your lives,” said Scott Morrison on Thursday, from the coastal town of Terrigal. “Enjoy the summer.” He recommends we “exercise the common sense precautions.” But what are those precautions? NSW Health’s Dr Jeremy McAnulty is urging people in Newcastle to abandon pre-Christmas socialising to “protect their loved ones, the vulnerable and essential workers”. The city is ground zero for the new surge. Newcastle’s Lunar Electric music festival planned for this weekend has been cancelled. Yet at the same time NSW has honoured a pledge to open up the economy to the unvaccinated. Mask mandates and QR check-ins are disappearing. Beyond “high risk settings”, the decision on mask wearing is now left to each individual’s sense of “personal responsibility”, in the words of NSW premier Dominic Perrottet. The state’s chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, has been sidelined but is sticking to her health advice. “All I’m saying from a public health decision is I’m strongly recommending we keep masks,” she said on Wednesday. It is weeks now since the prime minister began speaking of the government “stepping back” from people’s lives. With 90% of the adult population double vaccinated, that remains his course. “What is not helpful is stop go, flip and flop,” he said in Terrigal. “What’s helpful is clear, decisive action, sticking to a course, taking the best advice … allowing people to make sensible choices, to get vaccinated, as we encourage people to come forward and get their booster shots.” Australian studies confirm overseas analysis showing double vaccinations are not enough. “Significant community spread” of the Omicron variant is expected, warns the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners. World Health Organization chief Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus says Omicron “is spreading at a rate we have not seen with any previous variant”. Booster shots are needed both to protect against infection and serious illness and death. “We have a million vaccines right now in the distribution system, particularly in pharmacies, all around the country,” said Scott Morrison. “So if you are eligible please go and get that booster shot.” But by his own account, that means Australia is in trouble. “There’s over two million Australians who are now eligible for that booster shot,” he said, apparently not registering that one million Australians must miss out, or at least have to wait. The shortfall will grow steeply if the regulator Atagi approves a reduced interval before the third shot from five months to four. Its previous decision to reduce the interval from six months to five means in Victoria alone there are 442,716 people now overdue for their booster. Yet on the Victorian government’s own figures there are just 6,274 booster appointments available across state-run vaccination sites for all of next week. The commonwealth administered supply is going to have to do the heavy lifting. As of Thursday 985,598 Australians have received a third shot. In round figures, 20m more shots will be needed to deliver a booster to everyone over 16 who is already double vaccinated. The UK, by comparison, is offering everyone over 18 a booster shot by the end of this month, just two weeks away. Prime minister Boris Johnson has declared an Omicron “emergency”, warning of a “tidal wave” of infections. On Wednesday, new case numbers in Britain topped 77,000, nearly 10,000 more than the previous daily record 11 months ago. The UK administered many of their vaccines months before Australia, but Omicron is not yet sparking an equivalent anxiety here. “If you’re feeling uncertain, then it’s not compulsory to go out,” says Morrison. “It’s not compulsory not to wear a mask either … it’s just about being sensible, living with the virus, living confidently with the virus, living together with the virus.” If Brad Hazzard is right in predicting 25,000 new cases a day in NSW alone within six weeks, many hundreds of thousands of Australians – perhaps millions – will have contracted Covid-19 between now and the federal election expected in May. How we feel about that could be the political story of 2022. • Hugh Riminton is national affairs editor at 10 News FirstBanks should be forced to provide services to all “law-abiding businesses”, including export industries such as coal and live animal exports, a parliamentary inquiry has concluded. The inquiry, chaired by Nationals MP George Christensen, also called for treasury to examine “activist pressure” on banks in relation to lending to the resources industry and “if necessary develop options to address this issue”. Labor and the Greens have rejected the conclusions of the inquiry, saying incoherent climate policy, not banks, is to blame for job losses. The trade and investment standing committee report, tabled on Friday, is a mixed bag: on the one hand demanding regulators consult the resources sector more on climate change risk guidance, while on the other recognising net zero emissions will create investment opportunities. The report reflects the diversity of its members’ views, from Christensen, a fierce critic of financial institutions for their refusal to lend to resource projects, to Liberal MP Katie Allen, a proponent of net zero emissions. Banks had told the inquiry they needed to actively manage climate risk because governments and regulators required it, and because the investor community was “increasingly transitioning its focus towards a net zero emissions economy”. In his foreword, Christensen claimed that climate risk was “ill-defined” and amounted to “a veneer” for decisions made by “political and public relations considerations”. “The committee was concerned to learn that profitable and law-abiding companies in some of the country’s main export sectors – predominantly coal but also live animal exports – face the threat of losing access to essential services such as transactional banking, finance and appropriately priced insurance,” he said. Christensen accused companies of “thinly veiled corporate wokery”, bowing to “bad press” and “minority but noisy shareholder activism”. The majority report of Coalition MPs urges the government ensure “at a minimum” that banks provide transactional banking services to law-abiding businesses, a wide-ranging recommendation that could also benefit sex workers and gun shops refused banking services. It recommends the government “direct the banks to prepare a regulatory impact statement that outlines the real impacts of a policy setting … such as job losses and economic impacts, and detailing industry feedback … before withdrawing funding from any export project”. The inquiry asked the government to consider laws requiring shareholders to be consulted before decisions “to withdraw funding from export-focused projects”. It asked government to work with the resources industry to “create a self-funding insurance model”, which the Greens labelled “oxymoronic” and warned could lead to taxpayers being on the hook to underwrite such a scheme. In addition to the treasury review of activist pressure, the inquiry called for the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission to investigate whether refusing loans or insurance to the resources industry breaches competition law, which bans companies from acting “in concert”. The government should then “consider options to ensure that viable, profitable and lawful businesses can access reasonably priced finance and insurance services”, it said. On Thursday the reserve bank labelled climate change a “systemic risk” for the financial sector, a fact that tends to suggest banks are responding to the same imperative to mitigate risk rather than acting in an anti-competitive fashion. In their dissenting report, Labor MPs and senators said the recommendations would “impose a substantial material risk to the Australian economy”, warning of increased costs of insurance, business loans and even residential mortgages. The Labor report said the finance sector was anticipating lower coal export prices and volumes in the future and the “widely recognised” risks of climate change itself. In a separate dissenting report, Greens senator Dorinda Cox said the inquiry was a “barely concealed PR campaign for the fossil fuel industry”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Cox said the inquiry was premised on the idea “regulators and banks are not making a rational assessment of the threat posed by the climate emergency … [that] those whose job it is to assess risk by the trillions have all got it wrong”. The move to blame “activists” ignored “the fact that the global transition to net zero is already under way whether the Morrison government likes it or not”, she said.Tasmanian police have released the names of the five children killed in Thursday’s tragic jumping castle accident in Devonport. The five children who died are Addison Stewart, 11, Zane Mellor, 12, Jye Sheehan, 12, Jalailah Jayne-Maree Jones, 12, and Peter Dodt, 12. “Our thoughts continue to be with the families, loved ones and all those affected by this tragedy,” a police spokesperson said. Police released the details with the permission of the children’s families. The children were grade five and six students at Hillcrest primary school in Devonport celebrating the end of the school year. They died from injuries sustained when the bouncy castle was lifted into the air by a sudden wind gust. Several zorb balls, with children inside, also flew into the air. Three children remain in a critical condition, while police said one child had been released and was recovering at home. Earlier on Friday, the Tasmanian premier, Peter Gutwein, said the Devonport tragedy “is beyond comprehension” as police begin piecing together the cause of Thursday’s tragedy. Speaking to reporters in Devonport on Friday, he said there had been a huge outpouring of grief and support in the small coastal city on Thursday night. “The tragedy which occurred yesterday is beyond comprehension,” Gutwein said. “It is devastating, heartbreaking. It’s just simply incomprehensible.” Witnesses told police that the children were lifted about 10 metres before falling to the ground. Gutwein said he had been speaking to community members and offered his support to the family. “As a parent, I cannot understand how the parents of those who have lost children must be feeling,” he said. “But as a parent, I hope that they can understand that we are all feeling for you as well. As the commissioner said yesterday, a full investigation is under way and the coroner has visited the scene. I make a commitment to all of the families affected by this tragedy that we will stand with you and we will support you.” Hillcrest primary school was holding a “Big Day In” celebration to mark the end of the school year, with the jumping castle and a number of inflatable zorb balls. There were close to 40 year 5 and 6 students taking part in the end-of-term activities when this incident occurred. Several adults were also there when the inflatable equipment lifted into the air and they gave the children first aid until emergency services arrived. “Nine children were seriously injured. Tragically five of those children have died, three boys and two girls,” police commissioner Tasmania Darren Hine said. “One was 11 years old, four were 12 years old. Three remain in a critical condition at the Royal Hobart hospital. One is now recovering from home.” Asked if it was tethered to the ground, Hine would only say that it would form part of the investigation. They will also be investigating how high it flew, whether all the children injured were inside the jumping castle, and where the strong wind came from. The education department secretary, Tim Bullard, said they were supporting people on the ground. “At Hillcrest school today, we have a team of our own professional support staff, including school psychologists, social workers and chaplains, supporting children and their familes, and the Department of Health is also assisting with access to child and adolescent mental health services,” he said. “Together we are working together to ensure that those affected are receiving the care and assistance that they need at this time.” The mayor of Devonport, Annette Rockliff, said the community was “in shock”. “Certainly we are still trying to get our heads around how we could possibly be losing these children, and, as has been mentioned, we are a very connected community. “Everybody knows somebody, and we are already seeing people wrapping their arms around each other and supporting each other and I know that that will continue, but we as council will certainly be working with counselling services and social responders.” ABC reporter Monte Bovill, who arrived at the school just after the tragedy occurred on Thursday, said over Twitter it “was hard to put into words”. “At the height of awfulness when I arrived, I put down my camera. A parent came up to me and hugged me. She sat with me and said ‘we’re human’,” he tweeted. He said parents were running to the school to collect their children. Two female police officers had been some of the first at the scene. In the afternoon Bovill photographed the pair collapsed on the ground, holding each other. Neighbour Bob Smith’s veranda overlooks the primary school, he said he came out as the castle flew into the air. “Then I saw kids on the ground,” he told the Mercury. “There was one really strong gust of wind on what is a beautiful calm day. “At first we thought it might have been an emergency services training exercise then the reality of what was happening kicked in.” People gathered outside a primary school in Devonport on Thursday night for a candlelight vigil and flowers and messages of sympathy have been left near the gates. Some residents turned off their Christmas lights as a mark of respect and businesses closed early. “People who just have no connection to the school or any of the families have just come in crying and grieving over the loss of the children in something that was supposed to be a celebration,” Fiona Morrison, a member of the local Uniting Church, told Nine Network on Friday. “They just can’t believe what has happened. “Last night, people turned off their Christmas lights in respect, or turned on their Christmas lights to offer the other children some hope, some light, at this time when they are grieving.” Tasmanian senator Jacqui Lambie, who went to school in Devonport, broke down on channel Nine talking about the tragedy. Lambie said the accident was “unthinkable” and “beyond imaginable”. “It is just … just horrific, you know. A week before Christmastime,” she told Today. “Imagine those kids having those Christmas presents under the tree … it is just bloody awful.” Tasmania’s governor Barbara Baker released a statement on Friday morning saying she stood with the Devonport community and would provide whatever comfort she could. “Our thoughts are with those affected; immediate families, classmates and their parents, the school staff, first responders and the entire Devonport community,” she said. The coroner visited the scene on Thursday and police are investigating and gathering evidence, but Tasmania police commissioner Darren Hine said the investigation would take “quite some time”.Five children are dead and another three are in critical condition after a jumping castle was blown into the air during an end-of-year celebration at a school in Tasmania’s north-west. The Tasmanian premier, Peter Gutwein, is currently in Devonport and gave an update with the Tasmania police commissioner, Darren Hine, on Friday morning. They agreed there would be a lot of questions without answers in the coming days as authorities investigated how this tragedy unfolded. Here’s what we know so far: What happened? Close to 40 students were gathered on the sports oval at Hillcrest primary school at about 10am Thursday when a gust of wind picked up the jumping castle and several Zorb balls and hurled them into the air. Witnesses told police the castle had flown 10 metres in the air before dropping down. The children fell to the ground, some landing on the oval, others on the grassy slope. Several adults at the oval administered first aid on the children until officers arrived. Police have not said exactly how many were hurt in the incident, but several were airlifted out. They had been celebrating their last school day, which included “a jumping castle, zorb balls, tabloid activities”, a post on the school’s community Facebook page said. “The ‘Big Day In’ will start at 9:30am where students will have the opportunity to rotate through a range of activities with their cohort.” At 10:45am another post asked parents to urgently pick up their children from the school. “There has been an accident onsite at our school. We are closing the school for the rest of the day,” it read. “We ask that parents come to collect their children as a matter of urgency.” How many were killed and injured? Five children – three boys and two girls all between 11 and 12 years old – died from injuries sustained when the jumping castle was lifted into the air by a gust of wind. With permission from their families, Tasmanian police released their names on Friday afternoon. They were: Addison Stewart, 11 years, Zane Mellor, 12 years, Jye Sheehan, 12 years, Jalailah Jayne-Maree Jones, 12 years and Peter Dodt, 12 years. Three children remain in critical condition, but police said one had now been released from the hospital and was recovering at home. Was the castle tied down? This is a question many have asked, but police would only say it would be part of their investigation. The investigation will be led by Tasmanian police, with the assistance of WorkSafe, under the direction of the coroner – who also attended the scene yesterday. Hine said it “would take some time” to interview everyone who was there and work out what happened. “Sadly, there are a number of people and witnesses there that need to be interviewed, so it will take quite some time and will be guided by the coroner,” he said. “Our focus now is supporting those who are tragically affected by what’s happened here today.” The Bureau of Meteorology told the ABC that at the time of the event there was a gust of wind recorded at the airport, but it was only 22km an hour – which would feel the same as starting your car and putting your hand out the window. “It’s a fairly light wind,” duty forecaster Anna Forrest said. In a statement, BOM said it was now working with investigators. “The bureau will contribute information and analysis as part of those investigations,” it said. As part of the investigation, police said they would also be investigating how high it flew and whether all the children injured were inside the jumping castle. Hine said the investigation would form the basis of a future inquest into the children’s deaths. Has this happened before? It is rare, but children have been injured in similar events before. In November 2020 two children suffered multiple fractures after the jumping castle in Tabbita, near, Griffith, in New South Wales became airborne. In China in 2019 two children were killed and 20 others were injured when a jumping castle was also blown away. And in 2016 a seven-year-old girl was killed in Essex after the same thing happened. Two fairground workers were later convicted of manslaughter by gross negligence. In Australia Lifeline on 13 11 14, Kids Helpline 1800 551 800, Tasmanian mental health helpline 1800 332 388 and Beyond Blue 1300 224 636.As Covid case numbers rise in New South Wales and Victoria, people across Australia are being urged to get a vaccine booster dose as soon as they are eligible. Health professionals have warned of problems caused by an increased demand for booster shots, after the emergence of the Omicron variant and a shortening of the interval between vaccine doses. Both GPs and pharmacist have spoken of issues with the booster rollout, from running out of vaccine to staff shortages. So where can you get a booster shot and how soon? Are you eligible? The first thing to do is check whether you’re eligible by looking at the date of your second dose. People 18 years and older who had their second dose of any Covid-19 vaccine five months or more ago are eligible to get a booster of either the Pfizer or Moderna vaccines, even if they had AstraZeneca as their first vaccine. People who had AstraZeneca as their first two doses can have it as their third if they so choose. The only exclusion on booster doses is those who are immunocompromised and have already had a third dose. Where can I get it? More than 8,500 GPs, community pharmacies, Aboriginal community controlled health organisations, commonwealth and state government clinics are able to offer either the Moderna or Pfizer boosters. More than 670,000 booster shots have already been administered in Australia. The federal health department’s website will let you plug in your postcode and the vaccine type you are after to find the clinics near you. However it has limited information on what availability those clinics have. Alternatively, click below for clinic locations in your state or territory: Queensland Victoria New South Wales Western Australia Northern Territory South Australia ACT Tasmania Many of these places have walk-in appointments, especially pharmacies, so you will not need to book, but it is worth calling ahead in advance to see if they have stock. Boosters remain free of charge. Can I book an appointment? If you prefer to book ahead, or if you’re not quite at the five month mark, you can book through those sites. The best site around for finding Covid-19 vaccine appointments is one developed unofficially by Sydney-based developer Ken Tsang called Covid-19 Near Me. Using data from what he says is a “range of sources”, the website points out on maps where you can find Covid-19 vaccines, and whether those places have any stock. The site will then direct you to the clinic or medical centre’s booking page to make your booking.If it is something of a cliche that the Conservatives can be brutal in how they treat leaders who no longer feel like electoral assets, this is arguably all the more so for Boris Johnson, whose primary attraction for many of his MPs was his appeal to voters. If that has gone, he should be worried. They key word is “if”. The Tories’ loss to the Liberal Democrats of North Shropshire – a seat they had held for all but two of the last 189 years – is an undeniable earthquake, but byelections have particular qualities, not least the greater ability for opposition support to coalesce around one party. They often do hold wider lessons for governments, though, even midterm ones that could expect to receive something of a kicking from the voters at the best of times. What will alarm Johnson’s aides are the many reports from North Shropshire of not just annoyance with the government but some fairly significant and personal distaste for the prime minister. This was a recurring theme of the last major byelection story, the Lib Dems’ overturning of a 16,000-strong Tory majority in Chesham and Amersham in June, but here at least some of this could be explained by a strain of liberal, internationalist Conservatism in the affluent commuter belt seat. North Shropshire is very different: largely rural and strongly pro-Brexit. But here, too, voters complained about a sense of being taken for granted by the Tories, and also a feeling that Johnson was slippery, and not sufficiently serious. Some Conservative MPs will thus awake on Friday with two calculations in mind. Firstly, if their party can lose a seat which had a near-23,000 majority, what would such a swing mean for them? Also, if voters dislike the prime minister in both Chesham and Amersham, and North Shropshire, where exactly is he still popular? One consolation for Downing Street is that such mutinous thoughts will largely not be discussed with fellow MPs, as the political firebreak of the Commons Christmas recess has begun, closing what has been perhaps the most politically damaging week of Johnson’s career. It included a buildup of damning publicity over two rolling stories: a series of reports of allegedly lockdown-breaking parties in Downing Street, Conservative HQ, and government departments; and the prospect of more revelations about how Johnson had the costly renovation of his official flat paid for. Amid all this, Johnson was leading the response to a huge wave of the Omicron variant of Covid-19, which required the rushing-in of his plan B suite of restrictions, including a return to home working, further mask use, and the introduction of mandatory Covid certificates to enter venues like nightclubs and football grounds. The latter plan was hugely unpopular among many Tory MPs, 99 of whom rebelled in a Commons vote on Tuesday, calling into question both Johnson’s authority and his ability to further tighten Covid rules if, as many public health experts predict, the Omicron wave worsens. Some Tories will note that the North Shropshire campaign was always going to be tricky for the government, given it was prompted by the resignation of the former environment secretary Owen Paterson, who had broken rules on paid lobbying. North Shropshire has been a safe Tory seat since its creation But even this, many will feel, was a situation mishandled by Johnson and his advisers. Paterson only stepped down after Downing Street U-turned on an attempt to save him from punishment by trying to unilaterally rewrite the entire disciplinary system for MPs, sparking a mass of stories about lobbying and second jobs. If, in contrast, Johnson had urged Paterson to quietly serve the 30-day suspension imposed as a punishment, that would all have ended this week, and the prime minister might have been going into Christmas in a happier position.It’s coming. I stand outside in the hard dawn and watch the eastern trees, waiting to see what develops behind them. Anticipating what will spread through the flat grey of the sky, like waiting to see a photograph, back in the days when you had to wait. For reasons irrelevant here, I’ve been up very early in these weeks leading up to the solstice – that day when the hours start lengthening, and we all start aching for spring, despite the darkest-feeling months still ahead. This ache is often for lighter evenings; but for me, certainly lately, it’s all been about the mornings. Old, curious sayings needle as I watch. The darkest hour is just before the dawn: a metaphorical quip that today feels curiously real, despite being nonsense. Red sky at morning, shepherd’s warning, and its more optimistic inverse: to do with high pressure systems in the east or west, whether they’re on their way in, or their way out. Early birds. They seem to get all the best things. It’s the birds I’m watching for, really. No chorus at this time of year, just the cold hiss of air, a placebo sound that fills the gap where silence should be. I spot a few black spatters against a sky that is brightening with strides. Then the colours start. You forget. Every day, you forget what an eruption the dawn is. What a shift. Sunset has something culminating and gradual about it: when the day’s distractions have wearied its impact. Dawn feels fresh. Hopeful, even. Even if just for a minute. Oranges brush the relief of the high clouds, transforming them into climbing tiers. The sky beyond becomes an ever-richer blue, and for a few minutes it is a riot. The sort of show of colour that lifts you. Wakes you. The birds again: I wonder if they feel it. The sun bursts over the horizon. Climax. And within moments, the day collapses into layers of grey. To anyone who was asleep, that grey was how the day began. But not to us early birds. Simon Ingram • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe Indian government’s case against Rona Wilson, a jailed Indian activist and critic of Narendra Modi’s administration, is expected to face new scrutiny following allegations that his mobile phone was hacked using Israeli-made spyware just months before his controversial arrest. A forensic analysis of Wilson’s phone by Amnesty International found evidence that it was infected with NSO Group spyware, called Pegasus, between July 2017 and March 2018, three months before his arrest on terror-related charges. Wilson is part of a network of more than a dozen writers, lawyers and artists who advocated for the rights of indigenous communities and low-caste Indians and who have been detained since 2018. Members have denied a range of terrorism offences including plotting to assassinate Modi. Since then, evidence collected by digital researchers suggests that they have been subjected to intrusive digital weaponry. Activists and lawyers who have examined the cases have alleged they included serious “procedural irregularities” by Indian authorities. Evidence cited against them had been planted on laptops used by the activists, including Wilson, according to research by US digital forensic science firm Arsenal Consulting. The claim that Pegasus was deployed against Wilson by a government client of NSO is the most recent example of how digital surveillance tools appear to have been used against the campaigners. The Guardian has previously reported that Wilson’s mobile number was included in a leaked database at the heart of the Pegasus Project, an investigation into NSO Group by the Guardian, the Washington Post and other media outlets. The project was coordinated by the French non-profit group Forbidden Stories. Once a phone is infected with Pegasus, operators of the spyware have total access, including the ability to intercept phone calls, read text messages, infiltrate encrypted apps and track an individual’s physical location. The spyware can also turn a mobile into a listening device by remotely controlling the mobile’s recorder. The leaked database contained tens of thousands of phone numbers of human rights activists, lawyers, journalists and dissidents who are believed to have been selected as people of interest by government clients of NSO Group, which sells surveillance software. While the data is an indication of intent, the presence of a number in the data does not reveal whether there was an attempt to infect the phone with spyware such as Pegasus, the company’s signature surveillance tool, or whether any attempt succeeded. The database included not only Wilson’s number, but those of several members of an activist network who have been arrested over the past three years in India and charged with terrorism offences. Amnesty International’s Security Lab, a partner on the Pegasus Project, reviewed two backups of Wilson’s iPhone shared by his defence team with Arsenal Consulting. Etienne Maynier, technologist at Amnesty International’s Security Lab, said its analysis confirmed Arsenal’s findings that Wilson’s phone was compromised by Pegasus in July 2017, and again in February and March 2018. In between these two periods, Amnesty found that Wilson’s phone was targeted with 15 SMS messages containing Pegasus attack links. Clicking on any one of these could also have compromised the phone. “This case adds to the evidences revealed during the Pegasus Project about unlawful surveillance against human rights defenders in India using NSO Group’s products,” Maynier said. “Amnesty International is calling for an independent, impartial and transparent investigation into the unlawful targeted surveillance against Rona Wilson and all other human rights defenders targeted by Pegasus in India.” NSO has staunchly denied that the leaked database at the heart of the Pegasus Project is in any way connected to the company or its clients. NSO has also said that its government clients are only meant to use its surveillance tools to fight serious crime and terrorism and that it investigates credible allegations of misuse. The Indian government has neither confirmed nor denied that it is a customer of NSO. In a statement in response to questions about Wilson’s case, an NSO spokesperson said: “Without addressing specific countries and customers, the allegations raised in this inquiry are not clear. “Once a democratic country lawfully, after due process, uses tools to investigate a person suspected in an attempt to overthrow a (democratically elected) government, this would not be considered a misuse of such tools by any means.” NSO has been placed on a US blacklist by the Biden administration after it determined the Israeli spyware maker has acted “contrary to the foreign policy and national security interests of the US”. India’s federal anti-terror body, the National Investigation Agency (NIA), has dismissed Arsenal’s findings, saying the company has “no locus standi to give opinion”, and noting that the Indian government’s own forensics lab discovered no malware on Wilson’s devices. Vijayanta Goyal Arya, a spokeswoman for the NIA, said the charging documents had been filed “based on prosecutable evidence”. She declined to comment on the new forensic findings. Sanjay Kak, a film-maker and writer, who worked with Wilson on campaigns for the release of political prisoners, told the Washington Post that Wilson was a “quintessential self-effacing figure”. “Ironically, he’s now at the other end of the very machine that he worked against,” said Kak. India’s supreme court in October ordered an independent inquiry into whether the government used Pegasus to spy illegally on journalists, activists and political opponents. The Pegasus Project, including evidence that an Indian opposition campaign manager was spied on during a heated state election contest, caused an ongoing uproar that has raised concerns over the shrinking space for dissent in the country.The Liberal Democrats have won a stunning victory in the North Shropshire byelection, taking what had previously been a safe Conservative seat by a margin of nearly 6,000 votes, and capping a disastrous few weeks for Boris Johnson. Helen Morgan, the Lib Dem candidate, won 17,957 votes, ahead of the Conservatives’ Neil Shastri-Hurst, on 12,032, a majority of 5,925. Labour’s Ben Wood was third, with 3,686 votes. Turnout was 46.3%. The calamitous collapse in Conservative support – a 34% swing in a seat where they had a near-23,000 majority in 2019 – will prompt significant jitters among many Tory MPs, and is likely to raise questions about Johnson’s future. It was a swing even greater than the 25% seen last June when the Lib Dems won the Chesham and Amersham byelection. North Shropshire was seen as a notably greater challenge for the party, given it is a largely rural and strongly pro-Brexit constituency, one which has been Tory for all but two of the past 189 years, from 1904 to 1906. Morgan fought the seat in 2019 and came third, with 10% support. The byelection was called after the former environment secretary Owen Paterson resigned in the wake of a botched attempt by Downing Street to save him from punishment for a serious breach of lobbying rules by rewriting the disciplinary system for MPs, which set off a string of damaging stories about other Tory MPs’ second jobs. It was fought amid a wider atmosphere of damaging claims for Johnson and his government over allegations of lockdown-breaking Downing Street parties and a major Tory rebellion over Covid rules. In her victory speech, Morgan, a 46-year-old accountant and parish councillor, repeatedly targeted the prime minister, saying Conservative voters had been “dismayed by Boris Johnson’s lack of decency and fed up with being taken for granted”. “Tonight, the people of North Shropshire have spoken on behalf of the British people,” she told the count in Shrewsbury. “They have said loudly and clearly: Boris Johnson, the party is over.” While earlier prime ministers “believed in a sense of national service”, Morgan said, with Johnson it was “all about you and never about us”. She added: “Our country is crying out for leadership. Mr Johnson, you are no leader.” The Lib Dem leader, Ed Davey, who was not at the count as he has tested positive for Covid, spoke to Morgan by phone directly after her speech. In a statement he called the win “a watershed moment in our politics”. He said: “Millions of people are fed up with Boris Johnson and his failure to provide leadership throughout the pandemic and last night the voters of North Shropshire spoke for all of them. This is the second stunning byelection victory this year for the Liberal Democrats - both in formerly safe Conservative seats.” Leaving the count, Shastri-Hurst – who on Wednesday had declined four times during an interview to say that he believed Johnson was “a man of honesty and integrity” – gave no criticism of the prime minister. Asked if Johnson was to blame, he said only that it had been “a disappointing result for us”, adding: “We’re 11 years into a Conservative government, byelections are never an easy thing to do.” North Shropshire has been a safe Tory seat since its creation The result will also raise questions about the Tories’ choice of an outsider to be their candidate. Shastri-Hurst is a barrister from Birmingham, something which prompted annoyance among some voters. As soon as the byelection was called, the Lib Dems sought to present themselves as the only party capable of beating the Conservatives, and poured enormous resources into the area. Labour’s Wood campaigned hard but received notably less support from his party HQ. The byelection was seen as notably difficult to predict given both the short timetable and the number of candidates, totalling 14.A whistleblower at the centre of a bullying scandal at West Suffolk hospital says she will “never be the same again” after being “pursued” by NHS managers when she raised concerns about a doctor injecting himself with drugs while on duty. Dr Patricia Mills was exonerated last week in an independent NHS review that was highly critical of the way she was ignored and then subjected to disciplinary investigation that verged on “victimisation”. All of the executives have since left, and now the chair of the West Suffolk NHS foundation hospital trust, Sheila Childerhouse, is under intense pressure to resign. The review, by Christine Outram, chair of the Christie NHS foundation trust, said Mills’s concerns about the self-injecting doctor were “well founded” and yet, instead of acting on them, managers subjected her to an investigation that lacked “fairness, balance and compassion”. It included what Outram called the “incendiary” and “extremely ill-judged” demand to Mills and other doctors for fingerprint samples as part of a management hunt for an anonymous letter-writer who had tipped off a grieving family about a potentially botched operation. “I do feel vindicated,” Mills, a 53-year-old anaesthetist, told the Guardian, but she said the 21-month investigation into her conduct, which was only formally dropped in September, has had a lasting impact. “I will never be the same again. To be absolutely pursued like that by your employer inevitably has long-term consequences in terms of psychological wellbeing. It was an orchestrated campaign that really floored me.” Outram’s report noted that one of the hospital trust’s board members regarded Mills as a “terrorist in our midst”. The former chief executive Steve Dunn, who left the trust in July in the fallout from the scandal, emailed Mills in the summer offering to apologise in person for the distress the organisation had caused. “I thanked him for the sentiment but at the time I wasn’t psychologically robust enough to meet him,” Mills said. She added: “I’m concerned about the lack of accountability for what happened. Tremendous damage was caused to individuals and to the trust, but there is no regulation for managers in the way there is for health professionals. All the executives involved were just thanked for their service when they either retired or left.” Dunn’s salary will be paid by the trust until September 2022 while he is on secondment as a researcher at the Nuffield Trust health thinktank. Its spokesman said Dunn “has accepted the failings and shortcomings around the handling of events leading up to and surrounding the whistleblowing”. Outram criticised Childerhouse for failing to take up Mills’ concerns when she sent the chair a “confidential” email in 2018 expressing alarm that the self-injecting doctor was being allowed to continue to treat patients. When the email was passed on to the chief executive, Mills was accused of trouble making, libelling the doctor, and trying to undermine the hospital’s medical director. Her report expressed incredulity that the board did not question why the executive later demanded fingerprint samples from Mills and others. She wrote: “Whilst some members of the board, including the chair, were made aware of the decision to seek biometric data I was startled to learn from two of the trust’s non-executive directors that the first they learnt of it was when the Guardian broke the story in December 2019.” Announcing Outram’s report to parliament last week, health minister Edward Argar, said it described “a breakdown in working practices and [shone] a light upon an executive team that was not sufficiently held to account by its board”. Childerhouse was expected to come under pressure to resign at a meeting of the board on 16 December after being urged to consider her position by senior medical staff at a meeting on Tuesday; however, the meeting was postponed until January. Mills said: “Many consultants from all specialities feel the chair’s position has become really untenable.” She added: “Without the press coverage they would have got away with it.” Mills was signed off work twice with stress and feared for her job for two years. But she and others who were unfairly suspected by bosses of writing the anonymous letter, continued to work at the hospital throughout the pandemic. “We kept on working despite what felt like grenades being thrown at us by management,” she said. Mills said: “I love my job, and I work with great colleagues. And if we hadn’t been going through this together I think I would have given up.” She is also furious about the amount of money the trust spent on external investigations into her conduct, both of which were found to be flawed by Outram. Mills said: “They would have cost tens of thousands of pounds, which was a complete waste of money. All it did was make me and other people ill. We are here to provide health care to the people of Bury St Edmunds and the tragedy of this is that so much time, energy and money was focused on absolutely the wrong things.” She hopes West Suffolk and other NHS hospitals can learn from the saga. “Boards should be there to provide oversight of the actions of the executives. They are supposed to be a critical friend, but the balance has erred towards friendship and away from asking searching questions.” The trust refused to comment on Childerhouse’s future. It has apologised to staff affected and said has pledged further changes to “create an open, fair and inclusive organisation”.A Louisiana judge is taking an unpaid leave of absence and is facing growing calls for her resignation after a video surfaced of people in her home using racist language, including the N-word. Dan Ciolino, an attorney for Lafayette city court judge Michelle Odinet, said she feels “humiliated, embarrassed, and sorry for what she has done and the harm she has caused to the community”. Ciolino added: “What happens in the long term is something she is going to think about in the weeks to come.” The video, which has been shared widely across social media, was recorded after a burglary attempt at Odinet’s home last Saturday. An unnamed person allegedly saw a suspect leave one of the family’s vehicles. According to local news outlet the Current, the suspect attempted to run but was quickly caught and held until police arrived. The video, in which people inside Odinet’s home could be heard discussing a home security video of the suspect’s capture, features a man who is heard using the racial slur, to which a female voice responds using the same slur and likening the person to “a roach”. According to Ciolino, Odinet’s voice “appears at some point” on the video but declined to say what she said and who else may have been heard speaking. It is not clear who shot the video or how it came to be released. In a statement to the Current, Odinet said the burglary “shook me to my core and my mental state was fragile”. She added that she was given a sedative at the time of the video and thus has “zero recollection of the video and the disturbing language used during it”. “Anyone who knows me and my husband knows this is contrary to the way we live our lives,” she said, adding: “I am deeply sorry and ask for your forgiveness and understanding as my family and I deal with the emotional aftermath of this armed burglary.” The video has drawn swift condemnation from civil rights organizations and local defense attorneys. In a statement, Michael Toussain, the president of the Lafayette chapter of the NAACP, said: “The recently reveal[ed] video is clear that Judge Michelle Odinet see people base on the color of their skin and she holds a firm belief they are no more than roaches, rats or lesser species than herself. “Her voice is remnant of the shouts at lynchings in years gone by and white mob’s mentality that is evident still today,” he added. Lafayette criminal defense attorney Barry Sallinger called for Odinet to recuse herself from one of his cases involving a Black defendant, saying: “Judge Odinet has unequivocally, by her own words, shown that she is prejudiced and biased against African Americans. “Her free and flippant use of a vile, derogatory term to describe an African American man can result in no other conclusion.”Many of us will find soaps, aftershave, perfumes and pampering products among our Christmas presents. While most news articles on indoor air pollution tend to focus on candles, the air pollution effects of the products that we use in homes are far wider. The fossil-fuel derived chemicals that evaporate from printing inks, adhesives, coatings, cleaning agents and personal care products are now dominating the pollutants that form ozone in summer smogs and some types of particle pollution; exceeding the effects of emissions from traffic. The PhD student Amber Yeoman has been studying the air pollution produced when we take a shower. Building a shower in the laboratory was not practical, so instead Yeoman and her team relocated their equipment next to a shower room in the University of York. Sample pipes were installed in the shower room itself. Volunteers were each given the same supermarket products and asked to shower; starting with face washing and shower gel, followed by shampoo, conditioner, moisturiser and then aerosol deodorant. One by one, volatile organic compounds were measured by Yeoman’s equipment. Highly reactive limonene came mainly from the citrus smelling shampoo, benzyl alcohol from the conditioner and ethanol from the moisturiser. This was different for each person and those people that rinsed for longer produced fewer emissions. Other chemicals were seen too, possibly linked to laundry products used to wash each volunteer’s towel (they brought their own) or their clothes. In other experiments, Yeoman’s equipment found that products worn by other researchers affected the air in her laboratory. New attention is being paid to these products because of the cumulative impact of the emissions from our homes and the way they react together to form harmful air pollution. Control of air pollution that forms from personal care products will not be easy. The first step will be to make manufactures responsible for the pollution from the products they sell. Switching to non-aerosol products would be another simple change. It is clear from Yeoman’s work that any product labelling would have to reflect real-world use and also the fate of these chemicals in our drains and river systems. Yeoman said: “Air quality labels would help communicate the possible negative impacts to consumers and it could well encourage manufacturers to change their products to attract health-conscious buyers. Cleanliness has also been equated with the presence of perfume, rather than the absence of malodour. Changing this mindset has altered my personal buying habits toward fragrance-free products.”A leading Bradford GP is behind two private Covid test companies on the official government list that are racking up large numbers of complaints, the Guardian can reveal. Expert Doctors and Covid Travel Clinics appear to be leaving a trail of unhappy customers who say PCR tests they ordered and paid for have either never arrived or turned up late – with some complaining they have been forced to quarantine for several days longer as a result. Both companies are currently receiving large numbers of one-star reviews on the Trustpilot website. Waheed Hussain, the lead senior partner at an inner-city NHS medical practice in Bradford, is listed on Companies House as a director of Expert Doctors and the parent company of Covid Travel Clinics. He is also the director of a third Covid test firm, Doctor Medical Services, set up just three months ago. At the time of writing, according to Trustpilot, every one of eight reviews the firm had received since 3 December was a one-star “bad” evaluation. All three companies’ websites prominently mention that they are a “listed provider on gov.uk” The complaints are likely to fuel calls for the government to explain why companies that are apparently leaving customers high and dry have been allowed to carry on promoting their wares on the official list of providers that is scanned by thousands of people every day. Last month PCR tests became mandatory for those entering and returning to the UK. Hussain’s firms are not the first government-listed Covid test companies to receive complaints, and many are getting bad reviews on Trustpilot. In September, the UK’s Competition and Markets Authority said buying a PCR test was “a lottery”. Expert Doctors operates from Bradford and, as of Wednesday 15 December, more than 80% of the 405 reviews of the company on the website Trustpilot were rated “bad”. In response, Expert Doctors has posted messages on Trustpilot saying: “We have been overwhelmed with recent changes due to the new variant. We are working around the clock to provide the service required. We have had added pressure of logistics such as postal delays.” In some cases it has provided an email address for customers to use so it can “urgently” deal with their queries, and in others it posted a refund link to click on. Unhappy customers include Will Moran, 25, and his girlfriend, who were obliged to take a PCR test by the end of the second day after returning from a short break in Lanzarote. He went on to the government website on 28 November and booked with Expert Doctors, paying £70 for two day-2 tests. But on 8 December, four days after his return to the UK, he said the tests had still not turned up, forcing him to pay for a test with another company. Under the new rules, individuals arriving back in the UK have to self-isolate until they have secured a negative result. He said the Expert Doctors tests finally turned up this week. “What is the process to get on that government list of providers?” asked Moran. “They aren’t even conducting basic checks on these companies.” According to the government list, Covid Travel Clinics offers day-2 PCR tests from £15. On Trustpilot as of 15 December, more than half of the 367 reviews of the firm were rated “bad”. Brett Ascott, 62, who lives in south-west London, ordered a PCR test from Covid Travel Clinics on 30 November as he was leaving for Spain on 4 December and wanted the test to be there when he got home. He said he paid £35, even though the headline price on the government website was £15. “Anyway, no test kit arrived and, despite three emails and calls, they did not respond.” On 7 December, the day after he arrived back in the UK, Ascott went to a local walk-in centre and paid a further £65 to get a result in 24 hours. He said that when his Covid Travel Clinics test did finally arrive, it was four days too late. Ascott said the fact that more than 400 companies were on the government list “shows what a money-making cesspit this has all become … I reported this company to the government website, and they replied that they will respond within 25 days.” He added: “Who’s monitoring that they are supplying tests, and their testing procedures? It’s like the wild west.” In a statement to the Guardian, Covid Travel Clinics said: “We are always striving to provide a responsive and customer-centred service. This month we have experienced a recent surge in orders due to the recent government announcement … Courier companies have also experienced difficulties and delays in delivering the kits to customers on time during this period. We also experienced a significant number of orders with incomplete delivery addresses. We can assure customers that now this surge is being managed by the couriers, and we are not experiencing any delays.” It said it was asking customers requesting a refund to complete a form. “ Our customer support team has been processing these refunds. We would also like to clarify that our price for onsite testing is £15 and, if delivered to the home address, it is £35 for a day-2 test.” Hussain, 47, is named as lead senior partner on the website of Bradford’s Clarendon Medical Centre, which states he “has experience in … travel immunisations” and has been involved in education, particularly in relation to students from inner-city backgrounds interested in a career in medicine. Another online profile says he has been a GP for more than 13 years. The directors of Expert Doctors and Clarendon Kensington Healthcare, which is named as the parent company of Covid Travel Clinics, were approached for comment.Hospitals are drawing up contingency plans for “significant staff absences” to ensure they can still provide “essential” care for the most seriously ill patients, as health leaders warn the Omicron variant is already triggering staff shortages in the NHS. Staff absences have tripled at one NHS trust in London in just a week, the Guardian has been told. Doctors say they are concerned about their ability to provide care if a significant proportion of colleagues are off sick. Amid mounting concern that soaring numbers of infections could take out large parts of the health workforce, the chief executives of all hospitals in England have been urged to review staff numbers for the next three months and draft workforce plans “to ensure essential services can be maintained”. Hospital bosses have also been told to begin training staff for potential redeployment immediately, according to a memo from Amanda Pritchard, the chief executive of NHS England, and Prof Stephen Powis, its medical director. At the same time, hospital bosses are being urged to “accelerate recruitment plans”, bring forward the arrival of internationally recruited nurses, and offer staff options “to continue to contribute when they are unable to come into work, if they are able to do so”. Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer, warned on Wednesday of potential issues with the NHS workforce, as he said the expected sharp peak of Omicron cases was likely to lead to lots of people, including healthcare workers, being ill at the same time. “We may end up with quite substantial gaps in rotas at short notice,” he said. NHS bosses and medical leaders say the alarming spread of the Omicron variant was already causing staff sickness levels to “rise rapidly”, in particular in London. Danny Mortimer, deputy chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said: “Health leaders absolutely share the chief medical officer’s concern about the impact of coronavirus, including Omicron, on their teams and are seeing increased staff absences already. One of our members in London, for example, has reported a tripling of absences in less than a week and we know that primary care, mental health, ambulance and community services are feeling this strain too. “The last thing any health leader wants to see is their care for patients being disrupted, and they will do everything they can to minimise this. This is why it is so important that everyone eligible takes up their offer of vaccine or booster, that they behave in a responsible way that will reduce transmission, and that the government stays close to the impact the spread of this new strain has on frontline patient care.” Dr Sarah Hallett, co-chair of the BMA junior doctors committee co-chair, said she was “incredibly concerned” about the impact of the rapid spread of the Omicron variant on NHS staffing. “We’re already aware of this causing some problems in London, where we know cases are currently higher – and therefore this could be a worrying early sign of things to come across the country,” she said. “With a record number of cases yesterday, those of us on the frontline are not just worried about what this means for a potentially drastic increase in hospital admissions, but also on our ability to provide care across both primary and secondary care if we have a significant proportion of staff off sick with the virus.” Hallett said the NHS was “vastly understaffed” even before the pandemic, adding there were now about 100,000 unfilled vacancies in England. “We simply cannot afford to lose any more staff at this critical time,” she said. Official data published by NHS England on Thursday showed that on 12 December, the most recent date for which figures were available, at NHS acute trusts alone 56,889 staff were away through sickness or self isolation. Of those, 12,240 absences were directly related to Covid-19, according to the data. Saffron Cordery, deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents NHS hospitals and mental health, community and ambulance services, said: “Trust leaders are telling us that Omicron is already creating staff shortages in the NHS. In Omicron hotspots like London, absences are starting to rise rapidly. This is exactly what we would expect, given community infection rates are shooting up. “This is being borne out in the latest data, which shows worrying increases in NHS staff having to take time off work due to Covid-19 self-isolation or sickness. The impact on the workloads for remaining staff is a major challenge given the huge service demand currently across the NHS.”Poor service from suppliers of PCR travel tests is “an issue of national significance”, and regulators are not doing enough to police hundreds of new businesses that have moved into the market, the former competition boss Andrew Tyrie has said. In an interview with the Guardian, Lord Tyrie, who was chairman of the Competition and Markets Authority until last year, called for a clean up of the list of PCR test providers published on the government website, which many travellers consult before buying a kit. Tyrie said appearing on the official list has some of the characteristics of a “licence” and it should be possible to enforce minimum service standards. “It’s not beyond the wit of man to ensure that a reasonable service is available.” These measures should include firms taking liability for consumer costs when test results are late and a staffed phone line and email address with a minimum response time, he says. Customer reviews and performance scores, based on data such as complaint rates or the proportion of tests processed on time – which companies should be made to share – should also be visible on the official website, Tyrie adds. If consumers were given more information to gauge the reliability of a service they could make their own decisions about whether to trade quality and reliability off against price. “That way the good firms can drive out the bad,” he said. The government website, which lists testing companies in price order, says it “does not endorse or recommend any specific test provider” and “you should do your own research”. Tyrie, a former Conservative MP and chair of the Treasury select committee, gained notoriety grilling prime ministers, Bank of England officials and banking chiefs after the 2008 financial crisis. He resigned as chairman of the CMA last summer. Since leaving he has been critical of the watchdog’s performance. Problems in the testing market had been obvious since the spring and the CMA should have moved faster, with warning letters or potentially a test case, he argues. The decision to disband the CMA’s newly created coronavirus taskforce was a mistake too, he suggests. The unit had been effective in the early months of the pandemic when, for example, it clamped down on suspected profiteering on hand sanitiser. “The fact the taskforce was there and monitoring things itself almost certainly had a deterrent effect,” suggested Tyrie. “The CMA needs a small group of people dedicated to addressing this appalling detriment. It is threatening to become a massive rip off.” The CMA has told 25 PCR providers to clean up their act or risk enforcement action and has also begun formal investigations into Expert Medicals and Dante Labs. In the autumn it provided its advice to Department of Health and Social Care on how it could make the PCR market work better for consumers. At that time Andrea Coscelli, the CMA’s chief executive, said competition alone was not enough to deliver a healthy market because important aspects were dictated by government policy, so it needed to take a more “interventionist” approach, backed up by monitoring and enforcement. With the PCR travel test still a minefield for consumers Tyrie said the CMA had the “technical expertise to help the DHSC minimise the consumer detriment and needed to make every effort to put it at their disposal”.Picks of the week SteelHeads The End of the F***ing World’s Jessica Barden lights up this brilliant new thriller podcast as terminally ill tennis pro Joleen Kenzie, whose only hope of survival is to be cryogenically frozen. Her fear as she’s about to go under for the procedure is beautifully played, with whispered messages to her family. But as she wakes up in a Seattle lab in the near future she feels the terror of a body – and a world – that’s changed. Hannah Verdier America’s Girls The Dallas Cowboys cheerleaders revolutionised the craft in 1972 with their hotpants and go-go boots, becoming more popular than the American football team they were supporting. Sarah Hepola’s podcast gives the cheerleaders a voice as they’re interviewed about their battle for fair pay, creepy fans and the debate over their status as “sexy sideline dancers”. HV The Footballer’s Football Podcast Newcastle United’s Callum Wilson and West Ham’s Michail Antonio team up for this new podcast about what it’s like to be a Premier League player. When they’re not rehashing their performances at the weekend, it’s a fun listen, covering VAR leaving them “feeling like an idiot” and Virgil van Dijk being a “good-looking guy”. Alexi Duggins French &amp; Saunders: Titting About Dawn French and Jennifer Saunders are back talking nonsense in a festive episode of their waffling but very welcome podcast. The pals riff on everything from the disappointment of receiving a Mindy doll instead of a Sindy as a kid to peeling away for a secret bath on Christmas Day, with an analysis of cracker jokes and seasonal traditions in between. Jolly good fun. Hollie Richardson John Bercow’s Absolute Power Deborah Frances-White teams up with the former Speaker of the House of Commons for this new podcast. It’s essentially an extended interview, with an enjoyable chemistry between the pair as Bercow fields questions on his old job. It remains to be seen how many episodes this will manage before getting old, though. AD Producer pick: The in-betweenish pod Chosen by Axel Kacoutie I’d like to think that I’m not the only one who dreads being asked, “who are you?”. I think it’s because I’m forced to rely on a flimsy answer or I have to fish within the gaps of what I’m told to be – versus who I think I am today. Identity and belonging have always been fluid rather than fixed and in this new podcast, host Beatriz Nour courageously carves out a space for the listener where it’s ok to be confused and not have the answers. Through the experience and memory of her guests we are subtly given permission to reflect on our own life choices and relationship to country, culture and language. I’m very much looking forward to hearing more conversations from this series as tackling these existential topics becomes less scary with each listen. Talking points The latest entry to the world of podcasting? Possibly Quentin Tarantino, who is rumoured to be producing a show where he discusses his CD and DVD collection. Presumably it will be more captivating than it sounds on paper. Why not try: Life Sentence | Light Culture | Country Heat Weekly Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about Hear Here or any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to the Guide, our weekly look at the best in pop cultureTV’s foremost peripatetic monster-slayer is back. Season two of The Witcher (Netflix) lets us settle again into the granite-muscled embrace of Henry Cavill as Geralt of Rivia, a wandering warrior looking for his place on the Continent – a faux-medieval land full of awful creatures, scheming rulers and forests that spend half their time on fire. Last time out, the epic Battle of Sodden Hill coincided with Geralt finally meeting magical princess Ciri (Freya Allan), with whom he shares both a destiny and a love of coloured contact lenses. Now he must look after his new ward, while pining for up-and-coming sorceress Yennefer (Anya Chalotra), whom he wrongly thinks dead. Meanwhile, politics on the Continent become more complex. Basically, elves are up to something. This is a full-bore fantasy saga with a sprawling world of antagonists to keep track of, including the smaller details of elven bloodlines, and knowing who’s Vizimir and who’s Vesemir. The Witcher has ways of keeping your interest up, though. Naked bodies are the standard sweetener in the swords-and-horses genre, along with freely pouring blood, and this show does have both. But it prefers to deflate its own pomposity with blunt comedy, often provided by Joey Batey as Jaskier, an annoying bard in an unlikely purple leather jacket who helps see us through some mid-season episodes that get bogged down in straightening out the show’s mythology. Even the three main characters, much as they gravely go on about prophecies and dynasties and whatnot, can display an admirable economy of speech – which offsets the grandeur of the landscapes, the palaces and the protagonists’ voluminous capes. “Fuck!” says Yennefer when she finds herself regaining consciousness in captivity. Geralt himself has a prosaic answer to Ciri’s naive suggestion that they seek refuge in a place called Skellige: “You’d be married off to the nearest Lord of Bad Breath.” The Witcher also loves to treat us to a top British character actor, the sort who makes you say: “Oh good, it’s … whatshisname. From thingummy.” Here’s Kevin Doyle (Downton Abbey) as a cowardly elf! There’s Graham McTavish (Outlander) as an intimidating intelligence officer! Look out, it’s Simon Callow and Liz Carr (Silent Witness) as a pair of private investigators, poring over parchments in a book-lined hovel! If all this is a distraction from The Witcher never really amounting to much, that’s not necessarily a problem. Season one was based on Andrzej Sapkowski’s short stories, since that was initially the Witcher author’s favoured format. In turn, The Witcher in its TV guise began as a monster-of-the-week show and it sticks with that for the first of the new episodes, sending Geralt and Ciri to stay in the mansion of eccentric beast-man Nivellen (Kristofer Hivju). He’s a raconteur who can make a roast dinner or a hot bath fall magically from the ceiling, but who struggles to find love due to his hairy, tusked face. A horror-tinged twist on Beauty and the Beast develops, which could happily be watched in isolation. After that, though, season two bases itself largely on Sapkowski’s 1994 novel Blood of Elves and is more concerned with slow scene-setting. It has to take every opportunity to have fun among quite a lot of scenes of kings, queens, generals and magicians debating the nuances of their possible next moves. Much of the season is given over to Ciri training to fight alongside Geralt, which happens while they lodge with a senior Witcher named Vesemir (as opposed to Vizimir – he’s the churlish king of the Redanians). He’s played by Killing Eve/The Bridge star Kim Bodnia, who gives us his usual twinkly uncle with a dark side, enhanced by a ridiculous slicked-back long mullet. Ciri’s coming of age also involves an obstacle course that’s like an amusing medieval version of Total Wipeout, and there are some monsters to be slain, from a vengeful tree-man to a huge winged insectoid. When it needs them for a big dust-up, The Witcher’s special effects are flawless. But it’s mostly marking time, with Geralt barely ever driving the action as he surely should. Careful as one must be in the Time of Covid not to be too harsh on shows that return feeling constrained and underpowered, that is how The Witcher feels, at the point where you might have expected it to widen into a grand spectacle. It’s a between-the-wars season that works hard to keep us entertained while we wait for Big Gerry to be given something momentous to do. We’re waiting a little too long, though.In the creeping misery of post-summer, when dark, rainy days conspire with the grind of normal life to throw you into despair, Strictly Come Dancing dazzles like a glitter ball in the gloom. For nearly 18 years, avoiding Strictly’s omnipresence in the run-up to Christmas was a personal dogma. When asked for an opinion on who may be voted off or who would win, I’d respond with smug refusal to engage. I did not and could not watch the show. My strong reaction was in part founded on my inability to understand how watching people who already had money and got paid more to dance badly could ever be called entertainment. Adding insult to injury, the contestants would invariably huff into cameras, gushing about being grateful for the “journey”. No, thank you. Strictly’s brand of kitschy sentimentality grated. The likes of the former Conservative MP and Brexit party MEP, Ann Widdecombe, could be catapulted to national treasure status while taking vocal stances against abortion and same-sex marriage. D-list celebs being offered another opportunity to cling on to their fading fame – I couldn’t understand how viewers lapped it up. Its sweet wholesomeness smelled off. And then I had children. Now aged seven and nine, their insistent requests to watch Strictly couldn’t, unfortunately, be warded off with a simple “no”. No elicited a string of whys instead of the silence a parent might desire. Nor would they listen to arguments on how “the counterpart of sentimentality is … brutality” (Carl Jung), or that “a sentimentalist is simply one who desires to have the luxury of an emotion without paying for it” (Oscar Wilde). The best I could do was to fob them off with a “maybe, let’s see”, and keep my fingers crossed that at school trading Pokémon cards would trump swapping opinions on who may face elimination the following week. But, as most parents know, the power of playground discussions among seven-year-olds is strong indeed. I lost. We were watching Strictly. We began our Strictly journey in week two of season 19 and I wondered what great error had materialised in my parenting. How could my children (mine), in the era of streaming and on-demand TV, choose this out of the countless options stretching before them. To comfort myself, I rationalised that they’d eventually grow bored. How could they not? Other than the judges, who really has the stamina to watch the various missteps of 15 stars? If all else failed, I would resist by stealth. The moment the show came on, I would busy myself with dinner prep or ticking off an item on the to-do list. It was all going to plan until the first duo came on. The TV chef John Whaite and his partner, Johannes Radebe, the show’s first same-sex male couple, danced the cha-cha-cha, and I watched as my children sat mesmerised by the sheer joy in their performance. A one-off, I reasoned. Next, the presenter AJ Odudu and her partner, Kai Widdrington, danced the foxtrot to Amy Winehouse’s Tears Dry on My Own and I was … humming? By the time the Dragons’ Den judge Sara Davies glided across the floor with her partner, Aljaž Skorjanec, I had shed all sense of cool detachment. Now I was harmonising with the band’s rendition of Cass Elliot’s Dream a Little Dream. There was a lump in my throat when Rose Ayling-Ellis, Strictly’s first deaf contestant, who has been tipped to win this year, teared up as she watched her best friends wish her good luck from their honeymoon. What was happening to me? By week three, I tried to pull myself together. With my phone at the ready, I’d use Strictly’s running time to get through the long list of interesting articles I stumbled across while browsing for something. Why, then, was I devouring a precis of the “Strictly curse” and wondering who would become a victim of its power this year? At this point I gave up the ruse. Who was I kidding? I was hooked. It took mere minutes to fall prey to Strictly’s hypnotic effervescence but, at the risk of sounding sentimental, there is depth beyond those sparkles. With each instalment, with all that glitter and pizzazz, Strictly teaches a lesson I hope remains long after the winners are announced. It is this: learning should be lifelong. It requires the good grace to listen and practise, which entails the vulnerability of failing. It is about having a go in spite of yourself, and most importantly finding enjoyment. Bring on season 20. Lola Okolosie is an English teacher and writer focusing on race, politics, education and feminismHaiti’s joumou soup, a symbol of hope and dignity for the world’s first black-led republic, has been awarded protected status by Unesco. The soup, made from turban squash and originally cooked by enslaved African people for their owners in Haiti, was on Thursday added to Unesco’s prestigious list of intangible cultural heritage. It is Haiti’s first inclusion on the list, and the country’s Unesco ambassador, Dominique Dupuy, cried as the announcement was made. The decision is expected to be officially endorsed by Unesco’s general assembly next year. Since Haiti’s independence in 1804, joumou soup has become the national symbol of liberation from slavery, and is traditionally eaten on 1 January, the Caribbean country’s independence day. “It is a great joy and a point of pride to see this project come to fruition today, just two weeks before the Haitian independence day. It is an important gesture of recognition for the entire Haitian culture and identity, which will further strengthen its influence throughout the world,” said Audrey Azoulay, Unesco’s director general. The nomination of joumou soup was considered by Unesco on compassionate grounds, after the country’s difficult year. President Jovenel Moïse was assassinated in July, and a devastating 7.2 magnitude earthquake hit the country in August. The Haitian delegation to Unesco said the listing was “not only a fabulous sign of hope and encouragement, but also a unifying call, for a Haitian people currently facing an exceptionally difficult moment in their rich history”. A number of countries expressed solidarity with Haiti before the entry was adopted. “We cannot abandon Haiti at a time like this,” the representative from Brazil said in an emotional plea. “You cannot leave Haiti to its fate.” But a representative from Switzerland said joumou soup was being listed not only on compassionate grounds, but because of its quality. Members of the Haitian delegation said: “A symbol of the rejection of a system of oppression and discrimination, of the struggle against colonisation and all forms of racism, the soup also strengthens cultural identity, encourages coexistence and social cohesion and plays a key unifying role. This heritage generates a strong sense of belonging to the Haitian nation, connects new generations with their roots and has become an expression of their dignity as a people.” The spicy soup’s main ingredients are joumou, or turban squash, meat, potatoes and other vegetables, including malanga (taro root), yams, turnips and hot chilli peppers. The Unesco cultural heritage list was established in 2008 to protect national traditions. In 2020, 35 entries were added to the list, including sauna culture in Finland, sourdough making in Malta, budima dancing in Zambia and a grass mowing competition in Bosnia and Herzegovina.For many pop artists, the pandemic has been an exercise in downsizing. Taylor Swift used the sudden lull to eschew big pop moments in favour of tactile folky electronica that soothed and sedated; Lorde and Billie Eilish returned with low-key albums crafted in lockdown that consciously side-stepped fame’s monstrous glare. These shifts mirrored a collective sense of introspection and reappraisal of what’s important. Stewing in your feelings was matched only by online quizzes when it came to lockdown hobbies. Prioritise Pleasure, Rebecca Taylor’s brilliantly bold second album as Self Esteem, chimes with that theme of emotional wallowing – but it’s quickly alchemised into a heady rush of realisation. Feelings don’t just bubble on the surface, they rise up like spewing volcanoes, urgent and ugly. In a pop landscape that often seems to be bottling it all up inside, Prioritise Pleasure marked a hugely relatable uncorking of not just the past 18 months’ worth of festering emotions, but a lifetime of them. After a decade hemmed in as half of indie darlings Slow Club, Taylor released Compliments Please, her debut album as Self Esteem, in 2019. A tentative step away from her indie past shot through with blasts of pop escapism, she often sounded resigned to her fate. “What I might have achieved if I wasn’t trying to please,” she sighs on Rollout. On this unabashed follow-up, Taylor positions her needs first. The title track – a widescreen ode to self love in all forms – is about the benefits of ignoring that impulse to shape-shift, to diminish, and instead daring to break the mould. That realisation is reflected in the production by the Very Best’s Johan Hugo, who constructs the monumental chorus – all distorted guitar squall and communal vocals – like a wave crashing on to rocks. Taylor, now 35, has evolved into an out-and-proud pop star who dissects her emotions in pin-sharp, often darkly funny and always physically rousing testaments. Inspired by musicals and the empowered expression of Drag Race, her second album wears its theatricality proudly. The single Moody opens with the excellent line “Sexting you at the mental health talk seems counterproductive”, before riding a wobbly synth riff into its sugar-rush, pep-rally chorus. The song is a reclamation, Taylor has said, of the pejorative “mardy”, and it presents an alchemical transformation that runs throughout the album: after years of being told she was too big, too bold, too much, she celebrates all of those things as all-caps positives. The sheer heft and physicality of the album, all Yeezus beats and elastic melodies, is balanced by Taylor’s ability to zoom in on the minutiae of life, paired with her economical wit. Fucking Wizardry instantly flings the listener into that ungoverned period following a breakup when texts are still being sent but no one knows where the boundaries are. Taylor admonishes both herself and her oblivious ex, but there’s also a moment of near divine clarity: “I cannot stress this enough / You’ll never know how to love,” she sings as the song’s primal march switches to a crawl. “I ignored the warnings / But from that, I’m learning.” As with all the album’s moments where the fog lifts, Taylor is joined by a small choir of friends who reiterate and co-sign her emotions. Their presence also anchors lead single I Do This All the Time, with its swelling coda of “I’ll take care, I’ll read again, I’ll sing again, I will” transformed into the ultimate act of defiance. It’s the climax to Taylor’s spoken word verses, in which she picks at social anxiety, toxic behavioural patterns and death over a gentle trip-hop beat. And that’s just in verse one. The heaviness is balanced by a comedic flair that emerges in the shape of droll life lessons (“Don’t send those long paragraph texts / Stop it, don’t”) and well-earned self-help maxims (“All the days that you get to have are big”). By verse four Taylor is focused on a relationship gone awry. Its subject is mourned and venerated in opposing lines before that sense of clarity returns, clear as day. “It was really rather miserable trying to love you,” she sings as a string figure unfurls skywards and the clouds part. It’s a confessional, rip-off-the-plaster lyric made to be yelled back at her in communal moments of catharsis. After nearly two years of cooping up big emotions in restricted spaces, the bold, brash and beautiful Prioritise Pleasure feels like sweet relief.The problem with end-of-year lists is you can only judge something on the material you have. A couple of years ago, Damon Lindelof’s Watchmen adaptation limped in at number 40 in our list. This is because, at the time the list was compiled, Watchmen had only just begun to air. By the time the finale came around, all the disparate pieces had slammed together in a truly incredible way. Watchmen will be remembered as one of the best shows of the decade, but we missed the boat. I’m telling you this because, when this year’s list was being compiled, Succession was stuck in a holding pattern. The third series had landed hard, with season two’s cliffhanger ending ramped up to absurd degrees by a Covid-enforced delay. It arrived heralded by several big, weighty profile pieces in big, prestigious publications. Early reviews were breathless. Public screenings were met with something approaching full-blown Beatlemania. Succession was back! But as the season wore on, you could feel a restlessness setting in. Kendall selling out his father promised explosions, yet none were forthcoming. There was an episode where everyone hung out in an airport. There was an episode where the dramatic highlight was the arrival of some doughnuts. Once the wham-bang of the season two finale had burned off, we were all back to exactly where we always were; a never-ending competition to get a kiss from daddy. Lines were drawn in the sand, then quickly redrawn before anyone could feel their impact. Moments that felt permanent – Logan’s declining health, Kendall’s ambition – were reset without a second thought. To watch season three of Succession was to spend a great deal of time wondering when things would actually get going. This is when the end-of-year ballots were sent out. And, look, it’s no disaster. It is still all the way up the list. Of course it is. Even at half-power, Succession can still beat the socks off everything around it. However, in the weeks since the list was compiled, Succession has gone supernova. The season’s final third has found a gear that, even by the show’s own impossible standards, it had never found before. All the storylines that had been humming away in the background have snapped to attention, and the stakes are colossal. Professionally, everything is on fire. Personally, the ground is littered with bodies. If the first six episodes were about sharks circling the water, this is where we get to see them rip each other apart. In episode seven, we saw Kendall – high on his own hype as the man who “killed” Logan Roy – planning to throw himself the party to end all parties. And yet the sweep of his character arc in that one hour, from carefree singing to the deepest existential despair, was breathtaking. This season hasn’t been without its suicidal foreshadowing, but to watch Kendall’s entire sense of self-worth plummet to zero was to become truly worried for the man. But Kendall isn’t alone in his despair. Shiv is becoming more monstrous by the second, casually hurting her siblings and husband with the same cold glee, a trait we are beginning to learn blossomed in her teens. Roman’s fledging growth as a person, both in terms of empathy and business nous, was destroyed with a single dick pic. Even Connor, who is around purely for comic relief, has started to wear his unfathomable sadness more openly. And then there’s Tom, who has emerged as the unexpected heart of Succession – and someone to almost root for at last. Where he was once a power-hungry Jared Kushner-type hanger-on, Tom has spent this year finding the power in his vulnerability. He knows his wife doesn’t love him, because she told him as much. He knows the Roys think he’s a joke. He quaked at the thought of jail after offering himself up as a sacrificial lamb for the family. In one of the all-time great Succession moments he all but outright declared his love for Greg. So when, at last, Tom outmanoeuvred everyone, even his own wife, with his Red Wedding – can we make Red Wambsgans a thing? – it was hard not to feel utterly elated. Perhaps, just perhaps, this was Tom’s season all along. The third season of Succession has ended with what might be its greatest ever run of episodes. However, those aren’t the episodes we judged it on. Officially it’s the fourth best show of the year. But now that we’ve seen the whole thing, it’s OK if you want to bump it up a spot or two.Prioritise Pleasure is the Guardian’s album of the year. How do you feel? It’s fucking cool, innit [laughs loudly]. My PR told me at my gig in Manchester and then just walked off, like the ultimate mic drop. Also, I’ve done the double as well, with the single of the year. Amazing. Did you expect the album to break through in the way it has? No. I’d absolutely made my peace with being told I’m underrated. But I also don’t feel like things have massively changed – I still feel like I will be fighting for ever. But I get my own Travelodge room [on tour] now and – I’m not joking – that’s bliss to me. Before I was always sharing. Why do you think the album connected in the way it did? I keep doing this joke that everyone’s as depressed as me now because of the pandemic, so maybe it’s that. I used to feel very alone and I couldn’t understand why I found everything so difficult. On this album I’m starting to feel like, certainly for women, or for people who struggle not to live the perfect 2.4 children dream, it’s society that’s caused it to be shit for us. I think a lot of people are realising that as well, and maybe I’m vaguely eloquent enough to make sense of it all. A few months after your debut Compliments Please came out, you were worried about whether or not you even could make a second album. It had been a risk to do [Self Esteem], and I felt so accomplished, actually, on that first record. Then I was hearing “Hmm, but it didn’t really sell and no money was made” from the label. Are you kidding? All this work hasn’t been enough? That feeling of “maybe I’ll get dropped” was horrible but it managed to thicken my skin and I realised I wanted to do this regardless. I was prepped and ready to do [a second album] anyway, but then I didn’t get dropped. When did you start writing it? I did How Can I Help You at the end of 2019. Then I wrote a lot of it at the start of 2020 and spent the whole pandemic listening to the demos just ready to make it. I had to just sit and think about it longer than usual. How Can I Help You is pretty ferocious – what inspired it? Not being Mercury-nominated for the first album really hurt. Also, then nearly getting dropped and dealing with constant tweets from people going: “You’re so underrated; why does no one know who you are?” I was so sick of it. Was it important to have the lyrics be pretty plain-speaking and direct? I think so. I was in an indie band [Slow Club] for so long and I remember wanting to say really simple things I felt, but to get it OK’d I would have to deploy a metaphor or think about how Bob Dylan would say it [laughs]. So my lyrics sound like they do now because I’m not having to get it through someone else’s lens any more. When I was younger I’d get my disposable cameras developed and none of my pictures would be of the scenery or any cool things I saw, it was all just my friends. All I care about are people and the things they do. I’m interested in horrible life, and lyrics are the horrible life bit for me. There’s a black humour to some of the songs – is comedy an inspiration when it comes to lyric writing? No, not really. I’ve definitely curated a kind of [does a goofy voice] “I’m funny” thing to survive being a woman, and it seeps into who I am. It also is who I am. But it’s sort of the last level for me when it comes to things I need to stop doing. Gaga doesn’t have to do jokes! It naturally comes out of me because that’s just me, but I think it’s when I feel like people expect it that it pisses me off. Was I Do This All the Time – Guardian critics’ top song of 2021 – always going to be the first single? It wasn’t even going to be on the record! I work with another guy sometimes and I played the demo to him and he said: “Well, it’s long” [laughs]. But I always loved it. The way it went down [with the public] was unreal. Since April my life’s changed, basically, in terms of people liking what I’m doing. They get it. The knot in my stomach untied. The last line is: ‘We laid there in the darkness and you were asleep / And I wasn’t checking my phone for a moment and I felt–’ Why does it cut off unfinished? It’s a sort of mid-paragraph idea, like it could all just end at any moment. I live in a very stressed-out way, with lots of what-ifs. Life is long, or it isn’t, and both of those ideas scare me. My therapist is always begging me to find the middle ground. If I violently push myself to the middle then I find this weird peace but I have to really crowbar it into my mindset because it does not come naturally. The album touches on the idea of being perceived as too much – is its vast sound a way of exorcising those criticisms? I don’t want it to be the album you put on at a dinner party. I’ve always been background music. Producers would always say: “Can you do it again but a little bit softer?” I don’t want my songs to sound like I’m in a dress doing “shoop shoop bedoo” any more. Also, I am over the top. I like things that are loud and big and direct. Does it feel better in terms of your own mental wellbeing to have this success later in your career? One hundred percent. I do believe there’s something cool about being 35 doing this. In my quieter moments I sometimes feel a bit stupid, and I’m like: “Do I look ridiculous?” But even me asking that question is why I’m doing this. Why on earth are we put out to pasture at 30? I got plenty of comments from nasty men on the internet going “You’ve left it too late”, but I fucking haven’t. Your moniker was sort of about wish-fulfilment – if I put it out there in the world it will happen. Do you think you’re getting there now? It comes in and out. These past six months I have been very emotional. I’m really used to knowing why but I don’t know why this time. I think it might be that something is happening in me where I think I might love myself, finally. And that just makes me cry loads, but in a beautiful way. It just feels like there’s no going back now, and life will throw all sorts of shit but I finally feel like I’m on an even playing field with people who don’t suffer with this bullshit. I feel limitless.The federal government’s decision to end a plan to drill for gas off the New South Wales coast has been labelled a cynical political move ahead of the next election. Scott Morrison made the announcement at the Terrigal surf life saving club on Thursday, telling reporters he had overridden resources minister Keith Pitt to kill the petroleum exploration project, known as Pep11. “The reason why we’re here today, and that is to announce, that after careful consideration, the government has taken, through my own decision, the first step to formally reject an application for the petroleum export (sic) permit, known as Pep11,” Morrison said. Morrison cited widespread community opposition, a lack of financial support underpinning the project and insufficient justification to extend the permit as reasons for the refusal, saying he had “listened carefully”. But in a separate statement, the government said it was still forging ahead with gas developments in other parts of the country as part of its gas fired recovery plan. “The Morrison government is working to unlock investment in Australian gas including through a $220m commitment to the Beetaloo strategic basin and $15.7m in support for the North Bowen and Galilee basins,” it said. As community groups such as Save Our Coast celebrated the Pep11 decision as a victory for people power, observers say the government is trying to thread the needle between backing the gas industry and losing support ahead of the next election. Associate Prof David Holmes, director of Monash University’s climate change communications research hub, said there was a “dissonance” as the government sought to “hold on to the gas fired recovery narrative, but did not want that to impinge on their electoral chances”. “There’s a ‘not in my backyard’ element to it,” Holmes said. “Going into an election, the government does not want to upset electorates concerned about mining or any kind of extraction going on in the environment.” Bruce Robertson, an energy finance analyst with the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis, said Pep11 was among a number of “mind-numbingly silly projects” proposed within NSW in recent years. “I see it as a total failure of the planning system,” Robertson said. “Our planning system at all levels has a default approval position.” Robertson said the prime minister had expressed his personal opposition to the project as early as May but had delayed the announcement until now. “I think the politics of this situation are pretty obvious. The government are facing electoral challenges similar to what Zali Steggall did in Warringah. Morrison is trying to nip that in the bud,” Robertson said. Richie Merzian, director of climate and energy at the Australia Institute, said Thursday’s announcement was a “cynical” gesture following clear opposition from federal Labor and independents to ensure it did not become an election issue. “Pep11 was causing more trouble than it’s worth,” Merzian said. “This is not the only place where you have community backlash against respective fossil fuel projects. “There is also a large and loud push against the Beetaloo, but that’s far up north and out of sight in electorates that are not under threat.” Though Pep11 might not be going ahead, the government was still considering more than 100 coal and gas projects across the country. The International Energy Agency suggested in May that limiting global heating to 1.5C, a goal set out in the Paris agreement, meant exploration and exploitation of new fossil fuel basins had to stop this year. Pep11, has been held by several different energy providers in recent years and allows for offshore drilling for gas and oil, and seismic testing in 4,500 sq km of water from off Manly on Sydney’s northern beaches up to Newcastle. Several fossil fuel companies have previously held the licence to explore for gas in the area. At the time of the government’s announcement on Thursday, Advent Energy and Bounty Oil &amp; Gas had sought a renewal of the exploration licence and permission to undertake exploratory drilling in the area.Walking With Jim Moir 7.30pm, BBC Two The latest of these gently nourishing walks features Moir – AKA Vic Reeves – showing us around his favourite patch of the Kent coast. Along the way, he meets a bumble bee conservationist and a lugworm hunter and encounters some shingle that makes him walk “like a constipated duck”. An understated charmer of a series, showcasing a few of the nation’s hidden treasures. Phil Harrison Dispatches: The Truth About Disability Benefits 7.30pm, Channel 4 Injustices in the benefits system might have been pushed down the news agenda by Covid and allegations of general corruption, but the pain of disabled people goes on. Richard Butchins investigates a series of deaths that grieving families say were hastened by the misdeeds of the Department of Work and Pensions. Jack Seale Sainsbury’s: Christmas Food Secrets 8pm, Channel 4 ’Tis the season for foodie indulgence. This one-off enters the Sainsbury’s test kitchen to witness the creation of new festive offerings such as an ingenious veggie-friendly “gammon” and some outre winter sushi. There is also a peek at the R&amp;D behind that other vital ingredient in any supermarket chain’s lucrative December: the Christmas ad. Graeme Virtue Vienna Blood 9pm, BBC Two This stylish detective drama set in 1900s Vienna and based on The Liebermann Papers stories by Frank Tallis continues its second season. Tonight, Oskar (Jürgen Maurer) gets out of his lane when a mutilated corpse is found in a slum. He’s told not to touch the case but, inevitably, he can’t resist a little nose around. A bad idea. PH Gregg Wallace’s Magical Christmas Market 9pm, Channel 5 Yule gløgg: MasterChef’s jolliest judge heads for Copenhagen’s various festive markets to sample the delights of a classic Scandi Christmas. That means finding the perfect tree, helping make a Christmas cake at the city’s oldest bakery and enjoying Denmark’s signature festive tipple. GV The Graham Norton Show 10.35pm, BBC One Stanley Tucci is in the house tonight to talk about his new book, My Life Through Food. No doubt, he’ll find something to talk about with fellow guest Jamie Oliver. Somewhat inevitably, given his current ubiquity, Romesh Ranganathan will be around, too. Music comes from Lil Nas X. PH Film choice Get Out (Jordan Peele, 2017), 11pm, E4 One of the most influential films of this century, and certainly nearing classic status, Jordan Peele’s 2017 directorial debut expands on the pointed comedy of his TV sketch show Key &amp; Peele to chilling effect. Daniel Kaluuya’s Chris pays a visit to the family home of his white girlfriend, Rose (Allison Williams), to find that her parents (Catherine Keener and Bradley Whitford) are not the racially liberal types they appear to be. An excellent commentary on, and riposte to, the invisibility and marginalisation of Black people in the horror genre – and cinema in general. Simon Wardell Live sport Darts: World Championships 12.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Day three from Alexandra Palace.The British government’s granting of fishing licences to more than 1,000 UK and EU vessels for 2022, which will permit bottom-trawling and dredging in marine protected areas, could be unlawful unless conditions to safeguard ocean habitats are imposed, the conservation group Oceana says. In a letter to George Eustice, secretary of state for the environment, parts of which have been seen by the Guardian, the group warned that licences expected to be granted this month could contravene UK law. This includes the habitats directive, aimed at protecting vital marine ecosystems. Bottom-trawling and dredging, which are highly damaging to the seabed, are still permitted in 97% of marine protected areas (MPAs). Nearly a quarter of the UK’s territorial waters are protected areas, set up to safeguard vital habitats and species including harbour porpoises and dolphins. The MPAs are the most prominent feature of the government’s pledge to protect 30% of ocean biodiversity by 2030. Melissa Moore, head of UK policy at Oceana in Europe, said she expected the licences to be issued this month. “These licences could be massive supertrawlers or scallop vessels. Whether it is scooping up dolphins or dredging the seabed, this legislation is precautionary. “The habitat directive is saying before you license you must prove that the licence won’t have an impact on the site,” she said. “The government has not done that.” Oceana’s analysis found that of the 68,000 hours of fishing with damaging bottom-towed gear that took place along the seabed of protected areas off the UK shore last year, 39% was by British vessels, especially off Scotland, 35% by French and the rest by other EU states. Under so-called benthic MPAs – to protect species that live on the seabed – the government has so far banned bottom-trawling and dredging in only two of its offshore MPAs and plans to bring in a ban for four more, including in the Dogger Bank. At the current rate of progress, Oceana estimates it would take the UK until 2050 to properly protect all such vulnerable marine areas. Moore said: “We need an immediate ban on trawling and dredging in all offshore marine protected areas as well as the inshore zone. To continue to license this destructive activity, when we know the damage it causes, and that it is illegal under various environmental laws, beggars belief. A simple licence condition should prohibit fishing in MPAs.” Protecting marine habitats would help protect us from the climate crisis by sequestering and storing carbon, she said. In its letter, Oceana said the government had failed to conduct an appropriate assessment of any significant effect of the impending licences on special areas of conservation as required under regulation 28 of the offshore habitats regulations. Oceana also warned that the government could be failing to comply with marine strategy regulations requiring it to maintain “good ecological” status by December 2020 and could breach its duty to conserve the marine environment under the Fisheries Act, if the licences were granted without the necessary conditions. A recent study estimated that fishing boats trawling along the seabed release as much carbon as the aviation industry puts into the atmosphere annually, and that carbon emissions in UK waters were the fourth largest globally from trawling. In April, the government committed to adopting fisheries management for all its MPAs by 2024, after legal issues were raised by Oceana. Greenpeace described bottom-trawling in marine protected areas as “bulldozing national parks”. Greenpeace UK’s head of oceans, Will McCallum, said: “It turns the seafloor into a disaster zone while also releasing planet-heating carbon in the process. It should be banned. “So far, this destructive fishing method has been restricted in just two MPAs out of 64 – it’s a joke. If the government means a single word it said about being a global oceans champion, then the very least they can do is ban bottom-trawling and dredging from some of our most precious marine environments.” A spokesperson for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said: “To protect our vital fish stocks, all EU vessels granted access to fish in UK waters must comply with UK rules and regulations, including those on sustainability. “We have already stopped pulse-trawling by EU and English-registered vessels in UK waters, and are working closely with industry to address their concerns surrounding bottom-trawling. Now we have left the EU, the MMO [Marine Management Organisation] has also consulted on additional safeguards for several of our offshore marine protected areas.” The Scottish government said it would exclude all fishing from 10% of its seas by 2026. A spokesperson said: “As set out in the programme for government, we will deliver fisheries management measures for existing marine protected areas where these are not already in place, as well as key coastal biodiversity locations outside these sites, by March 2024 at the latest. “We will also designate highly protected marine areas, which will exclude all fishing activities, covering at least 10% of our seas by 2026.”Top story: Conservative-held for nearly 190 years Hello, Warren Murray here – quick’s the word and smart’s the action. The Liberal Democrats have won a stunning victory in the North Shropshire byelection, taking what had previously been a hugely safe Conservative seat by nearly 6,000 votes and capping a disastrous few weeks for Boris Johnson. Helen Morgan, the Lib Dem candidate, took 17,957 votes to secure a majority of 5,925 ahead of the Conservatives’ Neil Shastri-Hurst on 12,032. Labour’s Ben Wood was third with 3,686 votes. The seat has been Tory for all but two of the past 190 years. In the 2019 election, the former environment secretary Owen Paterson won with a majority of nearly 23,000 with the Lib Dems finishing third. The byelection was called after Paterson resigned in the wake of a botched attempt by Downing Street to save him from punishment for a serious breach of lobbying rules by rewriting the disciplinary system for MPs. “Tonight, the people of North Shropshire have spoken on behalf of the British people,” Helen Morgan told the count in Shrewsbury. “They have said loudly and clearly: Boris Johnson, the party is over … Our country is crying out for leadership. Mr Johnson, you are no leader.” Our political correspondent Peter Walker writes in his analysis of the result that had Johnson instead made Paterson quietly serve out his original sanction – a suspension from parliament – it would all have been over and done with by now. * * * Rishi Sunak rushes back – “Caught on the wrong side of the Atlantic” – Heather Stewart puts it best. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, returns to the Treasury today – a day earlier than he had intended – under intense pressure to help save hospitality and other businesses from going broke because of Omicron restrictions. Labour said Sunak’s absence from the UK to meet tech bosses in California was “an insult to British businesses and workers”. There are warnings that thousands of firms could go bust by January. Patrick Dardis, chief executive of the Young’s pub chain, said patrons were “terribly confused” about whether to keep their Christmas bookings while restaurants and pubs were “hanging on by their fingernails”. The industry is seeking a reintroduction of the VAT cut for hospitality, expansion of business rates relief, immediate grants for firms in the hardest-hit sectors and a targeted return of the furlough scheme. * * * Investigators seek Baldwin phone – A search warrant has been issued for Alec Baldwin’s phone in the investigation into October’s fatal shooting of a cinematographer on the set of the actor/director’s film Rust, according to New Mexico court documents. Baldwin was holding a handgun on the film set when it went off during rehearsal, accidentally killing Halyna Hutchins. The actor has said he never pulled the trigger, and denied responsibility for the shooting. He had believed the gun to hold only dummy rounds and had no idea how a live round got on to the set. * * * Cuts threaten Beeb quality – The BBC could be forced to replace expensive high-end dramas and natural history shows with cheaper programmes due to government-imposed funding cuts. The broadcaster is required to make deep and continued spending cuts due to successive Conservative governments reducing its licence fee income, according to a report by the National Audit Office. At the same time, the cost of making hit shows such as Line of Duty and David Attenborough’s nature programmes has increased rapidly, with competition from Netflix and Amazon driving up prices for talent and studio space. The BBC has been required to cut its spending by £1bn a year between 2017 and 2022 as a result of a licence fee settlement imposed in 2015 by George Osborne. * * * Modi critic ‘was Pegasus target’ – A jailed Indian activist and critic of Narendra Modi’s administration was phone-hacked with the Israeli-made Pegasus spyware before his arrest, it has been alleged. A forensic analysis of Rona Wilson’s phone by Amnesty found evidence it was infected with NSO Group spyware. Wilson is part of a network advocating for the rights of India’s indigenous and low-caste communities. The Indian government has neither confirmed nor denied that it is a customer of NSO. India’s supreme court in October ordered an independent inquiry into whether the government used Pegasus to spy illegally on journalists, activists and political opponents. * * * Seals prey on sharks – In a world first, New Zealand leopard seals have been found to feed on sharks, making them part of a tiny and exclusive club of marine predators that do so. A study found shark remains in the scat of leopard seals, and visible signs of struggle with sharks on seals’ bodies, indicating the marine mammals predate on sharks, rather than scavenge their remains. Krista van der Linde, who led the study, said it was unclear why the seals targeted sharks, especially given the risks. “There could be something nutritionally about sharks that makes them desirable, it could be sort of a treat.” Elsewhere in creature news, researchers in Australia have revealed the first true millipede, which has 1,306 legs and was found up to 60 metres underground in a mining area of Western Australia. It has been named Eumillipes persephone in reference to the Greek goddess of the underworld, Persephone. Today in Focus podcast: Struggle to keep the curtain up Theatres are battling to stay open as they contend with staff shortages and slumping tickets sales in what is usually their busiest time of year. For the cast of a pantomime in Corby, Northamptonshire, the show goes on – for now. Lunchtime read: Ukraine – Putin’s troop build-up, visualised Russia has forward-deployed hundreds of tanks, self-propelled artillery and even short-range ballistic missiles from as far away as Siberia to within striking range of Ukraine’s borders. Russia’s rhetoric has grown more belligerent. Vladimir Putin has demanded legal guarantees that Ukraine will never join Nato or host its missile strike systems, concessions he is not likely to receive. He is also short on time. His troops cannot remain out of garrison indefinitely. By late winter he will probably have to launch an attack or draw down his forces in what would look like a retreat. US intelligence has said Russia could launch an offensive by the end of January with as many as 100 battalion tactical groups (BTGs), comprising an estimated 175,000 troops. Current estimates say Russia has about 50 BTGs in the border region, already a significant force that could overrun Ukrainian defensive positions. Sport The second Ashes Test continues as England’s bowlers seek to limit Australia’s first-innings total on day two before the lights go on in the day-night match at Adelaide Oval. Everton snatched a point in a 1-1 draw at Stamford Bridge after Jarrad Branthwaite cancelled out Mason Mount’s opener to continue Chelsea’s patchy run. At Anfield, Jonjo Shelvey gave Newcastle an early lead but goals from Diogo Jota, Mo Salah and Trent Alexander-Arnold turned things around for Liverpool in a 3-1 win. There was an extraordinary acceleration of football’s Covid crisis on Thursday as the Premier League postponed six fixtures in one day but resisted calls for a ‘firebreak’ suspension, insisting that play will go on. Chelsea failed to qualify from the Women’s Champions League group stage after losing 4-0 to Wolfsburg, thanks to two goals apiece from Svenja Huth and Tabea Wasmuth. Old acquaintances will be renewed next summer when England face Germany, Italy and Hungary in a formidable looking Nations League group, while Wales have a reunion with Belgium. Mercedes’ team principal Toto Wolff says he can give “no assurances” that Lewis Hamilton will continue in Formula One after Sunday’s controversial season finale, saying the British driver is still in “pain” and “will never get over” what happened. Oisin Murphy, Britain’s champion jockey on the Flat for the last three seasons, said on Thursday that he has “temporarily” relinquished his licence to “focus on rehabilitation”. Gary Anderson brushed aside the challenge of Adrian Lewis on day two at the PDC world darts championships, fighting back from losing the opening set to prevail 3-1. And the 2022 edition of the Vuelta a España will begin in the Dutch city of Utrecht, with the first three stages all being held in the Netherlands before the race returns to Spain. Business After much toing and froing, the Bank of England raised interest rates for the first time in three years yesterday to 0.25%. The once-near-certain move had been expected to be delayed by concerns about the Omicron outbreak affecting the economy, but this week’s 5.1% inflation reading meant the Bank’s policymakers voted 8-1 for the rise. It could herald tougher times for borrowers, and for financial markets with the FTSE100 set to shed 0.5% this morning. The pound is on $1.333 and €1.175. The papers The daily papers might as well be an advent calendar of Tory Covid party scandals at the moment: today’s entry on page one of the Guardian, “PM joined No 10 pizza party during first lockdown, sources say”. Our lead story is “Sunak forced to return to UK for crisis talks amid Omicron surge”. The Mirror says “Cops quiz party pair” – that’s about the “raucous” gathering of aides at Tory HQ. “Archbishop appeals for honesty in public life” – the Telegraph delivers a Justin Welby sermon about his “disappointment over Tory gatherings during the Tory lockdown”. “Tories turn on Whitty” says the Daily Mail, about the chief medical officer being at variance with the prime minister on Christmas festivities. Her Majesty appears on side with science, though – “Queen sets ‘example’ by calling off Xmas party”, says the Express. The Metro goes with that one too: “Queen cancels Xmas lunch”, while the i has “UK shuts down in bid to save Christmas”. The Sun thinks “It’s beginning to look a LOCK like Christmas” while the Times has “Sunak in talks on bailout for pubs and restaurants”. And the Financial Times leads with that most rare of things, some excitement from Threadneedle Street: “BoE bows to inflation and wage pressure by lifting interest rates”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendDahabley smells of rotting flesh. Bodies of starved cows lie in various stages of decomposition, after being dragged to the outskirts of the village in Wajir county, north-east Kenya. They are added to on a near-daily basis and fester in the heat amid multiplying flies. North-east Kenya is well used to spells of drought, but it is experiencing the worst in living memory. As the region’s short rainy season, which starts in October, draws to an end, parts of Wajir have only seen small showers and other areas have had no rain at all for more than a year. In October, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), a regional trade bloc, and the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organization warned that 26 million people were struggling for food after consecutive seasons of poor rainfall in the Horn of Africa. Wild animals are dying and herders are reporting losses of up to 70% of their livestock. With conflicts raging in Ethiopia and Somalia, aid agencies are struggling to assess the extent of the crisis. Now, as the next four-month-long dry season starts, there are mounting fears that large numbers of people will die. In a round hut of woven sticks in Dahabley, Hodhan Issack, 22, is increasingly concerned about the health of her seven children. “I overthink things, and honestly, I think I’m going mad sometimes,” she says. “All I can think about is the children’s future.” Her husband left to find work months ago. He occasionally sends money, but poor phone reception means they rarely speak. All 10 of their cows have died, and the three goats she has left from a herd of 50 are very weak and are surviving on the children’s leftover rice and maize. Without making money from livestock, Issack can no longer afford monthly 500 Kenyan shilling (£3.30) school fees for her eldest two and they have not attended classes for a month. Her two youngest have thin hair and are visibly malnourished. Issack says she is struggling to cope. Mohamed Abdi, teacher at Dahabley primary school, says there are only 60 pupils left out of 120 as families have left in search of pasture. Animals are central to the way of life of nomadic communities across the vast semi-desert plains of northern and eastern Kenya. A healthy cow is worth about $300, a goat $50 and a camel $1,000. Livestock act as both a bank account and a key source of food. The cows still alive in Dahabley are increasingly weak, sitting emaciated in the shade of gnarled trees around the village, with their value decreasing by the day. Kusow Mohamed, 52, says that of his herd of 30 camels, 10 have died and the rest are thin, their fatty humps all but gone. Yet camels are one of the most climate-resilient mammals. “It’s unheard of,” says Mohamed, “we have never known them to die like this. Now we can’t afford to buy diesel to pump water from the village borehole.” East of Dahabley in Eyrib, in Sabuli wildlife conservancy, small businesses and homes are boarded up and more than 70% of the residents have left, according to the assistant village chief, Abdi Karim. “We haven’t had any rain here in 24 months. Some people have lost everything and have migrated to the cities.” River water has not flowed into the reservoir for at least eight months and people have been reduced to drinking salty water from boreholes. Wildlife is dying. In November, 10 giraffes, weak from lack of food and water, died after getting stuck in thick mud as they tried to reach a puddle of water in the middle of the reservoir. Their bodies were dragged out to prevent contamination of the reservoir and six left together are pecked at by birds as they lie on the outskirts of the village. “We have lost 102 reticulated Somali giraffes in Wajir, Garissa and Mandera over the last three months,” says Sharmake Mohamed, chair of the North Eastern Conservancies Association. Warthogs, oryx and ostriches have also been dying of thirst in the Sabuli wildlife conservancy. The region has also lost 30 hirola, also known as Hunter’s antelope, a critically endangered species. “That’s 6% of the total that were left in the wild,” says Mohamed. The drought is pushing wildlife, humans and livestock to compete for water and vegetation in areas that have seen small amounts of rain, creating human-wildlife conflict, where lions and cheetahs have been preying on livestock. The giraffes were trying to drink from the water source meant for the community, which created tension, Mohamed says. “Drought has become very frequent over the last 10 years. We could attribute it to climate change,” says Jully Ouma, disaster risk adviser for the IGAD Climate Prediction and Application Centre. The rainfall cycle is being disrupted by rising temperatures. Ouma says the extra heat “causes a pressure system that redirects movement of winds … so moisture can be taken to areas where it used not to go”. This can lead to a drought cycle in some areas and flooding in others. The communities suffering from drought in east Africa are among those who do the least harm to the environment, but whose lives are the most severely affected by the climate crisis. Muhumed Noor is chairman of Dujis village in Garissa, Wajir’s neighbouring county. He points to the skeletal remains of cows that died a month ago. Nearly three-quarters of the villagers’ cattle have died. Three water trucks are parked in the middle of Dujis. “They are waiting for money,” says Noor. The community has had to resort to buying water, at 45,000 Kenyan shillings (£300) for 10,000 litres. “We need three [trucks] a week for the 350 households in Dujis,” says Noor. But with no healthy livestock to sell, the community is struggling to pay the drivers, who refuse to leave without payment. “They will not go until they have got their money. They give us a timeframe – a week, a month. If we fail to pay there could be violence,” he says. “The rains have stopped now, so there is no hope of any other rain unless a miracle happens,” says Yusuf Abdi Gedi, Wajir’s local official for livestock and agriculture. The Wajir county administration is struggling to cope with the scale of the emergency and has hired 40 extra trucks on top of 18 of their own to distribute water. However, community leaders in Dahabley and Eyrib say they have not received government aid. “We have about 400 villages and we were not able to reach all of them,” says Abdi Gedi. The authority’s efforts have been hamstrung by a lack of funds and it is now redirecting money from other projects to deal with the crisis. The actions of Mohamed Abdi, the former Wajir county governor impeached in April amid allegations of corruption, is said to have exacerbated the problem. “Systems were not in place and there was not enough resilience-building done prior to the drought so what we are doing is only fire fighting,” says Abdi Gedi. Abdi Gedi says Wajir has not received any extra funds from the national government since the president, Uhuru Kenyatta, declared a national disaster in September. That was supposed to “trigger support from the international community,” he says, adding that it had not happened to the extent needed. Walking past the carcass of a dead oryx at the dried-up reservoir on the outskirts of Eyrib, Abdi Karim and his fellow teacher Abdikadir Aden say the chief of Eyrib is in Wajir asking the county government to send water. “The government should look to their people,” Aden says. “Their people need them very much.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:This list is compiled by the Guardian film team, with all films released in the UK during 2021 in contention. Check in every weekday to see our next picks, and please share your own favourite films of 2021 in the comments below. 50 Promising Young Woman Deathly dark satire of gender politics from writer-director Emerald Fennell, with Carey Mulligan at her ice-cold best as a scheming sociopath in a fearless unpicking of entitlement and victimhood. Read the full review. 49 Boiling Point Dizzying single-take drama featuring a potent lead performance from Stephen Graham as a chef enduring a nightmarish evening. Read the full review. 48 Natural Light Documentary director Dénes Nagy explores how conflict erodes loyalty, morality and human consciousness in his award-winning first feature about Hungarian troops occupying Ukraine during the second world war. Read the full review. 47 Last Night in Soho Thomasin McKenzie, Anya Taylor-Joy and Matt Smith star in Edgar Wright’s horror-thriller that takes a trip to the sleazy heart of London’s past and toxic 60s glitz. Read the full review. 46 Titane Julia Ducournau’s follow-up to her smart 2016 debut, Raw, is a freaky Cronenbergian body-horror that facetiously explores identity with yucky flair. Read the full review. 45 State Funeral The eerie last rites of Stalin’s Soviet Union are enacted as massed mourners hail the dictator’s flower-clad body in a film that gives long-lost footage, assembled by In the Fog director Sergei Loznitsa, a new and unnerving lease of life. Read the full review. 44 Shiva Baby Writer-director Emma Seligman’s debut about a young woman running into her sugar daddy at a family event is an amusing, transparently personal piece, a black comedy festival of excruciating embarrassment. Read the full review. 43 C’mon C’mon Written and directed by Thumbsucker’s Mike Mills, this coming-of-age heartwarmer, shot in classy monochrome and starring Joaquin Phoenix, oozes prestige as it tackles weighty themes. Read the full review. 42 Martin Eden Excellent Italian adaptation of Jack London’s 1909 thrilling tale, which follows the ascent of a proletarian novelist to popular success that proves a bitter disappointment. Read the full review. 41 Black Bear Aubrey Plaza hits a career high in an ingenious meta-movie in which social tensions spiral towards disaster before a cryptic rug-pull in this strange comedy gem. Read the full review. 40 Souad The lives of three young Egyptians become tragically entangled in Ayten Amin’s sharp, subtle coming-of-age drama that offers a shrewd and poignant study of social media identities. Read the full review. 39 The Reason I Jump This documentary inspired by the bestselling book of the same title is an empathic study of nonverbal autism that takes us into the world of young neurodivergent people across the world. Read the full review. 38 New Order Director Michel Franco leaves no room for sympathy or redemption in this violent, cynical thriller, a brutally unforgiving attack on Mexico’s super-rich that delivers a vivid warning against the consequences of inequality. Read the full review. 37 Annette Adam Driver and Marion Cotillard brim with nervous energy in this bizarre musical collaboration between Leos Carax and the Sparks brothers, which kicked off this year’s Cannes film festival. Read the full review. 36 Censor A woman working as a film censor in the 80s is shocked to discover a horror movie that recreates a traumatic incident from her childhood in Prano Bailey-Bond’s disturbing descent into video nastiness. Read the full review. 35 Never Gonna Snow Again A mysterious masseur visits a dysfunctional gated community in this absorbing fairytale from Polish film-maker Małgorzata Szumowska, resulting in a rich brew of strangeness in an unsettling vision of suburbia. Read the full review. 34 The Velvet Underground Todd Haynes’ documentary about the celebrated art-rockers, with insights from former members and friends, takes its job seriously and gets under the band’s skin. Read the full review. 33 House of Gucci True-crime fashion-house drama directed by Ridley Scott as a pantomimey soap following a stylish Lady Gaga, as Patrizia Reggiano, as she plots to kill her ex, Maurizio Gucci. Read the full review. 32 I Care a Lot Rosamund Pike is exquisitely nasty in J Blakeson’s toxic thriller, playing a black-hearted con artist who drains the bank accounts of well-off elderly patients after gaining legal guardianship of them. Read the full review. 31 Rose Plays Julie Uncanny and transgressive film from writer-directors Christine Molloy and Joe Lawlor about a young woman who tracks down her birth parents is the film-makers’ best work yet. Read the full review. 30 Ammonite Kate Winslet and Saoirse Ronan find love among the fossils in Francis Lee’s sensational biopic of palaeontology pioneer Mary Anning, which reimagines her encounter with a woman trapped in a stifling marriage. Read the full review. 29 The Nest Jude Law moves his family to a dark Surrey manor house in Sean Durkin’s 80s-set ghost story cum emotional parable that becomes a riveting neoliberal fever dream. Read the full review. 28 Procession Robert Greene’s extraordinary documentary follows the stories of six men abused as children by Catholic priests in Kansas City with remarkable care and creativity. Read the full review. 27 tick, tick … BOOM! Lin-Manuel Miranda’s heartfelt tribute to Broadway features Andrew Garfield as Rent composer Jonathan Larson, in his early years, in a sugar rush of showbiz highs and lows. Read the full review. 26 The World to Come Katherine Waterston and Vanessa Kirby play two wives who fall in love amid the grinding exhaustion and violence of pioneer life in a tale of secret passions in frontier-era America. Read the full review. 25 The Killing of Two Lovers A humiliating marital breakdown triggers a riveting portrait of male rage in Robert Machoian’s thought-provoking thriller, starring Clayne Crawford and Sepideh Moafi. Read the full review. 24 Palm Springs Ingenious Groundhog-Day style romance starring Andy Samberg and Cristin Milioti as two wedding guests who get stuck in a time loop that they can’t seem to escape from. Read the full review. 23 Identifying Features First-time director Fernanda Valadez conjures up a vision of real evil in her story of the horror and heartbreak faced by migrants into the US in Mexico’s borderlands. Read the full review. 22 Passing Rebecca Hall’s directing debut is a stylish and subtle study of racial identity, starring Tessa Thompson and Ruth Negga as friends who are both “passing” for what they are not, in an adaptation of Nella Larsen’s 1929 novel. Read the full review. 21 The Story of Looking An eye operation sets veteran cinephile Mark Cousins out on a delicate and fascinating exploration of what it means to look at movies and the world. Read the full review. 20 After Love Joanna Scanlan gives a tremendous performance as a Muslim convert, who agonisingly uncovers the secret life led by her late husband Ahmed, in a lacerating portrait of a life built on marital lies. Read the full review. 19 Limbo Heart-rending portrait of refugees stranded in Scotland that announces Ben Sharrock as a master of atmospheric film-making, in a stirring drama about a Syrian migrant. Read the full review. 18 Summer of Soul Questlove’s magnificent documentary of the forgotten 1969 Harlem cultural festival gives moving context to rediscovered footage of Stevie Wonder, Mahalia Jackson, Nina Simone et al. Read the full review. 17 = Getting Away with Murder(s) David Nicholas Wilkinson’s epic investigation into the Nazis who escaped a postwar reckoning is a powerful call for Holocaust justice, but lays out the difficulty of prosecuting a technocratic atrocity. Read the full review. 17 = The Humans Stephen Karam’s Tony-winning play makes the leap to film with ease. A masterly drama that is an extraordinarily well acted, uncomfortably intimate look at a family at Thanksgiving. Read the full review. 16 Quo Vadis, Aida? Through the eyes of a translator moving between the different ethnic factions, director Jasmila Žbanić musters real tragic power and clear-eyed compassion revisiting the Srebrenica massacre 25 years on. Read the full review. 15 Minari Infused with a wonderful sentimentality, Lee Isaac Chung’s fictionalised account of his rural Arkansas childhood explores the growing pains of a family farm. Read the full review. 14 Dear Comrades! Andrei Konchalovsky’s stunning re-creation of a Soviet-era massacre, in which Red Army soldiers and KGB snipers opened fire on strikers, is a rage-filled triumph. Read the full review. 13 No Time to Die The long-awaited 25th outing for Ian Fleming’s superspy James Bond has Daniel Craig saying goodbye to 007 in a weird and self-aware epic with audacious surprises up its sleeve. Read the full review. 12 First Cow Meek’s Cutoff director Kelly Reichardt returns with a superbly chewy story about a pair of drifters in the old west trying to make money by stealing milk from a newly arrived cow. Read the full review. 11 The Father Anthony Hopkins is superb playing a man with dementia in Florian Zeller’s unbearably heartbreaking film full of intelligent performances, disorienting time slips and powerful theatrical effects. Read the full review. 10 The Tragedy of Macbeth Denzel Washington and Frances McDormand hit top form in Joel Coen’s austere reimagining of Shakespeare’s Scottish bloodbath. Read more. 9 The Lost Daughter Maggie Gyllenhaal’s accomplished directing debut makes humid, sensual cinema of Elena Ferrante’s psychodrama of a novel, and boasts a superb central performance from Olivia Colman. Read more. 8 Azor Unnervingly subtle drama from Andreas Fontana, about a Swiss private banker visiting clients in Argentina during the period of the military junta and “disappearances”. Read more 7 West Side Story Stunning recreations of the original film’s New York retain the songs and the dancing in a re-telling that will leave you gasping at the verve and panache of Steven Spielberg and screenwriter Tony Kushner. Read more. 6 Dune Denis Villeneuve’s awe-inspiring take on the sci-fi classic starring Timothée Chalamet, Oscar Isaac and Zendaya has been given room to breathe, creating a colossal spectacle and an epic triumph. Read more. 5 Nomadland Frances McDormand delivers a wonderful performance as a boomer forced out of her home and on to the road in Chloé Zhao’s inspired Oscar-winning docufiction. Read more. 4 Drive My Car Ryûsuke Hamaguchi reaches a new grandeur with this engrossing adaptation of a Haruki Murakami short story about a theatre director grappling with Chekhov and his wife’s infidelity. Read more. 3 Petite Maman A spellbinding ghost story from Portrait of a Lady on Fire’s Céline Sciamma. A girl meets her mother as a child in the woods in a moving tale of memory, friendship and family. Read more. 2 The Green Knight Dev Patel rides high in the director David Lowery’s sublimely beautiful quest, which conjures up visual wonders and metaphysical mysteries from the anonymously authored 14th-century chivalric poem Sir Gawain and the Green Knight. Read more. 1 The Power of the Dog Jane Campion’s superb gothic western is a mysterious and menacing psychodrama about two warring brothers (Benedict Cumberbatch and Jesse Plemons) on a ranch in 20s Montana. Read more.This list is drawn from votes by Guardian music critics – each critic votes for their Top 20 albums, with points allocated for each placing. Check in every weekday to see our next picks, and please share your own favourite albums of 2021 in the comments below. 50 Agnes – Magic Still Exists The Swedish pop star’s long-delayed fifth album embodies the platonic ideal of pop disco, steeped in Gaga (invigoratingly stern vocals about freeing one’s mind and body), Abba (piano stomps and trills), Donna Summer (the thumping 24 Hours) and Queen (melodramatic balladry). It transcends pastiche on the strength of her songwriting (you could swap almost anything here on to Dua Lipa’s Future Nostalgia) and the going-for-broke intensity of it all. LS 49 MØL – Diorama Blending the blast beats and acid-gargling glottal mayhem of black metal with the uplifting, even sentimental guitar dynamics of shoegaze, “blackgaze” has become a vibrant corner of heavy music – and Danish quintet MØL became one of its best exponents with their second album. The moody breakdowns allow the explosive choruses to land all the more righteously, with vocalist Kim Song Sternkopf – a survivor of faith cults as a child – venting majestically into the mic. Tracks such as Serf bring in a groove metal sensibility to help it all swing. BBT 48 Lucy Dacus – Home Video Some of the year’s best musical storytelling lived in the Virginia songwriter’s third record, her writing newly amplified by subtle hints of pop propulsion and grit that evoked how Elliott Smith expanded his sound. Dacus reflects on her teenage years – of church and bible camp, of budding queer desire amid a culture of shame and damnation, of the fantasies that let her escape these limitations – with such tender curiosity that these vignettes feel less like fixed memories than forensic crime scene reconstructions. Read the full review. LS 47 Chai – WINK The truly self-assured rarely make a noise about it, and so it is with the third album by Japanese girl group Chai. To blissed-out, dreamy synth-pop that buoys you along like a lazy river – occasionally spiked by classic rap throwbacks and arcade-game electro – the four-piece dreamily hymn the joys of food, self-acceptance and protest, nurturing their own laid-back take on pleasure activism. LS 46 Stephen Fretwell – Busy Guy A songwriters’ songwriter beloved of Elbow and Arctic Monkeys, Stephen Fretwell was washing pots in a Wetherspoon’s pub, his music career having flatlined amid fatherhood. He hauled himself up and gave music another shot, apparently at the cost of his marriage. So these songs are the work of a truly inveterate musician, and it shows – Fretwell has such a natural facility for an affecting turn of melody, his simple fingerpicked guitar made eerie by the subtle ambient tones that sit behind it. BBT 45 For Those I Love – For Those I Love Poignant memories seem to lengthen and soften as we age, but this album is a reminder of how much jagged heft they have when you’re looking back after just a few years or months. David Balfe, 30, reflects on a dead best friend, poverty, trauma and the intense vibrancy of young friendships and creativity, in long recitations set to music that reaches towards techno and house. “You’re told you need to grow cold to grow old,” Balfe says, but he remains charged up with human warmth on these songs. Read the full review. BBT 44 Black Country, New Road – For the First Time You don’t tend to get many Top 5 charting albums from bands who blend klezmer, post-punk, jazz and prog with lyrics about failed romance at a science fair, but Black Country, New Road managed it. That success is testament to how particular and fresh their sound is amid the ordinary boys of British indie, further helped by a really arresting frontman, Isaac Wood. Whether it’s really him or a persona, he is haughty, easily hurt, lustful, clumsy and incurably romantic – a wonderful, flawed character. Read the full review. BBT 43 Chris Corsano and Bill Orcutt – Made Out of Sound For this album, made remotely last year, guitarist Orcutt improvised to Corsano’s drum tracks, observing the waveforms as he recorded “so I could see when a crescendo was coming or when to bring it down”, he said. It’s reminiscent of a surfer’s mentality, and Made Out of Sound feels thrillingly like the trusty unpredictability of broaching the sea: absurdist guitar begets quieter contemplation; burnished riffs harden and soften, then collapse. Throughout, the open-ended sense of beauty is undimmed. LS 42 Gojira – Fortitude Metal’s potential for thunderous anger makes it the most naturally expressive music to vent the fear, confusion and even shame of the climate crisis. “The greatest miracle is burning to the ground,” laments Joe Duplantier with bafflement and urgency, singing about the Amazon but perhaps also the entire planet. Other songs are direct rallying cries to save Earth (Into the Storm, Sphinx); Another World turns jaded and escapist, but is offset by The Chant, whose hearty chorus is the kind of thing a post-apocalyptic band of survivors would sing while rowing across a flooded city. Fortitude is an album that surveys humanity’s idiocy, but also its tenacity. BBT 41 Eris Drew – Quivering in Time The joyous ecclesiastical energy of house enriches your soul on listening to this full-length from the US producer, which also chimes with the desire for optimism and gregariousness amid the waning pandemic. Like a lot of the best underground dance artists in recent years (Skee Mask, Anz etc), she firmly embraces the breakbeat-driven sound of the early 90s – Ride Free even has the same Peter Fonda sample as Primal Scream’s Loaded – and further enriches those busy, cymbal-heavy rhythms with zesty detailing: rave melodies, declarative vocal samples, penetrating bass notes. Read the full review. BBT 40 Lana Del Rey – Chemtrails Over the Country Club Who is Lana Del Rey really? The question that has animated her decade-long career has sometimes riled her, but the first of two albums she released this year turns introspective to consider the matter. Was she happiest as a 19-year-old waitress listening to Kings of Leon, as she sings in stunning falsetto on White Dress? Is she most herself as a sister, a lover, a star, an adopted Californian – or embracing her wanderlust and escaping all that? The myth and melodrama, at least, remain unchanged on a Lana album made with an unusually light touch. Read the full review. LS 39 Hayley Williams – Flowers for Vases/Descansos With pop-punk surging this year, Paramore’s influence may never have been stronger – but the band’s flag bearer continued to burrow away from incandescent rock into stranger, subtler sounds. Williams’ second solo album in two years observed the dying days of her marriage, and how the reliability of sadness became its own sort of safe harbour. That strange sense of comforting desolation hums through in acoustic guitar and ghostly piano, although Williams’ innate way with a vocal hook provides the defiant life force. LS 38 Goat Girl – On All Fours The south London quartet’s debut was garage rock with a touch of psych; this sophomore album grandly scaled that second element up, using synths to crack open a portal out of the drab, repressive everyday. The bigger ambition was partly predicated by one member surviving cancer, and the band don’t shy from big questions about life and death: the climate crisis, capitalism and the struggle to be allowed one’s truth and identity are among the topics broached. BBT 37 Erika de Casier – Sensational Any crush has a delicate alchemy, and liable to lurch towards obsession or revulsion as the fantasy of someone duels with the reality. On the second album by the Portuguese-born Danish songwriter, her would-be lover may be a braggart who is rude to waiters, but that smile is irresistible: what are you gonna do? Her minimalist take on turn-of-the-millennium R&amp;B shivers with sensitivity, essaying every heart flutter and gut punch in plush bass, glassy percussion and elegant strings, while De Casier’s coy delivery brims with a beguiling sense of mystery. Read the full review. LS 36 Aya – Im Hole This is the kind of slippery, funny, explosively creative record that perhaps could only be made in the UK. Yorkshirewoman Aya Sinclair mulches various bits of club culture in to a fetid, sweating mass – grime, breakbeat, drill, the off-kilter electronics of Autechre, the hyper-contemporary bass shudder of the late Sophie – and threads vocals through it, her surreal non sequiturs and body horror hovering on the edge of rap. BBT 35 Aly &amp; AJ – A Touch of the Beat Gets You Up on Your Feet Gets You Out and Then Into the Sun It’s one of pop’s sweetest narratives: former child stars escape the machine to make a great, offbeat record. Fourteen years after their last album, one-time Disney performers Aly and AJ softened their synth-pop pedigree in this dreamy collection of west coast pop-rock, a vision of Robyn-gone-Laurel Canyon that also might sate anyone left hoping for a bit more brooding from this year’s Kacey Musgraves album. LS 34 The War on Drugs – I Don’t Live Here Anymore The psychedelic, shoegaze-y haze has gradually lifted from Adam Granduciel’s band, burned off under a rising sun as their success has grown. He now stands in the midday of his career, with this fifth album fully embracing bright, mainstream classic rock. Powered by those distinctive WoD backbeats, which match the tirelessness of Granduciel’s search for love, perspective and contentment, these songs are huge in scale: both the arrangements and the strength of feeling. Read the full review. BBT 33 PinkPantheress – To Hell With It In the TikTok phenomenon PinkPantheress’s micro-pop gems (only two songs on her debut project exceeded two minutes), classic drum’n’bass samples double as nagging memories and overwhelming rushes of adrenaline, swirling around lyrics about obsession and disappointment made more sinister by her innocent, breathless voice. Fourteen years ago, Burial’s transient, lonely, sodium-lit sound became associated with the experience of sitting on the night bus. PinkPantheress makes music befitting another after-hours rite of passage: that bleary-eyed, rueful stumble through bright lights and swarming crowds as you try to hold it together. LS 32 Cassandra Jenkins – An Overview on Phenomenal Nature The New Yorker’s second album is almost confrontationally still: brass like wisps of smoke, guitar a gentle thrum, softly puddling cymbals. Once the aftershocks of a loss have settled, Jenkins takes stock of what’s gone for good – Ambiguous Norway orbits her memories of David Berman, whose band Purple Mountains she was set to tour with prior to his death – and how learning how to trust again might yet retrieve her stolen sense of peace. LS 31 Low – Hey What Low’s last album, 2018’s Double Negative, was a total reinvention 25 years into a virtually undented career – a staggering achievement for any band. Yet somehow Alan and Mimi Sparhawk transcended it with this follow-up, bridling its predecessor’s swashbuckling noise until it splintered, and contrasting it with electronic reimaginings of the forlorn atmospherics that made their name. The sheer invention contrasted devastating lyrics about hitting a wall – drawn from the couple’s experiences dealing with Alan’s depression – imbuing these static hymns to limits and perseverance with a superhuman sense of determination. Read the full review. LS 30 Greentea Peng – Man Made There’s a wonderful sense of liveness to this record, evoking a dive bar with a fug of weed smoke sitting at shoulder height. On stage is London-born Aria Wells, whose delivery is natural and improvisatory: vowels that bend drowsily downwards, or rap flow that sits on top of the beat without being too fussily precise. Behind her a band shuffle through a selection of grooves – reggae, neo-soul, hip-hop – that add up to a sensual, instinctive album that you could imagine Amy Winehouse making on a different timeline. Read the full review. BBT 29 Clairo – Sling A strong self-preservationist streak ran through several highly anticipated albums by pop’s young women this year, with the likes of Billie Eilish, Lorde and Kacey Musgraves opting for lower-key sounds that poured cool water on heightened expectations. Among them was Clairo, whose second album left behind bedroom electro-pop for perfectly turned miniatures of Carole King’s warm classicism. Irrepressibly, sweetly funky, it sounded like music for pushing the furniture back and dancing on the living room rug – and Clairo’s lyrics, about breaking with relationships that no longer served her, underscored that joyful intimacy. Read the full review. LS 28 Kacey Musgraves – Star-Crossed Every stage of a breakup is sung in chronological order here: marital worries, hope for the relationship being good enough, worsening arguments, split, poignant staring at old photos, perspective gained, exciting/depressing ventures on to dating apps, eventual feeling of true freedom. Swerve a couple of tepid chillout-compilation moments and along the journey you alight at some of Musgraves’ prettiest songwriting, nicely leavened with her straight-talking, wearily dismayed tone of voice. Read the full review. BBT 27 St Vincent – Daddy’s Home It was perhaps slightly overshadowed by its backstory: Annie Clark’s father’s release from prison, which, for some listeners, cast the entire record in an unsympathetic light. But its lyricism was much richer than one man, and its 70s-inspired music richer still: psychedelic soul, cabaret songcraft, prog ballads, cosmic funk. Clark remains a highly literate and shapeshifting songwriter, where half the fun is working out how much is ironised and how much is real. Read the full review. BBT 26 Mogwai – As the Love Continues In a feat of lockdown recording, Dave Fridmann produced Mogwai’s 10th studio album over Zoom and Atticus Ross directed an orchestra in Budapest via remote connection from Los Angeles. The classic Mogwai physicality remained undimmed by these virtual limitations, however, swerving between twinkling beauty (Dry Fantasy) and pleasingly barbed dirges (Ceiling Granny), and chucking in a new bag of glitter (Supposedly, We Were Nightmares) for good measure. Happily for all involved, it became their first UK No 1 album. Read the full review. LS 25 Madlib – Sound Ancestors A relatively austere and serious release from the collagist hip-hop beatmaker, letting his fabled samples really stretch out and inhabit the songs instead of chopping between them – a result of Kieren “Four Tet” Hebden arranging the album. There’s still room for Madlib’s trickster energy though, as found in a chaotic blurt of mayhem-inducing rap duo MOP. The title track is spiritual jazz, but that genre’s mood pervades the entire album, as Madlib communes with more than half a century of sound. Read the full review. BBT 24 Billie Eilish – Happier Than Ever On her second album, Billie Eilish not only defied the tacit assumption that there’s nothing less appealing than complaining about the ravages wrought by fame but reinvigorated the cliche by toying deliciously with concealment and exposure. She sings about sexual fantasies and clandestine assignations and the power she can wield to keep her partners quiet, flexing her ability to carry on in secret – despite manifold violations of her privacy – as if it were a coveted jewel. She and her collaborator brother Finneas brought the same thrill to intimacy as they did to adolescent fears on her debut, tracing the scope of Eilish’s newfound commitment to her own pleasure in dreamy golden-age classicism and hormone-spiking techno. She let her listeners share in sensation even if the details were off-limits. Read the full review. LS 23 Floating Points, London Symphony Orchestra and Pharoah Sanders – Promises Promises is an album that rewards patience. Not only was it Pharoah Sanders’ first major recording in a decade – and a record five years in the making itself – but its nine movements unfolded with a rare subtlety. A chiming refrain written by Sam Shepherd (AKA Floating Points) and played by the LSO sparkled like dawn’s first light, its sense of potential undimmed over 45 minutes of repetition. Sanders’ saxophone playing, lightyears softer than the blazing attack that made his name, activated that magic. The harmony between them generated its own sense of orbit, with cello and violin solos and the moving spectacle of Sanders’ singing voice balanced in a kind of celestial harmony. Read the full review. LS 22 Laura Mvula – Pink Noise After enduring the humiliation of her old label dropping her with a seven-line email, Mvula donned the musical equivalent of shoulder pads – namely the 1980s’ gated drums, pugilistic bass and immaculately buffed synths – for this supreme display of confidence against the odds. The stylisation never comes at the expense of heart, either: Mvula delves deep as she searches for freedom in desire, art and within her own body, stretching her voice into majestic, wild anthems of liberation. Read the full review. LS 21 The Coral – Coral Island Few of their peers from the 00s indie boom are so hale and hearty; 20 years into their career, the Merseyside band made their most ambitious album, and one of their best. It’s a double concept album about a seaside resort, and captures those towns’ blend of buckets-and-spades buoyancy and out-of-season malaise; gorgeous harmonies flow through jangling psych-pop and touches of northern soul, though there’s also creepy rockabilly emanating from the ghost train and ballads for lonely fishermen at the end of the pier. Read the full review. BBT 20 Arooj Aftab – Vulture Prince The year’s biggest musical revelation came from Pakistani composer Arooj Aftab, who set traditional Urdu ghazals (and an adaptation of a poem by Rumi) amid harp and strings that rippled and ran as clear as a fresh stream. In her rich, meditative vocals, Aftab weighed the beauty of a single phrase and tenaciously addressed existential disappointments; her small ensemble shapeshifted between intricate filigrees and paring back to make a virtue of space. Made in response to the death of her younger brother, and released into an unprecedented global experience of grief, Vulture Prince was a refuge for solace and contemplation. LS 19 Dave – We’re All Alone in This Together “It’s like flying first class on a crashing plane,” Dave says of his fame and wealth at the outset of his second album. Few rappers have sounded so ill at ease with critical and commercial success as him – even when firing off bars about gorgeous women, there’s a wary, jaded tone to his voice. And in many ways, nothing has changed: he remains angry at the government over immigration and social mobility, and relationships certainly haven’t got easier. “Love’s a film and I’m just flicking through the parts I’m in.” That sense of a man looking down at his own life is Dave’s tragedy, and what makes his tracks such, well, psychodramas. Read the full review. BBT 18 Turnstile – Glow On The compressed, febrile sound of 80s punk rock is resurrected for this terrifically entertaining record, where the jams are not just kicked out but also sent off the nearest cliff. The monstrous chug of cock-rock rhythm guitar underpins lead lines made for whipping a mane of hair around to, and Brendan Yates’s vocals have something of Perry Farrell’s yelled pronouncements to them. But there’s a dream-pop softness, too – not least in two songs with Blood Orange guesting – that adds emotional range. BBT 17 Tirzah – Colourgrade The intimacy of new parenthood, where the world shrinks to a few rooms, is expressed in a new singular language by the south London musician (she also evokes the strangeness of those circumscribed Covid lockdowns). Breath, touch, kisses and sleep fill her songs, which conjure dub, hip-hop, post-punk and folk as if trying to remember them from a previous life. This album has the kind of utterly natural beauty that other artists strive towards, but will never reach because of that very striving. Read the full review. BBT 16 Deafheaven – Infinite Granite For their most mainstream album yet, the band’s screams abated, the drums slowed their gallop, and the guitars took on a prettiness that recalled Coldplay at times. For certain metalheads, these are unforgivable sins and Deafheaven remain a divisive band – but for the rest of us, this is a stirring blend of arena rock and shoegaze that seems to fill the sky. Read the full review. BBT 15 Nick Cave and Warren Ellis – Carnage The spirit of Scott Walker fills this idiosyncratic and brilliant album, which pumps with blood as bright and oxygenated as its red cover text. Freed from the occasionally sentimental and over-sumptuous backings of recent Bad Seeds albums, Cave and Ellis stalk off into a wilderness fringed with cyberpunk detritus: strange bits of production prowl at the edges of these violent songs. In its second half, the sky turns gentler as Cave ponders ageing across four ambient ballads: “I’m 200 pounds of packed ice / Sitting on a chair and in the morning sun” is as good an image for the inevitability of death as you’ll find. Read the full review. BBT 14 Lil Nas X – Montero One of the most proudly queer pop records ever released, where sex isn’t veiled in metaphor but detailed right down to where the ejaculate lands. Lil Nas X writes wittily about lust and witheringly about his rivals, but there are also frank admissions of loneliness and doubt as he navigates his way into the lasting fame that is assured by his stunningly good top line melodies. Read the full review. BBT 13 Japanese Breakfast – Jubilee Michelle Zauner (pictured above) weaves beguilingly strange fantasies of how fulfilment might look throughout her third album as Japanese Breakfast. The rapturous Paprika considers how it would feel to “stand at the height of your powers” as an artist, but other songs about desire – for other people, and for life – explore agency and submission in striking shades of grey. The musical roles on Jubilee are just as mutable, shapeshifting convincingly from New Order-era pop to the brassy filigrees of early 2010s indie, and the arrangements give Zauner space to wonder. LS 12 Jazmine Sullivan – Heaux Tales The power struggle between reason and desire fuels the Philadelphia songwriter’s fourth release, which intersperses soulful swagger and forlorn blues with interludes by women describing what they mean by owning their sexuality. Sullivan’s compassion resonates in how freely her interviewees express what some might see as contradictions (threatened with a sex tape leak, the subject of Ari’s Tale shrugs, “That dick spoke life into me”). And her own songs could be righteous – Pick Up Your Feelings snaps impatiently, and she makes no bones about her own pleasure on the languid On It – but they’re also transparent about the ways that freedom and dignity don’t always look how you might expect. “I just want to be taken care of / ’Cause I’ve worked enough,” she sings on The Other Side. LS 11 Sam Fender – Seventeen Going Under The North Shields songwriter’s second album starts with a grim image of teenage desensitisation: a chronically ill parent, snuff videos, fist fights and arrests; rinse and repeat. The forecast hardly improves across Seventeen Going Under, on which hope is elusive amid Fender’s bitter depictions of feeling trapped by political alienation and inherited bad habits. And yet the sheer force of feeling in this record – tenaciously euphoric sax a la Springsteen, tempos that bob like a featherweight boxer hungry for their shot, a reckless taste for the epic – indicates a life force that won’t be stamped out so easily, one that, going by the rabid response to the album, has mass revivifying potential. Read the full review. LS 10 Mdou Moctar – Afrique Victime In Mdou Moctar’s world, riff and rhythm count but the solo is king. His grounding in the nomadic Tuareg style of assouf (desert blues) made him a popular option on Niger’s wedding circuit, but the guitarist breaks from convention by always doggedly following his fingertips to some place new. A decade’s worth of refinement has led to Afrique Victime, which streamlines the hooky onslaught of Moctar’s 2019 breakout LP, Ilana: The Creator, into something more well-rounded. Bassist and producer Mikey Coltun’s sequencing affords breathers between levee-breakers, giving necessary hush to introspective ballads Bismilahi Atagah and Tala Tannam, while allowing the molten psychedelia of Taliat and Asdikte Akal to sprawl. True to the music’s Saharan origins, there’s ample space here. Sometimes Mdou’s voice is barely above a whisper before the band join him in skyward invocations. Read more. Gabriel Szatan 9 Arlo Parks – Collapsed in Sunbeams As the beginning of 2021 marked almost a full year of the pandemic, many of us were experiencing some sort of impact on our mental health. So when Arlo Parks released her debut album in January, she found herself chiming with universal concerns. Addressing issues that had been triggered or exacerbated by lives stuck inside four walls – unrequited desire, sexuality, poor body image, prejudice, betrayal and depression – Parks emerged as an empathic, comforting voice. What makes Collapsed in Sunbeams so effective is that the music is the striking inverse of her themes – light, airy, her conversational voice vulnerable and childlike. Her songs are delicately but cleverly constructed, with ear-worm choruses and generous hooks; soulful, folky tones, gentle R&amp;B and jazzy drumming; a shimmering sea of balm-like sound beneath which lurk those lyrical depth charges. Read more. Dave Simpson 8 Olivia Rodrigo – Sour Not since Britney Spears shimmied her way down a hallway dressed in school uniform has a debut single had such an immediate cultural impact: within four days of Olivia Rodrigo releasing Drivers License, the song had broken Spotify’s record for the most single-day streams for a non-holiday song; it would spend nine consecutive weeks at No 1 on the UK charts. Like Spears, Rodrigo also got her start with Disney, however, Rodrigo’s pathway to pop dominance wasn’t built on dance routines and Max Martin-penned bangers. Sour is an intimate, barbed, anxious and brilliantly crafted debut album about the butchery of heartbreak and the emotional hurricane that is being a teenager. Picture Rodrigo swooping in wearing a cheerleader outfit and Doc Martens while brandishing a baseball bat, her face still wet with tears. Read more. Alim Kheraj 7 Dry Cleaning – New Long Leg Dry Cleaning frontperson Florence Shaw captures a generation’s internal monologue like never before: those bitchy, distracted, utterly unmindful thoughts that a consciousness poisoned by city life and digital media is powerless to stop. Shaw doom-scrolls through her own life, yet the London band’s debut album is often breezy and full of little situation comedies; her humour given ample space by the sturdy guitar-bass-drums trio who cleave to varied strains of stoner-garage rock. Ultimately there’s a profound poetry in how her observations hang together, a reminder that something can be built from the dumb flotsam of ordinary life. Read more. BBT 6 Sault – Nine On Sault’s fifth album in two years, spoken-word interludes baldly state the reality of racism in the UK while lyrics tell impressionistic stories that teem with loss and hurt, knives and guns. Yet the music offers transcendence: tightly melodic, luxuriously layered, instantly memorable without being cheaply infectious. London Gangs nods to the Chemical Brothers, grainily retro R&amp;B, X-Ray Spex, hushed nu-folk and Auld Lang Syne. Bitter Streets is soulful 60s lounge music with a tricksy beat. The exquisite title track is pared-back psychedelic soul, proggy folk, cosmic Beatles and also none of those things. If you like the sound of Nine, apologies. Sault only made it available to stream and download for 99 days after its initial June release. Back then, the group said some of them hailed from “the heart of London’s council estates”, where the majority “get trapped in a systematic loop where a lot of resources and options are limited”. The unexplained erasure of Nine feels like a way to defy that lack of agency – proof that if Sault want to tightly control the distribution of their work, that’s their prerogative. Read more. Rachel Aroesti 5 Tyler, the Creator – Call Me If You Get Lost Call Me If You Get Lost is a decadent and luxurious showcase of Tyler’s reverence and nostalgia for music’s past – Gangsta Grillz mixtapes, lovers rock, Houston R&amp;B – channelled into his own present and future. Also central to this album’s beauty is the fact that Tyler can rap, crafting engaging tales out of deft, intentional flow. He has always been a romantic, but here he bears a softer side than ever, forced to recognise that love, so often, is about timing. “Come get lost with me,” Tyler offers on Blessed, late into an album that has already guided the listener through a bright, expansive and occasionally sentimental world, with the tracks melding into one another in true mixtape fashion. So often, we focus on beginnings and endings. Here, Tyler masterfully reminds us that life is all about the journey, growth, confusion, pain and magic in between. Read more. Tara Joshi 4 The Weather Station – Ignorance Tamara Lindeman’s fifth album as the Weather Station had a lightning-in-a-bottle quality that nothing she had released previously could quite prepare you for. At the end of 2018, she said, she was driven “insane” by reading a New Yorker article by environmentalist Bill McKibben, written as California burned during the most destructive wildfire season in history. She subsequently poured her anger and grief into the 10 songs on Ignorance. The lyrics occasionally slipped into something approaching straightforward protest songs but, for the most part, they entwine “climate grief” with what sound like words about a failing relationship to startling effect. She also shifted her musical focus, bringing in a new expansiveness and gloss – synths, disco beats, strings, sax and flute that carry a distinct hint of jazz about them. In purely melodic terms, these are Lindeman’s strongest songs to date, filled with nagging hooks and gracefully unforced-sounding tunes; the sound is smoothly, warmly appealing: you could imagine singing along to them if the lyrics didn’t keep belting you in the gut. Read more. Alexis Petridis 3 Little Simz – Sometimes I Might Be Introvert Introversion is considered synonymous with shyness, but on Sometimes I Might Be Introvert (an acronym of her nickname), Simbiatu Ajikawo demonstrates that she has no shortage of bold, cinematic vision. She makes up for a lack of travel during the pandemic by stamping her musical passport with the influences of a wide diasporic sound. Her Nigerian heritage is in fine hip-winding display on Point and Kill (featuring Obongjayar), while Protect My Energy layers motivational mantras over 80s Miami drums, balancing out the record’s heavier moments with a keen sense of play. And she is newly generous here with her vignettes of family life, driven by the desire to recalibrate her post-pandemic priorities as an aunt and sibling. On Little Q, she reconnects with a cousin on the other side of the Thames to learn more about his near-death brush with knife crime, while I Love You, I Hate You sees her attempting to find peace with a father who has disappointed her and to ensure she does not carry that fear of rejection into a new relationship. It seems to be working: I See You’s old-school R&amp;B is blissful with sleepy Sunday morning vulnerability, while How Did You Get Here is a tearjerking stocktake of the artist’s journey so far. A gospel choir frames her determination and gratitude: “I’m the version of me I always imagined when I was younger.” Read more. Jenessa Williams 2 Wolf Alice – Blue Weekend Wolf Alice singer Ellie Rowsell has called Blue Weekend her least autobiographical album: whatever the inspiration, it tells a convincingly lived-in story of embracing nihilism following the rupture of friendships and romantic relationships. “I take you back / Yeah, I know it seems surprising,” she thunders on Lipstick on the Glass. It’s here that Wolf Alice come into their own as adept musical shapeshifters, using their broad influences to explore the extremes of alienation: there are woozy fantasies, self-destructive ragers; stunning anthems of anxiety. Big, confident pop-rock albums are rare these days – and their demise hardly bemoaned – but there’s an undeniable pleasure in finding one adventurous, ambitious and human enough to remind you why they used to be so essential. Read more. LS 1 Self Esteem – Prioritise Pleasure In a pop landscape that often seems to be bottling it all up inside, Rebecca Taylor’s second solo album marked a hugely relatable uncorking of a lifetime’s worth of festering emotions, as well as her evolution into an out-and-proud pop star who dissects her emotions in pin-sharp, often darkly funny and always physically rousing testaments. The sheer heft and physicality of the album, all Yeezus beats and elastic melodies, is balanced by her ability to zoom in on the minutiae of life, paired with her economical wit. Often, Taylor is joined by a small choir of friends who reiterate and cosign her emotions: their presence anchors lead single I Do This All the Time, with its swelling coda of “I’ll take care, I’ll read again, I’ll sing again, I will” transformed into the ultimate act of defiance against those who once compelled her to diminish her desires and shrink her personality. After nearly two years of cooping up big emotions in restricted spaces, the bold, brash and beautiful Prioritise Pleasure hit like sweet relief. Read more. Michael CraggFatalities from jumping castle accidents should be preventable, according to injury experts, who say better regulation of safety standards is needed in the wake of Thursday’s tragic incident in Tasmania. Police are investigating the causes of the incident, including local weather conditions, after a gust of wind lifted the bouncy castle up to 10m into the air. Asked whether the castle was tethered to the ground, authorities said that was part of the investigation. Prof Rebecca Ivers, head of the school of public health and community medicine at the University of New South Wales, said it was well known that jumping castles were prone to being lifted by wind gusts. “The tragedy of it is this is not something that we didn’t know about,” she said. “Things like this should never happen.” In 2019, two children died when a tornado-like dust devil swept through a fair in China. In 2018, a British couple were convicted of manslaughter by gross negligence after a girl died in a bouncy castle in Norwich. Data suggests up to 2,200 children in Australia were injured using inflatable jumping castles between 1996 and 2006. A national standard regulating commercial inflatable jumping castles was introduced in 2005. It came four years after a South Australian girl died when a jumping castle was ripped from its anchors and lifted into the air. A coronial inquest in 2003 found the inflatable castle’s anchorage system had been inadequate. The Australian standard – AS 3533.4.1 – contains specific requirements for land-based inflatable devices such as jumping castles, including how many points of fixture are used to anchor them to the ground. Dr Lisa Sharwood, an injury epidemiologist at the University of Sydney, said regulation of the standard – which is not nationally mandatory – differed between states and had been “quite variable”. “Mandatory standards are fairly rare for products,” she said, citing enforced regulation of baby walkers as a rare example. “My hope out of this, at the very least, would be that the standard is mandated around every state and there’s much more rigour.” Sharwood said issues to be addressed included ensuring imported products met the Australian standard, and whether requirements around weighting, the number of rope attachments and supervision would be made mandatory in future. Ivers said: “When it comes to preventing the deaths of children, the community is prepared to tolerate a high degree of regulation because we understand how important it is to keep children safe and happy. One great example of that is isolation swimming pool fencing. “People push back on too much regulation. When it comes to the deaths of children and safety like this, I think we need to start thinking about what really matters to us.”Microsoft’s category-defining Windows 11 tablet finally gets the design and feature upgrade Surface Pro fans have been clamouring for, but it comes with the sting of price hike. The Surface Pro 8 starts at £999 ($999/A$1,649), without the essential £160 ($160/A$260) keyboard, which is £100 more for the tablet and £35 more for the keyboard than last year’s equivalent models. It’s the biggest upgrade since 2014: the design has been revamped to match the more modern-looking Surface Pro X, with rounded corners, slimmer bezels and a switch from magnesium to aluminium for the body. It is 116g heavier and 0.8mm thicker than the last model but looks and feels great. At 13in on the diagonal, the screen is bigger than the 12.3in of its predecessors. It is still compact compared with a laptop, but the larger screen makes working with multiple windows a bit easier. The display supports a faster refresh rate of up to 120Hz too, which is common on smartphones, high-end tablets and found on Apple’s latest MacBook Pro. Disappointingly the 120Hz screen is a feature yet to be fully realised. The Pro 8 is waiting on a firmware update due next year to enable variable refresh rates, which allows the screen to automatically adjust its speed depending on the content on display, saving battery for static images while being super smooth for fast moving animations. For now it is set to 60Hz by default to save battery life. Specifications Screen: 13in LCD 2880x1920 (267 PPI) 120Hz Processor: Intel Core i5 or i7 (11th generation) RAM: 8, 16 or 32GB Storage: 128, 256, 512GB or 1TB Graphics: Intel Iris Xe Operating system: Windows 11 Home Camera: 10MP rear, 5MP front with Windows Hello Connectivity: Wifi 6, Bluetooth 5.1, 2x Thunderbolt 4/USB-4, headphones, Surface Connect Dimensions: 287 x 208x 9.3 mm Weight: 891g (without keyboard) Faster and quieter The Pro 8 ships with new 11th-generation Intel Core i5 or i7 chips (as tested), which are 10%-15% faster than previous models in benchmarks and matched the performance of the Surface Laptop 4. A cooling system upgrade keeps the machine silent for most of the time, requiring the fans a lot less frequently than previous versions, which was a very welcome change. Microsoft has finally adopted Thunderbolt connectivity too, kitting out the Pro 8 with two USB/Thunderbolt 4 ports, which is a big, modern upgrade for connecting to displays, high-speed drives and docks, as well as charging. However, the useful microSD card slot and USB-A socket of previous models have been removed. Battery life remains very similar to previous models with only about seven hours of work between charges, which is less than half the 16 hours of the market-leading MacBook Air. Sustainability Microsoft does not provide an expected lifespan for the Pro 8’s battery; those in similar devices typically maintain at least 80% of their original capacity for in excess of 500 full charge cycles. The tablet is generally repairable with an out-of-warranty service fee of £424.02 and a battery replacement fee of £280.44. The tablet contains no recycled materials, but Microsoft operates recycling schemes for old machines, publishes a company-wide sustainability report and a breakdown of each product’s environmental impact. Windows 11 The Pro 8 runs the new Windows 11, which is the same as the Go 3 tablet, but is much snappier because of the faster chips. Windows 11 is a better fit for a tablet, with a more touch-friendly interface and significantly improved touchscreen keyboard. Windows 11 is still a little rough around the edges but is improving rapidly. Those transitioning from Windows 10 will find it mostly works the same with a few design changes such as the central Start menu. Signature keyboard and Slim Pen 2 The Pro 8 tablet is only half the equation. It supports Microsoft’s updated Signature detachable keyboard, which is stiffer and flexes less when you type than its predecessor. The keys and trackpad are still great. The new Slim Pen 2 stylus has a small vibrating motor in it, which activates when you drag the it across the screen to provide the sensation of pen-on-paper. It won’t miraculously give you artistic talent, but it really adds to the experience of drawing or writing on glass. Some apps can make the pen feel like it is clicking, too, when you activate certain functions or menus. The Slim Pen 2’s haptics only work in apps that support it, such as Microsoft’s Word, Journal, Whiteboard and PowerPoint, Adobe Fresco and a small handful of others so far. Observations The speakers are decent and can get quite loud, but lack bass. The screen is very reflective, which could make using it outdoors in direct light a challenge. Price The Microsoft Surface Pro 8 starts at £999 ($999/A$1,649) with an Intel Core i5, 8GB of RAM and 128GB of storage and is available in various different memory and storage combinations. Versions with the Core i7 chip start at £1,499 ($1,599/A$2,399). The Signature keyboard costs £159.99 ($159.99/A$259.95) on its own or £259.99 ($279.99/A$429.95) with the Slim Pen 2. For comparison, the Surface Laptop 4 starts at £799, the Surface Go 2 costs £369, the Samsung Galaxy Book Pro 360 costs £1,199, the Apple iPad Pro 12.9in costs £999, the MacBook Air costs £999 and the MacBook Pro costs £1,899. Verdict The Surface Pro 8 is Microsoft’s best tablet PC yet, finally adding some much-needed modern upgrades to an already winning formula. The more rounded, sleeker design feels great. The larger, better screen with smaller bezels helps productivity. It has the latest Intel chips, runs much quieter and finally has Thunderbolt connectivity for docks, drives, displays and much more. Battery life is just about good enough for a day of work, but miles behind market leaders. The 120Hz display will be a great feature once it is fully realised with an update. The removal of the microSD card slot is slightly disappointing, but the modular SSD is very welcome. The real starting cost of £1,160 with keyboard is slightly more than the equivalent standard laptop. If you want a compact and adaptable Windows 11 machine that can turn from a solid laptop replacement to a creative tablet in an instant, the Surface Pro 8 is unrivalled. Pros: great screen, good performance, Thunderbolt4/USB-4, excellent keyboard (essential additional purchase), excellent kickstand, Windows Hello, solid build, great stylus (optional purchase), removable SSD. Cons: fairly expensive, keyboard should be included, no USB-A port, no microSD card slot, waiting for an update to enable the variable refresh rate of the screen. Other reviews Microsoft Surface Laptop 4 review: Windows 10 as it is meant to be Microsoft Surface Go 3 review: small Windows 11 tablet can’t keep up Microsoft Surface Laptop Go review: missing the sweet spot Apple MacBook Air (M1) review: gamechanging speed and battery life 14in MacBook Pro review: putting power back in Apple’s laptop Samsung Galaxy Book Pro 360 review: flexible laptop with beautiful OLED screenWood burning stoves in urban areas are responsible for almost half of people’s exposure to cancer-causing chemicals found in air pollution particles, new research has shown. The polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in tiny pollution particles are produced by burning fuels and have long been known to have carcinogenic effects. The new study examined the sources of the PAHs and found wood burning produced more than the diesel fuel or petrol used in vehicles. The analysis was done in Athens, Greece, but the researchers were clear that this was not an unusual case. They said that home wood burning was a significant issue for urban air quality throughout Europe and that excessive exposure to wood smoke could cause severe health effects. “Athens is not an exception – it’s more representative of a rule,” said Athanasios Nenes, at the Foundation for Research and Technology Hellas in Patras, Greece, and the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland, and one of the team behind the new study. “On the one hand, it’s: ‘Oh, my goodness, this is terrible.’ But on the other hand, it points to something people can actually do to reduce this risk without too much effort. You basically stop burning wood. That’s the bottom line.” Research published in the last year has shown wood burning in homes is the single biggest source of small particle air pollution in the UK, producing three times more than road traffic, despite just 8% of the population using wood burners. Even new wood burning stoves meeting the “ecodesign” standard still emit 750 times more tiny particle pollution than a modern HGV truck. Wood burners also triple the level of harmful pollution inside homes and should be sold with a health warning, according to scientists. The new research, published in the journal Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, took background samples of the air in Athens every day for a year. These were analysed for 31 PAHs and a wide range of other chemical markers. Specific compounds are associated with different sources of pollution and these enabled the scientists to calculate the proportion of PAHs produced by each source. They found 31% of annual PAHs came from wood burning, mostly in the winter, 33% from diesel and oil, and 29% from petrol (gasoline). Some PAHs are more carcinogenic than others, however, and when this was taken into account, the proportion of the cancer risk to people as a result of wood burning rose to 43%, with diesel and oil at 36% and petrol at 17%. “We know that [smoke from] wood burning is much more toxic than other types of particles,” said Nenes, and the results clearly highlight wood burning as a principal driver of long-term carcinogenic risk. The level of PAH pollution in Athens was the same order of magnitude as found in studies of other European and North American cities, the researchers said, with much higher levels usually reported for cities in China. The average annual concentration of the PAHs in the Athens study was below EU limits but double the World Health Organization’s reference level. Based on WHO data, the PAHs in Athens would be expected to cause 5 extra cancer cases for every 100,000 people, the researchers said. “Given [the carcinogen exposure] and the extended usage of [wood] burning throughout Europe, eg France, Germany, Ireland and the UK, European action and policies aimed at the regulation of [wood] burning emissions are immediately required, as they can lead to considerable benefits for public health,” the scientists said. Nenes said PAHs were not the only carcinogen in wood smoke, and it also had many other compounds that damaged health. “Wood smoke is particularly potent and causes all kinds of ailments from cancer to oxidative stress, which leads to heart attacks and strokes, obesity, premature ageing, diabetes – anything that has to do with inflammation in the body. So overall, I’m really worried about wood burning.” Gary Fuller at Imperial College London, who was not part of the research team, said: “We tend to think that burning wood is somehow harmless, because wood is a natural product. These measurements remind us that wood burning is not pollution-free. The UK data on emissions of benzo(a)pyrene, one of the main PAHs, shows an increase of 16% since 2000 due to home wood burning.” Prof Alison Tomlin at the University of Leeds, UK, said the move to electric cars would reduce PAH exposure from traffic. “However, unless suitable mitigation methods are developed to reduce PAH emissions from domestic wood burners and boilers, they will continue to pose a significant health risk.” she said. The Athens study showed much of the PAH exposure occurred on winter days with low wind and rain, meaning the wood smoke did not disperse. Tomlin said implementing “no-burn days” at such times could be a useful short-term measure. “However, enforcing such a policy, or even wider restrictions on wood burning in densely populated areas, could be challenging,” she said. Earlier in December, Utrecht council in the Netherlands announced subsidies of up to €2,000 (£1,700) to encourage people to replace their wood burning stoves and fireplaces in order to clean up the city’s air. Earlier research by Nenes and colleagues found that wood smoke emitted at night time oxidised into more harmful compounds much faster than had been expected. This means the pollution becomes more dangerous to health while it is still concentrated near the source, rather than oxidising over a few days as it disperses.As climate scientist Kai Kornhuber walks around New York City this winter, an eerie feeling creeps into his body. It’s warm enough for a T-shirt in December, and the birds are chirping loudly. The temperatures tell birds and trees that it’s time for action, but the systems are out of sync for December, says Kornhuber, a postdoctoral researcher at Columbia University’s Earth Institute. “It’s not right, there’s a disconnect between how it should be and how it is.” Kornhuber said. Warmer winters are happening across the globe, and leading to some big impacts: 2021 brought the planet’s 16th-warmest February since records began. While the popular imagination might associate the climate crisis with scorching summers and their attendant droughts, wildfires, hurricanes and heat waves, milder winters can also be drivers of catastrophic weather events and profound changes. They range from shifts in agricultural use, triggering changing weather patterns to boosting the likelihood of violent events, like the swarm of tornadoes that wreaked havoc in the American midwest and south over last weekend. “One of the truisms in climate science is that cold places and cold times of year warm faster than the warmer places and warmer times of year,” says Daniel Swain, a climate scientist at UCLA studying how extreme events are changing on a warming Earth. “Not only is the actual rate of warming faster in colder seasons and places – like the Arctic, which is warming three times faster than other places – but also a lot of impacts that are associated with warming are amplified.” Swain points to one specific threshold where temperature has a huge impact: whether precipitation falls as liquid rain or frozen snow depends on just a single degree difference. And in the west of America, where there was a gigantic snow drought until just a few days ago, that has huge impacts. “There was wildfire risk up until last week, even at 8-9,000ft in elevation,” says Swain. “That has directly to do with the lack of snowpack.” When precipitation falls as snow, it sticks around for longer, creating runoff moisture for the spring season – it’s often referred to as the bank of future water for moisture-strapped places. But when it falls as rain, it runs off immediately. “Winter warming affects the frozenness – or not – of things, which is ecologically important for the accumulation of snowpack and the water supply,” explains Swain. Warm spells in winter can create extreme heat waves later in summer. Unseasonal warmth can lead to a premature snow melt and vegetation growth, which lowers soil moisture and amplifies the likelihood of extreme and persistent heat waves throughout the summer, says Kornhuber. He points to the chain of events that led up to a heatwave that rocked Siberia in 2020 and was associated with wildfires that lasted the whole summer and caused record breaking carbon emissions. In that event, late-winter heat in February and March sucked moisture from the soils at a time when vegetation was also taking up moisture – and parched soils can lead to summer heat waves, says Kornhuber. “Low soil moisture is one of the most important ingredients of mega heatwaves.” Climate model projections for the United States indicate that overall there will be an increase in the likelihood of conditions favorable to severe storms as the planet warms, says Chiara Lepore, an associate research scientist at Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory at Columbia University. Lepore published research last month predicting 14-25% increase in severe storms per every extra 1C degree of future global temperature increase. “The main driving mechanism is warming temperatures and increasing moisture, which are some of the major ingredients in storm updrafts.” She adds that that number represents the increasing frequency of conditions favorable to severe weather occurrence – not actual storms – and only some of these storms will produce tornadoes, she says. “The uncertainty is still large.” Swain says the climate crisis evidence is weaker for tornadoes than for other huge storms, but that’s mainly because it hasn’t been studied as much. “The vertical instability – which is likely with more warming – would create an increase in tornado-producing environments,” he says. “So it’s pretty clear that climate change will begin to increase the likelihood of severe convective weather.” Warmer winters can also impact agriculture, as some crops require a threshold of chill hours to achieve optimal outcomes. Cold temperatures that many orchard crops need could decrease by as much as 60% in California’s Central Valley by 2100. Researchers say apples, cherries and pears, which require the longest period of cold weather, could be hit the hardest. Late-winter heat can also wreak havoc on crops, if they get the biological signal to flourish, only to be knocked down by frost soon after budding. “It goes to show that relatively small amounts of global warming can have big effects in certain places and certain times of year,” says Swain. There is even evidence that climate change is at the heart of freak events like the cold snap that left Texas in a deep arctic freeze last February, causing hundreds of deaths and billions of dollars in damage. A weak polar vortex became divided and brought a big gush of cold air to the southern United States – and the vortex is more unstable than in the past. Kornhuber says that winter warming is essentially another form of saying that the summer season extends more and more, while the spring and fall transitions squeeze out what we used to think of as wintertime. “As temperatures increase, moderate climate zones just will not have winter the way we know it anymore.”For millions of Americans, the Covid-19 pandemic has left them and their families with little money or cause for celebrating the holidays this year. “My youngest turns six on Christmas day and I can’t even get her a single present,” said Amanda Starr of Lebanon, Ohio, a single mother of three who has struggled to find work after her car was repossessed when she missed payments due to losing her retail job in the beginning of the pandemic. Starr was one of millions of workers out of work who lost unemployment benefits when federal extended and pandemic unemployment benefits ended in September. She is spending the holidays currently worrying about her family facing eviction soon and has experienced issues in receiving federal childcare tax credit payments. As of November, 15.6 million workers in the US are still being affected by the pandemic’s economic downturn; 3.9 million US workers are out of the labor force due to Covid-19, 6.9 million workers are still unemployed, 2 million workers are still experiencing cuts to pays or work schedules due to Covid-19, and another 3 million workers are misclassified as employed or out of the labor force, according to the Economic Policy Institute. Several industries are still reeling from job shortfalls compared to prior to the pandemic, such as a deficit of 1.3m jobs in the leisure and hospitality sector and 951,000 jobs in state and local governments. Laura Nash, 38, of Bellingham, Washington, lost her engineering job on 19 October and has been waiting for over seven weeks for unemployment benefits while searching for a new job. “Times are definitely tough and I don’t have any money for the holidays,” said Nash. “I’m lucky to be able to tag along with my parents for the holidays, but no gifts.” She’s had to get by on help from her parents, food assistance through Snap and Medicaid, while continuing to try to push her unemployment benefits through until she finds another engineering job. Andrea, 49, of Orlando, Florida, who requested to omit her last name, lost her job in restaurant management in late 2020 after getting injured in a car accident and being forced to take a long medical leave to recover. She’s experienced several issues while trying to obtain unemployment benefits in Florida this year, from having to spend hours on hold to speak with a representative about her claim only to get disconnected, to technical issues and getting locked out of Florida’s unemployment website. “I’ve cried a lot since April,” she said. “l haven’t made one single step toward resolving this.I had to leave my vehicle because I had no way to pay for the repairs it needed and I’ve been without a place to call home since around June.” She’s been homeless since June, often spending nights either with friends or around Walmart parking lots, as she said the few nearby homeless shelters have been full and she hasn’t been able to obtain housing or rental assistance. “I’m not looking forward to Christmas on the streets, but that’s my reality,” she added. According to the most recent US Census Household Pulse Survey conducted from 29 September to 11 October, about 20 million Americans reported not having enough food to eat in the past seven days and over 44 million Americans were relying on either Snap or other forms of food assistance in the past seven days. Food banks have reported demand is still far above pre-pandemic levels. “Christmas is solely provided by my parents and in-laws this year as all I can provide is food for my kids, two girls, 13 and 16,” said Alonzo Werner, a welder helper in Wisconsin who applied for unemployment benefits three months ago due to a lack of welding work in his area, but is still waiting for his claim to be processed. “My family has been going to food banks for food and trying to apply for food stamps.” Colleen Nicole of New Jersey was laid off from her IT job of nine years due to downsizing in March. She’s experienced two long lapses in unemployment assistance since her layoff, when she first applied and since September 2021 when her benefits were mistakenly cut off. “There is no celebrating the holidays. I do what I can to feel in the ‘holiday mood’, but it’s just stress and the unknown as to when I’ll be able to get the benefits I was told I’d get at this time,” she said. “I’m thankful I do have some friends that are housing me, since unemployment has caused me to lose my place and ruined my credit, making it impossible for me to get a new place right now. If it does not get resolved by March, however, I will be homeless.” Robyn Melissa Hirshburg of Yardley, Pennsylvania, was laid off in December 2020 after the pharmaceutical company Bristol Meyers Squibb terminated the contract she worked under and is still experiencing issues in getting her unemployment benefits approved. “I’m interviewing non-stop with great companies, but haven’t been able to lock anything in and the holidays spread interviews further,” said Hirshburg, who is diabetic and suffers from heart issues. “There will be no gifts this year for the holiday. This year it’s hard to celebrate any holiday when I have so much uncertainty about being able to afford my home, my utilities and food. I never thought I’d be in this spot.” As millions of Americans are still out of work, experiencing issues with unemployment delays or trying to find suitable work, many other Americans are still grappling with the loss of loved ones to Covid-19 and the financial impacts associated with suddenly losing a loved one. More than 790,000 Americans have died from Covid-19 since March 2020, with some public health experts noting death counts could be as high as 20% more than official counts due to undercounting of deaths. Olivia WIlliams, 21, of Panama City, Florida, lost her mother, Sharon Williams, in August when her mother caught Covid-19 after a co-worker at the hair salon she worked at tested positive. Williams shared an apartment with her mother and relied on her for financial security. “Financially, I’ve felt like I’m never going to recover,” said Williams. “We lived together so rent became my responsibility on top of losing my mom and best friend out of nowhere in a span of two weeks.” Janie Garlick, 56, of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, lost her husband, David Garletts, 56, to Covid-19 in October. A steel worker for nearly 20 years, he tested positive for Covid-19 on 22 October and was hospitalized shortly after, where he fought for his life in intensive care before passing away on 24 November. “He died that Wednesday night, 9.21pm. It was the eve of Thanksgiving, which was his favorite holiday,” said Garlick. She is now struggling financially, having relied on her husband’s income, and angry that he did not get vaccinated for Covid-19. “Our house is too expensive to keep so we must now find another home. We, now I, have custody of our granddaughters and they’re scared we’re going to be homeless,” she added. “Covid stole our loved one, our security, and the pain we feel is unbearable.”Trump supporters and members of far-right extremist groups who took part in the violent insurrection at the US Capitol on 6 January are raising hundreds of thousands of dollars from online crowdfunding sites by portraying themselves as maligned American patriots, martyrs and “political prisoners”. Several of the highest-profile participants in the “stop the steal” insurrection which attempted to disrupt Joe Biden’s certification as US president are raising substantial sums on fundraising sites. They include members of the far-right Proud Boys and many of the 6 January individuals being detained in a Washington DC jail, awaiting trial for allegedly attacking police officers. In their donations appeals they are drastically rewriting history. Their scripts transform 6 January from what it was – a violent attempt to overthrow the democratic results of the 2020 presidential election on behalf of Donald Trump – into the fantasy that it was a peaceful and patriotic protest to uphold voter integrity. “It’s shocking to say, but America now has legitimate political prisoners, en masse,” says the fundraising page titled American Gulag for Jan 6 Political Prisoners which has so far raised $41,000. The page, created by Jim Hoft, founder of the conspiracy site Gateway Pundit, claims that there are “scores of political prisoners wrongfully imprisoned as a result of the protest on January 6th”. Scott Fairlamb, the first person to be sentenced for assaulting a police officer, describes the insurrection on his fundraising page as a “sea of America loving, American Flag waving patriots who came together from all over our great nation in support of our 45th President Donald Trump”. Fairlamb has so far raised more than $38,000 towards his goal of $100,000. He pleaded guilty to the assault and was sentenced to 41 months in prison. The framing of his appeal to potential donors contrasts sharply with what actually happened on the day. Hundreds stormed the Capitol and five people died, including a police officer, with scores more injured. Court documents point to videos that capture Fairlamb climbing scaffolding on the Capitol building and punching and shoving a police officer on the West Front of the complex. Another video catches him wielding a collapsible baton and shouting: “What patriots do? We fuckin’ disarm them and then we storm the fuckin’ Capitol.” Jake Chansley, the self-styled QAnon Shaman whose bearskin headdress and horns became an enduring image of the insurrection, has so far raised more than $10,000 on his online page, “Free Jake”. In his plea for money, he says he went to Washington on 6 January “answering the call that President Trump put out to his supporters”. He admits he entered the Senate chamber and sat in the seat of vice president Mike Pence, but insists it was only to make a statement “that the people had showed up for work that day”. Chansley pleaded guilty to obstructing an official proceeding and last month was sentenced to 41 months in prison. Richard “Bigo” Barnett, who became instantly infamous after a photo went viral of him inside House Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s office with his boot up on her desk, has created his own personal fundraising site which purports to be a “legal defense fund”. It is unclear how much he has raised, but donors who give more than $100 are promised a signed photograph (though not the image for which he is notorious because of copyright issues). In his plea for cash, Barnett likens himself to Japanese Americans interned by the US government during the second world war. He also cites Thomas Paine’s 1776 pamphlet Common Sense which argues for the right of American colonists to stand up against the tyranny of the British government, claiming that he was acting on 6 January in the same spirit – standing up to the “tyranny” that gave Biden the White House. “Richard believes that his actions were not criminal, but rather a constitutionally protected form of political protest…. He is asking for the support of America’s Patriots, who embrace the kind of America that stands up to the evils of communism and socialism, not bows down to it,” it says. Barnett, who is out on bond, has been charged with breaking into the Capitol carrying a deadly stun gun walking stick. In social media posts before the insurrection he described himself as a “white nationalist”. By his own admission, he stole a document from Pelosi’s office and wrote her a note that he left on her desk saying: “Nancy, Bigo was here, you Bitch”. One of the striking aspects of the 6 January appeal for cash is not only the large number of fundraisers that have been set up for people accused of participating in the insurrection which stretch into the hundreds, but also the considerable sums of money they have been accruing over the months. Brandon Straka, a prominent Trump supporter with more than half a million Twitter followers who has pleaded guilty to disorderly conduct, has so far raised more than $178,000 for his “legal defense fund”. A collective fundraising page for the 40 or so alleged insurrectionists who are being held in pre-trial custody has so far raised more than $268,000. Created by a group calling itself The Patriot Freedom Project, it says the money will go to support “1/6ers” and their families who are being “politically persecuted for standing up to what they believe was a fraudulent election”. A tally by CNN in September estimated that the total amount raised to support those accused of 6 January crimes may have exceeded $2m. Experts who track extremist fundraising online warn that the impressive flow of resources to alleged violent insurrectionists could have long-term consequences by giving succor to anti-democratic movements. Megan Squire, a senior fellow at the Southern Poverty Law Center, told the Guardian that though the money was put to a variety of uses, from providing bail money and legal fees to paying bills, the scale of the funding was worrying. “However it is used, there are consequences,” she said. “It definitely keeps them going and keeps them in business, which is not good for any of us.” Squire said the donation sites also had the effect of spreading involvement in anti-democratic activities by making donors feel involved. “People view donating to events like January 6th as a way of participating from afar,” she said. “It’s one step up from being a keyboard warrior to being a keyboard warrior with a wallet.” Accused insurrectionists have been assisted in their fundraising efforts by the proliferation of sites that are willing to host their monetary appeals, even in several cases where the individuals have pleaded guilty or been sentenced to prison terms. The sites include AllFundIt, which was created by a Trump-supporting conservative blogger and which hosts the Straka fundraiser. OurFreedomFunding has provided a money-making platform to several of the Proud Boys extremists allegedly involved on 6 January. The site is currently promoting the fundraiser of Zachary Rehl, president of the Philadelphia chapter of the far-right group, which states: “He has fought for all of us, now he needs us to fight for him”. Rehl’s fund has so far raised more than $40,000. He is in custody, having been part of a group of Proud Boys leaders who allegedly began plotting to impede the certification of Biden’s presidential victory by Congress as early as election day on 3 November. On 7 January, Rehl posted on social media: “I’m proud as fuck of what we accomplished yesterday”. The cash generating platform of choice for alleged insurrectionists is GiveSendGo, which bills itself as the “#1 Free Christian Crowdfunding Site.” Today it is providing a home to 96 fundraising appeals relating to prosecutions following the Capitol insurrection. Four of those appeals have each raised more than $100,000 for their subjects. Among the 96 fundraisers are appeals for several military veterans and former law enforcement officers charged with felonies on 6 January. A former army ranger, Robert Morss allegedly used his military training to play a leading role in organizing the violent attack on the Capitol. Ronald McAbee, a then serving sheriff’s deputy from Tennessee, turned up on 6 January wearing his own department’s tactical gear and spiked gloves with metal knuckles. Videos show him assaulting other police officers. Julian Khater and George Tanios both have pages on GiveSendGo. They are accused of using powerful bear spray to attack Capitol police officer Brian Sidnick who died a day after the insurrection. A medical examiner found that Sidnick died of natural causes. The Guardian reached out to the co-founder of GiveSendGo Jacob Wells, but he did not reply to questions about the site’s hosting of alleged insurrectionists’ fundraising appeals. In a statement on the website, he calls himself a “committed Christian” who believes that “purpose comes from God”. On the website, Wells says he does not condone the use of violence for political gain and that “we unequivocally condemn those who threatened the lives of our elected leaders and the police officers who were simply doing their jobs”. He does not explain, however, why his site is still presenting appeals for cash from individuals like Scott Fairlamb who has pleaded guilty and is imprisoned for assaulting a police officer.We meet in the forest in the dark. Though dawn is breaking, the evergreen trees all around us, a mix of old-growth conifers, giant redwoods and Douglas firs, are so tall and dense that they steadfastly block out the light. Getting out of bed early to exercise in winter is never easy – it feels as if you’re being dragged from the womb – but as we pedal off and see the first rays of sunshine, golden, slanted lines cutting through the mist on the trail ahead, it already feels like the right call. We have the forest completely to ourselves; the only sounds are birdsong and the crunch of our tyres on the stony track. I’m in the New Forest on a guided gravel bike ride with Tobie Charlton of Gravel Kings. In the past few years, gravel cycling has risen from relative obscurity to become one of cycling’s most-hyped disciplines, and I’m curious to see what all the fuss is about. Tobie tells me I’ve come to the right place as the New Forest is “the purist’s place to ride gravel”, thanks to high-quality stone tracks, used by the Forestry Commission, which loop and twist around the national park. Gravel bikes are like the adventurous cousin of road bikes. They have slightly thicker and much grippier tyres than a road bike, so can be ridden on any surface, from stone to grass or dirt. But unlike a mountain bike, they’re enjoyably efficient to ride on the road, which opens up a huge range of route possibilities. There are more than 100 miles of off-road trails and bridleways in the New Forest, mostly gravel but some paved, and Tobie, who has lived locally all his life, has ridden all of them. He grew up riding mountain bikes with his friends but in his 20s began to experiment with cyclocross (designed for cross-country racing) and then gravel bikes. “A lot of trails around here are quite flat, but gravel bikes make those tame trails entertaining. You can ride more aggressively, but you’re still in control,” he says, while we’re whooshing down a gentle slope. I know what he means: the bike handles surprisingly well considering how rugged the trail is, especially on corners. And it gets good purchase on the ground, rather than sinking into it as you often do on a mountain bike. This means you can ride at a decent pace without too much effort. We’re not hanging about, but we can still chat easily and take in our wonderful surroundings. This, Tobie tells me, is the main point of gravel riding. His clients are often city-dwelling cyclists like me, who want to get away from traffic and into nature, or road cyclists who want to try something different. “It’s more about time on your bike and the experience, rather than personal bests or [ride-tracking app] Strava, or even distance,” he says. I have no idea how fast we’re going or how far we’ve travelled, but I do know I’ve seen wild ponies and wild cows, and, at one particularly magical moment, a doe and her fawn crossed our path. I’ve spied toadstools, watched autumn leaves slowly spiral down to earth, wondered what’s hibernating beneath the carpets of rich brown fern, and enjoyed the contrast of riding through open moorland followed by thick forest. We’ve crossed rivers and brooks and ridden past a flooded stretch of forest awash with dead trees, their skeletons stark against the bright blue sky. As the morning goes on, I’m even becoming a gravel geek and noticing how the varying consistency of the stones on the trail affects how the bike rides, from the wetter, tacky gravel, which is sticky and grips really well, to the softer dust, which doesn’t. The gravel holds up well in bad weather. It rained a lot the week before I came here, and the bogs beside the trails are sodden but there’s virtually no water on the tracks themselves. “They stay in great condition for riding 365 days a year, which is why it’s great to come in winter,” says Tobie. The park is far less busy then, too. The fact the New Forest has sections of lush evergreen and deciduous trees also means he can pick his routes according to the weather and keep clients out of the rain or driving winds. “If it’s really tipping down, we’ll factor in more cafe stops,” he says. Our cafe stop comes towards the end of the ride in the village of Brockenhurst; it’s the only time I’ll see traffic during the ride. We power up on coffee and cake at the Rosie Lea Bakery, then make our way through the forest back to the start at the Blackwater Arboretum, which, now I can see it in daylight, evokes a very Pacific north-western vibe. Our route focused on the centre of the New Forest and was around 45km, but Gravel Kings does longer rides, of up to 85km, including routes to the sea and back, or shorter 20km circuits, depending on groups’ needs and fitness levels. You can, of course, hire bikes at various places in the New Forest, though not the kind of high-spec gravel bike I’ve been on today, which would cost about £1,200 new. It is such fun to ride I’m seriously contemplating getting one. But there is something special about being guided by a knowledgable local, who knows how to make a ride flow perfectly. It lets you get the best out of your day and tune in to the natural environment, as opposed to constantly checking the route on your phone – the last thing you want to be looking at when you’re trying to switch off. It was certainly worth the early alarm. The trip was provided by Gravel Kings. Dawn Patrol guided gravel rides, including bike rental, cost £135, or £85 if you’re bringing your own bike.People in New South Wales are facing lengthy queues at Covid-19 testing clinics ahead of the busy Christmas period. Hundreds of thousands of people have undergone testing in the last week as cases rise across the state with 2,213 new infections on Friday. On Thursday 127,583 people were tested, a slight dip from 143,938 the day before. But many were left waiting for long periods before getting swabbed. Kate Evans waited for an hour and a half for a test at Warringah Aquatic Centre’s testing clinic on Thursday morning. “Fun times,” the 27-year-old said. “I got so bored I ended up Facetiming some friends from overseas, who watched me get my nose swabbed.” Despite the queue, she got a negative result about 17 hours later. Alexandria woman Lizzie Garrett took one look at the queue for the Histopath testing clinic on Gibbons Street, Redfern, on Wednesday morning and decided to go somewhere else. “It was blocks and blocks long,” she told Guardian Australia. The 31-year-old, who woke up with “no voice” this week ahead of a planned trip to Melbourne, went to a drive-through Laverty clinic in Rozelle instead, where she queued for about 45 minutes. “I get a lot of tests because I’m immunocompromised,” Garrett said. “I’ve seen a lot, during the spikes, during the low periods, I’ve seen what the traffic is like. I’ve never seen Rozelle this bad in all that time.” Her result came back in a little over 36 hours. “It definitely seems like there are lots of people doing what I’m doing and going, ‘I’ve got to make sure I don’t have Covid before I travel, before Christmas, before seeing family’.” Anecdotally, wait times have increased dramatically in a matter of days. When Nurie Salim went to the Gibbons Street clinic last week, there was a “zero minute wait”, she said. “And then they’d get you your result in two hours, no joke. Two hours.” On Friday, she returned to find a line that already “snaked around several blocks” when the clinic opened at 9am. It moved pretty quickly, she said. “We were only waiting for an hour.” One man was in and out of the Sydney International Airport clinic in 10 minutes on Monday, with a result back in 10 hours. But a woman who went to the same clinic on Thursday waited 45 minutes for a test and was yet to get a result at Friday lunchtime. A NSW Health spokesperson said it “has the capacity to extend testing hours, introduce additional drive-through sites and establish extra pop-up clinics should the need arise”. NSW Health was working with private providers to ensure turnaround times were “as fast as possible”, the spokesperson added. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning People have also turned to rapid antigen tests, but they are flying off shelves faster than many places can restock them. Pharmacies across Sydney said they had zero or very few left when called by Guardian Australia. Some people struggled to find the tests in stores, while others reported they were easy to find, though costly. Salim stressed healthcare workers should not be blamed for long queues. “They’re doing their best. It’s a hard job, people are disgruntled,” she said. “I’m not shaming the good people of the testing clinic. I just wish there could be more of them, in more places.”Grazing livestock can be a key part of healthy, wildlife-rich farmland, but the number of sheep across the globe has soared, and the UK is now home to 32.7 million of them. The Peak District saw a fivefold rise in the density of sheep during the 20th century. This has led to widespread loss of biodiversity in vast areas of the country’s uplands because sheep graze the land closely (they can nibble it down to a height of 3cm), leaving less space for plants, scrub and trees to flourish. Loss of habitats caused by the intensification of agriculture is one of the main drivers of wildlife decline globally. But what if you put up fences to keep sheep and other grazing animals out? Ben Lawers, on the northern shore of Loch Tay, is the highest mountain in the southern Highlands. In 1990, a fence was built around nine hectares (23 acres) of land so native habitats that pre-dated the grasslands could recover. Farmers have rights to graze sheep on this hillside, so fencing off an area was the only way for this natural transformation to occur. Deer also graze outside the enclosure. For the past 30 years, it has been allowed to regenerate more or less unaided – except for a small amount of planting in the early years – and this is what it looks like now. There is a huge difference between the native trees, scrub and flowering plants within the enclosure and uninterrupted grassland visible across the rest of the hill at Ben Lawers. Trees and scrub provide shelter for an abundance of butterflies and bees, which would have struggled to survive in the harsh conditions outside this area. It is also home to many birds, including declining species such as whinchat, as well as willow warbler and cuckoo, which come in to feed on these insects. Other birds such as redpoll and twite have also been drawn to this new habitat. Flowers such as lady’s smock, heath bedstraw, wild angelica and devil’s-bit scabious are visible in spring and summer in the Ben Lawers reserve. These plants would have previously been restricted to hard-to-reach places protected from grazing. There is still some heather outside the fenced-off area but generally the vegetation is much more varied within the enclosure. Outside it, grass is ankle height, and skylarks and meadow pipits make up most of the birdlife. Put up around two decades ago, this fence at Tal-y-llyn in Snowdonia national park divides a steep slope above the A487. The section on the right has been fenced off from sheep, allowing natural regeneration of rowan, hawthorn and willow trees, while grazing by sheep on the left means the grass has remained short. More vegetation stabilises the slope, meaning stones and scree are less likely to fall on to the road beneath. Trees also slow the speed at which water moves through a landscape, which reduces the flooding risk downstream after heavy rain. This shows part of Venford reservoir on Dartmoor, Devon, in May. The fence cuts off about 5 hectares to the south-west of the reservoir, keeping out the cattle, ponies and sheep that graze the surrounding moor. Behind the fence, woodland has been able to regenerate and is much bushier than outside, and bluebells have been able to flower. They are likely to be a relic from when the moor was more wooded. The reservoir was opened in 1970, and the fence looks to be at least 50 years old. This fenced-off area of Bodmin Moor in Cornwall encloses the shaft of an old tin mine, protecting animals and people from falling down it. The enclosure is probably 100 square metres, and this photo was taken in September, when the heather and gorse are are at their best. This fence in Waberthwaite, west Cumbria, has been up for about six years and sits on a common grazed by sheep. On the left side vegetation is starting to get thicker and scrubbier thanks to reduced pressure from grazing. There are few trees up in this harsh, denuded landscape, so natural succession takes longer. More lush, heath-like plants such as heathers, bilberry, crowberry and cranberry are starting to take hold. This will draw in more birds, such as redwing and fieldfare, on the hunt for autumn berries. Black grouse and short-eared owls will also make use of this habitat. In Mollen Woods, a site of special scientific interest (SSSI) in north Cumbria, sheep and cattle graze to the left of the fence, which has been there for more than 10 years. On the right, bracken and bluebells are doing well, and there is a mature woodland of sycamore, beech, hawthorn and crab apple trees. Not all grazing is bad. Less intensive grazing is an important way of maintaining habitats, and can be crucial for many wildflowers. The timing of grazing, density of animals and type of animal used all affect the amount of wildlife on the land. Many regenerative farmers manage their stocking densities and use rotational grazing, or mob grazing, to enhance farmland ecosystems. This photo was taken in August at Loweswater, Cumbria, and shows an area left for woodland regeneration that is only grazed by cattle or fell ponies for a few days a year. The other side is grazed by sheep all year round. The fence was put up three years ago. The left side is dominated by tall, tussock-forming grasses, including cock’s-foot and tufted hair-grass, Yorkshire fog and sweet vernal-grass. It is home to grasshoppers, froghoppers, spiders and beetles. The right-hand side is made up of much shorter, mat-forming grasses, including rye grass and crested dog’s-tail. It appears to be relatively devoid of insect life. Grass is seen on both sides in Brough, Cumbria, pictured in July. But on the left – where sheep are excluded – there are also orchids, lady’s mantel, wood avens and young trees sprouting up. Sheep nibble close to the ground, and can bite off single leaves or shoots. If the land is given a break from grazing, sheep can create conditions for delicate wildflowers to come through, because they create space for them. Traditional livestock breeds are often hardier and better at eating in rough grassland than commercial breeds. However, if they are still on the land when these shoots come up, they eat them too. Creating fences to keep sheep and other grazing animals out shows what happens when heavily grazed grass is given space to breathe. It is an indication of the sort of wildlife-rich mosaic habitats that could be recreated if there were fewer sheep in the landscape. Find more Age of extinction coverage here, and follow our biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresIn a very strange year for movies, the failure of Steven Spielberg’s West Side Story is perhaps the most head-scratching development of all. The remake of the beloved 1961 musical grossed just $10m on its opening weekend, and while the film could certainly improve upon its lackluster debut over the holidays, it caps a year of disappointments for fans of the movie musical. In the Heights kicked off the summer with poor ticket sales and accusations of colorism for failing to have enough Afro-Latino actors in its cast. Dear Evan Hansen created the rare consensus of the year, hated by critics and audiences alike, and endured prolonged mockery on social media for its casting of the crow’s-footed Ben Platt as its teenaged protagonist. The less said about Diana: The Musical, a filmed version of the Broadway bomb that made its way to Netflix, the better. At least people seemed to like Tick, Tick… Boom!, the Lin-Manuel Miranda-directed adaptation of a work by the late Jonathan Larson, although we don’t really know how many – Netflix continues to be cagey about viewing numbers, and the film had only a nominal release in theaters. All in all, it was a catastrophic year for a genre that has been a mainstay of cinema since the advent of talkies. Historically, movie musicals have been an opportunity to highlight the best of the theatrical experience: these are films with big budgets, melodramatic plots that play well on the big screen, and expansive dance numbers, and they just don’t play as well at home, no matter how big your flatscreen or how expensive your sound system. Studio executives and box-office pundits expected audiences to show up for In the Heights, Dear Evan Hansen and West Side Story, and not just fans of the movie musical but general audiences, as well. After a year without movies, audiences would crave the spectacle. It didn’t happen. Viewers showed up for other movies. They showed up for superhero movies such as Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings and Venom: Let There Be Carnage. They showed up for horror movies like A Quiet Place Part II. And they showed up for corporate bland-fests Free Guy and Jungle Cruise, which are already on their way to being money-making franchises for Disney. The pattern is damningly clear: each of the year’s 10 highest-grossing movies is either part of a long-running franchise or the beginning of one. It’s too early to say if the movie musical needs a doctor or a coroner, but what is clear is that studio executives wildly overestimate how popular this genre is. People who love musicals really, really love musicals, and every time one of them hits at the box-office, a series of enthusiastic imitators tends to follow. When Chicago won best picture at the 2001 Oscars, it opened the floodgates for the genre’s revival (after basically being absent from theaters for two decades). The results have been spotty at best. For every The Greatest Showman or Les Misérables, both of which were huge hits, there were several like Nine, Rock of Ages, The Prom, or, worst-case scenario, Cats. The success rate for the movie musical is simply not very good, and given that they typically require large budgets to support the spectacle, it’s a risky proposition. The disappointing returns from this year’s crop of movie musicals may also indicate a Covid-led acceleration of a long-simmering dynamic. For a great many moviegoers, there are now two kinds of movies: those you go to the theater for and those you are happy to watch at home a few weeks later. It seems that that theater is the place for big-budget serialized storytelling with major movie stars. Superhero movies, yes, but also the Fast and Furious franchise and James Bond. Vin Diesel, The Rock and Daniel Craig still have faces that mean more to us up on the big screen. For all they had to offer, neither In the Heights nor Dear Evan Hansen and West Side Story featured a major movie star, and there’s some hubris in the assumption that audiences would turn out for these casts filled with actors they had never heard of before. West Side Story did have Ansel Elgort onboard as Tony, but after he was accused of sexual assault, the distributors were forced to downplay his presence in the film’s marketing (Elgort has maintained that it was consensual). There is still time, however, for the genre to make a comeback. Tick, Tick… Boom! may be nominated for a few Oscars, which would raise its profile significantly, while West Side Story is still considered the frontrunner for best picture. It will probably stay in theaters at least until the Academy Awards happen in March, which will give it plenty of time to increase its box-office haul. Still to be released this year is Cyrano, starring Peter Dinklage as the lovelorn poet, and featuring songs by the National. It’s unlikely to be a hit, but like the others mentioned, it could make an impression on awards voters. Perhaps that’s where the musical has landed: as Oscar bait. With the hegemony of franchise film-making, any genre of film that deals with serious subject matter or is designed with adults in mind has already been relegated to the last few months of the year. King Richard, Being the Ricardos and Belfast were all made with Oscars in mind, and if they miss out on nominations, they will probably be considered failures. Movie musicals were once apart from that. They won Oscars, but they were also beloved by the general moviegoing public. Unless something changes dramatically in the next two months, those days may be over, and 2021 may be remembered as the year the movie musical took its last bow.The Black and White Museum, 15 short stories written over five decades, confirms Ferdinand Dennis as a flâneur and urban philosopher exploring territory he first began to map in his now classic novels. The epic Duppy Conqueror (1998), astutely republished by Small Axes last year, broke ground as a Black British answer to Gabriel García Márquez’s One Hundred Years of Solitude. Spanning two centuries, the odyssey moves from Paradise, Jamaica, via Liverpool and the London blitz to the fictitious ex-colony of Kinja in west Africa. It combines plantation gothic, a reluctant hero’s mythological quest, and an ancestral curse, setting out to redeem the painful collective journey from the postwar Caribbean amid an inheritance of enslavement and familial rupture. Dennis came to England from Jamaica, aged eight, in 1964. For a second generation under pressure in Britain’s inner cities, his novel lays claim to rich global ancestries, as well as a modern Africa of skyscrapers and arts scenes. His coming-of-age debut, The Sleepless Summer (1989), is no less a classic. Amid the heatwave and police “heat” of the 1976 Notting Hill Carnival, the part-autobiographical school-leaver, on a gap year with a difference, learns his own history from Rastafarians and Garveyites, but also not to see in black and white. Nourished by Dennis’s travelogue Behind the Frontlines: Journey into Afro-Britain (1988), its fictional cameos – such as a monologue from a sacked machinist – give deeper insight into the anger behind Britain’s 1981 uprisings than reams of commission reports. In The Black and White Museum, ghetto blasters, bus conductors, mobile phones and shiny apartments “like stacked shipping containers” mark some of its largely London sketches as period pieces, others as 21st century. Extending the terrain of Sam Selvon’s The Lonely Londoners, the narratives glide from Holland Park villas and Park Lane hotels to Hackney barbershops and “kiosks selling Nigerian food, Ethiopian coffee, Jamaican jerk chicken” in Newington Green. Characters range from an exiled African prince and a Lithuanian laundress to a Venezuelan art lover bonding with a Jamaican over a shared love of Neruda’s poetry. One key image is of a youth on the top deck of a No 36 bus, wiping the steamed-up window to command a view, “like a ship’s porthole”. The darkly satirical title story, written more than 20 years ago, is both of its time and timely. At an east London emporium, the kaftan-clad Papa Legba touts a “Middle Passage Week-End” for visitors of all races to spend 48 hours stacked in a fetid basement’s mock slave ship, pitched about mechanically and fed “foul-smelling, grub-infested gruel” amid iron chains “encrusted with dried blood”. Some experience trauma, others catharsis, sparking arguments about forgiveness and reparations – and a vogue for rival sports shoes named “Plantation” and “Runaway”. The burlesque was inspired, the author notes in a preface, by his living in a “south-west English city with a strong slave-trading past” (presumably Bristol), having to cope with the “ubiquitous and oppressive reminders of its history”. Its targets go beyond the chains beneath Britain’s former slaving ports to the commodification of black urban style as it moves from pavement to catwalk. Dennis’s music-filled second novel, The Last Blues Dance (1996), was a valedictory tribute to the West Indian pioneers who dreamed of return. In the stories here, it is the second generation weighing up the vexed meaning of home with a sense of time running out. In Only for a While a woman’s “dream of Caribbean retirement turned as sour as curdled milk”, the islanders ostracising her as the “English lady”. Yet mounting friction with her son in London confirms her sense of being nowhere at home. In The Unfinished Tapestry, a woman is torn between retirement in Jamaica, where she might “smell the fragrance of ripe mangoes, feel the warm breeze blowing off the sea”, and the “laughter and cries of the children … the scent of the newly born great-great-grandchild whom she had cradled in her arms”. That mental shift, to home being where one’s children and grandchildren are, applies also to friendship. Among old friends, “with music playing and alcohol flowing, washed by their fruity laughter”, one retiree feels “if not at home, then certainly nearing home”. In Turning White, an unexpected upside to ageing is discovered by a man appalled by his thinning silver strands. Almost overnight, he ceases to be viewed by some white Londoners as a “feral” threat, avoided by crossing the street. The title acquires a double meaning as he becomes worthy, to his puzzlement, of common courtesies. Among refreshing first-person voices is the indignant protagonist of The Dinner Lady, censured for sacking a religious convert who refuses to handle pork: “Me, whose parents used to tell us about race prejudice when they first came to England, you know, all that no dogs, no Irish, no blacks nonsense – me anti-Muslims?” Wendell Clarke, a poet whose “muse had deserted him”, attends an old schoolfriend’s wake in Nine Night, written for this collection. Ribbed about using fancy words, he is materially poorer than the other mourners, whose “working lives as telephone engineers, car mechanics and builders were drawing to a close”. Yet their respect, and being reminded of a playground fight when he “stumbled into the library and found peace in its silence”, is an upbeat affirmation of the path he chose. “In my mid-50s, my regrets are an important part of who I am,” one character declares. Yet, as befits these elegiac snapshots with their subtle epiphanies, his later resolve to declare his passion, long after the moment has been missed, liberates him from regret, to love again. • The Black and White Museum by Ferdinand Dennis is published by HopeRoad (£9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Earlier this week, Benedict Cumberbatch picked up his first nomination this awards season: best actor in a drama at the Golden Globes for The Power of the Dog. It will not be his last. In Jane Campion’s western, adapted from the novel by Thomas Savage, he plays Phil Burbank, a brilliant but vile cattle rancher in 1925 Montana. Trained at the start of the century by an iconic cowboy called Bronco Henry, Phil bullies everyone: men, animals, his brother, George (Jesse Plemons) – and, particularly, George’s new wife, Rose (Kirsten Dunst), and her delicate son, Peter (Kodi Smit-McPhee). Campion’s film is a thriller, wound tight as a noose, even in those scenes which permit glimmers of Phil’s secret life, one far removed from the dirt and aggression of the ranch. I spoke to Cumberbatch as he was driving to the set of the new Doctor Strange film in Hollywood, about his experiences shooting the western in New Zealand over the first nine months of 2020 (with a three-month break at the start of Covid restrictions), and his feelings about the film now. You’ve said that when you watched The Power of the Dog, you were amazed by being able to see the whole arc of your character Phil, just as you’d hoped. Is that unusual? I don’t know if watching your own work is a good or bad thing. I don’t know how much I learn from it. Each individual circumstance holds its own world of singularities and peculiarities. But among that, you can go: “Oh yeah, I remember that was what I tried to do.” Sometimes it doesn’t fit with the cast or the energy of the scene or the beat of another character. But to sit down in the audience and go: “Oh my God, I think that was what I intended”, was great. Sometimes you worry the director is looking from a very specific angle and maybe a better take or different take has been overlooked because of what they’re prioritising. But everything about this project felt very in sync with Jane and her process. In the rawest form of just building the character as well; I felt as if I was doing it alongside her in pre-production. We had an equal love and need to carefully create this character from the page to the screen. We understood the complexity of a man whose monstrous behaviour masks a deep well of pain; a scar needed to be understood in order to be inhabited. I’d never had that long in the company of a director doing the same sort of things to get to a character. I don’t know if she always works like that but it just felt like I was going on a journey with a friend. I didn’t feel like I was being steered by her because we were using tools to manifest the results and then sharing them. Whether it was me going to dude camp to learn the outward skills of the man or whether it was the more internal, psychological work with dream analysis and role playing to find the core of the man, we were always doing similar work or sharing the work at the same time. It’s just a lovely, productive thing to do with the director when you have the luxury of time. She wanted me to sort of marinate it for longer than I usually get. Sometimes, because of a happily busy career, I’m kind of building the plane as it takes off. What did you like about Phil? What do you miss about him? I liked his directness. His mastery of the world. And I really, really liked the fact that he was someone who brought the outside in. He was all about nature. He was consumed by every aspect, every craft, every detail of his job involving men, animals and the landscape. The way he saw detail in everything – not just the dog in the shadows – but everything. He had that highly attuned, animalistic sensibility towards his environment. The stewardship of land and animals was a very different thing in those days: far harsher, far less low-impact. You rode ’em hard and got what you needed and that was that. And then he burned the hides! I never really understood that other than as the need to consume everything that his work produced. But I admired his complete involvement. And as somebody who’s a bit of a people-pleaser and apologetic at the best of times, who worries too much about what people think of me, I loved the freedom of being somebody who wasn’t in that space. Of course, there’s this deep kernel of truth he never lets get exposed. And that ties into the breadth of fear and fury that we know he has. But he can also stand with his hands behind his back and survey all these scenes with a sort of calm acceptance and knowing. And not be taken in with the hoopla of worrying about what the ranch-hands think of him. He’s very self-assured. I admired that. I have a deep, deep empathy for him, a real love for him, a real feeling of the tragedy of someone who has lived his entire life in a secretive way apart from one small shard of acceptance and tolerance with a man in his teenage years. He was 19 when he watched Bronco Henry die at a corral in a stampede of death. So this is a man who has lived his entire life without fully knowing what it is to love and to be loved. The loneliness and the pain of that – I felt for that, I really did. How has it changed your own relationship with nature? And how has that changed over the course of the past two years? It’s completely heightened the value of what it is to be in nature. The nurture that nature provides, the answers it holds and our dependence on it. But also to have an experience where everyone – through the conditions of the pandemic – was forced to stop and to contemplate. You could not be in a more beautiful example of Earth’s abundance and variety than New Zealand to make a film like this. If all the exteriors were shot in some kind of Mandalorian environment, that would’ve been a hell of an acting exercise. I was terrified enough about clinking in spurs across a car park in Auckland to do the studio section of the shoot. You are provided with an extra character by being surrounded by that environment. And when it’s something that your character is so dependent on, it’s such a lifeline. It nourishes him and provides his wellbeing and his profession. But it’s also a sanctuary, a place where he finds solace and can express himself, where he rebaptises himself. For me, it’s not just about being clean, that sort of sacred space where Phil washes and is discovered by Peter and re-engages with the memory of Bronco Henry. That place, it holds him and that water is purifying for him, bringing him back to something that’s honest and true. Not just washing away the dirt of his work, but the mask of his life. To have those tools, to be able to be in that water and kind of connect, was an absolute gift. On the first day of the shoot we were introduced to Maori elders from the local tribe who did a blessing to welcome us to the land and to ask the land to bless and support the project. I was already in character and so was standing a little bit to the side as Phil’s got a slightly tenuous link with indigenous culture. Jane introduced me as Phil, not as Benedict, and said they’d meet Benedict at the end of the shoot. It felt very tied into that moment of submergence into the character. I went for hours and hours to just lie in the grass, to move around the set, to look at those hills, to watch the light change. During the shoot, we had every form of blessing. We even had snow! Every kind of weather that you could possibly want for a shoot that tells a story, contextualised by environment, over a yearly cycle at this ranch. We looked at each other a lot and went: this is kind of extraordinary. And the locals were saying that, not just the wide-eyed Europeans. I was very outdoorsy before. I’m all about that. That’s my refuge as well. Not for the same reasons as Phil, but I find comfort in the humbling scale of it, of what it returns you to think of in terms of being a species on the third rock from the sun, rather than everything else we tie ourselves in knots over, to do with identity and our day-to-day struggles. At dude camp you had riding and banjo lessons. You learned how to roll a cigarette one-handed and castrate a bull. Have you kept any of that up? Yeah! Also taxidermy and ironmongery. Taxidermy is little bit hard to come by in this part of LA [where he’s shooting the new Dr Strange]. I think I’d get a few frowns. Horse riding I’ll definitely keep up. Ironmongery is a very specific thing. Roping and braiding: I haven’t caught myself braiding a bit of grass or twine or anything else at hand, in moments where I could have done. I do still use the loud whistle. That’s very helpful when you’re corralling small children on a beach or they’re far away from you. I hope they don’t grow up thinking that I think of them as Phil thinks of his cattle. But it’s a good tool of communication. And it’s better than shouting out names. I really enjoyed playing the banjo. I was awful at it compared to Phil, but it’s a very satisfying if peculiar instrument and you can have a lot of fun with it, with very little skill. I’m getting there. What do you play? Little exercises and repetitive scales and standards which are on the verge of bluegrass but the minute I speed them up kind of fall apart. A bit of Radiohead. It’s very meditative. I’m not gonna sing on a stage any time soon; it’s just for my own enjoyment. But I really do love it.American TV viewers weren’t exactly clamoring for a 10-part docuseries on Formula 1 racing, a sport that has previously been thought of in the US as the most tedious of all pastimes, literally going around in circles. “Let’s be real folks, F1 is garbage racing in cars and technology none of us will ever dream to drive,” tweeted one former driver and Fox Nascar analyst in 2018, reflecting a wider mood in the US. So when Formula 1: Drive to Survive, launched on Netflix in March 2018, it seemed doomed, especially as the show had no access to Mercedes and Ferrari – the main protagonists in the championship chase. This forced producers (who chided the title rivals for “letting the sport down”) to focus on the teams fighting for relevancy farther down the grid. But, strangely, Americans didn’t much care about the main story becoming a B-plot. Instead, we swooned over Sauber’s Charles Leclerc and other heartthrob drivers; we felt for Claire Williams, the sport’s only female team principal; we salivated over the boss-level beef between Red Bull’s Christian Horner and Renault’s Cyril Abiteboul. Then we turned out for that November’s US Grand Prix in Austin, Texas, a quarter million deep, a slightly crowd than when organizers used a Taylor Swift concert to goose turnout in 2016. That may well have been the moment Netflix knew they had a mega hit. Since Mercedes and Ferrari came aboard the following season, Drive to Survive has been doing what was once thought to be impossible: flipping Americans into Formula 1 fans. More than 400,000 turned up for this year’s US Grand Prix. One million more watched the race on TV. Overall ratings for this season are up more than 40%, making this the most-watched F1 season in America. A second American race, through the streets of Miami, was added to the 2022 schedule – the first time the US has hosted two races since 1984. And it’s not just the US – the sport added an estimated 73 million fans last year, in markets including Brazil, China and France. Sunday’s championship decider in Abu Dhabi averaged almost a million viewers, and its controversial ending kept social media users buzzing well into the NFL afternoon slate. Mostly, they argued about whether Max Verstappen’s last-lap upset of seven-time-world champion Lewis Hamilton was engineered as a ratings lead-in to Drive to Survive’s season four premiere in March. Through a mix of broadcast footage, recorded interviews and dashcam angles, the series has taken what, in the US at least, has been seen as a sport for anoraks (what with all the obsessing over time splits and drag coefficients and tyre temperatures) and reimagines it as a high-stakes clash of big egos, tense power struggles and stunning betrayals.The producers understood a fundamental truth of American binge watchers: drama is our love language. This is the brilliance of Drive to Survive, presenting F1 in terms a Real Housewives fan can process: Daniel Ricciardo is the guy you want leading your pub crawl. Lance Stroll is the spoiled son of a billionaire Bond villain. Christian Horner is married to Ginger Spice and yet Mercedes team principal Toto Wolff, aka Racing Arnold Schwarzenegger, lives rent-free in his head. What’s more, the tension unravels against an ever shifting backdrop of private planes, paddock suits and supercars. “Formula 1 is the perfect sport to obsess over because there is no end to how far down the rabbit hole you can go,” wrote The Ringer’s Kevin Clark. “It reinvents itself constantly and is based on a million little edges that add up to big ones.” The Netflix show has drawn hundreds of thousands of sports agnostics to F1, including a lot of women. “On the weekends when there is no Grand Prix for me to watch while groggily drinking coffee on my couch at 9 am”, wrote The Atlantic’s Amanda Mull, “I now feel a bit disoriented.” The number of female attendees at this year’s Mexican Grand Prix – which follows right after the US race – rose by 30% compared to just the previous year. Drive to Survive has also sparked a massive fan spike in the ever coveted 16- to 35-year-old demographic. Nielsen Sports research found that 77% of the growth was driven by this age group. Having so many young, telegenic drivers – not least, a 24-year-old champion now – is a casting coup. Other American sports are in a rush to green light their own spinoffs: the PGA golf tour is currently filming a Netflix reality series that uses Drive to Survive as its blueprint, while Amazon has expanded their All Or Nothing sports reality franchise to include seasons on the Toronto Maple Leafs, Arsenal FC and the Brazilian national soccer team. But those other sports will have a hard time recreating a scene as high stakes as Haas’ Romain Grosjean nearly being burned alive in his cockpit after crashing out of the 2020 Bahrain Grand Prix. Not everything in Drive to Survive tracks. Fans have decried the artistic license show creators have taken while stitching in-car radio snippets out of context and overheating some interpersonal conflicts. But those gripes pale in comparison to the white-hot outrage that followed Sunday’s finale. It’s enough to make you wonder if this is what F1’s managing director of commercial operations envisioned years ago when he said the sport “should create a little less predictability” as F1 pivoted “from motorsports company to a media and entertainment brand”. For many F1 loyalists, the tail is now wagging the dog. With ESPN’s carriage rights set to expire after the 2022 season, Netflix has been bandied about as a potential successor. Such a move would do as much to consolidate F1’s audience as blur the lines between sport and entertainment, fact and truthiness. For the sports’ existing fans, it could spell the end of fairness and objectivity in its 75-year history. But it sure sounds like damned good TV.Magnus Carlsen is “unlikely” to defend his world title in classical chess again unless his opponent is the rising star Alireza Firouzja. The Norwegian’s statement, in a podcast made public on Tuesday, opens up an uncertain future where the game could have two rival No 1s, as occurred in the years after Garry Kasparov broke with Fide, the world governing body, in 1993. Carlsen cited lack of motivation as the main factor: “ It’s been clear to me for most of the year that this world championship should be the last,” he said. “It doesn’t mean as much anymore as it once did. I haven’t felt that the positive outweighs the negative”. He will be far from retiring completely; indeed his next action over the board is almost imminent. From Christmas to the New Year, Carlsen will be at the World Rapid and Blitz championships in Warsaw, where he will attempt to win the Rapid for the third and the Blitz for the fifth time and to hold three world titles simultaneously. After that, starting with Wijk aan Zee in January, he has set himself a new target in classical chess-to become the first player to reach the stratospheric target of a 2900 rating. The all-time list on the 2700chess website shows that while 15 players have achieved lifetime peaks above 2800, only three – Carlsen, Kasparov and Fabiano Caruana – have made it beyond 2850. Carlsen has already reached 2882 twice, in 2014 and 2019, and even higher, 2889, on the live ratings. But he still looks at the task like the early Everest mountaineers just a few hundred feet from the summit: “I have never had it as a goal before, because I felt it was difficult. I have raised my rating a bit again now, to 2865, and it is at least a goal you can set,” he continued. “It does not feel completely impossible, but at the same time I know I have to be at the top of my game every time I play. There is no room for error. It is something to motivate oneself for.” The 31-year-old is interested in another classical title defence only if his opponent is Firouzja, the 18-year-old who is favourite for next year’s Candidates and who has already broken Carlsen’s record as the youngest ever to achieve a 2800 rating. Carlsen won his previous five championship matches against India’s Vishy Anand (twice), America’s Fabiano Caruana, and Russia’s Sergey Karjakin and Ian Nepomniachtchi. His decision to stop after at most one further defence means he is passing up the chance to surpass the record of six titles held jointly by Emanuel Lasker and Kasparov. If Firouzja does win the Candidates next summer, he will then challenge Carlsen for the world crown in early 2023, and all is clear; but other scenarios are possible. By naming the former Iranian, who now represents France, in this way, Carlsen has put extra pressure on the teenager and also gives Firouzja’s opponents in the Candidates an incentive to make a special effort against him. If Firouzja is knocked out of contention in the eight-man tournament next summer and Carlsen refuses to play the Candidates winner, then the regulations say that there will be a match between the winner and the runner-up, not just for first place, but for the world championship itself. The glittering incentive for the other seven will be that two of them would then take part in the lucrative (€2m prize fund in 2021) match for the title. A plausible scenario is that Fabiano Caruana wins the Candidates. The American, 29, was No 2 in the ratings behind Carlsen for a long time, and has been the most consistent Candidate since 2014, finishing successively second, first and fourth. If he wins in 2022 and Carlsen then declines to play him again, it seems between quite likely and very probable that the US chess Maecenas Rex Sinquefield will step in with a sizeable increase in the prize fund. Sinquefield could even consider doubling it, as Jim Slater famously did in 1972 to save the Bobby Fischer v Boris Spassky match in Reykjavik, and offering his and Caruana’s home city of St Louis as the match venue. Another unlikely but possible scenario is that Firouzja is half a point ahead of a rival before the final round, with the pair clear of the field. If Firouzja wins, he will probably lose the match to Carlsen due to inexperience. If he loses and Carlsen declines to meet the rival, then under the regulations the rival and Firouzja would play a match for the world title which the 19-year-old could win and thus become champion while avoiding Carlsen. Whatever the consequences of Carlsen’s decision, the Norwegian has earned the right to make an unorthodox move. He has exceeded all previous world champions in promoting chess as a popular mind sport by being an active and involved player all year round and in a variety of formats. He has played classical, rapid, blitz and banter blitz, bullet and Chess 960 at the highest level. He has brought new sponsors to the game, organised important tournaments, and overall has shown a positive and articulate respect to the chess community, in marked contrast to the self-centred Fischer and the divisive Kasparov. British chess has just had its first casualties from Omicron. The traditional Hastings congress scheduled to start on 29 December has been cancelled, a rare break in the series launched in 1920 and staged annually since, apart from the war years and the 2020-21 online version. GM Gawain Jones won last week’s 10-player English Rapidplay in Central London, beating GM Luke McShane in the play-off after the pair tied on 7/9. There have been no reported Covid-19 illnesses yet among the players, but Nigel Short, who was present as a commentator, tweeted a selfie on Tuesday from his hospital bed. The Guardian joins in wishing the 1993 world title challenger a speedy recovery. 3794: 1...Rxd5! 2 Qxd5 Qf6+ 3 Kg1 Qxf1+! 4 Kxf1 Nxe3+ and Nxd5 leaves Black a knight ahead with a simple endgame win.Aside from Liverpool, West Bromwich Albion are the only team in the top four tiers with an unbeaten league record at home this season. They also have the best defensive record in the Championship and are third in the table, five points off the summit, but not all supporters are feeling the festive cheer there. On Friday, Valérien Ismaël will return to Barnsley – whose fans developed an unconditional love for him during a remarkable run to the play-offs – for the first time as an opposition manager and knows his popularity at Oakwell could plummet if he picks up three points. “It [would] mean I did my job,” Ismaël smiles. Barnsley know what to expect. “Yes,” comes the instant reply from the defender Mads Andersen, a key cog under Ismaël as Barnsley finished fifth last season. “High press, direct play, set pieces – we are ready for it.” Ismaël has implemented that style, which transformed Barnsley from relegation candidates to unlikely promotion contenders, at Albion and a minority of fans remain unconvinced. The Under-23s, second in Premier League 2 Division Two, have adopted the same 3-4-3 formation and philosophy. “The people needed to learn about my methods and our way to play and it is still a process but I think now, after six months, we have learned a lot and we have progressed a lot,” Ismaël says. “We know more about ourselves and the players believe more and more in our way.” Victory at Barnsley would represent a third in a row at a time when others are wobbling. The leaders, Fulham, have drawn four on the bounce and second-placed Bournemouth are winless in five. West Brom started with four wins from five games but a run of one victory in six, which began with October’s comprehensive defeat at Fulham, alarmed some supporters. “I was surprised that it started very, very well and after it was clear that we needed to develop the squad,” Ismaël says. “We want to be strong out of possession, in possession and at set pieces – they are the three pillars – and at the minute we improve massively in all areas. Now it is all about taking the next step.” Albion gave Ismaël a four-year contract after paying £2m in compensation to Barnsley and are adamant this is a long-term project. Some Albion supporters worry Ismaël’s style is better suited to the underdog, given how Barnsley bloodied noses last season. West Brom intend to return to the Premier League at the first attempt. “At West Brom, you’re expected to win every game,” says Alex Mowatt, who followed Ismaël to Albion from Barnsley. “They [fans] get frustrated if you’re not winning, but rightly so because we’re expected to be at the top of the table, or in and around there.” Ismaël felt the backing of the Albion hierarchy upon taking charge. “The club told me clearly before I signed that this is the way the club wants to go, a clear plan, a clear way to play and [to] create a pathway for the young players,” he says. “It was a massive topic that the club was really unhappy that a lot of very good young players left the club for [clubs such as] Aston Villa and Leeds and never got the chance to play for West Brom. It was one of the main topics and it takes time. It’s clear the expectations are high.” The big news at Albion this week was Wednesday’s arrival of their lesser-spotted Chinese owner, Guochuan Lai, at the training ground, for his first face-to-face meeting with Ismaël. The entrepreneur has not attended a game at the Hawthorns for three years, leaving day-to-day running of the club to the chief executive Xu Ke – known as Ken – and chairman Li Piyue. Lai also met players and senior staff. He discussed the January transfer window and made clear his satisfaction at the emergence of young players, with the 19-year-old Taylor Gardner-Hickman impressing in recent weeks. There are also high hopes for the striker Reyes Cleary, 17, and midfielder Rico Richards, 18. “If everything goes in the right direction like we spoke, then we’re in a good place,” Ismaël says. “He [Lai] is completely committed.” Conor Townsend has excelled at wing-back and last week the winger Adam Reach filled in at centre-back because of illness and injury. There is no absence of steel or spirit but Ismaël knows Albion must be more ruthless, with Matt Phillips among those asked to play as a striker in the absence of a talismanic No 9; Jordan Hugill has struggled on loan from Norwich and Kenneth Zohore, an £8m signing under Slaven Bilic, has not started a league game for almost two years. Ismaël is thought to be keen on reuniting with the Orlando City striker Daryl Dike, a revelation during a four-month loan at Barnsley last season. At Oakwell, Ismaël saw the fans only once – when 4,000 attended their play-off against Swansea. He will no doubt get a similar reaction – before kick-off at least – on Friday. West Brom hope to record their first victory there since 1947, while second-bottom Barnsley are desperate for lift-off under another new head coach, Poya Asbaghi. “It was a successful story to show that when everyone is on the same page, everything is possible,” Ismaël says. “I’m grateful I got the chance to manage in English football. It was a win-win situation for everyone.”The year’s best film is a western, based on a novel from the 1960s (by Thomas Savage) when the western was a more accepted popular genre in both movies and books than it is now. But it modifies that genre, creating something more elusive and unmanageable: western psychodrama? Western gothic? And it tackles issues around sexual politics, toxic masculinity and family dysfunction in a very contemporary way. The Power of the Dog is Jane Campion’s first feature film in over a decade, the last 10 years having been mostly taken up with her hit streaming-TV series, Top of the Lake, with Elisabeth Moss. Maybe that project influenced the element of murder mystery in this latest film, whose title is taken from Psalms 22:20: “Deliver my soul from the sword, my precious life from the power of the dog!” Benedict Cumberbatch and Jesse Plemons play two brothers, Phil and George, who run a cattle ranch in 1920s Montana. Phil is a sweaty roughneck: an instinctive and vicious bully who calls his brother “fatso”, encourages the ranch-hands to mock him and jeers at George’s pretensions to fancy clothes and hats. In his self-important and self-congratulatory way, Phil is obsessed with the fact he is the one with the hands-on practical know-how to make the ranch work, unlike his milksop brother, because he learned these skills from a veteran rancher, now dead, called Bronco Henry. But Phil is also repressed and utterly reliant on George emotionally: these two grown men share a bedroom in their large house like little kids. But which of these two is putting on airs? Who is putting on the act? The two brothers come from money: their rich, sophisticated and politically well-connected parents staked them in the business. There is an excruciating scene when the elderly couple come for dinner: George insists on dressing up in a tux. But Phil embarrasses everyone by showing up sweaty and dirty. The existing tensions between the brothers explode into the open when George reveals to Phil that he has got married, to Rose (Kirsten Dunst) the widow who runs the cafe in town and has a sensitive teenage son Peter (Kodi Smit-McPhee), now to be George’s stepson and heir. Rose is going to move in as the mistress of the house and Phil senses the immediate loss in his own status: he subjects Rose to a hateful campaign of harassment and makes Peter the subject of homophobic bullying. But then, a strange turnaround takes place: he makes friends with young Peter and declares he will take him riding in the remote hills where he will school him in the ways of ranching and being a man – the way Bronco Henry schooled him. Cumberbatch makes Phil a vivid and horrible monster, all the more disquieting for his flashes of intelligence and cunning. When Rose brings her piano into the big house (an irresistible echo of the earlier Campion classic) and attempts to play Strauss’s Radetzky March on it, Phil mischievously joins in on his five-string banjo, putting poor Rose off her stroke and revealing that he is, in fact, rather more musically talented than she is. But Kodi Smit-McPhee’s performance as Peter matches him in presence and potency, and the story doesn’t at all go where you think. It is a movie with lethal bite.The prosecution: Ciara With the Christmas decorations, mum rules with a rod of iron – and takes away all the fun For as long as I can remember we’ve called my mum “Mrs Claus”, because she really gets into the spirit of Christmas. Her mother was the same – it’s traditional. But the decorating process is never without tension. One year, when arranging tinsel, I accidentally smashed a vintage glass bauble that mum had inherited from her family. She fell to her knees and let out this loud, low wail. She shouted “You’re careless!” at me and didn’t talk to me for two days. Over the years we’ve lost a wise man, a baby Jesus and the Virgin Mary. All of them smashed to smithereens. Each time I tried to hide it from mum for as long as possible. When she finds out, all hell breaks loose. We’re told that we don’t look after things, that we’re selfish. But accidents happen. Decorating our house is a huge process – it begins with going into the cellar, where there are boxes and boxes of ornaments – and takes two days. Mum wants the tree up on 1 December and not taken down until the end of January. I think it should come down straight after 1 January, but my opinion doesn’t matter. Everything has to be done to mum’s taste. If I’m not heavily involved she will accuse me of being uninterested, but when I do take charge of something – say, the lights – she will control it. I’ll spend ages arranging them only for her to take one look and say, “I don’t like it.” It’s exhausting. None of us kids lives at home any more, but when we’re back for Christmas we are expected to step up. I’m the eldest of three, so it falls on me to liaise with my siblings and find time when we’re all free to decorate the house. My mum dictates the whole process from start to finish. If I don’t create a schedule to suit her, it’s, “Oh you never help. You’re so ungrateful.” It’s not that; it’s just hard to get everyone together. This year, I want mum to relax. It’s nice to go all out with the house, but it’s better to take it easy. The process puts too much pressure on us all. Christmas is about family time, not flashing lights and figurines. The defence: Aileen My children should be grateful I make the effort to decorate the house, and respect my feelings Every Christmas, I move the boxes from the cellar and put the decorations up. After my hard work, Ciara will pop up and say: “Oh it’s lovely. It all looks so Christmassy. Can I help?” But most of the time it’s already done. For Ciara, the idea of decorating is much more exciting than the reality. She wants to come and place the last bauble on the tree, but even then she will probably break it. A lot of mothers are territorial over the tree. When Ciara was small, she’d bring back decorations she’d made at school. I’d say, “Yes, it’s lovely darling,” then hide it around the back. Now my kids are older, I still like decorating the tree as a family, but when their backs are turned or they’ve gone to bed, I move things about. I rearrange it to my taste. I like things to be symmetrical. When Ciara smashed a bauble that was precious to me, she was like, “Oh, well.” But it had been in the family for years. I don’t think I reacted too badly – she’s exaggerating. But Ciara doesn’t realise that decorations have sentimental value. The nativity crib gets pride of place in our home: we put it in the hallway. I set out the figures to look just right but Ciara always rearranges it. Things have gone missing over the years: the ox and the kings have mysteriously vanished. That stresses me out because I put a lot of effort into making it look good. When it’s time to take down the decorations, everyone is suddenly busy. While Ciara has benefited from my arrangements all Christmas, she quickly disappears when it’s time to remove them. I have an orderly process of packing them away so that next year it’s easy to unbox. But Ciara just wants to throw it all in the cellar. I put a lot of effort into making the house look nice. It’s something my mother always did and it’s been passed down. I want Ciara and her siblings to carry on the tradition but also to ensure that they make themselves free when I ask, and to take more care when handling decorations. Ciara is lucky I still put so much effort into the house each Christmas – many families don’t bother. The jury of Guardian readers Should Aileen stop being a Christmas decoration tyrant? Aileen should be free to decorate the house how she wants – that’s not actually the issue. The issue is the emotional blackmail and unreasonable demands she makes of her children. She has no right to expect them to join in her decorating frenzy, and needs to let them live their own lives. Martin, 50 Judging others’ actions based on exacting specifications is no fun for anyone. The family should start a new tradition. Have one day for Aileen to set up non-negotiable festive displays, and a second for the family to add finishing touches and enjoy shared time. Shona, 41 I have nothing but sympathy for Ciara and her siblings. Feeling forced to carry on a tradition that’s both time-consuming and stressful sounds pretty awful. Aileen needs to chill and recognise how wonderful it is that the kids even come home for Christmas! That’s the important bit. Jude, 52 I side with the prosecution. Christmas baubles are delicate, and breakages are inevitable. Aileen also upsets her family when she rearranges the decorations, creating tension. Jan, 69 Christmas can be such a fraught time and it sounds as if Aileen regards herself as the “keeper of traditions”. That’s fine – as long as she owns it! If she wants to put the tree up and pack the items her way then she cannot expect others to join in the exacting regime. I’m with Ciara. Emma, 52 You be the judge So now you can be the judge, click on the poll below to tell us: should Aileen stop being so picky about the Christmas decorations? We’ll share the results on the next You be the judge, in two weeks’ time. The poll is now closed Last week’s result We asked if Jay should try to get over his phobia of seafood, something that annoys his girlfriend, Ines. 26% of you said no – Jay is innocent 74% of you said yes – Jay is guilty Have a disagreement you’d like settled? Or want to be part of our jury? Click hereCan there be a silver lining to the disaster that is Covid? It happens in wars when societies shift focus and priority. It should happen in pandemics, too. Boris Johnson has adopted a presidential style of government. He rules, as we saw on Sunday, by television performance and press conferences during which he is in control. Apart from his weekly fisticuffs with Keir Starmer at prime minister’s questions, that is all the Johnson we get. As the political theorist and activist Thomas Paine once said, he touches the Commons “with an opium wand, and it sleeps obedience”. This week parliament woke up and hit back. Tory MPs did not seriously disagree with the government’s Covid policy, which they knew would pass. But 100 of them took the opportunity to disagree with Johnson’s leadership and, in effect, vote no confidence in him. They gave him a formal warning. With its blood pressure thus raised, can we hope that parliament might now take a serious look at itself? It has had a terrible year. MPs have been revealed as paid lobbyists. Many are moonlighting. Corruption allegations are rife. During lockdown the old chamber seemed tired and stilted. MPs found to their surprise that they could vote – and even speak – electronically from home, and no one noticed any difference. The Lords survived yet another bought peerages scandal, its 783-strong membership apparently past all shame. Next year parliament faces a new crisis. It must decide whether to move out to make way for yet another round of rebuilding. Most of the palace of Westminster was supposedly renovated in the 1980s, when asbestos was removed and architect Augustus Pugin’s interiors restored. The interiors were said at the time to be “to a Versailles standard”. Since then the palace’s entire roof has just been replaced, at a cost of £80m, and Big Ben is in the process of being renovated over the course of five years and a further £80m. Curiously, much of it seems to need doing again. The Commons in 2015 turned to Whitehall’s favourite firm of consultants, Deloitte, with the architects BDP and the US Olympics contractor, CH2M in tow,. The conclusion was that the palace needed to be rebuilt. MPs were advised that they would need to decant for four years into a temporary chamber down the road off Whitehall, at a cost of £1bn. MPs said the chamber should be an exact facsimile, with even the voting lobbies recreated even if that meant, as it did, demolishing the listed former department of health. The Lords, meanwhile, would take over the entire QEII centre, at a cost of £500m, complete with rooftop terrace restaurant. The price of this whole operation began at between £3.5bn and £5.6bn. It has now soared, according to Meg Hillier of the public accounts committee, to nearer £12bn. No one in parliament seemed to have any interest in challenging this. If the MPs were local councillors, someone would have sent in commissioners. Since these proposals were first mooted, suspicion has grown that the Commons, or at least the taxpayer, was buying a pig in a poke. Lockdown has showed MPs that hybrid working can actually work. Most MPs do just three or four days in London and the Commons chamber is rarely full, except for during PMQs. Most serious parliamentary activity in terms of select committee hearings and legislative work is in office rooms, and they could be anywhere. If a decant were really necessary, it would clearly be an ideal opportunity for image-building, moving MPs and peers not just out of Westminster but out of London for the requisite three years. Nothing would convey more symbolically the sincerity of “levelling up”. The opportunity could also be taken to experiment with a non-confrontational chamber layout. Most democratic assemblies are arranged in a semicircle, conveying individual responsibility rather than Westminster’s baying mobs. The layout is thought to yield more reasoned and less partisan debate. This would also be a moment to refresh parliament’s constitutional functions. Its deliberative role has long declined in favour of the press and broadcasting, and that is probably terminal. But its legislative role is important. Public bill committees should be given higher profile. During the recent German interregnum, Bundestag laws were argued, compromised and voted on, ad hoc, by multiparty committees. They were, I am told, remarkably non-partisan and successful. Where the Commons most needs to reform itself is in its role as a check on the executive. The Speaker, Lindsay Hoyle, was furious this week at Johnson treating parliament with contempt. Important policy decisions, he said, should be reported to parliament before being announced on TV or to the press. The trouble is that the Commons makes an awful press conference. It is set up as a bifocal battleground, with aggressive or defensive posturing at the dispatch box. If MPs want to hear ministerial announcements – as they should – they would do better to stage their own hearings in a sober setting and with sober questions asked. They have got to get over tradition. The reality is that parliament is a weak not a strong institution. It lacks leadership or the confidence to reform itself. Like an archaic church, it takes refuge in precedent and tradition. There is never the right time to reform. Lockdown has shown that upheaval and disruption can challenge old ways. Much of education can be performed online without formal lectures. So can the courts of law. Office work need not be shoehorned into a long commute and an eight-hour day. We can now shop at the touch of a button. I know of no one whose work and thus life has not been altered by coronavirus. This may be bad for some, but for others the cloud can have a silver lining. Those others should include parliament. • This article was amended on 22 December 2021. An earlier version said that public bill committee debates should be conducted in the open, but this is already the case. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistThere’s a moment in The D’Amelio Show, the Hulu reality series about teenage TikTok stars Charli and Dixie D’Amelio and their parents, in which the 17-year-old Charli – who shot to fame on the platform as a 15-year-old sophomore in high school with chipper, lithe dance videos – tries to make sense of the rupture in her life: “I don’t consider myself famous,” she says in a standard reality confessional. “I’m just a person that a lot of people follow for some reason. I think it was the right place, right time. I think it was a vibe, maybe, that I give off.” I thought about this response for weeks after the show’s September premiere, first because it’s ridiculous for Charli D’Amelio to be considered “not famous” – she has, at time of writing, over 131m followers on TikTok – her name and face synonymous with the platform at the forefront of pop culture. But also, I get it. Over the course of a few months in 2019, Charli D’Amelio went from high schooler in Connecticut with today’s version of anonymity – a figure to your first and second hand connections, visible online with attention proportional to your peers – to global celebrity, the face of cultural forces (the explosion of TikTok, the bland algorithmic medium of everyone’s taste) outside of one’s control or full understanding. How could anyone make sense of that? How could you see yourself? It’s a heavy question that carries through several other films about celebrity this year, from Billie Eilish’s surprisingly grounded Apple TV documentary The World’s a Little Blurry to this week’s Juice WRLD: Into the Abyss, the HBO film about the late icon of so-called “SoundCloud rap.” In footage shot by tour videographers during the last year of his life (the emo-rap artist, who openly struggled with opioid addiction, died of an accidental drug overdose in December 2019, less than a week after his 21st birthday), Juice, born Jarad Anthony Higgins, attempts to account for his meteoric popularity: “It still feels surreal,” he says on a Facetime call with a fellow rapper. “If I stop and think about it, that’s how my head’s gonna get too full and that’s how I’m gonna become an asshole or somebody that went Hollywood, somebody that’s not a genuine person.” Fame is an evergreen, often tragic subject for the camera; we’re all familiar with a star, often female, falling from icon to ire, dogged by delusion, caving to the pressure of others’ expectations or opinions, a la Amy Winehouse in Asif Kapadia’s heartbreaking Amy. Celebrity’s toxicity undergirded some of the year’s most popular and polarizing documentaries, from Framing Britney Spears to HBO’s Jagged, on Alanis Morrissette to Roadrunner: A Film about Anthony Bourdain. Several, such as Malfunction: The Dressing Down of Janet Jackson, have tried to re-evaluate or contextualize the narrative of past celebrity according to current values, tilling and curating an archive to find the person or truth therein. But a batch on the newest generation of stars look forward, trying capture an unfolding cultural paradox: fame is at once swifter and more stratifying than ever before, but also more democratized. The World’s a Little Blurry, Into the Abyss, and the D’Amelio Show offer fascinating, often bleak portraits of what it’s like to win the fame lottery anyone with an online presence is playing, deliberately or not; on the internet, we’re all famous, observed by people we can’t see and discernible to people we don’t know. The pressure of maintaining an image for masses of people you don’t know is well-trod territory, given sensitive and at times shocking treatment in 2021, especially for female celebrities whose bodies, attractiveness, age, thinness, and desirability are always under scrutiny. In Demi Lovato: Dancing with the Devil, the now 28-year-old singer recounts how the chaste image as a Disney Channel star in the aughts kept them from not only reporting rape by a costar, but understanding it as a violation in the first place. The queasy collection of documentaries on Britney Spears – the New York Times and FX on Hulu’s succinct and damning Framing Britney Spears and Controlling Britney Spears, Netflix’s less effective Britney vs Spears – brought fresh outrage to the pop star’s hounding by the press and long-ignored abuse through her family’s legal control of her estate. Others took fame as a prerequisite to tragedy. Roadrunner, directed by Morgan Neville, begins not with Bourdain’s evolution as a chef, but with the true bisection of his life: celebrity, which arrived at age 43, in 2000, with the publication of Kitchen Confidential. Through interviews with close friends and a trove of archival footage and reanimated correspondence, Roadrunner burrows into a restless, complicated character bogged down by the familiar, persistent burden of fame. Into the Abyss, which similarly (if over a much shorter period) synthesizes archival footage and interviews with the inner circle for a tribute to a generational talent with demons exacerbated by the whirlwind (and access to drugs) of stardom. The pressure to always stay visible, the bottomless appetite for new content, the escalating demands for authenticity – these are familiar dynamics to anyone on social media in 2021, though experienced in concentrate by celebrities made famous online at mind-boggling speed. “I can’t have one moment where I’m like ‘I don’t wanna do this,’” Eilish laments in The World’s a Little Blurry after a fan wrote on Instagram that she was rude during a meet-and-greet. “I have to keep smiling and if I don’t, they hate me and think I’m horrible.” The most fascinating and troubling exploration of fame, however, came from The D’Amelio Show, one of the nascent TikTok-to-Hollywood productions (such as Addison Rae’s gender-flipped He’s All That) that appears to fill the mantle left by Keeping Up with the Kardashians, but operates more as a mental health PSA. Over the course of several episodes and half-hearted plot points – beach date, family dinner, Dixie’s first live singing performance, Charli’s nomination for a fan award – the D’Amelios appear to be a loving family confounded by stardom, unsure if it’s worth it, yet stuck in the spotlight loop. Mass attention, courted but not explicitly sought on TikTok, has made the teenage girls paranoid, wary, timid, unable to find fun in their old passions; the job of celebrity seems even more fragile when the talent was being yourself. As the pilot ends, Dixie breaks down in anxious sobs over negative comments about her appearance in a Vogue video. The camera cautiously enters her bedroom, where she’s comforted by her parents. Dixie doesn’t want to do it anymore, doesn’t want to be judged; yet, she and her family assure, they want this filmed, so people can understand, can see. It’s a familiar feeling, wanting to both connect and opt out, at a scale that gives me chills. The camera keeps rolling.With that, we’ll end our live coverage for today. Here’s a recap of today’s major news developments: A child who was in hospital after yesterday’s tragedy in Davenport was released today, with three others in a critical condition. Police also released the names of the five children who died in the incident. NSW registered a record 2,213 new locally acquired Covid cases today, and one death. Victoria recorded 1,510 new cases and seven deaths. Queensland recorded 20 new cases. The ACT also recorded 20 new cases today. South Australia recorded 64 new cases, with one person in hospital. The NT town of Tennant Creek has been placed under lockdown after four new cases were recorded. Former Wallabies star David Pocock said he will run as an independent candidate for the Senate at next year’s federal election The NSW government made the decision to restrict visitors to health facilities, as Covid cases grow. NSW and Victoria also decided to scrap the 72-hour isolation for international arrivals Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk announced that mask mandates will be returned to retail settings over Christmas and New Year. South Australia relaxed number of restrictions, including allowing standing while drinking, dancing and the removal of caps on visitors at home. 90% of Australia’s over 16 population are now double vaccinated. Australia’s chief medical officer Paul Kelly said the Omicron variant adds ‘complexity’ but vaccines remain effective New Zealand has recorded 76 new locally acquired cases, 47 of which were in Auckland. The ministry of health added that there were 51 cases in hospital, with five of those in intensive care. The second Ashes test continues in Adelaide, and you can keep up at our liveblog here: Santa Claus, unlike many other, more real people, appears to have been granted an exemption to enter Western Australia. Australian Fair Trade and Investment Network (Aftinet) says a clause in the free trade agreement with the UK raises doubts about the Australian government’s commitment to waiving intellectual property rights on Covid-19 vaccines. The intellectual property chapter says both the UK and Australia “recognise the importance of contributing to the international efforts to implement Article 31bis of the TRIPS Agreement”. Dr Patricia Ranald, the convener of Aftinet, said this is part of the intellectual property agreement Trips that allows for “compulsory licensing” agreements to be struck – an argument some countries have used to reject calls for a specific waiver to deal with the Covid-19 pandemic. “As we’ve seen over the last 18 months, these provisions are not working,” she said. “It is too difficult for each low-income government to negotiate with each company about each particular medicine. “Australia says that is supports the TRIPS waiver but the debate in the WTO has been between those who support the TRIPS waiver and those who have opposed it, including the UK and the EU, who have [cited] this specific clause in the TRIPS agreement to say we don’t need a waiver. “It is a confusing signal. It casts some doubt on Australia’s commitment. Why would they agree to put this specific clause in the agreement? It’s not in the CPTPP, for example, or intellectual property provisions in other similar agreements.” The Australian and UK governments have also agreed on a side letter on medicines that says that Australia and the UK “will strengthen their cooperation on regulation of medicines”. Qantas will not have to rehire 2,000 ground-handling workers whose roles the airline unlawfully outsourced during the pandemic, with the federal court dismissing an application for reinstatement. Instead, the airline will have to pay compensation to the workers, Justice Michael Lee ruled on Friday afternoon, following months of remediation hearings between Qantas and the Transport Workers Union. In July, the federal court ruled that Qantas’ decision to sack about 2,000 ground-handling staff and was in part driven by the fact that many of the axed workers were union members with stronger bargaining capabilities. Qantas previously maintained the outsourcing measure was a necessary financial measure that could save $100m annually, and chief executive Alan Joyce has previously said the airline plans to appeal the July decision. Qantas had previously asked for remedy hearings to be delayed until after the appeal is heard, however Lee determined the affected workers needed clarity about their jobs before the end of the year. Case management hearings to determine an appropriate remedy for the outsourcing will continue, however Lee granted the TWU leave to appeal Friday’s ruling. A TWU spokeswoman told the Guardian the union will appeal Friday’s decision. Lee noted the commercial reality of rehiring the workers given Qantas had restructured its ground handling operations to rely on contractors. During remedy hearings this week, the court heard Richard Dalton QC, the barrister representing Qantas, said the process of rehiring the outsourced workers “would require an unscrambling of the egg”. And we have confirmation now, with both NSW and Victoria jointly announcing they will scrap the three-day isolation for international arrivals. Instead, arrivals will need to get a PCR test within 24 hours of arrival and isolate until they get a negative result. In a joint statement, NSW premier Dominic Perrottet and acting Victorian premier James Merlino said it was a move made to allow people to celebrate Christmas with their relatives: We know it has been a challenging time for international travel with new rules and the emergence of the Omicron variant, but this announcement is about simplifying the process and making sure Australia’s two biggest cities have a consistent approach. This decision has been made with safety remaining the top priority, which is why all arrivals must return a negative PCR test before they can exit isolation and have an additional test following that. Under the new rules, arrivals will still need to provide a negative pre-departure test, as well as another test on day six in NSW and between days five and seven in Victoria. Hotel quarantine will remain a requirement for travellers who are not vaccinated. We are hearing reports that NSW and Victoria are looking to lift the 72-hour isolation rule for international arrivals: We will bring more details as they come. Good afternoon, Mostafa Rachwani with you this evening, taking you through the afternoon’s news. Just a quick thanks to Tory Shepherd and Matilda Boseley for their stellar work earlier. This must seem strange to people in NSW and Melbourne, but many South Australians are anxious about the 64 cases of Covid recorded overnight – that’s the highest daily number, ever. And now this: Former Wallaby David Pocock is hoping to play a much rougher game – politics. Pocock will run for an ACT Senate seat at next year’s election. He’ll join a swag of independents hoping to disrupt the two-party system. Pocock nominates climate change, an Indigenous voice to parliament, and a federal integrity commission as issues he’ll focus on. He says: Politics has never been more important. In the face of big challenges like climate change, we need governments making decisions in the best interests of Australians and future generations who will call this amazing continent home. I want to play my part in building a better future. ACT has two Senate spots. If Pocock picks one up, he’ll be the territory’s first independent senator. It’s Friday, which means it’s time for Amanda Meade’s Weekly Beast. Huzzah! It’s got job snobs, Gerard Henderson’s obsessions, Antony Green’s Twitter weirdness and more: Now for something... different. I posted a Twitter thread below about this “treason” court case a man brought against Victorian premier Daniel Andrews. There was CHAOS. (The case was struck out). The story’s up now: Hey, all – again, sorry if this is painful for you. Here are the pictures of the five children who died in the Devonport tragedy. And please see below post for all the helplines if you’re struggling. Everyone, please feel free to skip this post if you need to. The Devonport tragedy is really hard to deal with – I’ve certainly had to have a few breaks from the news today. The Tasmanian police, with permission from the families, have released the names of the five children who were killed. They’ve also released images, which I’ll add in a bit. Those children were: Addison Stewart, 11 years old. Zane Mellor, 12. Jye Sheehan, 12. Jalailah Jayne-Maree Jones, 12. Peter Dodt, 12. “Our thoughts continue to be with the families, loved ones and all those affected by this tragedy,” the police said, and anyone who needs help can contact: Kids Helpline – 1800 551 800 Beyond Blue – 1300 224 636 Lifeline – 13 11 14 Attention Ken Behrens! (And all ACT residents). A potential thunderstorm asthma event is looming this weekend. Elevated pollen levels and possible gusty thunderstorms could cause severe asthma symptoms. The health directorate says be vigilant, prepare for a possible event, carry a puffer, and avoid the outdoors if possible. If you have an asthma action plan, follow it. And if you don’t, think about making one! Also, they recommend this nifty air quality app. Further to Lt Gen John Frewen’s reassurances (below) that we have plenty of booster shots, Hugh Riminton writes that may not be quite the case. He’s cast a steely eye over prime minister Scott Morrison’s statements on the matter and the figures: The NSW government has announced the purchase of 194 hectares of koala habitat near Port Macquarie on the state’s north coast. The purchase has been jointly funded through a $3.5m donation from Koala Conservation Australia and with money from the state’s $193m koala conservation fund. The state’s environment minister, Matt Kean, described the land, which is adjacent to the Lake Innes Nature Reserve, as core koala habitat that “will help us reach our target of doubling the koala population by 2050”. He said there had been sustained community advocacy for the site to be purchased and protected and he said the land would leave “an enduring legacy for the community”. Community members had launched a petition for the government to protect the site that was supported by the local member Leslie Williams. The government plans to add the land to the Lake Innes Nature Reserve and declare it an asset of intergenerational significance, which triggers stronger legal protections. Kean said: Our iconic koalas are increasingly threatened by the loss and fragmentation of habitat, this purchase will protect critical habitat from development and ensure the koala population in this area is safeguarded forever. On your toes, NSW, if you’re in a danger zone: Asked about state restrictions and other pandemic-related decisions, chief medical officer Paul Kelly says that this is a time for “national leadership and national consistency”. The head of the vaccine rollout, Lt Gen John Frewen, says 1.1 million people have had boosters, and that there are “absolutely no concerns” with supply. The big demand will hit in February and March, when 11 million will be eligible – but we’ll have enough. Also Australia has also passed the 90% milestone of over-16s double-dosed – well done you! Australia’s chief medical officer Paul Kelly is giving a Covid update: We are are now seeing we have cases throughout the country. Other than Western Australia, we have had local transmission in recent days. He says we knew this would happen, and that there is “added complexity” from the Omicron variant. It’s more transmissible, but: The vaccine remains effective against severe disease, perhaps a little less than is the case against with Delta, for example, but it does remain effective. And I think that’s one of the reasons why we are seeing increases in cases but not so much of an increase in hospitalisations or other forms of severe disease, so that is important. And get a booster! Kelly also says there’s no move to bring the interval forward, so it stays at five months after the second dose. But he urges people to be flexible over the Christmas period, you can get it a little bit earlier if you’re worried about clinics closing for the holidays. An Atagi (Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation) statement will be out later today, so we’ll keep you posted on that. WA premier Mark McGowan is announcing a “significant” cabinet reshuffle. The top point is that health minister Roger Cook has been replaced by Amber-Jade Sanderson, who had been the environment minister. McGowan said the health portfolio was “gruelling” and that he was giving Cook the opportunity to “broaden”. The ABC reports Cook had “come under increasing pressure over the past two years, as WA’s health system continued to struggle despite the lack of any Covid-19 in the community”. NT chief minister Michael Gunner said the Tennant Creek lockdown will be in place until 5pm on Monday. There is a mask mandate for outdoors, and people can only leave home for: Medical treatment, including Covid testing or vaccination For essential goods and services, like groceries and medications. Only one household member should visit the store, once per day. For work that is considered essential. For one hour of outdoor exercise a day within 5km of your home with one other person or people from your house. To provide care and support to a family member or person who cannot support themselves. In case of an emergency. Acting chief minister Nicole Manison said there were eight new cases in the NT recorded overnight. Vaccination rates were “frustratingly low” in Tennant Creek, she said, with 70% of residents double-dosed. Tennant Creek has gone into an immediate lockdown after four new cases were found in the remote Northern Territory town. More to come. The deal is done. Australia has officially inked a free trade agreement with the UK. Trade minister Dan Tehan said it will make exports cheaper, and would “create new opportunities and further strengthen the special relationship between our two countries”. You can read the preview we put up this morning here: The reaction to a Daily Telegraph piece that awarded prime minister Scott Morrison an “A” grade for the year, because he had “neutralised or turned into net positives” the vaccine rollout and ... Brittany Higgins... Yes, Brittany Higgins... has not gone down well. She will not be “neutralised”. I’m sharing this tweet from the ABC’s Stephen Dziedzic because a) it’s important and b) I love the word “brouhaha”. In nerdy news ... UNSW engineers have created self-healing 3D printed plastic. Simply add a “special powder” to the liquid resin used, print it, and if it breaks, you can then repair it just by shining a standard LED light on it. Cool, huh? Dr Nathaniel Corrigan says: There is an obvious environmental benefit because you’re not having to re-synthesise a brand new material every time it gets broken. We are increasing the lifespan of these materials, which is going to reduce plastic waste. Ash Barty. What a champion. Literally. Again. Fantastic is a rather large stretch today, Matilda Boseley, but thank you! With that, I shall hand you over to the fantastic Tory Shepherd to take you through the next few hours of news. Just in case you were wondering what the NSW daily case number graph looked like nowadays... Not ideal. In comparison, here are the hospitalisation numbers in blue. However, it’s worth remembering that hospitalisations tend to be delayed by a week or two. A big thank-you to data wizard Nick Evershed for the graphs. Huzzah! Tasmania’s premier, Peter Gutwein, says the Devonport tragedy “is beyond comprehension” as police begin piecing together the cause of Thursday’s tragic jumping castle accident that killed five children. Speaking to reporters in Devonport on Friday, he said there had been a huge outpouring of grief and support in the small coastal city on Thursday night. “The tragedy which occurred yesterday is beyond comprehension,” Gutwein said. “It is devastating, heartbreaking. It’s just simply incomprehensible.” Five children – three boys and two girls – died from injuries sustained when the bouncy castle was lifted into the air by a sudden wind gust. Several zorb balls, with children inside, also flew into the air. They were 11 and 12 years old. You can read the full report below: Speaking of the Coalition’s newly unveiled Indigenous voice, here is a little run down on the situation from AAP to get you up to speed: Local and regional advisory bodies would be established as part of a path to an Indigenous voice to advise federal parliament. Up to 35 bodies designed and led by Indigenous communities would be up and running from July 2022 under the proposal accepted by the federal government. It would also be obliged to consult a 24-member national voice on proposed laws overwhelmingly affecting Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. The final report on the Indigenous voice process says: We heard in chorus - from our own people, along with non-Indigenous Australians - how much it would mean for Aboriginal and Torres Strait peoples to have our voices heard ... The importance of what we propose cannot be understated. The report was authored by prominent figures including Indigenous academic Marcia Langton and delivered to the federal government for consideration in July before its release on Friday. It’s the product of a two-year consultation process to establish an Indigenous voice. The Coalition opted against enshrining a voice in the constitution as called for by the 2017 Uluru Statement from the Heart. Indigenous Australians minister Ken Wyatt said it was important to get the process right. For the Indigenous voice to work, it must have a strong foundation from the ground up. Morrison: I don’t believe it will derail the process if we move ahead and listen to the voices of local Indigenous communities and organising it as best as possible. I’m committed to doing that for one simple reason: It helps us deliver better services to Indigenous people across the country, to improve their lives, to increase their life span, to improve the health of their kids. That’s what this should be about. It’s not about politics. It’s about the health of young boys and girls, indigenous to this country, growing up in their communities. That’s what I’m interested in. I’m not interested in the political gesturing. Reporter: Prime minister, your government repeatedly insisted an Indigenous voice will be legislated to parliament. Can you keep that promise that that will happen? Morrison: What we said is we would follow [the] codesign process. That was our commitment. That was set up and I want to thank Marcia and Tom for the job they’ve done in pulling it together. We’re proceeding with that. We’re keeping that commitment. We said we would work through the codesign process. What I’m trying to do here is ensure that we can hear the voices of Indigenous people on the ground because I want to close the gap. This is not some political exercise. In other words for us to close the gap on infant mortality, in Indigenous communities, to reduce substance dependence, to reduce child abuse, to get kiddies in school, to ensure that we can improve maternal health in Indigenous communities, to get young people and their parents into jobs, to do that you have to work in partnership with local Indigenous communities. That’s why I’m interested in this. This is about listening to local Indigenous communities and that’s where the voice must start. It doesn’t start with grandiose gestures, with big political speeches, it starts on the ground pulling together local Indigenous communities and listening carefully to them so we can get service delivery right. That’s what our voice is about. It’s not about other things, it’s about hearing and it builds on the local voices that are already there and where that has been successful. So, that’s what we’re committed to doing. It’s about closing the gap. That’s what I’m about. I’m about closing the gap, not setting up political edifices, I’m interested in hearing what’s happening on the ground and that’s where Ken Wyatt and I have had our focus. That’s where it must start. That’s where we’re starting. That’s what the codesign process has delivered and that is us keeping that commitment. Morrison: It was the Labor party who said that the real test of the government and of the economic recovery was jobs - well, the Labor party have just told you, by their own benchmark, that the way to secure the economic recovery is to vote Liberal because we have delivered on those jobs. That being said, Morrison is very much not in Tasmania today, and very much is in Syndey for an unofficial election campaign media event, discussing the Coalition’s job training program. 217,000 Australians are in trade training right now which is the highest level on record since they were kept in 1963. When you invest in skills like we have, when you invest in increased university places, 30,000 more this year, then our manufacturing industry has that future. The Modern Manufacturing Initiative is a key part of our economic recovery plan as we go into the future, supporting businesses just like these ones here and so many around the country. OK, jumping back to Morrison, and here is what he said about the Devonport tragedy: Before I make some remarks about why we’re here, I want to extend on behalf of the government and Jenny and I, our deepest sympathies to all the families and all the community in Devonport for this horrific tragedy that’s occurred with the loss of five young precious lives, and more that hang in the balance. I want to thank all the first responders. You know, our first responders each and every day are trained to deal with some of the most unimaginable things, but on this occasion it goes beyond what they could have imagined and the scene on the ground. I spoke to the police commissioner this morning, thanked him and through him all the first responders. I’ve spoken to the premier again today. We’re working on programs of support for the entire Devonport community. We’re working on programs of support for the entire Devonport community. You can imagine. This is a tight-knit community. There would be few people, if any, in Devonport, that wouldn’t have a connection to one of those families, to that school, to the first responders, those impacted by this terrible, terrible tragedy. I know people will be in shock, be in grief, in disbelief. I will assure them we can do everything we can to support you through this time, not just today, but into the weeks and months ahead as you somehow seek to process this terrible tragic event. We will continue to work closely with the Tasmanian state government. Five of those 20 new Queensland Covid-19 cases are the Omicron variant. Four are overseas required, 16 detected in the community. Queensland has seen a significant jump in Covid-19 cases today, with 20 cases reported. Prime minister Scott Morrison is speaking now from Sydney and has started by once again offering his condolences to victims and family in Devonport. Former premier Gladys Berejiklian will have to wait a little longer to find out what counsel assisting Scott Robertson SC has submitted to the state’s anti-corruption body (Icac) investigation into her alleged conduct following further hearings in Operation Keppel. Submissions of counsel assisting will now be provided by 15 February 2022 instead of by today. The submissions will not be made public, but will provide Berejiklian and her legal advisers with some idea about what she might be facing in terms of possible findings. Submissions in response to the submissions of counsel assisting are to be provided to the commission by 28 March 2022, which means there is almost zero chance of a resolution before the federal election due in May. There had been speculation that Berejiklian might run for the federal seat of Warringah, and the prime minister, Scott Morrison had talked up the idea, despite the cloud cast by Icac. Berejiklian was less enamoured and ruled out the idea earlier this month, which is fortuitous given the more extended timetable revealed today. Berejiklian resigned in September after Icac announced new hearings in the investigation into her alleged role in awarding grants to her former boyfriend Daryl Maguire’s electorate of Wagga Wagga. At issue is whether Berejiklian has engaged in corrupt conduct by failing to declare the relationship to colleagues and whether she failed to report reasonable suspicions about Maguire’s behaviour to Icac as required under the Icac act. At the hearing in November, Berejiklian insisted Maguire was treated like all other MPs, that she didn’t need to disclose the relationship and vigorously rejected any wrongdoing. Out of today’s 2,213 NSW Covid-19 cases, 308 are from the Newcastle LGA. Here is Marshall on the planned removal of in-home gathering caps for fully vaccinated South Australians. The cap has been completely removed from the 28th. I know that will be a huge relief for people who have really had to do some fairly extensive workarounds. It was important in the early days of the disease, especially when we were in the elimination phase of the disease when we did not want to have a single case of community transmission otherwise it could potentially close down our entire state. The reality is that we are now in a suppression stage and we are putting speed bumps in the way of Omicron but, because of the great work that the people of South Australia are doing, it means that we can start to relax restrictions but we continue to do it in a prudent and careful way, keeping restrictions in place that will stop the spread going through South Australia to quickly. I swear, I still chuckle every time I hear “verticle consumption”. Marshall has confirmed 64 cases of Covid-19 have been recorded in SA in the latest reporting period, but says policies will primarily be based around hospitalisation numbers instead of the daily total. A the moment we see an increase in numbers in South Australia. Sixty-four cases overnight in South Australia and we will see those numbers climb. Don’t forget, much of the work done previously was done on Delta and we know that the Omicron variant is far more transmissible and we are clearly going to watch this very closely but the reality is that at this point in time we are seeing far less severe symptoms from those people contracting Omicron. Our major statistic here on the issue we are focused on at the moment is hospital admissions. Today we have had our borders open for over three weeks, Omicron cases in South Australia but only three admissions to hospital. No admission to ICU and no admission to a unit that has ventilators so the reality is that we are pleased with that. We only had one person in hospital at the moment and they are in a stable condition. We are absolutely pleased that we have not seen an increased level of hospitalisation in South Australia. This is the key metric that we will watch going forward. Marshall says a number of restrictions will be relaxed (mostly for fully vaccinated people) from 28 December. These will include standing while drinking, dancing, the removal of any caps on how many vaccinated people you can have in your home, and the reduction of international travel quarantine to three days. Marshall: Relaxations are planned for December 28 and we are only doing this because of the great work of the people of South Australia. We will also be implementing a new regime in regards to nightclubs in South Australia. The good news there is that we will allow fully vaccinated nightclubs to operate at 50% capacity from December 28. That is our plan and we want to keep making sure that we get vaccination numbers. It will be a big relief for a sector that has done it disproportionately hard for a long period of time. The key issue is to go and get vaccinated. Thank you to everybody, there is a relaxation of restrictions that will take place from December 28, that is our intention. OK, going now to South Australia, and premier Steven Marshall is announcing the state’s reopening roadmap. Here is a slightly hard to read photo of it for you, I’ll try and get another version soon. Former NSW MP Eddie Obeid and his two convicted co-conspirators will remain in jail over Christmas after being refused bail, reports AAP. Lawyers for the ex-Labor powerbroker, his son Moses Obeid and his former ministerial colleague Ian Macdonald on Tuesday applied in the NSW supreme court for bail pending the hearing of their conviction appeals. The Obeids, in Cooma Correctional Centre, and Macdonald, in Lithgow prison, appeared by video link before Justice Helen Wilson who told them bail was refused during a brief hearing on Friday. She said her published reasons would be emailed to the men. Justice Elizabeth Fullerton in October jailed Obeid for at least three years and 10 months, his son for at least three years, and Macdonald for at least five years and three months. After a lengthy and complex judge-alone trial, she had found them guilty of conspiring for Macdonald to engage in misconduct as a minister between 2007 and 2009. The then resources minister was found to have breached his duties by providing confidential information to the Obeids over a coal exploration licence which delivered a $30m windfall to their family. The Crown opposed bail for Obeid, 78, his son, 52, and Macdonald, 72. Their lawyers contended the men weren’t a flight risk, citing compliance with their bail conditions for many years before they were convicted. They argued the case involved “special or exceptional” circumstances. And they submitted they had “an arguable case” on appeal which will include a claim that Justice Fullerton’s verdict was unreasonable. The court was told if their appeals were filed by March, they would be able to be heard by September, but the judgment may not be delivered until 2023. If they were successful, this would mean a significant portion of their sentence would have been served if they weren’t granted bail. There is a lot of background to this. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, was listed for a court appearance. Apparently if you pay $85.70 you can bring a private prosecution against someone in the magistrates court (how egalitarian!). So someone did. And now it’s unfolding in a very Covid-era way. On top of everything else today ... AAP says a March election is still a possibility after the Myefo (which is a pleasure to say, and stands for the slightly less pleasurable midyear economic fiscal outlook). If you tuned out a bit yesterday (I did), everyone has been reading the Myefo entrails to see if there’s a clue to when the election will fall. Maybe March. But treasurer Josh Frydenberg also referred to an early budget (which would push the election timeline out till May). So, we still don’t know. Do we care, right now? AAP says it could still happen in March because there’s a whole lotta moula that can be spent in January and February. Here’s some more on the startlingly large war chest: In the very first blog post today I mentioned that a GoFundMe page for the families of those affected by the Hillcrest primary school jumping castle tragedy in Devonport, was close to reaching $250,000. Well, in just three-and-a-half hours that has nearly doubled, and is now pushing towards half a million. Queensland’s mask mandate just announced by Annastacia Palaszczuk will kick in at 1am on Saturday. It will be revised when the state hits a vaccination rate of 90% double-dosed. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk closed out her press conference discussing the Devonport primary school tragedy. Now, finally, can I just say to the people of Tasmania, we are also deeply saddened to hear about the loss of such young lives in what should have been a happy day in such tragic circumstances and on behalf of the people of Queensland we express our deep sadness for the families that will be grieving over the Christmas period. Hospitality venues will not be included in the reinstated mask mandate as those inside must already be fully vaccinated. OK! I for sure thought there could be an unfortunate border announcement from Queensland today, but no! The borders are still open. This will come as a blessed relief for those blog readers who are very invested in my upcoming holiday to Noosa (and by that I mean my friends Josh and Sophie who are also coming). Annastacia Palaszczuk has announced masks will be back in Queensland for certain settings over the Christmas and New Year period. Masks will be mandatory in shops, retail, Woolworths, Coles. We are asking this to slow the spread of the virus. We know Christmas is one of the busiest times of the year for families, doing Christmas shopping and getting ready. In hospitals and aged care, masks are mandatory. On public transport, they’ll be mandatory. In rideshare. And of course in airports and planes, that’s already the case. We are not mandating it in workplaces at the moment. More details are expected from Queensland Health at 10am, local time. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has just stepped up for an “important announcement”. She starts the press conference with an update on the Brisbane Cross River Rail. The second tunnel of our Cross River Rail, the Brisbane underground, is through. It’s completed, it’s come right through, the breakthrough. This is a fantastic Christmas present to all who have been involved. I’ll bring you more on this soon, however it seems one of the big announcements from Queensland today was that masks will once again become mandatory in shopping centres as Omicron case numbers south of the border grow rapidly. As if there wasn’t enough going on already, St John Ambulance NSW is warning about a potential surge in venomous snakes and spiders due to the warmer weather and the wet and humid conditions from La Niña. Sarah Lance, CEO of St John Ambulance NSW, said: Australia has some of the most venomous snakes and spiders in the world. Time is critical when it comes to venomous bites, and they should be treated as a medical emergency. That is why we are asking people to brush up on the signs, symptoms and – most importantly – the treatment of snake and spider bites. Over half of the deaths from snake bites in Australia happen at home, with the most dangerous snake posing a threat in Australia is the eastern brown snake. Funnel-web spider bites can be fatal in 15 minutes, with symptoms including breathing difficulty, excess saliva, muscular twitching, numbness around the mouth, disorientation and confusion leading to unconsciousness. St John Ambulance says the best thing to do is immediately call 000 in the event of a bite, and stop the venom from travelling by keeping the patient still, laying them flat, and wrapping a bandage at the site of the bite, followed by a pressure bandage from the fingers or toes upwards. Gutwein has been asked if the Tasmanian state government has the power to ban “or at least impose a moratorium” on the type of jumping castle and inflatable balls involved in the incident and if he plans to do so. My understanding is that yesterday [the department of] education checked to see immediately whether any form of castles were being used to cross the state with a view to stopping them. Obviously we need to understand from the coroner, as the broader investigation takes place, what the recommendations are out of that, and I understand obviously that [the department of] education will be conducting its own review as well. Tasmanian premier Peter Gutwein says the prime minister has offered to fly in counselling and other support services from interstate to ensure the Devonport community have the care they require in the coming weeks and months. Gutwein: I spoke with the prime minister both yesterday and again this morning and he has offered any support that we need. Obviously at a time like this, we have counselling services that are available. If we need more people on the ground, he has said to me very clearly that he is happy to reach out to other states and if we need people here, then we will bring people here. Reporter: What have witnesses told you about how strong the wind was and how sudden? Hine: I think I’ve already said in the media that there are various accounts of how strong the wind ... It is fair to say that the wind was quite strong. Again, this will all form part of the investigation to try to get an estimation of the wind strength, to see whether it was a freak event. All of those questions, we’ve all got them. The coroner has required that we work together to make sure that a full picture is put together. Reporter: What was the connection with the Zorb balls, were they inside the castle or outside? Tasmania police commissioner Darren Hine: That will form part of the investigation, but my understanding is that the Zorb balls were outside. But it will form part of the investigation. Reporter: Were all the kids who were injured, were they inside the jumping castle? Hine: Again, that forms part of the investigation. It is fair to say that those injured were inside the castle. We need to piece the movements of the individuals together so we can present a full picture to the coroner. The police commissioner says they will not go into details about if and how the jumping castle was tethered to the ground as this will form part of the WorkSafe and coroner’s investigations. The secretary of the department of education, Tim Bullard, has laid out the supports in place for the school community: At Hillcrest school today, we have a team of our own professional support staff, including school psychologists, social workers and chaplains, supporting children and their families, and the Department of Health is also assisting with access to child and adolescent mental health services. Together we are working together to ensure that those impacted are receiving the care and assistance that they need at this time. And for our Hillcrest families, I urge you, please make contact with the school so that you can access appropriate support. We will continue to be in contact with families through the weekend and over the course of the holidays. For others affected by this incident, as the premier said, there are a range of local support services that will be part of a coordinated response. And the Department of Education website has a list of those services that are available. These events will take some time to come to terms with, and I know that continued support and care is essential, as we know there will be lasting impacts to our students, our families and our staff, as well as to the wider community. In closing, this event may impact your own children and young people right across the state. So it is so important that we take particular care of them and surround them with our love at this time. I will now hand back to the commissioner. Gutwein has confirmed a full investigation will be launched into the incident. As the commissioner said yesterday, a full investigation is underway and the coroner has visited the scene. I make a commitment to all of the families impacted by this tragedy that we will stand with you and we will support you. I spoke just a short time ago with the prime minister and he has offered any support that we need and I have been working closely with the mayor and where support, where services, where counselling is [needed], then we will provide those services. My heart goes out to everyone that is impacted by this tragic event, for the four children especially who remain in hospital. Our thoughts and prayers are with them and their families during this difficult time. Can I just say once again to the parents of the five children that tragically died yesterday that our thoughts are with you. As I community, as a state, we are thinking of you. I want to just once again remind people of the numbers that they can call if they do need assistance: Lifeline, 13 11 14. The helpline, 1800 551 800. The mental health helpline, 1800 333 288. Beyond Blue 1300 224 636. Gutwein: We are very grateful for this support at this very sad time. Overnight and again this morning I have had the opportunity to speak with people in this community, to come to understand just how connected this community is, the number of people I’ve spoken to that knew people who were there yesterday, or had connections to the school, and I know that this is going to be a very challenging time for this entire community. I know that I speak for all Tasmanians when I extend my deepest sympathies to the family, friends and loved ones of everyone affected by this tragedy. As a parent, I cannot understand how the parents of those who have lost children must be feeling. But as a parent, I hope that they can understand that we are all feeling for you as well. The Tasmanian premier, Peter Gutwein, has urged Tasmanians to reach out to family, friends and professional help if they are struggling with the Hillcrest primary school tragedy. Today the Tasmanian community continues to grieve for the five children who sadly lost their lives yesterday. We also continue to hope and pray for the four children who remain in hospital, that they will be able to recover. The tragedy which occurred yesterday is beyond comprehension. It is devastating, heartbreaking. It’s just simply incomprehensible. What should have been a celebration for the end of the school year turned into an unfortunate tragedy for our young children at Hillcrest primary. Overnight there has been an enormous outpouring of grief as well as support for those involved here in Devonport, across Tasmania, across the country and indeed across the world. Tasmanian police commissioner Darren Hine: Tasmanians are already coming together to support each other at this very difficult time. The whole community and particularly the Devonport region is feeling this loss deeply. Support those around you and ask for help if you are struggling. That is so important. I have already spoken to some of the officers and emergency responders who attended and I would like to thank them again for their incredible response to such a confronting and distressing incident. Again, my heart goes out to all those affected and my thoughts are with them. For privacy reasons at this stage we won’t be providing any further details on the victims. Again, I urge media to allow the families and school community some space to process this devastating event. The Tasmanian press conference is starting now, and we are hearing from the police. As you are aware, yesterday evening another child lost their life in hospital. This takes the death toll of this tragedy to five. The investigation is ongoing and police are preparing a report for the coroner with the support of WorkSafe Tasmania. I know this means you will have some questions that we are not able to answer as many details will be a matter for the coroner. I can say that police understand there were close to 40 year 5 and 6 students taking part in the end-of-term activities when this incident occurred. Several adults were also in attendance when the inflatable equipment lifted into the air and they rendered first aid until emergency services arrived. Nine children were seriously injured. Tragically five of those children have died, three boys and two girls. One was 11 years old, four were 12 years old. Three remain in a critical condition at the Royal Hobart Hospital. One is now recovering from home. A spokesperson for the home affairs department has given further detail on the safeguards in the deal between Australia and the US to speed up information sharing about criminal suspects between law enforcement agencies and tech companies. The department said: The CLOUD Act Agreement includes specific prohibitions on the targeting of each other’s citizens and people located in the other’s jurisdiction. For example, Australian citizens, permanent residents and persons located in Australia cannot be the subject of US orders under the new framework. Neither can Australian law enforcement nor national security agencies use the agreement to gather evidence on US citizens or anyone located in the US. A key part of the IPO framework is the independent authorisation by judges, magistrates and Administrative Appeals Tribunal members of orders for electronic data from US communications service providers. Oversight and transparency arrangements are similar to those that apply under the domestic framework. For example, as with Australian agencies’ access to domestic data, there will be robust and extensive oversight by the Commonwealth Ombudsman and the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security and public reporting on use of international production orders. The deal is expected to be operational by the end of 2022 as it first needs to be considered by the joint standing committee on treaties. AHHHH! Why is Annastacia Palaszczuk tweeting in the third person all of a sudden? In any case, an important announcement coming up at 8.45am Queensland time, 9.45am Sydney and Melbourne time. ACTU secretary Sally McManus has once again called for the urgent rollout of booster shots to all disability and aged care residents and staff. By the way, we should be hearing from the Tasmanian premier reasonably soon, to discuss the primary school jumping castle tragedy. Just a note, this is the highest ever daily Covid-19 tally for NSW. Victoria has once again recorded fewer new Covid-19 infections with 1,510 new cases. Seven people infected with Covid-19 have also died. NSW has recorded another large jump in Covid-19 case numbers, with 2,213 new infections. Sadly one person with Covid-19 has died. OK, let’s break up the heavy news a little bit with the millipede that ACTUALLY has 1,000 legs for once. Donna Lu has this very fun report: The federal government has released its final report on the Indigenous voice to parliament co-design this morning. Ken Wyatt, the minister for Indigenous Australians, says this will “enable broader community discussion and consultation with jurisdictions”. The Morrison government committed at the 2019 federal election to undertake a process of co-design to develop models and options for an Indigenous voice and to enhance local and regional decision-making. Today we have delivered on that commitment, following an extensive co-design process involving more than 9,400 people, communities and organisations. The Local &amp; Regional Voice will contribute to achieving the Closing the Gap outcomes by providing avenues for Indigenous voices to be heard, including to provide feedback to government on Closing the Gap. Independent senator Rex Patrick has condemned the prime minister’s department for claiming it cannot find a key letter from Christian Porter to Scott Morrison about the sports rorts affair, a position seemingly at odds with the attorney general’s office, which has fought to keep the document secret. Patrick has been fighting an almost two-year freedom of information battle with the attorney general’s office, seeking access to a letter from the then attorney general to the prime minister about the administration of the community sport infrastructure program. The attorney general’s letter is thought to provide legal advice to the prime minister on a particular aspect of the damning auditor general’s report that found the government handed out $100m in sport grants in order to favour “targeted” Coalition seats at the May 2019 election. You can read the full report below: The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, has just appeared on the Today show, defending the somewhat optimistic assumptions in today’s budget update, by once again stating the Omicron appears to be a less severe form of the virus. (Even though it’s only been around for two months and it’s really quite early to know anything for sure about it yet). Treasury’s forecasts yesterday were based on the best medical advice that has been provided to the government and the chief health officer has said very publicly that while this Omicron variant looks to be highly transmissible, it’s perhaps less severe than other variants and that our vaccine is a defence against the virus and so too our our – are our treatments. There is no need to panic. Premiers need to keep their heads and to stay calm and obviously proceed with the national plan. That means reopening in a Covid-safe way. The deputy opposition leader, Richard Marles, who was on a panel with Dutton, says he was deeply affected by the photos of police officers weeping and comforting each other at the scene: The first responders and their need to look after each other given what they witnessed and what they had to deal with speaks to how desperately sad this tragedy is. I think for the likes of Peter and I, we spent this time of year going to primary schools, particularly at the end of their school year. We join in with their celebrations. It is a really emotional time, the end of the primary school year. Grade 6s graduating. It is a joyous moment that these kids were going to that yesterday with a sense of celebration. And that it turns out this way. It is just desperately sad ... But for all of us ... well everyone. I was going to say for all of us who are parents, this is just an unspeakable tragedy. And our thoughts and prayers are very much with those families and with those kids who are fighting for their lives right now. The federal defence minister, Peter Dutton, told Nine News that the tragedy of the fatal jumping castle accident in Tasmania is “indescribable”. The only comfort you can take at the moment ... [is] that there is community support and people are rallying around each other, which is important. Because it is obviously at the worst possible time of the year, just to compound the shocking tragedy in any case. I just think those families will need every support not just in the coming hours and days but for years to come. I mean, as a parent, you could just never ever recover from this and the whole community will be shattered. So, as you say, thank God for people like Fiona and others in a small-knit community and they are pulling together and they must. The interview with Birmingham moves on to the latest budget update released by the federal government. While it paints a slightly better picture of Australia’s financial situation, as ABC host Micheal Rowland points out, the update assumes the federal government will continue to control the pandemic, with most restrictions coming off from the start of next year. With Omnicron surging is NSW and little still known about this new variant, it’s unclear if this is actually a realistic outlook. Here is what the finance minister had to say about it: I don’t think [it’s too optimistic]. We have been cautious along the way and we’ve continued in many instances to be able to exceed expectations, that the economic outcome, the employment outcome, the jobs outcome, are all better than we had previously forecast. Debt will be lower than we previously forecast. On previous occasions, we’ve shown that we take a careful, cautious and conservative approach to these things and in terms of this budget update, we are continuing that. In terms of Omicron and Covid, Australians should still have confidence because we have one of the highest vaccination rates in the world – more than 90% double-dosed across Australia, higher than New Zealand, or the United Kingdom or Finland or Norway. We have now more than 1 million Australians who have had their booster and we’ve just recorded a record day in terms of delivery of booster shots, and we encourage people to get those done as soon as they fall due to make sure that we can maintain that maximum protection that can enable us to continue to safely and effectively reopen. Appearing on ABC News Breakfast, finance minister Simon Birmingham has been asked about his reaction to the tragedy unfolding in Tasmania: Look, I’ve got to say in all honesty that more than once tears have come to my eye when I’ve listened to news reports about it. It is incredible to think about the trauma, the lows, the difficulty for those kids, their playmates and friends, their parents, the teachers, the police and ambos. It is just something, for many of us, who have particularly spent many hours standing beside bouncy castles, an unspeakable trauma and tragedy and a loss that many will never recover from. Our hearts go out to them. Tasmanian senator Jacqui Lambie, who went to school in Devonport, said people in the community were still in shock after a freak jumping castle accident has resulted in the deaths of five primary school students, with four more in a critical condition and one with serious injuries. She told Nine Network this morning: I’m a bit scared to get on the phone and make calls actually. I don’t know whose children they are. I don’t know whose grandchildren they are. So, I think for us today, I think we’re still in shock. Like, you know, I’m sitting there doing a Zoom and I could see one child had gone, and then another. The numbers kept going up. It is the most awful thing before Christmas time. Honestly! It is just ... I just ... I think we’re all in shock. You don’t even want to know about it. It is just awful. The former Wallabies star David Pocock says he will run as an independent candidate for the Senate at next year’s federal election, declaring climate change as “the greatest threat we face”. In a statement issued this morning, Pocock indicated he would also target voters who were “fed up with ‘politics as usual”. They don’t want another politician who’ll deliver a line that’s been workshopped and run through a focus group, but someone who really believes in what they’re saying. Pocock will run as a candidate for the upper house in the ACT – meaning he faces an uphill battle, given the territory has only two Senate seats. Currently, Labor and the Liberal party each have one ACT Senate seat. You may remember that last night it was confirmed that the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, has been forced into isolation, awaiting a negative Covid-19 test, after attending a birthday party on the Elwood foreshore last weekend, that has since become a Covid-19 hot spot. Well, good news for the premier, he is negative and free to once again go out and about. A sharp rise in Covid-19 transmissions in NSW has prompted the state’s health department to restrict visits to health facilities. Patients will be allowed visitors for compassionate reasons only and to provide essential needs including palliative care and supporting women in childbirth. All visitors must be fully vaccinated and follow mask-wearing rules. Last night NSW tweeted out: We have temporarily restricted visitors to healthcare facilities due to increasing transmission rates with the emergence of the Omicron variant. We have not made this decision lightly. We must always prioritise our vulnerable patients and staff who are arguably the most vital workers needed in a pandemic. The latest significant cluster emerged from a Taylor Swift-themed dance party in the Sydney CBD on Friday, AAP reports. At least 97 people have tested positive so far, NSW Health said on Thursday evening, with at least some of the cases likely to be the Omicron variant. All 600 people who arrived at the Metro Theatre after 9pm were designated close contacts and forced to isolate for a week. A series of super-spreader events in Newcastle have caused a wave of infections in the Hunter area, which was responsible for 633 of the new cases. The majority are the Omicron variant. Two 20-year-old men have been fined for attending one of the events – a Wednesday evening party at a nightclub – in defiance of self-isolation orders after they were designated as close contacts. They both later tested positive. More than 200 people contracted the virus at the party. Good morning everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley here on the blog with you today. Tributes have been pouring in for the five children who died in a freak jumping castle accident at a primary school in north-west Tasmania. A wind gust lifted the jumping castle into the air and a number of children fell from a height of about 10 metres during end-of-year celebrations at Hillcrest primary school in Devonport on Thursday. The dead include two boys and two girls. The gender of the fifth child, whose death was confirmed by police last night, has not yet been revealed. A GoFundMe page set up by a Devonport resident has already raised more than $250,000 for the families of those affected. In a separate fundraiser, the aunt of one of the girls who has died described her as “precious”. I don’t even know what to write at this stage. Everyone is devastated, she was always such a sweet kind, old soul. A close family friend of one of the boys who died described him as “such a beautiful caring, gentle soul”. [He] had challenges growing up with his autism and ADHD but that never set him back he kept achieving. At least four more children are in hospital, with three in a critical condition and one in a serious condition, Tasmania’s premier, Peter Gutwein, said. Tasmania’s education department will provide support to children, families and staff in the coming days and into the school holidays, and counselling has also been offered to first responders. Department secretary Tim Bullard said: Our approach is being guided by our senior psychologists, who are trained in trauma-informed practice. What has occurred is a tragedy and there are no words that I can give that would take away the grief that those impacted families are feeling right now. I will bring you further updates throughout the morning here on the blog.Ipswich have appointed Kieran McKenna, the Manchester United first-team coach, as their manager on a three-and-a-half-year contract. The League One club have been looking to replace Paul Cook since his sacking on 4 December and settled on the highly rated McKenna, a 35-year-old who was a member of United’s coaching staff under José Mourinho and Ole Gunnar Solskjær. He was kept on to work alongside Ralf Rangnick after Solskjær’s departure but has decamped to Portman Road after being offered the chance to take a first managerial role. “Leaving a club like Manchester United was obviously a difficult decision, but I strongly believe in the opportunity to build something here,” McKenna said. “It feels like the right time, project and club to make my first step into first-team management.” McKenna is the first appointment made by Ipswich’s owner, Gamechanger 20, which took over in April and put sizeable resources into assembling a squad that was expected to win promotion from League One. It has not worked out that way and they sit 12th, also losing to the League Two side Barrow in an FA Cup second-round replay on Wednesday night. McKenna’s first task will be to bridge a nine-point gap to the play-offs although he will be viewed as a longer-term recruit, potentially occupying a position more akin to head coach. McKenna, under-18 coach at Tottenham before joining United in a similar role five years ago and quickly ascending to the first-team setup, will be assisted by another current coach from Old Trafford, Martyn Pert. They will attend Saturday’s game against Sunderland and formally take charge from Monday.A leading road safety expert says the New South Wales government’s decision to reintroduce warning signs for mobile speed cameras is “populist insanity”. Prof Raphael Grzebieta from UNSW’s Transport and Road Safety Research Centre said on Friday the decision was “very disappointing” and would lead to more road deaths. “What’s going to happen now is people will start speeding again,” he told Guardian Australia. “It’s a simple formula. You’re getting more kinetic energy into the system and crashes are going to become more severe. “It’s lunacy, it really is.” Since fixed signage was removed across the state in November 2020, the number of motorists receiving infringement penalties has escalated. From February 2022, large double-sided blue and white warnings will again appear, this time on the roofs of all mobile speed camera vehicles. The deputy premier and minister for regional transport and roads, Paul Toole, said on Friday the new signs would be rolled out along with an additional 1,000 fixed signs previously announced. “This is about striking the right balance,” he told reporters. “There is no excuse for those who are speeding ... this is a government that has listened to the community.” In November, former NSW roads minister Duncan Gay told a parliamentary road safety inquiry the removal of the signs was done in good faith but was the wrong decision. “Speed cameras are important but they shouldn’t be there for entrapment,” he said at the time. Revenue NSW data shows the number of mobile digital speed camera fines where the speed limit was exceeded by 10km/h or less went from 3,222 in October 2020 to 27,855 by February 2021. Grzebieta said the rise in revenue was because NSW drivers were “hooked on speed” and accustomed to getting away with it. “You drive the speed limit, you don’t get stung, you don’t get fined,” he said. “Simple as that. “There really is no speed over the speed limit that is safe, to tell the honest truth. A 5% rise in the average speed of the population, you get a 20% rise in fatalities. “That’s a very clear relationship, well established.” The NSW opposition leader Chris Minns welcomed the decision to bring back the signs, saying common sense had prevailed. “These hidden speed cameras were raising revenue on a giant scale in NSW like nothing we had ever seen before,” he said. The removal of signs was about revenue raising, not road safety, he claimed. “They were on track to collect more in one year than they collected in the previous five years, combined. “We would much rather someone not commit the offence in the first place, rather than receive a fine in the mail two to three weeks after the offence has been committed.” The government says camera revenue goes directly into the community road safety fund to improve road safety and provide education, life-saving infrastructure and enforcement.The Archbishop of Canterbury has said he was “disappointed” to see a photograph showing dozens of people attending a party at Conservative party headquarters in December last year at a time when others were observing lockdown rules. The Metropolitan police said on Thursday that they were to contact two people who attended the event in London during lockdown last year in relation to alleged breaches. The party was organised by the London mayoral campaign team of Shaun Bailey, who stepped down this week from an official role in the London assembly after a photograph emerged of him joining a throng of others people for the “raucous” gathering. Justin Welby said it was “clearly essential” that a culture of honesty should come from the government amid a string of allegations about rule-breaking parties held in Downing Street and elsewhere last year. “First of all, obviously, we must obey the rules. Obviously, we must all obey the rules,” he told BBC Newscast. “Secondly, there’s an investigation going on. I won’t pre-judge that but we need to set an example.” But he added: “On a human level, I’m just disappointed, really. I make so many mistakes myself, I’m not a big one for throwing stones … “I don’t really do much on judging people, but we must obey the rules. We have to depersonalise it, let’s get away from that example, and I’d say, ‘Obey the rules, stick to the rules.”’ Scotland Yard has also said it is looking into staff gatherings at No 10 Downing Street and the Department for Education in November and December 2020 and was in contact with the Cabinet Office, but would not open an investigation at this time. The Department for Transport apologised this week after it emerged staff had a party the day London was plunged into tier 3 restrictions in December 2020.New South Wales health officials are considering breaking with commonwealth advice by shortening the Covid vaccine booster interval to four months, amid concern about spread of the Omicron variant. Guardian Australia understands that NSW health department officials were meeting with vaccine providers in the state on Friday and canvassing the prospect of how they would cope with an influx of people eager to be vaccinated ahead of schedule. A source familiar with the vaccine rollout in NSW told Guardian Australia health authorities in the state were concerned about record transmission levels this week as well as a potential waning of protection, given that a large number of people in the state received AstraZeneca. The NSW health department is also understood to be considering its own incentives to encourage more general practitioners and pharmacies to rejoin the booster rollout, after the Australian Medical Association raised concern about the Commonwealth’s decision to decrease the fees it pays providers. Earlier this week, the AMA said the booster rollout was “already falling behind” and called for it to be sped up. Guardian Australia contacted NSW Health for comment in relation to the potential four-month interval, and a spokesperson referred the question to the commonwealth government. The Guardian contacted the federal health department for comment. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) on Friday decided to maintain the five month interval for booster shots. However, Atagi decided to allow flexibility for those who were one or two weeks short of the five-month period but who wanted to get it ahead of clinic closures and travel over Christmas. Demand for booster shots grew significantly in the days after the commonwealth brought forward the booster interval from six months to five. In Sydney, St Vincent’s Hospital has begun shifting more staff on to its vaccination clinic to cope with the surge in demand for boosters ahead of the Christmas period. St Vincent’s spokesperson, David Faktor, told Guardian Australia the hospital’s vaccination clinic has been busier in the last few days than at any point during the vaccine rollout. Pharmacy Guild of Australia NSW president, David Heffernan, said many pharmacists who were part of the booster rollout had all of their bookings until February snapped up in the days after the commonwealth’s five-month interval announcement on Monday. “We’re just stretched at the moment,” Heffernan said. “Pharmacists are doing their best, they’re doing roughly the same amount as GPs. “It is a very tired workforce and they’ve been going over and beyond trying to get these vaccines out.” Asked about potential financial incentives for more pharmacies to join the booster rollout, Heffernan said “some pharmacies are knocking it back because there’s no business case to do it”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Heffernan said there did not appear to be booster supply issues in Australia, but instead raised concern about deployment of the vaccine supplies from the commonwealth and pharmacies opting out of the booster rollout. There were 2,213 new Covid-19 cases and one death announced in NSW on Friday, its highest ever daily case number of the pandemic. However intensive care presentations remain relatively low, with 24 people currently in ICUs in the state. In response to spiralling transmission, a red alert was issued for hospitals in the state, which a NSW Health spokesperson said was done “due to increasing transmission rates with the emergence of the Omicron variant”. Under red alert, NSW Health temporarily restricts visitors to its facilities, with exemptions granted “in some circumstances for essential patient needs and compassionate reasons, especially when supporting women in labour, providing care for children in hospital, and for palliative care”. “NSW Health has not made this decision lightly. We must always prioritise our vulnerable patients and staff who are arguably the most vital workers needed in a pandemic,” the spokesperson said.VARIORU(M) 1 R. C. Teuton: Coronavirus shot with no cons, a version that contains no variants (anag. less cons). 2 Dr S. J. Shaw: ‘Au revoir’, Europe initially expressed, then ordered a succession of changes (anag. less E). 3 T. West-Taylor: With spread of coronavirus, split Conservatives found wanting – as noted by commentators (anag. less Cons). VHC D. &amp; N. Aspland: Leaders of very authoritative ringing institution officially reject unconventional sequence of changes (first letters). M. Barley: The video ref, alas, has diminished football for many, garnering a range of criticism (VAR + io + RU). A. Brash: A succession of changes – that’s what our air needs, very first thing (v + anag.; ref. climate change). Dr J. Burscough: Shifting constitution, coronavirus mutates in succession of changes (anag. less cons.). C. A. Clarke: Triumphant cheer in game following review of referee’s decision having several interpretations (io in VAR + RU). W. Drever: Series of changes produced by video assistance referee leads to inconsistency of results unfortunately (VAR + first letters). P. Finan: Part of Euro I rave about – it has notes from different sources (hidden rev.; ref. EU currency). Dr I. S. Fletcher: Sequence of changes? A coronavirus after that can so spread out (anag. less anag.). M. Hodgkin: United going after match official booking Ferdinand, perhaps reflecting views of commentators (Rio in VAR u). M. Lloyd-Jones: A series of changes from United after match official takes Ferdinand’s name (Rio in VAR u). M. Lunan: Very advanced choir (no children) backing starts to ring up succession of changes (v a + (ch)oir (rev.) + r, u). D. F. Manley: Authorised Version could be demystified with this one ed’s possibly brought out? (anag. less anag., &amp; lit.). P. W. Marlow: A succession of changes for a virus when mutating (following latest of strains disappearing) (anag. less f, s). D. J. R. Ogilvie (USA): Succession of changes leads to vicar admiring ringers’ ingenuity on remaining unified! (first letters). J. R. Tozer: ‘Goal-line technology ruined our international’ – the commentators are all over it (VAR + anag. incl. I). A. J. Wardrop: Series of changes football official imposes, initially on 15-a-side game (VAR + i, o’ + RU). HC T.Anderson, M. Barker, T. C. Borland, C. J. Brougham, M. Clarke, A. S. Everest, J. Fairclough, H. Freeman, Ms B. Hall, R. J. Heald, J. Hood, G. Johnstone, A. MacDougall, P. McKenna, K. Milan, T. J. Moorey, T. D. Nicholl, S. Randall, W. Ransome, D. P. Shenkin, A. J. Varney, Mrs A. M. Walden, Ms S. Wallace, R. J. Whale, Dr M. C. Whelan, D. Whisstock (Italy), K. &amp; J. Wolff. Comments 113 entries, no mistakes spotted, except for my carelessly giving you the wrong numeration for E(GG)LESS (especially reprehensible in a Letters Latent context). The whole competition was messed up by an extended breakdown affecting postal deliveries in Oxford and the consequent delay in my announcing the results. Even now I’m getting a very few late entries, but I couldn’t hold things up any more and I’m confident that submissions from regulars all got through. The low entry overall probably resulted from the overall difficulty of the puzzle itself, which many commented on while stressing how much the puzzle was appreciated. It was certainly tough to compile, once I’d spotted the appropriate Burns quotation. This commended itself both because of its wording and also because it had a workable number of constituent letters (38, i.e. two more than the normal average). Favourite clue of the month, by a long way, was ‘German squaddie nurses wound leaving front’ for (F)RANK(F)URTER, from 12 receiving mention, including one for PER(V)E AT. I can’t think how I came to include this unattractive phrasal verb when PER(V)ERT was equally available, but no one complained. VARIORU(M) proved a tricky customer, albeit an interesting word. Many understandably used ‘coronavirus’ in various ways to help them out. One aspect of the competition was the dilemma I faced as to whether ‘linking’ words between mutilated and umutilated forms were acceptable. I took care to avoid these in my own clues on the grounds that the two refer to different ‘words’, but given all the other factors involved this month I relented somewhat. Many of you may not have seen it as an issue, bit I invite you to consider it, albeit in retrospect, as it may come up again in future competitions. The sad news has reached me of the recent death of Anne Bradford, a regular Azed competitor in earlier years and a longtime acquaintance whose magnum opus, Bradford’s Crossword Solvers’ Dictionary, has proved invaluable for many years and through many editions. Asked for a short quote for the back cover, I wrote: ‘An unrivalled and dependable companion for all serious setters and solvers’. I wonder if anyone will continue to keep it up to date.Just over a week out from Christmas and the yard of Hillcrest primary school should have been abandoned for the holidays, children gone, gates locked. But on Friday the car park was full. The police were there along with investigators trying to piece together the course of events that led to a tragedy that has befallen the northern Tasmanian town of Devonport. Five children died here on Thursday morning. Another three are in a critical condition after what had been planned as an end-of-term treat for the schoolchildren – a jumping castle on the grounds – went horrifically wrong. The sheer enormity of the tragedy has led to an outpouring from local and national leaders and brought people from across the region to these gates. Early on Friday one man arrived carrying a cardboard box, pausing briefly as he approached a sea of flowers under the bright yellow sign on the school’s nature strip. There he placed five boxed toys – one for each life lost. The man was one of a constant procession bearing flowers and handwritten notes who made their way here throughout the day. More will come tomorrow. Nearby, a woman dropped to her knees in the morning sunshine to light a single candle. Contemplative teenagers left their bikes along the entry to the school and sat on the low fence in silence, watching people come and go, occasionally kicking the dirt. Clearly in shock, and many oblivious to the media milling around, people threw their arms around each other. Others stood in silence, staring at the scene in helplessness. Many were in tears. Community leaders, clearly well known by the crowd, also gathered beneath the towering gum trees, hugging those who came. Individually and collectively, the community of Devonport – a township of 26,000 people – is grieving the loss of those five bright young lives which has left many asking questions about how it could have possibly happened. What is known so far is that close to 40 year 5 and 6 students were taking part in the end of term activities when the incident occurred at 10am. The jumping castle and huge inflatable zorb balls with students inside were picked up by a strong gust of wind and hurled into the air. Police say eyewitnesses reported seeing the jumping castle and zorb balls rise about 10 metres. Moments later the children fell, some landing on the oval and others off the hilly slope at its edge. Investigators are still piecing together exactly how the accident happened, but initial indications are that the majority of those killed or injured were in the jumping castle. A full investigation is under way and the coroner has visited the scene. As Friday wore on, the names of the children were released with permission of the families. They were Addison Stewart, 11, Zane Mellor, 12, Jye Sheehan, 12, Jalailah Jayne-Maree Jones, 12, Peter Dodt, 12. “Our thoughts continue to be with the families, loved ones and all those affected by this tragedy,” police said in a statement. The whole state of Tasmania has been plunged into a state of shock and grief, the Tasmanian police commissioner, Darren Hine, said. “There’s no doubt this incident will leave its mark, and I know that people are sending their thoughts and prayers right across the country, and farther afield. We will be doing everything we can do to support people through this tragedy.” “It’s fair to say that the wind was quite strong, but this will form part of the investigation, which will take some time, and is being conducted under the direction of the coroner. “No doubt we all have a lot of questions.” First responders were faced with confronting scenes at the school and have been provided with counselling as the shock is replaced by grief. The commissioner urged people to support others, and to ask for help if they are struggling. In the meantime, this small community is rallying. Even teenagers are trying to find a way to help, while those struck by loss try to make sense of what has happened. Zoe Smith is an 18-year-old born and raised here. She took it upon herself to set up a GoFundMe page, which has so far raised $965,000 after donations poured in from around the world. “I’m still in shock about how much has been raised. I never expected this to happen, I was just trying to find a way to help,” Smith told Guardian Australia. “The tight-knit community is struggling to make sense of the tragedy. People here are unsure of how to act and what to do. We feel like we’re all connected through this tragedy. The whole community has been rocked by this.” Smith isn’t yet sure if she knows anyone personally affected by the deaths. “I presume I will know a friend of a friend impacted. It’s not important. I just want to help. “ Emergency doctor Nathan Warner was treating injured kids yesterday. He posted to Twitter to urge those who want to help to roll up their sleeves. “We ran out of blood yesterday; it’s a precious resource. Roll up a sleeve, go donate today like I did.” The state education department has also pulled together a team of professional support staff at the school today, made up of social workers, chaplains, supporting children and their families. The Devonport mayor, Annette Rockliff, appeared visibly shaken when fronting the media. “Certainly, we are still trying to get out heads around how we could possibly be losing these children, and as has been mentioned, we are a very connected community. “Everybody knows somebody, and we are already seeing people wrapping their arms around each other and supporting each other, and I know that will continue, but we as council will certainly be working with counselling services and social responders.” The Tasmanian premier, Peter Gutwein, echoed those words and said he had been fielding offers of help from across the nation. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has been in touch with offers of support. He said Tasmanian authorities may reach out to other jurisdictions to source psychologists to help the community through what will be a long period of grief. “What should have been a celebration for the end of the school year turned into an unfortunate tragedy for our young children at Hillcrest Primary. “I’ve spoken to locals and come to understand how connected this really is. I know it will be a challenging time for this entire community. My heart goes out to everyone impacted by this tragic event, and thoughts and prayers with their families at this difficult time,” Gutwein said. The entire nation continues to hope and pray for the children who remain in hospital in the hope that they will be able to recover, he says. “I make a commitment to all the families impacted by this tragedy that we will stand with you and we will support you.” Whether or how the jumping castle was tethered to the ground is expected to form part of the investigation. In Australia Lifeline on 13 11 14, Kids Helpline 1800 551 800, Tasmania mental health helpline 1800 332 388 and Beyond Blue 1300 224 636.The Conservative party co-chair Oliver Dowden has conceded that voters have given the government “a kicking” after the Liberal Democrats clinched an extraordinary victory in the North Shropshire byelection with a swing of 34%. Boris Johnson is facing a backlash from Tory MPs after the result, which was worse for the government than even pessimists at Conservative campaign headquarters had feared. Helen Morgan, the Lib Dem candidate, won 17,957 votes, 5,925 more than the Conservatives’ Neil Shastri-Hurst, while Labour’s Ben Wood was third with 3,686. Turnout was 46.3%. Dowden told BBC Breakfast: “Voters were fed up and they gave us a kicking. They were fed up with a byelection that was called because of sleaze allegations; they were fed up with all the sort of stories that are going on at the moment.” “I take it that they are saying to us that we need to focus on the core job at hand,” he added, suggesting this meant pressing ahead with the vaccine booster programme. The Tories’ catastrophic performance in a seat they won comfortably in 2019 with a majority of nearly 23,000 has renewed concerns about the prime minister’s leadership. The senior backbencher Roger Gale told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that Johnson must take personal blame for the result. “The electorate wanted to send a very clear message to Downing Street that they were dissatisfied with the management of this government,” he said. “I think this has to be seen as a referendum on the prime minister’s performance and I think that the prime minister is now in ‘last orders’ time. Two strikes already, one earlier this week in the vote in the Commons and now this. One more strike and he’s out.” Johnson faced the biggest rebellion of his premiership earlier this week over Covid certification, with 100 Tory MPs voting against the government. Some MPs had suggested in advance that they could consider sending letters to Graham Brady, the chair of the backbench 1922 Committee, demanding a vote of no confidence in Johnson if North Shropshire was lost. It would take 54 such letters to trigger a vote. The Liberal Democrat leader, Ed Davey, who was unable to attend the count in person after testing positive for Covid, said: “This result is a watershed moment in our politics and offers hope to people around the country that a brighter future is possible. Millions of people are fed up with Boris Johnson and his failure to provide leadership throughout the pandemic, and last night the voters of North Shropshire spoke for all of them.” North Shropshire is the second supposedly safe seat won from the Tories at a byelection this year, after the Lib Dems took the Buckinghamshire constituency of Chesham and Amersham in June. Davey said: “From Buckinghamshire to Shropshire, lifelong Conservatives have turned to the Liberal Democrats in their droves and sent a clear message to the prime minister that the party is over.” The Liberal Democrats now have 14 MPs. In her victory speech Morgan, a 46-year-old accountant and parish councillor, repeatedly targeted the prime minister, saying Conservative voters had been “dismayed by Boris Johnson’s lack of decency and [were] fed up with being taken for granted”. The byelection was sparked by the resignation of the veteran Brexiter Owen Paterson after a botched attempt by the prime minister to prevent him being punished for paid lobbying. Johnson’s decision to back Paterson crystallised Tory MPs’ concerns about his political judgment, and his authority has continued to be battered by a string of missteps and scandals – including the revelation of lockdown-busting parties in Downing Street. Shastri-Hurst, the losing North Shropshire candidate, was derided by opposition candidates as a “lawyer from Birmingham” and at one point during the campaign repeatedly declined to say whether he thought Johnson was a man of integrity.Just Eat has entered the fast grocery delivery market by partnering with Asda in its first tie-up with a supermarket in the UK. From January, Just Eat customers will be able to add a range of products to their baskets starting with five Asda stores, with the exact locations to be announced in the new year. “We live in an on-demand world,” said Andrew Kenny, the UK managing director of Just Eat. “We want to make sure we are getting our customers the food they want, when they want, when they want it. Our tie-up with Asda means we can help people access everything from store cupboard essentials to fresh groceries in a matter of minutes.” Just Eat follows rivals Deliveroo and Uber Eats, which already have fast delivery deals with some of the UK’s biggest supermarkets. Best-known for restaurant and fast food delivery, Just Eat said that up to 1,000 grocery items would be made available for customers to order seven days a week. The two companies anticipate the partnership to be extended to more Asda stores throughout next year. The partnership builds on an existing relationship, with Just Eat delivering pizzas and meal deals from Asda Kitchen, the grocer’s indoor cafe and diner, which operates at 42 locations nationwide. “We’re always looking for new ways to offer customers more choice and extend the number of delivery options available,” said Simon Gregg, the vice-president of online grocery at Asda. “The trial will also see Asda become more accessible to a wider customer base through Just Eat’s significant presence in the on-demand food delivery space.” Just Eat has more than 60,000 restaurant partners it offers a delivery service for, covering 95% of the UK. The food delivery service has more than 10,000 grocery and convenience store partners on its platform internationally, including brands such as Spar, Shell and 7-Eleven. Last month, Asda appointed Stuart Rose, the Conservative peer and former boss of Marks &amp; Spencer, as chairman.1) Premier League stuck in Covid quandary At time of writing, five of the weekend’s 10 scheduled top-flight games have been postponed, but the Premier League has resisted calls for a “firebreak” suspension of all fixtures. Thomas Frank has seen two consecutive Brentford games postponed because of the surge in Covid-19 cases, and surely spoke for the majority of Premier League managers when calling for a full shutdown of fixtures. The clear and obvious problem is that more postponements now, heading into the intensely busy festive period, will ensure multiple headaches further down the line in trying to shoehorn rescheduled matches into the congested season. The Leeds manager, Marcelo Bielsa, has also expressed concerns about sporting integrity with several teams depleted. Much as when coronavirus first hit in early-2020, perhaps there are no right answers – aside from the certainty that the safety of players, staff and supporters is paramount. With the Omicron variant “running like wildfire around the world”, as Frank said, postponing all of this weekend’s matches would appear to be a sensible measure. On the other hand, you can perhaps understand reticence on the Premier League’s part that it may lead to a longer shutdown. No one wants major disruption, but in no circumstance should TV revenue be prioritised if it means the virus spreading and lives being endangered. For now at least, 10 teams play on. LM 2) Gunners target away improvement Could there be a more dangerous opponent than a wounded beast that has just shipped seven goals against the champions? Probably, yes – particularly as Leeds are down to the bare bones and will miss eight first-teamers when they host Arsenal, with Jamie Shackleton and the suspended Junior Firpo joining those already unavailable. Leeds badly need to hobble towards January and reinforce before this season runs away from them. In the meantime their opponents will smell blood and Arsenal, buoyant from a lively win over West Ham, have an opportunity to press home their top-four claims. Mikel Arteta’s side have lost successive away games against Liverpool, Manchester United and Everton; their home form has been solid but output on the road must improve. It could be a good chance for their frontline, looking perfectly capable without Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, to compound Marcelo Bielsa’s recent woes. NA Leeds v Arsenal (Saturday, 5.30pm, all times GMT) 3) Newcastle can hurt City (no, really) Just looking at the words Newcastle United v Manchester City is enough to make a person wince; City have won as many games this week as Newcastle have this season, scoring more goals in the past seven days than Newcastle have in the last seven weeks. Consequently, it’s hard to imagine anything but a thumping win for the away team, because it’s hard to conceive of a strategy that will stop them dominating possession and creating chances. Under Steve Bruce Newcastle would have sat deep, cluttering space while hoping for a counter or a set piece, and though Eddie Howe will not turn up his nose at similar attacking opportunities, that will not be the sum of his ambition. Assuming he sticks to his favoured 4-3-3 formation, he has midfielders able to get about the pitch and create moments that lead to goals. In front of them, Howe has attackers quick and physical enough to run channels, create chances, and worry City’s back four in possession. Don’t laugh! DH Newcastle v Manchester City (Sunday, 2.15pm) 4) Conte should deploy Son and Kane After almost a fortnight off, Tottenham should at least be refreshed; as Manchester City proved last season, the benefits of an impromptu winter break are not to be underestimated. But coming into a game cold has its downsides – all the more so if that game is against a steaming-hot Liverpool. Though they are nearer the end than the peak of their cycle, their familiarity, confidence and belief mean that even on a bad day, they are still too much for most teams. Antonio Conte will be well aware of this, so it will be fascinating to see what he has planned. If he sticks with his current 3-4-3 formation, it is hard to see Tottenham getting enough of the ball to do anything. Perhaps, just for this game, it is worth tweaking to a 3-5-2, the extra man in midfield giving Harry Kane and Son Heung-min greater scope to affect the game. DH Tottenham v Liverpool (Sunday, 4.30pm) 5) The importance of Kanté to Chelsea “He is there to scare the Everton bench, every time he stands up and I call his name,” Thomas Tuchel joked of the recovering N’Golo Kanté’s presence in the squad for Chelsea’s draw on Thursday. No one can have any doubt about the midfielder’s importance as he continues his progress towards a full return from a knee injury. In the end, Kanté stayed on the bench at Stamford Bridge as the hosts dropped two points, while Romelu Lukaku missed the game after testing positive for Covid-19 – a blow for the striker as he also works towards full fitness. Although the jury is still out on Lukaku’s significance, Tuchel needs both players back soon to help prevent the Premier League becoming a two-horse race. “The big advantage at the moment for Manchester City and for Liverpool, they have everybody available, and you can see that,” Tuchel said before the draw with Everton, which saw them fall four points off the title pace. LM Wolves v Chelsea (Sunday, 2pm) 6) McGinn benefits from Gerrard’s arrival Steven Gerrard knows better than most: win the battle in central midfield and win the match. He also knows he is on to a good thing at Aston Villa with John McGinn, an all-action box-to-box operator in the Gerrard mould. The former Liverpool manager did not exactly hold back in praising the Scotland international this week. “I love John McGinn, I love the person, the character, the player,” Gerrard said. “I’m the lucky one that’s able to work with him and try to improve his game.” For McGinn, working under Gerrard was always going to increase his capacity to boss games from the middle of the pitch and his form has been exceptional in recent weeks. If he can raise his already considerable goal threat and combine it with his usual range of passing and energy, McGinn will develop into one of the most complete midfielders in the division. LM Aston Villa v Burnley (Saturday, 3pm) 7) Enforced break offers time for Rangnick When Ralf Rangnick took charge of Manchester United, he doubtless eyed the 10-day break originally due for the period after Saturday’s game as an opportunity to inculcate and drill in his principles of play. Little did he know that a 10-year break might not be enough to get his squad to perform complexities such as thinking and trying, but at least he now has extra time to try. While his 4-2-2-2 formation has solved the team’s most pressing problem, conceding goals and allowing opponents to saunter through the middle of the pitch, this has come at a cost. United are struggling to create and score, because it compromises Jadon Sancho and Bruno Fernandes, their two most creative players. Both are good enough and intelligent enough to learn their new roles, but the feeling persists that Sancho is better going from out to in rather than from in to out, and Fernandes needs more freedom than has so far been afforded him. If Rangnick can resolve those issues, he will really be on to something. DH 8) Celtic injuries offer Hibs final hope With Covid-19 cases yet to affect the Scottish calendar to the same extent as in England, an early shot at silverware is still on for Sunday afternoon at Hampden Park. Celtic are favourites to lift the Scottish League Cup and earn Ange Postecoglou the first trophy of his tenure, but the manager must contend with a raft of attacking injuries. Kyogo Furuhashi, Albian Ajeti, Giorgos Giakoumakis, Jota, James Forrest and Mikey Johnston are all battling to be fit, with Postecoglou expecting some, but not all, to be in contention. Mid-table Hibs are in the unusual position of playing a cup final under an interim manager, after Jack Ross was sacked 10 days before the game. David Gray will take charge, with the Belgium assistant Shaun Maloney the favourite to take over permanently. Putting a brand new trophy in the cabinet would be quite the start. NMc Hibernian v Celtic (Sunday, 3pm) 9) Atalanta can stake Scudetto claim A long weekend of football in Italy could help shape one of the most open title races in years. Internazionale, the defending champions and current leaders, should be able to see off the bottom club, Salernitana, on Friday night; then it is a matter of who can stay with them. On Sunday, Milan host Napoli in a meeting of two sides who flew out of the traps before stumbling. Luciano Spalletti’s visitors have lost their past two games, but would move back level with their opponents with victory. In between those two sides sit Atalanta, unbeaten in 10 league games and genuinely in the hunt for a first-ever Scudetto. They host José Mourinho’s Roma, who still seem one bad result from total meltdown, in a must-see match on Saturday. NMc Atalanta v Roma (Saturday, 2pm) 10) Covid concerns for Ancelotti Sunday’s derby win over Atlético put Real Madrid eight points clear of La Liga’s chasing pack, surprisingly led by Sevilla and their local rivals Real Betis. Atlético and Barcelona are even further back, trailing by 13 and 18 points, respectively. There seemed to be nothing standing in the leaders’ way, but a new Covid-19 outbreak could change that. Luka Modric, Marco Asensio, Gareth Bale, Rodrygo and Marcelo have all tested positive in recent days. Football results are, of course, a trivial concern amid the bigger picture, and Real Madrid should still have enough players available to fulfil and win Sunday’s fixture against Cádiz. After the Champions League redraw pitted his side against PSG, though, this has been an unexpectedly taxing week for Ancelotti. NMc Real Madrid v Cádiz (Sunday, 8pm)It is a Sunday afternoon in November in the village of Leldaet, Kenya, and Kip Tisia’s mother and sister-in-law are cooking a feast. The family has just watched a livestream of Tisia’s brother, Elkana Langat, winning the Maratona di Ravenna, Italy, with a time of 2:10:33. A few weeks before, another brother, Kiprono Langat Clement Ken, won the Rome Marathon in 2:08:23. Tisia, himself a winner of multiple marathons in Upstate New York and Cleveland, is giddy as he shares the good news in a telephone interview. Many in the village will be coming over to celebrate with steak and ugali, a traditional Kenyan staple made from corn. Distance running is practically the national sport in countries in East Africa. For families like Tisia’s that have struggled, distance running provides a better income as well as scholarships to higher education in the United States – much like basketball in impoverished communities in this country. “At first, I thought it was a way to better my life, but the more I learn the more I realize you get a satisfaction when you finish,” said Tisia, 33, three-time winner of the Buffalo Marathon, two-time winner of the Rochester Marathon and one-time winner of the Cleveland Marathon. “Your family is proud, your friends, so it’s more than money or getting famous, it’s that feeling of finishing something,” added the runner, who is in a Kenyan phase of his dual-country life between Rochester and his home village between Nairobi and Lake Victoria. “From winnings, I’ve been able to buy my shoes, my running gear, and also travel back and forth to train in Kenya … If I won $3,000, I’d send my mother $2,000.” Tisia and his brothers are among a legion of runners from Kenya, Eritrea, Ethiopia and other parts of East Africa known worldwide for their speed, grace and agility. As this year’s marathon season wraps up, those who’ve been fortunate enough to secure sponsorship are making publicity appearances or resting up before the next training cycle for spring races. Others are exhausting contacts to secure that elusive sponsorship that will help them compete and also support their families. While rank-and-file runners in the United States, unaware of their relative wealth, are obsessing over the physical size of medals or the newest shoes and tech fabrics, runners from East Africa are encouraging one another, or regrouping in villages of red dirt and lush green, far from the races they’ve just run in New York, Boston and Chicago. Winning this figurative race is at the top of their minds and they are willing to go all out for that – from attending colleges in places with few people who look like them to bunking up with roommates in order to work with a specific coach in the United States. Some of the African runners have strong motivation to help family back home: almost 36% of the population in Kenya lives below the international poverty line, and about 65% of the population in Eritrea lives in poverty. “Non-sponsored runners who work or go to school while striving for elite running status are the very definition of ‘Grind now, shine later,’ a term I learned years ago working events in Savannah, Georgia,” said Ted Metellus, race director of the TCS NYC Marathon and longtime race event manager. “They are working hard to not only keep the lights on and food on the table, but also working hard on their craft,” Metellus said. “Their work ethic reminds me so much of my immigrant family which had to learn a new language and new culture in a foreign land. They have to work twice as hard in many cases to get an opportunity to showcase their skill,” added the race director, whose family is from Haiti. That road is made even harder by the quality of competition. “The market is very tough for the Kenyan athletes because there are so many of us that are fast runners, which makes it very competitive,” Kenyan-born Peres Jepchirchir, 28, an Olympian and winner of the women’s race in this year’s TCS NYC Marathon, told the Guardian. The East African phenomenon first began bubbling in 1960, when Ethiopian Abebe Bikila won the Olympic Marathon in Rome. Four years later, Bikila won gold again at the Olympic Marathon in Tokyo. He set world records in both races. In 1966, three years after Kenya gained its independence from Britain, athletes gathered in Kingston, Jamaica, for the Commonwealth Games. Kenya took home five medals in middle- and long-distance running events. It marked the first time that Kenya placed in any of the events for eight years. Two years later, Kipchoge Keino of Kenya won a gold medal in the 1500m at the Olympics in Mexico City despite severe abdominal pain from a gallbladder issue. By the 1980s, Ibrahim Hussein of Kapsabet, Kenya, became the first Kenyan to win the New York City Marathon and also logged the first of three Boston Marathon wins. A network of coaches in Kenya and the United States, some connected to schools, began to form. In Kenya, training camps and groups surfaced around Bekoji and Iten, where St Patrick’s High School and its running program attracts legions of would-be distance champions. Hussein opened a training camp in Kapsabet. By the 2000s, the Georgia-based One More Mile athletic wear company began selling shirts and other merchandise with the phrase: “In my dreams I am a Kenyan.” Fast forward to 2021, and it seems all the East Africans do is win. In 2019, two-time Olympic marathon winner and Kenyan Eliud Kipchoge broke the two-hour marathon barrier, finishing a race in Vienna created just for him in 1:59:40. That event was completed with pacers and Kipchoge has credited his Nike shoes with helping him. Last year, Aliphine Tuliamuk, a native of Posey, Kenya, pushed through to a 2:27:23 surprise win in the women’s Olympic marathon trials in Atlanta. The distance running world has been at a loss to fully explain East Africans’ dominance. Some of today’s champions grew up running after cattle, running to school, running to errands – all at high altitudes and over hills. When East Africans commit to running, they train hard. Garrett Ash, an exercise physiologist at Yale University who has studied Ethiopian runners, has said that it’s likely a combination of genes and environment that makes East African runners so fast. But Kip Tisia says the explanation goes beyond science. During those periods when he’s living in Rochester, New York, his face is a fixture in the lead pack at local races. He lives from race winnings and also worked at a local running store for a time. He stays with friends. “You have to have that ache,” Tisia said of runners in East Africa. “You can see 10 Kenyans, 20, running every morning or evening - that is the tradition that has affected our running - [but] if you don’t have that drive, you’re not going to succeed.” Tisia did not have it easy growing up in Kenya with five brothers and two sisters. The family lost their father early on, putting more pressure on their mother. “We started trying to figure out a way so that we can make it in life,” Tisia said. “My brother dropped out of school and started running.” Another brother began running too, motivating Tisia to do the same. Tisia excelled and won scholarships at Youngstown State University and Kent State University, both in Ohio. He later trained with an elite running group in Upstate New York before settling into his dual-country routine. Sammy Kibet, 37, who lives in Chepterit, Kenya, and has placed in marathons around the world, began running as a youngster growing up in the village of Kapyagan. Kibet’s break came after he was spotted by Ibrahim Hussein and joined Hussein’s athletic camp in Kapsabet, Kenya. A few years ago, the race invitations began coming. Kibet sold his goats to take part in his first race, the marathon in Kigali, Rwanda. He finished sixth. He came in second place at the Good Life Marathon in Toronto and has won the Enschede Marathon in the Netherlands. Now, back home in Kenya, Kibet is hoping for a sponsor. Covid-19 put a halt on an invitation to run the Philadelphia Marathon last month. It is not easy, because he has a wife and two children to help support. “Now, running doesn’t support us because of Covid,” Kibet said. “We are suffering.” Jepchirchir, the winner of the women’s race in this year’s New York City Marathon, is fortunate that she stood out from the pack and secured sponsorship early on. The athlete grew up running up 5km to and from school each day in western Kenya, where her family farmed tea and corn. In school, Jepchirchir ran track. “My brother was the one that motivated me and discovered my talent when I was a young girl,” she said. “I didn’t really go through a period of struggling to find sponsorship because at my first National Cross Country Championships a sponsor noted me and offered me a contract.” Today, Jepchirchir is sponsored by Adidas and is part of the company’s “Impossible is Nothing” campaign. She reached a turning point last year when she won the Valencia Marathon in 2:17:16. It was the fifth-fastest marathon by a woman in history. Then, this past summer, Jepchirchir won Olympic gold, finishing in 2:27:20. But it was Jepchirchir’s victory on the streets of New York that gave the public a first-hand view of another part of the character of East African runners: support for fellow runners. During the trek through the five boroughs, fellow Kenyan Viola Cheptoo told Jepchirchir she wasn’t feeling her best and asked Jepchirchir to stay with her. It wasn’t until mile 25 that Jepchirchir broke away from Cheptoo and finished in 2:22:38, seven minutes past her goal. “I knew that the NYCM course was going to be a tough course with no pacemakers,” Jepchirchir said. “For me, it was more important to win than to focus on my time. I ran with Viola and she asked me not to push very much and stay with her until the last few kilometers.” When asked whether she thought her generosity cost her those seven minutes, she responded, “I ran alongside my fellow runners for the majority of the race - it makes me really happy to win next to my fellow runners and when they do well too. But I prefer to win than be number two.” That humility and support has also been seen in Olympian Meb Keflezighi, who has won both the New York City and Boston Marathons. Keflezighi, an ambassador for New York Road Runners’ Team for Kids Charity, is known for spontaneously popping up at races to cheer on runners or taking the time to chat with fans. During this hiatus for the major races, Jepchirchir will rest and train and runners like Tisia and Kibet will exhaust their contacts trying to make an impression on potential sponsors and race directors. Tisia also is busy with organizing a race back home in Kenya called the Race for Inclusion that is designed to raise awareness for autistic children and children with special needs. Metellus says the world can learn much from the altruism practiced by East African distance runners. “Our society, events, and races should showcase and learn more from our global runners,” Metellus said. “We can learn the value of community development through sports. Running is the one sport which an everyday person can compete on the same stage as the greatest in the world. As a kid, I would never play on the same court as Michael Jordan, but I can lace up my sneakers and run in the same race as former New York City Marathon champion and Olympic medalist Meb Keflezighi. We may never know who may be the next great East African runner. They may be standing right next to you at the start line.”Emily in Paris The first season of this comedy-drama was one of the more perplexing TV events of 2020. The show did big numbers despite poor reviews and frequent lapses into absurdity. Clearly, Covid was a factor: many people wanted to disappear into escapism. On those terms, the adventures of American social media executive Emily Cooper (Lily Collins) as she wafted around Paris were just the ticket. However, the show was criticised for cultural insensitivity and there was bewilderment at its getting nominations at the Golden Globes. Will season two be a more chastened, modest creation? Netflix, from Wednesday 22 December The Wonder Years The original Kevin Arnold would be entering his senior years by now. But nothing ever really dies in the world of streaming TV, and the coming-of-age classic has been rebooted with a few little differences. It’s directed by Fred Savage (who played Kevin in the original series), and Don Cheadle narrates, with charm to burn. But, most strikingly, this reboot’s “Kevin” (Elisha Williams’s Dean) is Black. Inevitably, this means there’s already a pointless but implacable online culture war slanging match raging around the show, which – as you might expect – remains essentially its old self: a likable mixture of mild comedy and gentle life lessons. Disney+, from Wednesday 22 December Frasier All 264 episodes of the urbane sitcom starring Kelsey Grammer as the fussy psychiatrist Frasier Crane are now available on Channel 4’s streaming service. Marvel at Niles’s (David Hyde Pierce) waspish one-liners and endless neuroses. Swoon at Eddie the dog. Howl at the magnificently awful “British” accents of Daphne’s (Jane Leeves) regionally confusing family. And raise a can of beer to Marty (the late John Mahoney). With the reboot set to air in 2022, now might be the perfect time to catch up with Seattle’s finest in this landmark of 1990s TV. All4, available now Girls5eva It’s just been renewed for a second season, but this is the first UK screening – on the Sky-affiliated Peacock platform – for this snarky, funny comedy (executive-produced by Tina Fey) in which a one-hit-wonder girl group from the 90s are sampled by a rapper and decide to reunite. It’s a format familiar to fans of the films of Christopher Guest, but it’s interesting to see it transposed on to glossy pop. The performances from the likes of Sara Bareilles and Busy Phillips are on the money, and the songs work as catchy-as-hell pop earworms and parodies of the same. Peacock, from Tuesday 21 December Spy City Muted trumpets, endless cigarettes, neon lights reflected in puddles – all the traditional spy noir tropes are present in this new drama. Fortunately there’s a story to match, as British agent Fielding Scott (Dominic Cooper) negotiates cold war Berlin, attempting to plug leaks heading in the direction of Russia but also in search of answers to a more fundamental question: why did a British agent try to kill him? Scott is initially a closed book, but there are hints of enigma and vulnerability in a nicely modulated performance from Cooper. BritBox, from Thursday 23 December Yearly Departed 2021 A sort of 2021 roast, this comedy special features, among others, Jane Fonda, Chelsea Peretti, Meg Stalter and X Mayo, and will form a presumably not particularly fond farewell to the departing year. Given that 2021 has been almost as hard to love as 2020, expect the humour to be fairly barbed. Topics will include the dilemmas of vaccinated life and the miseries of everyone’s least favourite video conferencing platform, Zoom. Insecure star Yvonne Orji will host and there’ll be a musical send-off from Alessia Cara. Amazon Prime, from Thursday 23 December Jimmy Carr: His Dark Material Much of the advance publicity for this new standup set from the talented but sometimes gratuitously “edgy” comic has surrounded Carr’s righteously brutal takedown of an anti-vaxxer who was brave (or stupid?) enough to identify himself in the crowd. But Carr might not always be on the side of the angels here, as we’re also promised a few jokes billed as “career-enders” – although we’ll believe that when we see it. An interesting option for release on Christmas Day then, but surely a bracing corrective to cloying festive kitsch. Netflix, from Christmas Day Stories of a Generation: With Pope Francis Pope Francis and Martin Scorsese: together at last! An unlikely dream team for Christmas Day family entertainment but, then again, we guess the pope makes his own rules when it comes to creative collaborators. This one-off documentary – based on his 2018 book Sharing the Wisdom of Time – sees the pontiff exploring the stories of 18 people over the age of 70. Aside from legendary Hollywood directors, he also ropes in the likes of primatologist Jane Goodall, artist and activist Omar Badsha and surfing icon Felipe Pomar. Netflix, from Christmas Day Death to 2021 After last year’s farewell, the annual special from Charlie Brooker’s comedy stable returns to offer a none-too-affectionate send-off to arguably the second worst year. For this year’s roast, Diane Morgan, Tracey Ullman and Hugh Grant will be returning, alongside new recruits Nick Mohammed, William Jackson Harper, Stockard Channing and Lucy Liu. Netflix, from Monday 27 December Peter Crouch: Save Our Beautiful Game The pink and navy scarves of Dulwich Hamlet – until recently the hipster’s football club of choice – have fluttered less defiantly in the last couple of years. Partly due to Covid, the club is facing serious financial problems. Can Peter Crouch save them? The former Liverpool and England star turned out for Hamlet in his youth, so he has a personal interest in helping to revive the club. Discovery+, from Tuesday 28 December The Book of Boba Fett “Jabba ruled with fear,” says Boba Fett. “I intend to rule with respect.” Another of the gaps in the Star Wars universe gets filled in as the underworld is explored and the bounty hunter gets his own long-awaited series. In it, Boba and his mercenary pal Fennec Shand are returning to Tatooine to stake their claim to Jabba’s former territory. But the remains of his crime syndicate aren’t going to give up their territory without a fight. Temuera Morrison stars as the rogue clone, with Ming-Na Wen as his sidekick Shand. Disney+, from Wednesday 29 December Kitz As showcased by Succession and The White Lotus, one of 2021 TV’s defining obsessions has been dramatising the dysfunction enabled by extreme wealth. Here’s another case study – this German thriller snowploughs into the heart of a clique of rich kids from Munich as they make merry in Kitzbühel (“The Aspen of the Alps”). Lisi (Sofie Eifertinger) is our guide to this world as she arrives in the resort, out of the loop and still trying to come to terms with the death of her brother, but inadvertently setting off an uncontrollable chain of events. Netflix, from Thursday 30 December Cobra Kai Somewhat by stealth, this Karate Kid spin-off has been a big hit for Netflix – after beginning life on YouTube, its blend of martial arts, comedy and 80s nostalgia has become a genuine phenomenon. The series sees the high school rivalry between Ralph Macchio’s Danny LaRusso and Johnny Lawrence (William Zabka) rekindled in the context of middle-aged suburban life. This fourth series delves into the backstories of a few of the supporting cast, with Demetri (Gianni DeCenzo) and Eli (Jacob Bertrand) rebuilding their relationship. Netflix, from New Year’s Eve Queer Eye “Don’t mess with Texas,” as the saying goes. Excitingly, the Queer Eye gang are about to do exactly that, and Texas can expect to be better groomed, better fed, more culturally aware and more emotionally literate as a result. This sixth series is set in the Lone Star state – for Houstonian Bobby Berk at least, this represents a homecoming, but – as ever – the Fab Five make friends everywhere they go with their mixture of practical advice, infectious empathy and good humour. A reliably uplifting way to start the new year. Netflix, from New Year’s Eve Stay Close A woman about to marry her long-term boyfriend. A detective unwilling to give up on a cold case. The parents of a missing teenager. A gone-to-seed photographer … This nervy thriller adapted by Danny Brocklehurst from a Harlan Coben novel skilfully weaves these four strands together – there’s a sense of growing unease and tension as the past begins to swarm into the present. The catalyst looks likely to be Sarah Parish’s Lorraine; a woman who knows more about Megan (Cush Jumbo) than is entirely healthy. Netflix, from New Year’s EveAt 3am on 3 December 1921, the mail steamer Cambria, on her maiden voyage between Holyhead and Kingstown, now Dún Laoghaire, struck a small boat off the coast of north Wales. The Cambria was slightly damaged, but the smaller boat was sliced almost in two, and three of her seven seamen lost. The Manchester Guardian reported that there was “great excitement among the passengers” when they were instructed to put on their life jackets, but the Irish Peace Conference delegation, who were also travelling on the Cambria, helped to reassure them. Michael Collins, the famous IRA director of intelligence and minister for finance in the Irish republican government, quipped to a crewman: “I have been in a tighter corner than this.” He was, the sailor told the Guardian, “the coolest man on board”. This is just a glimpse of the rich detail contained in Gretchen Friemann’s The Treaty, which takes the reader through every twist and turn of the negotiations a century ago that led to the signing of the Anglo-Irish Treaty on the night of 6 December 1921. The agreement brought an end to the Irish war of independence, but provoked in its place a civil war. The Irish delegation had arrived at Euston station at the start of October to extraordinary scenes, with thousands of supporters thronging the platforms, singing republican songs and waving tricolours. When the king and queen reached Euston on the royal train half an hour before the Irish delegation, the crowd good-naturedly cheered them as well. It all began, on the surface at least, with joy and hope. But, as Friemann shows in a pacy and controlled narrative, there were shadows from the outset. The delegations were enormously mismatched: the British one was packed with “big beasts”, men with long political careers behind them, and with the experience of major international conferences to boot. The prime minister, David Lloyd George, was staking his political career on getting a deal done. By contrast, the relatively inexperienced Irish delegation were further disadvantaged by being on away turf, and making regular exhausting journeys back to Dublin to confer with the rest of the Irish cabinet. For all they were comrades in revolution, the Irish plenipotentiaries – Collins, Arthur Griffith, Robert Barton, George Gavan Duffy and Eamon Duggan – were not exactly united. Collins, a skilled bureaucrat who had effortlessly combined his military and political roles during the war of independence, set up his own household at Cadogan Gardens, west London, with his circle of trusted IRA bodyguards. The rest of the delegation, along with the secretaries, typists and clerks who accompanied them, were based at nearby Hans Place. Personality clashes simmered throughout, particularly focused on Erskine Childers, the Trinity College Cambridge-educated IRA director of propaganda, whose penchant for meticulously documenting every meeting the delegation had, however brief, has been a boon for historians. It irritated Collins and Griffith beyond measure.Moreover, the precise role of the Irish delegation was not clear even at the outset. Did they have full plenipotentiary powers, or was this all mere positioning for a later, more substantive negotiation to follow? Although Friemann does not shed any new light on the vexed question of why President Éamon de Valera did not join the delegation himself, she does present a plausible, if by now well-rehearsed explanation: De Valera expected these negotiations to fail, and planned to ride to the rescue at the last minute to secure better terms. The anticipation of failure is perhaps what is most distinctive about Friemann’s analysis: she emphasises throughout the fragility of the negotiations that came close to breaking down on many occasions. And, as she makes clear, a lot ran on how that breakdown might occur. Would it come, as the Irish strategy suggested, on the question of national unity and the reversal of partition? Or would the break come, as the British hoped, on the question of sovereignty – allegiance to the crown and the place of Ireland with the empire? Both sides were anxious to secure the break on their chosen issue, positioning themselves for the war of words (and perhaps the real war) that would follow. Friemann weaves a complex narrative, deftly jumping back and forward in time to set the scene or to fill in the picture. With such a strong focus on the political strategies adopted by each side, and the cut and thrust of each negotiating round, there is little space left for the story of what happened outside the negotiating rooms as the Irish delegation enjoyed the delights of interwar London. In the event, the break did not come on Ulster. The Irish delegation, faced with a threat of war within three days, signed the treaty. When news came back to Dublin, the press responded with jubilation, but IRA members couldn’t believe what they were reading. Even before the delegation returned, sides were being taken in the conflict that would follow. Three of the main characters in the book would be dead within a year: Griffith from a brain aneurysm, Collins shot in an ambush and Childers executed by the new Free State government for the capital crime of possession of a weapon. It was an ornamental pistol, given as a gift by Collins months before. “Step forward lads,” he told his firing squad, “it will make it easier.” Friemann’s book helps to explain the roots of those three deaths; with an admirably light touch, she charts the road to the political division that engulfed Ireland. • The Treaty is published by Merrion (£16.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Last Train to Christmas On a train back to Nottingham on Christmas Eve 1985, Stringfellow-esque club owner Tony Towers (Michael Sheen) discovers that if he moves between coaches he can visit his past or future life. With his business and relationship with his brother Roger (Cary Elwes) in peril, Tony tries to rewrite history in his favour, only to make things worse for everyone. A smart, twisty reboot of A Christmas Carol from Julian Kemp, with Sheen sporting a series of wonderfully cringe-worthy hairstyles and clothes. Saturday 18 December, 1.45pm, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere Great Expectations The greatest Charles Dickens film adaptation to date, David Lean’s atmospheric 1946 drama gave us the iconically cobwebby Miss Havisham (Martita Hunt) and a truly menacing Magwitch (Finlay Currie). The redoubtable John Mills plays the fallible hero, Pip, as a young adult, after a secret benefactor has transformed him from country lad to gentleman about town. As always with Dickens, some of the depth and character colour is discarded in the script-to-screen process, but Lean’s eye for detail makes this cautionary tale sing. Saturday 18 December, 2pm, BBC Two Scrooge: A Christmas Carol Alastair Sim set a standard for Scrooge in this 1951 film that has rarely been bettered in the many subsequent attempts at Dickens’s festive favourite. Whether being properly mean, convincingly freaked-out or giddily happy, Sim is a joy to watch as his miser learns a lesson in humility and humanity, helped by director Brian Desmond Hurst’s inventive treatment of the light and dark of snowy London. A host of solid British character actors are in support, including Michael Hordern as Jacob Marley, Mervyn Johns as Bob Cratchit and George Cole playing young Scrooge. Saturday 18 December, 5.55pm, Channel 5 David Byrne’s American Utopia Spike Lee’s glorious concert film of a Broadway date on the erstwhile Talking Head’s 2018-19 tour is worthy of a place in the concert documentary pantheon next to Stop Making Sense. Dressed in grey suits to match his hair, the ever amusing Byrne and his impressive musicians weave their way through songs from his long career (lots of Talking Heads tunes, thankfully) plus a cover of Janelle Monáe’s political anthem Hell You Talmbout. Annie-B Parson’s courtly choreography and Lee’s up-close camerawork add colour to a joyous musical experience. Saturday 18 December, 6pm, Sky Arts Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse Despite being separate from the Marvel Cinematic Universe, this terrifically creative animation’s multiverse plot seems to have influenced the direction of the main Avengers series. Taking sustenance from the comics, directorial trio Bob Persichetti, Peter Ramsey and Rodney Rothman deliver many dimensions of Spidey, principally Shameik Moore’s Black teenager Miles Morales, but also Spider-Woman, a film noir version and Peter Porker, a web-slinging pig, as evil is vanquished yet again. Sunday 19 December, 6.45pm, Film4 The Invisible Woman A corrective to the seasonal Dickens love-in, this biographical drama directed by and starring Ralph Fiennes is taken from Claire Tomalin’s book about the Victorian author’s lover, teenage actor Ellen Ternan. In the 45-year-old Dickens, whose great novels and compelling theatrical readings have made him a star, Ellen (Felicity Jones) finds a kindred spirit but realises the path she is taking could lead to disgrace. Fiennes portrays Dickens as an emotionally complex figure – egotistical and cruel to his wife, Catherine (Joanna Scanlan), but also with a love of life in his bones. Sunday 19 December, 11.45pm, BBC Two Being the Ricardos Although Lucille Ball isn’t a huge name over here, in the 1950s 60 million US viewers watched her TV sitcom I Love Lucy. Aaron Sorkin’s fascinating, sharply witty biopic is structured round the production of one weekly episode, when a press rumour that Ball (a sparky Nicole Kidman) is a communist gains traction. Also, her trust in the fidelity of her husband and co-star Desi Arnaz (Javier Bardem) starts to falter. The politics of state, Hollywood and gender come into play, as Ball and Arnaz fight her corner. Tuesday 21 December, Amazon Prime Video Die Hard Yippie-ki-yay! John McTiernan’s seminal 1988 action movie shows how to bring a family together at Christmas – all you have to do is defeat heavily armed bank robbers. As NYPD cop John McClane, Bruce Willis went from TV comedy regular to bona fide film star in one multistorey leap. McClane’s attempt to reconcile with wife Holly (Bonnie Bedelia) at an LA skyscraper is interrupted by Alan Rickman’s Hans Gruber taking the building hostage. Luckily, Stallone and Schwarzenegger turned down the role, as Willis’s ordinary Joe shtick fits the tale perfectly. Wednesday 22 December, 10.45pm, ITV Don’t Look Up Leonardo DiCaprio and Jennifer Lawrence play Randall and Kate, two astronomers who discover a comet is heading straight for Earth – it will hit in six months and cause an extinction-level event. Taking the news straight to President Orlean (an effortlessly facile Meryl Streep), they expect swift action … but midterm elections, a celebrity breakup and a TV interview meltdown by Kate lead to possibly fatal delays. Throw in Mark Rylance as a Bezos-like big tech billionaire with the ear of the president and Cate Blanchett as a ratings-grabbing TV host, and all hell breaks loose. Adam McKay’s latest satirical drama is a funny, disconcerting deep dive into what happens when an incontrovertible disaster butts heads with a social media-obsessed world. A film for a post-Trump age when truth has become a commodity or a negotiation. Christmas Eve, Netflix Encanto Featuring songs by composer of the moment Lin-Manuel Miranda, this Colombia-set animated musical fantasy has built-in family appeal and a rainbow of colours bursting from every frame. Stephanie Beatriz (of Brooklyn Nine-Nine fame) voices Mirabel, the only member of the Madrigal clan without a special ability, and that includes their house. However, she discovers that the magical home – created after the family escaped armed conflict – is under threat of destruction. Christmas Eve, Disney+ Frozen One of the highest-grossing films of all time, earworm generator and irritant to parents of obsessed small children, Disney’s 2013 animated feature remains a fantastical triumph. It moves on traditional fairytale material such as The Snow Queen into new territory: the relationship between two sisters – Elsa (Idina Menzel), who can turn things to ice but fears her powers will alienate those she loves, and the naive Anna (Kristen Bell). Add in the songs (Let It Go etc), a beautifully created frosty world, and Josh Gad’s comic snowman, Olaf, and what’s not to love? Christmas Eve, 1.30pm, BBC One Home Alone Forget the fun but mostly forgettable recent reboot, Home Sweet Home Alone, and return to the source for all your Christmas slapstick needs. Chris Columbus’s 1990 comedy, scripted by John Hughes, takes the routines of silent comedy greats Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton and gives them to a scarily sadistic small boy, Kevin (Macaulay Culkin), and the two bungling robbers (Joe Pesci and Daniel Stern) trying to get into his home when he’s accidentally left there by himself at Christmas. Christmas Eve, 6pm, Channel 4 Amazing Grace Aretha Franklin’s 1972 live gospel album, Amazing Grace, recorded at a Baptist church in Los Angeles, was meant to be accompanied by a concert film. But technical difficulties with the sound, and Franklin’s own reluctance, meant that only in 2018 did the remarkable footage get released as this documentary. Any footage of the great soul singer is to be treasured but here she is in her pomp, wringing out every emotion with her brow beaded in sweat; in thrall to the religious message in the songs but also the power of the music to move us. Christmas Eve, 11pm, BBC Two Love Actually After Four Weddings and a Funeral and Notting Hill, Richard Curtis decided to expand his romcom remit with this 2003 film, featuring at least eight variations on the theme. Its overlapping stories include the prime minister (Hugh Grant, naturally) and a No 10 staff member (Martine McCutcheon); widower Liam Neeson’s young son and a classmate; and Martin Freeman and Joanna Page as film body doubles. There’s adultery and unrequited love, too, to add tartness to a mostly sweet experience. Christmas Day, 10.40pm, ITV Mary Poppins Returns Emily Blunt was perfectly cast in this sparkling 2018 sequel to the Julie Andrews classic. Her magical nanny reappears to supervise the children of her former charge, Michael (Ben Whishaw), now a widower with a cashflow problem. With a twinkle in her eye and a fine singing voice, Blunt doesn’t stray far from the original – and neither does the film, even featuring a hand-drawn animation/live-action scene. Lamplighter Lin-Manuel Miranda (who else?) is a slightly better cockney than Dick Van Dyke, and Marc Shaiman’s songs stand up well to their forebears. Christmas Day, 3.10pm, BBC One Their Finest Like TV’s Call the Midwife, Lone Scherfig’s 2016 drama delivers hard historical incident alongside comforting light entertainment. Gemma Arterton shines as Catrin, a secretary from Wales who finds herself part of the film script team at the Ministry of Information in London during the second world war. As the group plan a propaganda fiction based on the Dunkirk evacuation, she proves her ability to head writer Tom (Sam Claflin). Bill Nighy, as is his wont, dominates most of his scenes as an ageing thespian involved in the shoot. Christmas Day, 9.35pm, BBC Four Paddington Michael Bond’s accident-prone Peruvian bear comes alive for a new generation, thanks to this masterful 2014 comedy. The CGI bear (voiced by Ben Whishaw) blends in seamlessly with his live-action, adopted family the Browns – led by Hugh Bonneville and Sally Hawkins – as he comes to London to find the British explorer who encountered his uncle and aunt in the rainforest. Mild peril comes in the shape of chilly taxidermist Millicent Clyde (Nicole Kidman), who covets Paddington’s rare hide. The sequel can also be seen on Monday 27, on BBC One. Boxing Day, 4.20pm, BBC One The Suicide Squad You could be forgiven for thinking you’ve been here before, but the “The” is the sign this isn’t the 2016 supervillain film but its 2021 sequel. James Gunn of Guardians of the Galaxy fame writes and directs the pulpy misadventures of a bunch of convicts, including Margot Robbie’s returning Harley Quinn, Idris Elba’s Bloodsport, John Cena’s Peacemaker (soon to get his own HBO series) and Sylvester Stallone as a shark-human hybrid, who are offered lighter sentences if they infiltrate an island nation and destroy its secret weapon. Boxing Day, 11.45am, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere Mr Holmes Director Bill Condon reunites with the great Ian McKellen, star of his 1998 film Gods and Monsters, for this deft, affecting 2015 tale, taken from Mitch Cullin’s novel about an ageing Sherlock Holmes. The Baker Street detective has retired to rural Sussex and is facing a losing battle between his brilliant mind and dementia. As he struggles to remember his final case (recalled in flashback), which he fears must have been a failure, he befriends Roger (Milo Parker), the attentive young son of his unhappy housekeeper Mrs Munro (Laura Linney). Boxing Day, 1.10am, BBC Two West Side Story Steven Spielberg’s new take on the stage musical is currently in the cinema, but you could do worse than stay on the sofa for Robert Wise’s Oscar-laden 1961 version. In this Romeo and Juliet tale updated to mid-50s New York, Richard Beymer and Natalie Wood may not be the most vital of leads (Jimmy Bryant and Marni Nixon were employed as their “ghost singers”) but with support from George Chakiris and Rita Moreno, and a rollcall of jazzy numbers from Leonard Bernstein and his lyricist Stephen Sondheim, it’s the swingiest thing. Monday 27 December, 4.35pm, BBC Two Blade Runner 2049 Denis Villeneuve – currently wowing the crowds with Dune – was on a hiding to nothing in making a sequel to Ridley Scott’s venerated 1982 sci-fi thriller. But despite its epic length, this is both a visual marvel and an engrossing rumination on the nature of identity and existence. Ryan Gosling plays a replicant “blade runner”, a cop hunting rogue members of his own kind. When he finds out a replicant has given birth, he is charged with eliminating the child, but finds his own past called into question. Monday 27 December, 9pm, BBC Two A Star Is Born Every generation gets its version of this rags-to-riches tale, and gen Z’s boasts the splendid Lady Gaga in a role already graced by the likes of Judy Garland and Barbra Streisand. Bradley Cooper – also the director and co-writer – co-stars as over-the-hill, alcoholic country singer Jackson, who discovers Gaga’s younger waitress Ally doing a number at the drag bar where she works. Seeing her potential, he mentors her to success and they inevitably fall in love. However, the less Ally needs him, the more Jackson resents her fame and changing musical direction. A remake that has fascinating things to say about the power balance in relationships. Wednesday 29 December, 9pm, BBC One The Remains of the Day Merchant-Ivory’s finest film, a devastatingly sad 1993 drama superbly adapted by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala from Kazuo Ishiguro’s 1930s-set country house novel. Anthony Hopkins is repression personified as Stevens, the loyal-to-a-fault butler to James Fox’s Nazi sympathiser Lord Darlington. But when new housekeeper Kenton (Emma Thompson) arrives at the estate and shows an interest in him, there are hints of a thaw in his character. Hopkins and Thompson are on the top of their game, nuanced but on point emotionally, in a world hidebound by class and tradition. Thursday 30 December, 4.50pm, BBC Two Judy “Unreliable and uninsurable” – that’s Judy Garland in late 1968, just before she flies to London for a five-week run of concerts at the Talk of the Town nightclub, in Rupert Goold’s biographical drama. The actor and singer is a figure in sad decline: underweight, hooked on prescription drugs, often drunk and missing her children back in LA, whom she can’t afford to take care of. But still, in Renée Zellweger’s outstanding portrayal, she can knock your socks off with a song and inspire adoration from her many fans. A tragedy about the uses and abuses of talent. Thursday 30 December, 9pm, BBC Two The Lost Daughter Maggie Gyllenhaal’s adaptation of Elena Ferrante’s novel is a stark exploration of motherhood – its pleasures and burdens, plus the general expectation that all women should have parental feelings. All this comes out through the story of Leda (the peerless Olivia Colman) who is on holiday alone at a Greek seaside village. The appearance of Dakota Johnson’s unhappy young mum forces memories of Leda’s choices into the present (Jessie Buckley plays Leda in flashbacks) and reawakens her pain. New Year’s Eve, Netflix Coco Mexico’s annual Day of the Dead celebrations provide fruitful subject matter for Pixar’s blend of joy and nous in this entertaining 2017 animated fantasy. Aspiring young musician Miguel is trying to find out more about his supposed great-great-grandfather (father to his beloved relative Coco) but after a magical trick finds himself in the world of the dead. It’s a race against time to find his ancestor before he is trapped there for ever. For a film about living with death, Lee Unkrich’s film is a remarkably cheery experience, with a soundtrack of fantastic Latin tunes. New Year’s Eve, 2.40pm, BBC One When Harry Met Sally Tonight’s scheduling of Rob Reiner’s 1989 romcom is no accident – its climactic scene (no spoilers) should occur around the time real-world folk are singing in the new year. Billy Crystal and Meg Ryan do full justice to Nora Ephron’s scintillating script, as two New Yorkers in their 20s who fall in and out of friendship over several years, despite being clearly meant for each other. Bruno Kirby and Carrie Fisher as their respective best mates offer their views on love, as do a series of fictional talking-head couples recalling how they met. New Year’s Eve, 10.40pm, BBC FourIt is the story of a miserly gentleman who eventually finds redemption, and it was a huge bestseller in its day, but Charles Dickens’ festive story The Cricket on the Hearth is far less well-known than its predecessor A Christmas Carol. Now the Charles Dickens Museum in London is hoping to bring new attention to the tale, with the first display of some of the sketches drawn to illustrate it. The tale, which was published in 1846, is the third of Dickens’ five Christmas books. It tells of John Peerybingle and his wife Dot, who have a cricket in their home that brings happiness to the family. The toy-maker Tackleton, a malicious old man who “despised all toys; wouldn’t have bought one for the world”, convinces Peerybingle that Dot has cheated on him, but all finally ends well. “We’re very keen that everyone knows that there are other Christmas stories by Dickens,” said Emily Smith, curator at the Dickens Museum. “A Christmas Carol is so well-known, and the others are a bit underappreciated, despite the fact that they sold very well when he published them. They were really popular during the 19th century, but they have lost that connection today.” The museum is currently displaying John Leech’s sketches for The Cricket on the Hearth for the first time. “‘It’s quite a lovely, homely romance story, that was also extremely popular. It’s quite fairytale-like,” said Smith. “John Leech was an illustrator who worked with Dickens primarily on his Christmas books, so his most famous images are the ones for A Christmas Carol. In 2019 we had a donation of these lovely sketches, and we’ve now got on display a lovely collection of three of them from The Cricket on the Hearth.” Dickens wrote his five Christmas books in the middle of his career; A Christmas Carol was published in 1843, The Chimes in 1844, The Cricket on the Hearth in 1845, The Battle of Life in 1846, and The Haunted Man in 1848. “All of them sold very well, which is also why Dickens continued to write them; people were not only enjoying them, but obviously, for him, it was a bit of a business venture as well,” said Smith. “The Chimes is set on New Year’s Eve, so that’s a lovely one to think about bringing in the new year, and The Haunted Man is actually really good. It’s about the haunting of someone called Professor Redlaw, who is given the power to make people forget their own stories. So it’s kind of Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind before it became a thing.” Lucinda Hawksley, an author and great-great-great-granddaughter of Dickens, agreed. “It’s interesting to me that the other Christmas books have all fallen out of currency as it were, even though they were so widely known in their own time. Each was even more popular than the last,” she said. For Hawksley, A Christmas Carol remains the best of the lot, because it was written with “such passion” by her ancestor. “He was originally writing a government report into child poverty, but then he thought no one was going to read it, and it wouldn’t have an impact. After going to Manchester, and staying with his sister, he witnessed a level of poverty which was even worse than in London, families just starving on the streets, and he felt very powerless to do anything. So on his way back to London, he came up with the idea of turning it into a work of fiction. It was an amazing story that was written to bring about change.” Hawksley’s favourite of the remaining four books is The Haunted Man, which she said was “similarly written from the heart about a character who is suffering over the death of his sister”; Dickens’ own sister Fanny had also died that year. “The fact he was really struggling with depression shows, in The Haunted Man,” she said. “When he was writing A Christmas Carol, he was very stressed and anxious, but with The Haunted Man, he was genuinely suffering from depression. And I think that comes across in the writing style.” Dickens then went on to write David Copperfield and Great Expectations, and his Christmas stories faded away. “I think of all his Christmas stories, A Christmas Carol was the one that stayed with everybody the most, because the plot is kind of the original idea. A lot of the other Christmas stories that he writes are based around the same sort of idea, with a moralistic tone to them. The first time he does that is A Christmas Carol, and that’s seen as the original,” said Smith. “But the others are also definitely worth reading – and they were written by Dickens to be celebrated in the same way as A Christmas Carol, to be read with your family over the Christmas period, around the fire, and probably to be read out loud.”Twenty-seven people are feared dead after a fire swept through a mental health clinic in the Japanese city of Osaka, the local fire department said. The blaze is being treated as suspected arson, the Kyodo news agency said, quoting police sources saying that a man who appeared to be in his 60s had been seen carrying a paper bag leaking an unidentified liquid. A witness reportedly said the fire had started soon after the man had placed the bag near the fourth-storey clinic’s reception counter. The prime minister, Fumio Kishida, offered his condolences and said authorities were trying to establish the cause of the fire. An official at the Osaka fire department said 27 people were in cardiopulmonary arrest – a term Japanese media use before a death is confirmed by a doctor – and one person was injured. Media reports later said at least 20 people had been confirmed dead. A doctor at one of the hospitals treating the victims said he believed many of them had died from carbon monoxide inhalation. Television footage showed dozens of firefighters working inside and outside the eight-storey building in a commercial district of the western port city after the blaze was extinguished. The charred interior of the fourth floor of the narrow office building was visible through broken and blackened windows. The floor housed a clinic that provided mental health services and general medical care, local media said. “The fire was detected at 10.18am at the fourth floor,” the official said. “As of noon, 70 fire engines are at the scene.” The blaze, in the busy business and entertainment district near Kitashinchi train station, was put out after half an hour, they added. People on other floors of the building are believed to have been evacuated. “When I looked outside, I saw an orange flame in the window on the fourth floor of the building,” an unnamed witness, who had been in their nearby office, told Kyodo. “A woman was waving her hand from the window on the sixth floor and seeking help.” A middle-aged woman who witnessed the fire told public broadcaster NHK: “There was lots of a dark smoke … there was a very strong smell, too.” The fire is the most deadly in Japan since July 2019, when an arson attack at an animation studio in Kyoto killed 36 people.The last decade has seen an explosion in the popularity of board and card games that aren’t just the traditional Christmas assortment. Families seeking interesting, actually fun alternatives to Monopoly and Trivial Pursuits have embraced the German-designed classics Catan and Carcassonne, as well as a growing range of exuberant, highly social card games exemplified by the irrepressible Exploding Kittens and the frighteningly timely Pandemic. And now, with successful, critically acclaimed video games such as Slay the Spire and Wildermyth drawing key design principles from board games, it’s the perfect time to tempt the most stubborn console and PC owners away from their screens. Recently I asked video game designers on Twitter for their favourite board and card games to add to my own recommendations. Here then, are 10 examples worth investing in for the festive season, most aimed at teenagers and adults but all fabulously entertaining whether your players are veterans of Cluedo or Call of Duty. Dungeon Mayhem (Wizards of the Coast, £15, 2-4 players) From the creators of Dungeons &amp; Dragons, this is a simple but enjoyably competitive card combat game in which players choose one of four characters and then battle other participants with a range of attack and defence cards, as well as devastating power moves. It’s easy to learn, fast-paced and more tactical than it sounds, and there are expansion packs to add variety later on. The Quacks of Quedlinburg (Schmidt, £35, 2-4 players) When I asked video game designers for their favourite board games, this one came up most often. Each player takes on the role of a quack doctor trying to create the ultimate healing potion. Everyone must blind draw ingredients from a pot to add to their mixtures, but while some additions increase the value of their potions others will eventually explode, so each draw is a gamble. It’s a really fun game, with lots of tension and a clever “catch-up” mechanic to help quacks who’ve fallen behind. Escape the Dark Castle (Themeborne, £25, 1-4 players) Designed to capture the look and feel of early 1980s tabletop role-playing adventures, escape the Dark Castle is a cooperative game in which up to six characters (each with different stats for Might, Cunning and Wisdom), must break out of the eponymous building while avoiding deadly traps and deciding together the best course of action. Each turn, a chapter card is played, which gives a little narrative and a set of options – like a “choose your own adventure” book. I love the visual style of the game, and the fact that it’s cooperative makes a nice change for families prone to board-tipping tantrums. Codenames (Czech Games Edition, £16, 2-8 players) If you like team-based deduction games but are a bit bored of Pictionary or Heads Up!, this is a really fun alternative. Twenty-five word cards are placed on the table and team leaders must attempt to describe the words belonging to their own side without accidentally helping their opponents. It’s filled with social interaction so great for parties. Alternatively, try Monikers (CMYK, £25, 4-20 players), which can get even more loud and lively. Colt Express (Ludonaute, £30, 2-6 players) Another popular choice with video game designers, this Wild West adventure has competing bandits attempting to hold up the same train, shooting and punching each other in their rush to get rich. In a similar style to turn-based strategy games such as XCOM and Into the Breach, players have to pre-plan their actions, utilising the special abilities of their characters. It’s fast-paced and accessible, and with its 3D locomotive model, it has real visual appeal. Incan Gold/Diamant (Sunriver Games, £30, 3-8 players) Combining luck, gambling and bluffing, and a setting that’ll be familiar to anyone who’s watched an Indiana Jones film over Christmas, Incan Gold (also available under the name Diamant) has players exploring a series of ruined temples, going deeper and deeper in search of valuable jewels. The further you explore, however, the more likely you are to encounter a deadly snake or mummy, so you need to know when to get out with the spoils. It’s all played with cards, so you don’t need tons of space, and it’s really well-balanced for family game nights. A nice alternative to this might be Saboteur (Mayfair games, £10, 3-10 players) – a treacherous gold mining card game with a hint of Among Us. Santorini (Spin Master, £30, 2-4 players) If you love world-building strategy sims such as Populous or more recently Islanders or Valheim, this is the one for you. The players are Greek gods competing to construct a city for their followers, using various strategies to create the tallest buildings. The board comes with lovely little building blocks to make the 3D towns, and although the instructions are very simple, the structure allows for a huge array of tactics and outcomes. A cool alternative is the Japanese city-building game Machi Koro. Downforce (Restoration Games, £30, 2-6 players) If you have lots of driving game fans in your household, Downforce should appeal. Players bid on six F1 cars taking part in a race, then “drive” their vehicles by placing cards which have instructions on how many spaces they can move. It sounds simple, but there’s also a mid-race betting mechanism to add extra tension, and to win you need to plan your racing strategy very carefully. Like a board game version of Mario Kart, the whole family can play, and last minute changes in fortune will have you all yelling at each other – in a good-humoured way obviously. If you’re not into cars, try Camel Up, a similar concept but with, um, camels. Azul (Plan B, £35, 2-4 players) One of the most gorgeous looking titles on our list, Azul is billed as an abstract strategy game in which everyone competes to build beautiful mosaic designs from a range of tiles bought from centrally placed factories. In order to earn points, players must complete rows of matching tiles and then transfer the pieces to their wall. There are similarities with block matching video games such as Bejeweled and Candy Crush Saga but in a more refined and thoughtful environment. Starship Samurai (Plaid Hat, £35, 2-4 players) There are lots of branded sci-fi board games out there with Star Wars, Star Trek and Alien all well represented, but I’m recommending this entertaining space war title instead, mostly because it has giant samurai battle mechs. Players represent different races attempting to control a distant galaxy through conflict and cunning. The mech figures are lovely and there’s an expansion pack if you get completely addicted. Honorable mentions There are so many more board games that will capture the imagination of video game fans. Among those suggested to me by multiple game developers were: Splendour, Organ Attack!, Railroad Ink, Century Spice Road, Cutthroat Caverns, Forbidden Island, The Quest for El Dorado, Skull and King of Tokyo. • Many thanks to Matt Jarvis from board gaming site Dicebreaker for his help with this article.In October 2005, Bob Innes bought the website domain name “rentahitman.com.” It was the dotcom era and he was a business school student in North Carolina trying to advertise website traffic analysis services: the “hit” was a nod to clicks coming in on a client’s website. “It was simply a play on words,” he says now, when contacted via email for an interview. Little did he know that come 2021, he would be involved in hundreds of legal cases, handing people to the police for trying to solicit assassin services. This week, one woman was found guilty, after trying to have her husband killed through Innes’ website. But in 2005, with business far from booming, Innes moved on from his plans for a network analysis business with a catchy name. He graduated; his friends who collaborated with him on the site found full-time jobs. But Innes held on to the domain name in the hopes that someone might buy it one day. No one bought the site, and it continued to exist in the background of Innes’ life. Then, in 2010, he returned to its inbox out of curiosity and was stunned to find a client – just not the type he had been looking for. Innes had received a message from a woman named Helen. She was stranded in Canada, had lost her passport, and wanted three family members in the UK murdered for screwing her out of her father’s inheritance. He didn’t respond. But she persisted: sending a second email, which included names, addresses and other corroborating information. Innes felt compelled to act. So he responded, feigning to have the capability to do what was being asked of him. “Do you still require our assistance? We can place you in contact with a Field Operative,” he replied, stepping into character. Within hours, Innes was in possession of the legal name, location, and phone number of a woman he thought was capable of serious harm. “I truly felt that three people’s lives were in jeopardy,” he says. Innes turned her in, and soon found out from detectives that ‘Helen’ was wanted in the UK on extraditable warrants for “more serious charges”. It was at this point Innes realized his $9.20 website provided a little more value than he’d initially bargained for: he had just saved the lives of three people. ••• After Helen’s arrest in 2010, Innes went back to a relatively normal life. He never planned on being a detective, or a criminal catcher, or whatever it was that he was doing when posing to be a person who could procure assassins online. He didn’t have the training. He was just a man with a wacky website name who happened to intervene in a crime. “In case you haven’t noticed, I’m not really a murder-for-hire type of guy,” Innes says. “I’m more of a save-a-life type who just happened to be in this position by way of a fluke.” So he kept the site running, filling it with jokes and clues to show it wasn’t the real deal. “Your point and click solution,” the blurb for the website says when you search for it on Google. The website boasts providing services to children, and assures readers they are protected by the “Hitman Information Privacy Protection Act (HIPPA)”. And then there’s the warning message that lurks on the front page. It reads: “Everyone should know by now that the Dark &amp; Deep webs [sic] are not safe places to shop for your nefarious deeds. There are lots of potentially dangerous sites, ripe with viruses, and fraud runs rampant there. Your privacy is NOT guaranteed and your information could be leaked to thousands of less than stellar sites, including law enforcement, and that’s no fun!” But still, the appeals just kept on coming, leaving Innes swamped with requests , not just from those looking to harm others, but also those looking to harm themselves. “I’m not a crisis counsellor and it’s hard to find proper solutions and resources for many who reach out,” he says. The site runs completely out of pocket, although Innes accepts donations to cover the costs associated with running it. He also plans to set up an internet safety program, to help educate on the dangers of the internet and to lobby for tougher laws for people who try to commit violent crimes online. Does he ever worry that he is setting people up, just by keeping the website? “This is a stupid question,” Innes responds. “The site is not a ploy to lure or dupe people who want to have others killed. These people search the internet to contact a hitman,” he says – explaining that the website is not advertised anywhere. Innes also typically gives people a “cooling off” period of 24 hours after they try to procure him – for him to ascertain whether they are certain. “I’ll ask two simple questions,” he says: “Do you still require our services? And would you like me to place you in contact with a field operative for a free consultation?” If they don’t answer, he says they get a free pass. But if they do “then it’s game on,” he says. Ultimately, he also feels he has no choice. “As long as these emails keep coming in, I will continue to act,” he says. “So far, nearly 150 lives have been saved as a direct result of the site and my actions.”On Christmas Eve 1996, I’d been out drinking and came home at 1am to find my dad, Bill, asleep. This was unusual – he was usually awake at that hour, worrying about money. My sister, Felicia, said he wasn’t well. He had caught pneumonia. Later, I heard him coughing, so I went to him. He was coughing up blood. I called an ambulance, which took him to hospital at 4am on Christmas Day. Felicia, Mum and I thought, OK, Dad’s in hospital with pneumonia, but let’s have Christmas, he’ll be fine. Mum started peeling potatoes and putting the turkey in the oven. Then we heard that, because of an intensive-care bed shortage, Dad had been moved from Darlington – where we lived – to Bishop Auckland hospital 10 miles away. The oven was turned off. Our neighbour took us to the hospital. We stayed there all day, sitting in the waiting room and by his bedside. Dad died on Christmas Day. But then, only a few days later, we discovered that Mum had caught pneumonia from him. She died on 30 December; she was 50, and Dad 52. My mum’s twin sister came to see us with our cousins. Our family doctor showed up, as well as a teacher from my sister’s school. Neighbours came, too. It was surreal. It’s overwhelming dealing with other people’s shock when you are grieving yourself. Legal discussions started on probate. When it was granted, we found out Dad owed all this money, but we didn’t know why. Dad had lost his job as a door-to-door insurance salesman five years before, and never got salaried work again. His creditors wanted the money from the sale of our house. I was a first-year broadcasting student at Leeds University, about 60 miles away. I wasn’t sure who could care for Felicia, who was 16 at the time. Neighbours and the family doctor brought us food, checked in on us and tidied up, but they had their own families. Then our story was picked up by the press and we were called “the Christmas orphans”. When I returned to university, everything was a blur. I was in such a state that whole time, thinking things couldn’t get any stranger. One day, my course director asked me to meet the vice-chancellor, Alan Wilson, in his office. He had seen the articles about Felicia and me, and wanted to help. He immediately made me feel that everything was going to be all right. I assumed I’d have to give up my studies and sell the house, but Alan said that wasn’t going to happen. He set up a trust fund (along with three others) and got donations to buy our house in the name of the trust. Felicia told me to go back to university, but I was worried about her. In the end, they arranged for me to do some lectures via video, and I was only away for a couple of days a week; Felicia’s boyfriend and his parents would spend time with her. Everyone knows everyone in Darlington, so the adults were quietly watching over us. With hindsight, I can see that the experience had affected me deeply. After university, I did a lot of crazy travelling, and didn’t want to stay in one place, or one relationship. The house was sold when I was 24, and what remained was divided between me and Felicia. I wanted adventure, which explains how I ended up writing about the Sahel region in Africa and becoming a Foreign Office analyst for west Africa. Now I have children, I can see how shocking it all was, especially for Felicia. It’s made me pretty resilient, able to laugh at almost everything, and very conscious that we have only one life, and to make the most of it. Felicia and I are close and see each other every Christmas; we mostly drink and eat cheese. For the first few years, we used to talk about our parents a lot and it was hard, but so much time has passed now. I’ve stayed in touch with Alan. I’ve had to chase him down a few times, as he’s a very successful man, but you can’t let someone who’s done that for you leave your life. He saved us. Looking back, I’d tell my 19-year-old self that it would all be OK. I would also tell Alan not to worry about us – fortunately, he could stop doing that years ago. • As told to Anna Derrig Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.comThe hack A kitchen version of your trusty black liquid eyeliner, made from household items such as charcoal, almonds and oil. What could possibly go wrong? The promise The great lockdown DIY cosmetics movement led to eyeliner “recipes” all over YouTube. They sound speedy, but can you do a “flick” with charcoal? Being both a goth and Indian – eyeliner is a big part of both cultures – I was very open to trying this. The test My first formula uses activated black charcoal, from health food stores. I add a teaspoon(ish) of it to a heat-proof bowl, into which I’ve already melted half a teaspoon of beeswax and coconut oil. When mixed, it looks just like black gel liner, but when I apply it (with an eyeliner brush) it’s more translucent than I’d like, and smudgy. Another recipe suggests charring an almond over a flame then powdering it (I use a pestle and mortar) before adding a smidgen of almond oil or ghee. This is even messier – after a couple of hours’ wear, I look like a post-gig Alice Cooper. The verdict Mess aside, making your own eyeliner, in a non-sterile environment and without preservatives, increases the chances of bacteria forming and that’s not a risk I’ll take with my eyes. I’d rather use Makeup By Mario Master Mattes liquid liner (£19).The Poems by Derek Mahon (Gallery Press, €22.50) With Derek Mahon’s death in October 2020, the world lost one of the great modern lyric poets. From Night-Crossing (1968) to Washing Up (2020), he fashioned an oeuvre of rare elegance, wit and visionary reach. “Even now there are places where a thought might grow”, begins his best known poem, A Disused Shed in Co Wexford, snatching its moment of triumph from the violent panorama of history. Mahon was a lifelong self-revisioner, and monumental though it is, this post-revisions volume will not be to everyone’s taste, with some key omissions making it a Collected rather than a Complete Poems. Still, the work endures, “rinsing the choked mud, keeping the colours new”. Far District by Ishion Hutchinson (Faber, £9.99) “There is nothing here, // no visible history”, the Jamaican poet Ishion Hutchinson reports in the titular poem. Even as he echoes James Anthony Froude, Hutchinson turns that Victorian traveller’s erasure of the West Indies to creative account. Landscapes are painted in a pseudo-anthropological style (“the sugar-headed children will wander / the field at night, lost to the scavenging / green, eating the ripe flux of the land”), the better to capture not just the thing in itself but the layered narratives of which history is made. The effortless sketches of New World Frescoes bear comparison with Derek Walcott, whose heir Hutchinson is in many ways becoming. In Autobiography of Snow he trails Caribbean forefather Claude McKay, “waiting for your coat to turn the corner, / licked by a lamp’s flame”. Like the butterflies of House on the Hill, these are poems that “beat their wings in [the] throat”. Stones by Kevin Young (Cape, £12) “Man is in love and loves what vanishes, / what more is there to say?” mused Yeats brokenheartedly. In Stones, American poet Kevin Young goes one step further: “I’m done being // in love with / what leaves”. Young has always favoured the short line, and in Stones combines brevity and sharp line breaks in poems that spurn the formal consolations of the Yeatsian high style. The theme is grief. Poems perform a stark self-subtraction towards silence and white space – “of us there is / always us” – and dance on the edge of a formal death wish (“Nothing can make, make me want / to stay / in this world”). Even when he titles a poem Balm, Young realises “the end // has no end”. Stones is a book of language at its limits, paring down the usual occasions of joy in the face of loss until only the gesture of the poem itself remains, frail, endangered, yet resilient. Like a Tree, Walking by Vahni Capildeo (Carcanet, £11.99) “I am / without those things they say a poem needs”, we read in Capildeo’s fourth collection since the Forward prize-winning Measures of Expatriation in 2016. Lack is a not infrequent starting point for the post-Covid poem, and in Walk #7, Capildeo embarks on an “imaginary stroll” on an “imaginary holiday” in France. Real or remembered, Capildeo’s travels are driven by “love of things invisible”, and a reaching out across time as well as space, as in the verse-essay Windrush Reflections. Erasure poems unearth ghostly presences beneath texts by Simone Weil and Julian of Norwich, and translations from Eugène Ionesco further flesh out an imagined France, where “the least little thing is a splendour”. “Just look how / I’ve lost form” frets the lovely sequence After an Unspeaking. The rich poems of Like a Tree, Walking suggest otherwise.It was early 1999, and people were freaking out about the future. A new millennium was on the way, carrying with it the promise – or threat – of massive change. Would the next century guide us toward a tech-enabled utopia? Or, as some feared, would it plunge the world into a full-on apocalypse? These were strange days, marked by equal parts anxiety and anticipation. Which made it the perfect moment for a sleek, cerebral movie called The Matrix. Created by a pair of mostly unknown filmmakers (Lana and Lilly Wachowski), and headlined by a commercially iffy star (Keanu Reeves), the $60m cyber-thriller became an instant hit. Some viewers were sucked in by the film’s mind-melting storyline – about a hacker named Neo who discovers that mankind is enslaved in a computer-made simulation. Others were simply turned on by the film’s whoa-inducing fight scenes. The year may have been full of big-spectacle, big-hype movies, but by the end of 1999, it was clear that The Matrix was The One: the first true digital-era blockbuster, one that foretold the ways technology would reshape not only filmmaking, but also our daily lives, both for better and for worse. The pop-cultural impact of the film was clear within months of its release. The Wachowskis had plundered numerous visual influences, from Hong Kong action flicks to Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey. And they’d incorporated new digital effects that let characters freeze in mid-air, or dodge hails of gunfire, while cameras circled the action in a near-360-degree swirl. As a result, The Matrix didn’t quite look like any movie that had come before, and its slowed-down, hyper-detailed visual style was soon being satirised and adapted by other filmmakers. Not since 1977, when Star Wars was released, had a movie so quickly rebooted the look and feel of mainstream moviemaking. But these were all surface-level aftershocks. The deeper legacy of The Matrix wouldn’t be revealed for years. A DVD release broke sales records at the time, allowing for multiple repeat viewings. But it was the internet that really let Matrix fans go down the rabbit hole. The Wachowskis’ script had been kicking around since the mid-90s, a time when the mainstream web was in its infancy. But by 1999, millions of Americans were chatting, ranting, and shopping online. At the same time, the spectre of the possibly destructive Y2K “millennium bug” hung over everything. It was a tense, transformative period – one that was encapsulated by The Matrix. If you were suspicious of all this new technology, the film served as a cautionary tale about our devices overpowering our lives. But if you were already very online, The Matrix was proof that the internet was full of possibility – and that if things went bad, people had the power to rise up and reclaim their own humanity. These were big ideas and they led to big conversations, many of which percolated online, where debates and deep-dives carried on day and night, and around the globe. A circa-’99 glimpse of the notorious fan-site Ain’t It Cool News hints at some of the questions moviegoers were asking at the time: “Are we being controlled by our computers?” “If the Matrix is real, what can you do about it?” “Also, where can I get some of those cool Matrix sunglasses?” The Wachowskis had made a film that seemed to speak directly to the internet, and the internet couldn’t stop speaking back. For Matrix fans, there was always some new subtext to kick around, some rad new Morpheus gif to share. But over the course of the next decade – which saw the release of two sequels – some of the talk shifted toward the Wachowskis’ most alluring innovation: the red pill. In the first film, Morpheus gives Neo the choice of either swallowing a blue pill, which will keep him happily oblivious to his own enslavement, or taking the red one, which will allow him to see the truth. Oddly, not much was made of this conceit when the film debuted. But it started to resonate in the years after its release, when the mood of the US, and much of the world, became one of full-on existential funk. The seeming unreality of the 9/11 attacks, followed by the disorienting invasions of Iraq and Afghanistan, Hurricane Katrina, and the 2008 financial crash, had prompted many to ask, “Wait, is this really happening?”. Soon, the social-media era was kicking off, which would give even more space to discussions of The Matrix and its real-world implications – and applications. Starting around 2012, the movie inspired an ugly, misogynistic shorthand, thanks to a subreddit dubbed TheRedPill, in which angry young men shared their stories of being “red-pilled” – that is, “realising” that feminism was an oppressive force working against them. Since then, “red-pilling” has become a sort of catch-all term to describe “political awakenings”. When Elon Musk implored his millions of Twitter followers to “Take the red pill” last year, it prompted a response from both Ivanka Trump (“Taken!”) and Lilly Wachowski herself (“Fuck both of you”). The fact that “red-pilling” has taken on such dopily spiteful connotations is, for Matrix fans, a bummer: after all, one of the joys of the Wachowskis’ original films was its open-minded vision of society. Neo and his partner, Trinity (played by Carrie-Anne Moss), treat each other with a level of mutual respect that’s rarely seen in male-female big-screen relationships, even to this day. And they work alongside a multi-gender, multi-racial team of rebels. For all of its grim shoot-’em-up scenes and killer machines, The Matrix is a deeply hopeful film: one that pushes the value of caring for one another, and the freedom that comes from defining who you really are (since its release, the film has been embraced as a trans allegory – a reading supported by none other than Lana Wachowski). Still, the ultimate sign of The Matrix’s ongoing importance, as well as its predictive powers, is the fact that, more than two decades after its release, it’s becoming harder to tell if we’re living with The Matrix, or within it. The internet has become so overloaded with misinformation and misdirection, it’s now possible for everyone to generate their own immersive reality (or realities). You can now opt in to whatever set of facts you like, knowing your beliefs – no matter how damaged, or even dangerous – will be supported by a vast digital machine, one more terrifying than anything the Wachowskis could have imagined. It’s a grim situation, one that undercuts the message of hope that was hardwired into The Matrix. Perhaps we’ll get a brighter glimpse of our next future this month, when The Matrix Resurrections arrives in cinemas. But no matter where Neo and Trinity go next, the message of the original landmark film will continue to ring truer than ever: we’re all increasingly stuck in our own versions of the Matrix – but we still have the power to rage against the machines and free ourselves. Brian Raftery is the author of Best. Movie. Year. Ever: How 1999 Blew Up the Big Screen, and the host of the podcast Gene &amp; RogerIn the summer of 2019, 23-year-old Elijah McClain was stopped by the Aurora, Colorado, police while walking home, after someone called 911 saying he looked suspicious. The incident quickly turned violent, with three police officers piling on the 140lbMcClain, twice putting him in a chokehold that has since been banned. After vomiting, coming in and out of consciousness and pleading for breath, paramedics arrived and injected McClain with an excessive dose of ketamine, a powerful sedative. He immediately went limp and went into cardiac arrest on the way to the hospital, dying a few days later. The three police officers and two paramedics have since been charged with criminally negligent homicide, and the family of McClain – who was Black – was recently awarded $15m in a civil lawsuit against the city of Aurora, the second largest of its kind, just behind the one awarded to George Floyd’s family. McClain’s death magnified the American reckoning with racism and police brutality but it has also sparked a national debate about the use of ketamine – a medical anesthetic, popular club drug, and psychotherapy tool – in law enforcement situations, leading to its ban in the state of Colorado, and possibly across the nation. “What we’re talking about is the weaponization of medicine,” says Mari Newman, the lawyer representing McClain’s family. “It might as well be a taser or a gun.” Newman says that McClain was exhibiting none of the signs of “excited delirium syndrome” – a controversial diagnosis that legally warrants a ketamine injection – and that police officers erroneously employed “code words like ‘he had superhuman strength’” that she says were an attempt to influence paramedics to give the injection (and justify their own use of excessive force). Police are not legally allowed to administer ketamine. Paramedics can, but only if a patient is exhibiting symptoms of “excited delirium”. The controversy surrounding this diagnosis – characterized by aggressive behavior, superhuman strength and hyperthermia – comes in part from its emergence during the war on drugs in the 1980s, and is applied disproportionately in the post-mortem of Black men killed by police. The condition is not recognized by the Diagnostic Statistical Manual of Mental Health Disorders, or the American Medical Association. A report by public radio station KUNC revealed that in the past 2.5 years, Colorado medics injected 902 people for excited delirium, leading to serious complications in 17% of cases. The American Society of Anesthesiologists recently stated it “firmly opposes the use of ketamine or any other sedative/hypnotic agent to chemically incapacitate someone for a law enforcement purpose and not for a legitimate medical reason”. A Minnesota medic filed a whistleblower lawsuit last year claiming police had pressured him to inject someone with ketamine during an arrest, adding that such acts are not uncommon (in Minneapolis, ketamine use grew from an average of four law enforcement incidents a year, to 62, from 2015 to 2017). After the death of McClain – and a similar incident involving Aurora police – the state of Colorado passed legislation last June banning the use of ketamine for excited delirium, and clarifying that police should never influence medics to use it. “EMS is responsible for patient care, not law enforcement,” Governor Jared Polis said in a signing statement. “Ketamine should not be used for law enforcement purposes.” A similar federal bill was introduced shortly after, and is being considered by Congress. Emergency Medical Services Association of Colorado president, Scott Sholes, says that, when used according to protocol, ketamine is the safest alternative to violence or other sedatives available to paramedics, and removing it from their toolbox puts them at a serious loss. “I can tell you horror stories about physically restraining people for hours, back in the day,” says Sholes. “For the first ten years of my career it was strapping people to back-boards, sometimes flipping the board over and sitting on it in order to control people, and eventually we got some medications we could use.” Starting in the early 1990s, Shole says, medics could use antipsychotics like Haldol, and later benzodiazepines like Valium or opioids like fentanyl, to subdue those who pose a threat to themselves or others. But these drugs could often take 30 minutes to take effect, and sometimes delivered the opposite effect intended. “In comparison, ketamine takes three to four minutes, is easy to dose, has the safest profile, and has remarkable success with sedation,” Sholes says. “With everything we’ve seen in the media on ketamine, no one is looking at the data.” Sholes points to a study released last summer revealing that, of the 11,291 instances of patients being injected with ketamine by paramedics, “patient mortality was rare. Ketamine could not be ruled out as a contributing factor in 8 deaths, representing 0.07% of those who received ketamine.” Sholes stresses a kind of church-and-state separation between medics and law enforcement, and that paramedics should never be collaborating with police in the execution of their duties. However, he admits, there have been instances where this line has been blurred, violating EMS protocol. And in the case of Elijah McClain, he says that Aurora paramedics failed to follow basic practices in the administration of ketamine. “I’ve been a paramedic for 40 years, and that video [of McClain’s death], if you think it’s bad from a layman perspective, it’s astonishing to me,” says Sholes. “That’s not how ketamine is commonly used … In that video, I see paramedics who did not assess the patient. By the time they injected him, he wasn’t moving, certainly wasn’t fighting. He was given way more [ketamine] than protocol called for. ” First approved by the FDA for use as an anesthetic in 1970, ketamine has been a popular medical tool for pain relief and sedation in humans and animals for decades. In the 80s and 90s, illicit use of ketamine (or “special K”) was popularized by the rave scene of New York City’s club kids, who took it for its euphoric, hallucinogenic properties. In recent years, it has shown remarkably promising results in the treatment of mental health disorders, spawning an industry of “ketamine clinics” around the US. “Ketamine’s effects operate on a spectrum,” says Desmond Wallington, a psychologist and Colorado mental health director for Klarisana, a ketamine clinic. “On the low-dose end it’s a psycholitic; so time, space and reality briefly dissolve around you. And then there’s a psychedelic experience, where those effects will last for an hour or so, and on the far end there’s an anesthetic [unconscious] experience. We operate in the first two realms.” Wallington says he “cringes” at the idea of ketamine being used in a law enforcement context, particularly because of its growing association with police brutality against young Black men. “You don’t want to give ketamine to someone with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder – you could send them into a delusional headspace and leave them worse than you found them,” he says. “If they’re already on a stimulant, you’re putting them at risk for a stroke.” McClain’s family attorney, Mari Newman, says that she believes ketamine injections are being used by law enforcement simply to silence an unruly suspect. “If someone’s disagreeing with an officer, what better way to shut them up than to knock them right out?” she says.‘Is this really how you feel about France? You think we’re all sexist?” It’s the kind of question you were likely to face if you were a North American woman in Paris last year – more so if you were a fashion influencer. Monica de la Villardière, who lives there with her French husband having emigrated from Canada, got it time and again. “I promise you, I don’t!” she would protest. But, thanks to one glossy Netflix romcom, Parisians began to wonder whether she viewed them as little more than walking, bigoted stereotypes. The show was Emily in Paris, the Netflix series that became arguably the most divisive television of 2020 – and which is soon to return for a second series. An instantly memeable, Devil Wears Prada-ish concoction from Sex and the City creator Darren Star, its first run saw Chicagoan Emily Cooper (Lily Collins) emigrate to France for a marketing job. Thrust beret-first into a cliche-ridden version of Parisian life, she somehow became an influencer, despite almost exclusively posting pictures of croissants and cheeseburgers, and spending most of her time seeking out new Frenchmen to snog. It was less la vie en rose – more la vie en sparkling rosé. The version of Paris seen in the show consisted mostly of tourist highlights (the Eiffel Tower, Café de Flore, Sacré-Coeur), improbably large apartments and suspiciously clean streets, without a gilet jaune protest in sight. And it was not exactly a considered portrait of the city’s residents, with Parisian characters who leaned heavily into patronising stereotypes. Think rude waiters, lazy, mean-spirited workers and unfaithful men. Internationally, the series was met with affection and bafflement. US news site Vox conceded it was both “a fantasy about millennial laziness” that had no bearing in reality and “an isolated, low-effort form of pleasure”. Rolling Stone praised its “warm, dumb embrace”, while British Vogue spoke of its “exquisite tackiness”. The French press, however, went into overdrive. De la Villardière wrote a piece for French Vogue calling out her fictional nemesis, featuring the line “my nightmares are filled with you”. Fabien Randanne of the newspaper 20 Minutes says he rolled his eyes constantly while watching the show. “It’s this mythical image of Paris – everybody on the terraces, the fashion, the snobbish people. In every cliche there’s a kind of truth, but this is a metaverse. It’s not realistic at all.” It also painted an extremely one-dimensional portrait of the French fashion world’s attitude to women. Emily was our enlightened heroine/#girlboss, here to bring #metoo to an entire industry so unquestioningly sexist it was as though the 21st century had passed them by. Her colleagues’ views on feminism were outdated and immovable, to the point where Emily had to sit down with a senior executive and explain the very concept to them, clearly and slowly, over a glass of white wine. It’s a shame, because some Parisians see this as the one area where the show might have had a point, if only it had been capable of nuance. Instead, it created something so one-note that a potentially interesting discussion about the evolution of gender equality became toe-curlingly cringy. It failed to understand that some of the attitudes Emily questions don’t come from a head-scratching ignorance of feminism. They’re rooted in the feminism of a previous generation, from which the debate has moved on. “Emily’s colleagues represent an older wave of feminism and there are a lot of French women who think that way,” says De la Villardière. “I’m not saying I agree with them, but the way Emily goes about [changing their minds] is so wrong. It would go down like a lead balloon in Paris.” Moreover, the casting confused and offended many viewers. As a Black woman from Paris, journalist Christelle Murhula found it strange to see the city devoid of people who looked like her. “There are a lot of Black people, a lot of Arab people and so much diversity in Paris,” she says, “but most of the people in the series are white.” As well as Emily’s best friend Mindy, who is Chinese-American, “Emily has one Black colleague [Julien]. It seems like an example of the ‘Magical Negro’ trope – it’s like he’s just there to make her comfortable.” Randanne points to a book published last year by an American living in Paris, Lindsey Tramuta, titled The New Parisienne: The Women &amp; Ideas Shaping Paris. It profiles women including the Franco-Moroccan novelist Leïla Slimani and Paris’s Spanish-born mayor, Anne Hidalgo. “It has portraits of French women – women whose parents immigrated to France, disabled women, women from all kinds of backgrounds,” says Randanne. “In Paris you can meet so many different people in a day, and the series didn’t show that.” Even the show’s writers seemed uncomfortable. Deborah Copaken – who penned part of the first series – wrote an opinion piece for the Guardian in which she said she wished Michaela Coel’s I May Destroy You had been nominated for a Golden Globe alongside Emily, following much criticism around its exclusion (and scrutiny of the diversity, or lack thereof, of the judging panel). Additionally, Copaken has since claimed that Star did not properly credit her. Later this month, the show returns for a second series, and it seems that such real-world conversations have made their mark. Lily Collins has said she was “really passionate” about diversifying the show, and two new characters of colour will join the cast, played by Jeremy O Harris and Lucien Laviscount. Slave Play writer Harris will have a recurring role as the fashion designer Gregory. Laviscount, the British actor who has made the jump from Grange Hill and Waterloo Road to US TV roles, will play Alfie, a Brit who is more nonplussed with Paris than even Emily. However, Murhula worries the new additions to the cast could feel tokenistic – especially given that Emily has a revolving door of boyfriends. “[Alfie] is the love interest for Emily but for how long?” she wonders. De la Villardière has also suggested ways that Emily in Paris could improve its portrayal of Paris in season two. In a recent follow-up to her article on the show, she proposes – tongue somewhat in cheek, but still firmly unimpressed – that Emily might want to “eat a croissant or two. Listen to some Gainsbourg while lying on the floor of your apartment naked amid the croissant crumbs … throw on an old white T-shirt without a bra.” This feels unlikely, though. After all, in the first series, one of Emily’s lines of dialogue summarised the entirety of Paris as “looks like Ratatouille” – the much-memed Pixar film about a rat with dreams of becoming a chef – so you have to wonder just how seriously anyone involved was taking the whole thing. And yet, for all of its faults, Emily in Paris was a pop culture talking point and a hatewatch which seems sure to be viewed by millions once again. Ultimately, the series is more about a vision of a city than of its reality – signified and signifier having slowly moved apart over the decades. “This image of Paris as the city of love and light and a romantic city is a good thing in a way, for tourism,” says Randanne. “Although the city is so much more than that.” And, maybe, that cliched version is all viewers should expect (although, quel bonheur, it has been confirmed that the characters will at least speak French among themselves this time round, and Emily will attend a language class rather than just speaking in louder, slower English). Emily in Paris seems intended as a slick but shallow treat, escapist fun, or maybe a soundtrack to an evening spent double-screening. Nonetheless, perhaps the vision of Paris it promotes should come with some kind of warning. “If there are people looking up to Emily who want to live that dream – and they go about it in the same way as her – it’s not going to go well,” says De la Villardière. “You would be a social outcast. I feel like I have a public duty to inform them before they get here.” This is a well-documented phenomenon. It even has a name: Paris syndrome, a kind of culture shock observed in tourists whose media-fuelled expectations of the city jar with the rough-and-ready reality. And Emily in Paris could at least have one benefit to Paris as a city: it might help keep its psychologists in work. “I think there’s going to be a whole new generation of American girls who have Paris syndrome,” says De la Villardière. “I just hope Netflix pays their therapy bills.” Season two of Emily in Paris is on Netflix from 22 DecemberIn an extraordinary defeat for the Conservatives, Lib Dem Helen Morgan won 17,957 votes in the North Shropshire byelection, 5,925 more than the Tories’ Neil Shastri-Hurst. Labour’s Ben Wood was third with 3,686, and turnout was 46.3%. A Tory safe seat since its creation, the Tories had won North Shropshire comfortably in 2019 with a majority of nearly 23,000. We would like to hear your views on the results below. Were you expecting this result? If you live in North Shropshire, what does it mean for you and what are your hopes for the future? Share your thoughts You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The boom in UK house prices is likely to end next year as household finances become increasingly stretched, according to Halifax. The mortgage lender said it expected the red-hot increases in average house prices over the last two years – 8% so far this year and 6% in 2020 – to end, with growth forecast to be “broadly flat” in 2022. The Bank of England raised interest rates on Thursday for the first time since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, from 0.1% to 0.25%, and signalled further increases in the months ahead, potentially dampening appetite for spending as budgets come under strain. The Bank made its move after the Office for National Statistics said that UK inflation jumped to a 10-year high of 5.1% in November, as the price of petrol reached a record high and the global chip shortage pushed up car prices. “With the prospect that interest rates may rise further in 2022 to subdue rising inflation, and with government support measures phasing out, greater pressure on household budgets suggests house price growth will slow considerably,” said Russell Galley, the managing director of Halifax. Halifax expects strong housing price levels to be maintained – the average UK house price is £272,992, almost £34,000 higher than at the start of the pandemic – but that growth in 2022 would be between flat and 2%. “There is still a large degree of uncertainty around this forecast,” Galley said. “Particularly around the extent to which savings accrued during the pandemic continue to boost housing transactions and prices, and how lasting the recent shifts in housing preferences prove to be.” With the pandemic-fuelled shift to flexible, remote and home working, homebuyers have rushed to buy larger properties in picturesque and rural locations outside urban centres. Other factors increasing homebuying were the government’s stamp duty holiday, which came to an end in England and Northern Ireland in September after finishing earlier in Scotland and Wales, and historically low interest rates. “We normally see a seasonal market slowdown towards the end of the year, but we are witnessing a comparably active market instead,” said Guy Gittins, the chief executive at the real estate agent chain Chestertons. “As a result of demand outstripping supply, the market has seen a 30% drop in sellers willing to lower their asking price. Looking ahead, we are still seeing plenty of unsatisfied buyer demand.” However, with soaring inflation and further rate rises expected in 2022, the cheap mortgage deals that have boosted the housing market in 2021 are likely to be more difficult to find. “Nevertheless, interest rates will remain low by historic standards and property prices will continue to be supported by the limited supply of available properties,” Galley said. “However, it is prudent to highlight the potential for house prices to rise or fall by much greater margins next year, depending on how Covid-19 and its variants continue to impact the economic environment and the potential for any further policy interventions.” Despite the potential cooling of two years of house price growth, there are fears first-time buyers will continue to be priced out of the UK market. “The news that house prices [could] continue to rise is particularly concerning for first-time buyers, a group who have struggled with rising house prices for decades,” said Sophia Guy-White, a co-founder of Generation Home, which specialises in mortgages for first-time buyers. “And although this demand seems to be cooling, there remain too few homes to buy and too many buyers locked out of homeownership.”With Christmas just around the corner, the opportunity to celebrate and reunite with loved ones after a difficult year is almost upon us. But Covid-19 still poses a very real threat because of the new Omicron variant and the increase in social interactions anticipated over the coming weeks. Every adult in the country now needs to get a Covid-19 booster vaccine, because two doses does not give you enough protection against catching Omicron. Get your booster now at nhs.uk/covidvaccination. “Get boosted now” is the best way to protect ourselves against Omicron. This mission is more urgent and more important than ever before with Covid-19 because Omicron Covid-19 is spreading fast. Vaccines are the best way we can protect ourselves. You can get a Covid-19 booster 12 weeks after your second dose. Boosters give you the best possible protection against the virus and should significantly reduce your risk of serious illness and hospitalisation. With cases of Covid-19 rising, new measures have been implemented – such as face coverings becoming mandatory for some indoor public venues, including places of worship, theatres and cinemas, as well as in shops and on public transport. People have also been advised to resume working from home where possible, while access to certain venues, including nightclubs, requires Covid certification (or negative rapid lateral flow test). Despite stricter new rules, it’s still crucial we continue to follow other safety measures over the holidays to protect ourselves and loved ones, says GP partner Dr Luke Gardner, from the Park Surgery, in Great Yarmouth, Norfolk. “This Christmas, I will be spending the day with a few members of my close family,” he says. “As far as gift buying goes, I’m popping into local shops at less busy times, maintaining social distancing, wearing a face mask and ensuring I’ve packed my hand sanitiser.” Thinking about plans beforehand can be helpful, he says. “The risk of viral transmission is reduced when meeting people outside, therefore my gift exchanges this year with friends will be completed outside over a glass of mulled wine or hot chocolate, rather than in my home.” Ahead of the big day itself, testing is still incredibly important, adds Gardner. “Leading up to Christmas Day, all members of my family will be taking a rapid lateral flow test before meeting, since these give an extra layer of security alongside following all of the other advice. “For our Christmas Day meal, we plan to eat in the largest room in the house to maximise ventilation. The kitchen extractor fan will be whizzing away all day and the windows will be open to improve ventilation and reduce the risk of virus transmission. If anyone in the family feels unwell with symptoms of Covid-19 – anything from a high temperature or new cough to loss of taste or smell – then they will take a PCR test and isolate appropriately until their test results are back. As we enjoy the festive period, it’s really important that we all follow NHS and public health advice this year to keep ourselves, our loved ones and our communities safe.” Take up vaccine boosters We know that the vaccine is our best defence against the virus, reducing our chances of spreading and catching it, and – if we become infected – it means we are less likely to become seriously ill as a result. It’s vital to stay on top of booster vaccinations, hence the UK-wide drive, so be sure to prioritise getting one when you are invited to or when your age group becomes eligible. If you haven’t had your primary dose yet, do so as soon as you can (you can book by calling your GP or visiting the NHS website). Now is a good time to start thinking about other jabs and boosters as well. More people are expected to get flu this winter as fewer people will have built up natural immunity as a result of social distancing measures during the pandemic. Research shows that anybody who gets flu and Covid-19 at the same time is more likely to become seriously ill, so it’s really important to protect yourself and those around you by having any vaccinations offered. Even if you have already had Covid-19, the flu vaccine is still safe and effective at helping to prevent flu. Keep indoor areas well-ventilated Because the Covid-19 virus is passed on via droplets and aerosols when an infected person coughs, talks or breathes, meeting outdoors dramatically reduces the risk of airborne transmission. Sometimes though, this isn’t always possible, so when in close contact with others indoors, it’s important to let fresh air in whenever you can. Research shows that the more fresh air we let into our homes or enclosed spaces, the less likely a person is to inhale infectious particles, so by ventilating indoor spaces we are able to dramatically reduce the chances of transmission. Even just opening windows for 10 minutes makes a real difference. Extractor fans in the bathroom or kitchen are another helpful way of letting fresh air in (just leave them running for longer than usual, with the door closed). Catherine Noakes, professor of environmental engineering at Leeds University, says: “While we are all looking forward to spending time with friends and family this Christmas, it’s important to remember that coronavirus is still spreading and can easily transmit in the home, even when people are vaccinated.” She explains: “In an enclosed space, the infectious particles hang around in the air like smoke and can build up over time, increasing the risk of other people in the room breathing in the virus, especially if there is no ventilation or fresh air helping to refresh the air. That’s why it’s so important to ventilate indoor spaces by opening windows, even if just regularly for a short time. This way, fresh air can disperse and blow Covid-19 particles away to decrease the risk of others being infected.” Wear a face covering in crowded and enclosed areas New government rules mean face coverings are now mandatory in some indoor public venues, including places of worship, theatres and cinemas, as well as in communal areas of universities, colleges and schools (by staff, visitors and pupils in year 7 or above) and on public transport. Ensuring we protect ourselves and those around us is key, so make sure your mask or face covering fits properly – they should cover the nose and mouth completely while allowing you to breathe comfortably. Evidence suggests thicker fabrics and multiple layers may reduce the risk of transmission, so ideally they will be made from at least two layers of material in order to work effectively (the World Health Organization recommends three layers). Getting in the habit of wearing them in situations where we might be at a higher risk of catching or transmitting the virus is incredibly important – even if it’s not legally required. It’s especially important to remain vigilant in crowded or enclosed spaces, since it’s not always obvious if somebody is infected. Remain vigilant about testing When life is busy, it’s easy to forget to take a test, or to check others in the household are doing so regularly. But ensuring we take regular rapid tests will deliver peace of mind when meeting loved ones over the holidays, as well as helping to stop the spread of the virus. Ahead of meeting anybody indoors or visiting those who are at a higher risk of becoming seriously ill if infected, be sure to take a rapid lateral flow test. Use existing supplies – many schools and workplaces offer free tests, as well as some pharmacies, local community test sites or the NHS website – it’s worth thinking ahead when it comes to the holidays, when we’re likely to be socialising much more. Don’t forget the NHS Covid-19 app is still the fastest way to know if you’ve been exposed to someone who tested positive for Covid-19, so keep it on. If results are positive, ensure you self-isolate immediately and take a PCR test, as well as reporting the test results (at gov.uk/report-covid19-result or by calling 119). This is important, since it helps the NHS monitor the spread of the virus and ultimately, saves lives. For those travelling this Christmas, new rules now mean anybody aged 12 or over travelling to England from abroad must show a negative PCR or rapid lateral flow test result beforehand, having taken the test in the two days ahead of travel. You must also take a PCR test within two days of arriving, self-isolating until the negative test result has been delivered (even if fully vaccinated). Daily testing for contacts of Covid-19 From Tuesday, 14 December 2021, if you have been in contact with someone with Covid-19 and are double-vaccinated you should take a daily rapid lateral flow test for seven days if you have no symptoms. This will help slow the spread of the virus and allow you and your loved ones to continue your plans that day if you test negative. This applies to those who have been contact traced officially and those who have found out in any other way. All those who test positive within the seven days or develop symptoms must self-isolate, take a PCR test and follow the latest guidance on gov.uk. Remember, if you develop Covid-19 symptoms at any time, you must self-isolate and take a PCR test. If you are unvaccinated, you must continue to self-isolate for 10 days if you are a contact of someone with Covid-19. Those working in a vulnerable setting already have access to daily contact testing and should continue to follow the specific guidance from their workplace as this varies depending on the setting. This advertiser content was paid for by the UK government. All together (“Get vaccinated this winter”) is a government-backed initiative tasked with informing the UK about the Covid-19 pandemic. For more information, visit gov.uk/coronavirusAfter the local elections in May, cabinet ministers and supporters of Boris Johnson were keen to talk up a new decade of “Johnsonism”. The idea was that the Tories taking Hartlepool from Labour in the byelection was proof that the 2019 Tory electoral triumph was no blip. Instead, it was part of a wider political alignment that could see the prime minister outlast Margaret Thatcher. After the result of the North Shropshire byelection, that hypothesis is looking rather optimistic. Overnight the Liberal Democrats have managed to overturn a majority of more than 20,000 in a seat that has been Tory since it was re-established in 1983. What’s more, the Lib Dems did so with votes to spare – earning a majority of 5,925. Given the Lib Dems only came third in the seat in 2019 – with Labour second – it is more than a shock result. The polling expert John Curtice has described it as 8.5 on the Richter scale. In other words, a political earthquake. It points to problems ahead for the Conservative brand – and Boris Johnson’s own position. For the prime minister, it caps off a miserable month in which he has found himself under fire over Tory sleaze, Covid restrictions, “partygate” and general questions about his Downing Street operation. Ever since the byelection was called, there were concerns in Conservative campaign headquarters over the vote. Given it was sparked by Owen Paterson’s decision to quit the Commons after a botched attempt by No 10 to spare the Tory MP a suspension over a breach of lobbying rules, it was vulnerable to an anti-Tory protest vote. But what worries those Tories who have been out canvassing is that sleaze only came up occasionally. Instead, the complaints from voters that the Conservatives once relied on in the area pointed to a wider dissatisfaction with the party, and more specifically the prime minister. As in Chesham and Amersham – which the Lib Dems also took from the Conservatives – traditional Tory voters complained that they were being taken for granted by this government. There is a feeling that “levelling up” has little to offer agricultural constituencies such as North Shropshire. What’s more, this result suggests that the factors that helped the Tories cruise to victory in 2019 are going fast. In a constituency that voted to leave, Brexit is a much less potent issue than it was two years ago. Rather than Paterson, the issue that came up more regularly early on on the doorstep was Johnson’s rambling CBI speech to business leaders in which he waxed lyrical about Peppa Pig World. “They kept saying he just wasn’t a serious person,” says one Lib Dem working on the seat. To those in CCHQ, the focus on Peppa Pig didn’t come as a huge surprise – it chimed with their own intel. As the campaign progressed, the conversation turned to “partygate”. Despite attempts by ministers to write off allegations over alleged breaches of Covid rules in Downing Street last year as a Westminster bubble story, it became a live issue on the ground. “We were shoring up the vote and then the party video came out. We were done,” says one Tory staffer of the impact of the Downing Street video leak of No 10 staff joking about a party. One Tory supporter tasked with phone canvassing started to worry when not a single person they spoke to said they planned to vote Tory. The only glimmer of hope they had was that some supporters had opted for postal votes so backed the party before it all kicked off. Ahead of polling day, there was talk that a Tory loss could trigger a vote of no confidence in Boris Johnson. There is clear anger among MPs, with John Redwood taking to social media to say it’s time for the government to “listen to Conservatives”. However, senior Tories are telling colleagues now is not the time for a leadership contest. The fact that parliament has risen for Christmas ought to give Johnson breathing space. “Everyone is furious, but they are also now at home so hopefully there can be a moment of reflection,” says one Tory MP. But what if that moment of reflection leads MPs to conclude that Johnson has gone from being a voter asset to an electoral liability? The prime minister’s remaining allies argue that this is a midterm blip – that it is more common for the governing party to lose byelections than to win them. There were also local issues that played a factor. But after a tricky few weeks for Johnson, it is impossible to separate the prime minister from the result. Tory MPs believe he was a key factor on the doorstep. The result points to issues in a general election. While byelections are more vulnerable to protest votes, the North Shropshire vote shows how tactical voting has the potential to wound the Tories at the next election. There is a particular concern among those MPs in Lib Dem-facing seats, of which there are about 50. But the problem goes further. “If we can’t keep a majority in a true blue seat that voted heavily to leave, where can we?” asks one frustrated Tory MP. Most immediately, the North Shropshire byelection is a problem for Johnson’s own authority. His MPs have been willing to begrudgingly put up with things they don’t agree with – such as tax rises and Covid restrictions – when they believed Johnson had the support of the public. If they start to see him as the central problem, the calculation will change. Johnson will find it even harder to get his agenda through. Already Tory MPs from across the party are openly discussing whether he can really lead them into the next election. As the prime minister takes a break over Christmas, he will need to use that time to work out how to regain the support of his party. Otherwise, 2022 will be his most turbulent year yet. Katy Balls is the Spectator’s deputy political editorAn attempted suicide, characters in the grip of crushing loneliness, laments on a life wasted: it doesn’t feel very Christmassy. It does, however, feel like a musical for now; festive love in a time of Covid. There was a sense of defiance to this production opening in the second half of December. But there’s a sense of defiance to staging She Loves Me at all. Sheffield Theatres’ artistic director Robert Hastie, taking the reins, always programmes with wit and surprise. If you were going to choose a musical by Joe Masteroff (the writer of Cabaret) or Jerry Bock and Sheldon Harnick (composer and lyricist, respectively, of Fiddler on the Roof), She Loves Me might not be the first to spring to stage. Particularly for the Christmas show, which has become a bright, tinselly affair over the past decade. The story of a warring couple who fall in loathe-at-first-sight despite being each other’s secret penpal sweethearts first came to the stage in 1937 in Miklós László’s Parfumerie. The plot provided the basis for the 1940 James Stewart film The Shop Around the Corner, the 1949 Judy Garland musical In the Good Old Summertime and in 1998 it brought together Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan in You’ve Got Mail. The accents in Hastie’s production suggest we’ve rocked up in Yorkshire, although the lack of uniformity might leave you guessing exactly where in the county. Karl Seth’s Zoltan Maraczek, the owner of the parfumerie at the heart of the plot, has a name that suggests Budapest and an accent that suggests Barnsley. As the warring lovers who meet in Maraczek’s shop, David Thaxton and Alex Young have a charm that is neither Hanks-ian nor Garland-ian, but play the piece with a postmodern sensibility. Thaxton’s Georg Nowack has a touch of Chandler; he could quite easily have slotted into the cast of Friends, while Young’s Amalia Balash will bring Bridget Jones to mind for modern audiences. The pair find layers to their performances; this is deeper than your average romcom and while it lacks the big numbers of a My Fair Lady or Guys and Dolls, both previous Christmas shows here, it does have something to say about the sadness that can accompany the sleigh bells at this time of year. • At the Crucible, Sheffield, until 15 January.Social distancing In Wales, 2-metre social distancing will be mandatory in offices, and measures including one-way systems and physical barriers will be introduced in businesses to protect customers and staff, from 27 December. In Scotland, the government has said businesses must “return to the kind of protections in place at the start of the pandemic” to avoid crowding, such as physical distancing and table service in bars. Its advice also includes a return to one-way systems in premises, app-based ordering and the use of screens at service points. Face masks In England, face coverings have been made compulsory in most indoor public settings, as well as on public transport, and people have been told to work from home if they can. Wales is encouraging people to wear face coverings and wash hands. By law in Scotland, everyone over the age of 12 must wear face coverings indoors unless exempt, and new guidance emphasises that masks should be worn inside all businesses. Going out England has the most relaxed rules in the UK, despite new restrictions introduced after a Commons vote this week. It is now mandatory for nightclubs and large venues to check the Covid status of visitors over the age of 18. People will have to show proof of being at least double vaccinated or of a negative test. This applies to indoor events with 500 or more attenders where people are likely to stand or move around, such as music venues; outdoor events with 4,000 or more attenders, such as music festivals; and any events with 10,000 or more attenders, whether indoors or outdoors, such as sports stadiums. In Wales, the government is encouraging people to have a negative lateral flow test result before going shopping or meeting people; to meet in well-ventilated areas, preferably outdoors; and to space out socialising to allow test days in between. Nightclubs in Wales will be closed from 27 December, with a £60m fund to support affected businesses. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has urged people to limit their socialising to three households. She emphasised she was “not asking anyone to cancel Christmas”, but advised people to limit their socialising either side of the holiday. From Friday, businesses across Scotland are legally required to take “reasonable measures” to minimise Covid transmission. Stormont ministers will meet next Wednesday to consider potential new coronavirus restrictions. The current advice is that indoor gatherings should have no more than 30 people present. A scheme that requires people in Northern Ireland to prove Covid status to gain entry to a range of hospitality venues and large-attendance events will be made mandatory. Those wishing to access nightclubs, pubs, restaurants and other licensed premises will need to provide proof of vaccination, a negative lateral flow test result, or evidence of a previous Covid-19 infection. The same rules will apply for entry to large indoor and outdoor events such as concerts and sporting events. Working from home England’s guidance is that people should work from home if they can. Anyone who cannot work from home should continue to go in to work, but is encouraged to take lateral flow tests regularly. In Wales there will be a requirement from 27 December to work from home wherever possible. The Scottish government announced that allowing staff to work from home where possible would again become a legal duty on employers from Friday. In Northern Ireland, working from home is recommended where possible. Care homes Care home residents in England will be allowed visits from a maximum of three named people over the Christmas period. The Welsh government is urging people to reduce contact with others, especially if Christmas plans include seeing older or more vulnerable people. In Scotland, care home visits have been limited to two households. Vaccinations Boris Johnson has increased the booster jab campaign, with people 18 and over able to get their third jabs from this week. In Scotland, all over-18s can book a booster jab appointment online.As the nights draw in and the days grow shorter, the people of North Shropshire have lit a flame of hope to brighten our nation. The Liberal Democrats have defeated Boris Johnson in Shropshire, just as we did in Buckinghamshire in June. Two heartland Tory constituencies, more than 150 miles apart, written off as foregone conclusions at every past election. Until now. My party has shown that the Conservatives can be beaten anywhere – because across the villages, towns and cities of our country, people are fed up and angry. Throughout the North Shropshire campaign, I spoke to lifelong Conservative voters who had decided enough was enough. Many told me loud and clear – they will never vote Tory again. In North Shropshire and earlier this year in Chesham and Amersham we have seen a fundamental realignment of British politics, a generational shift, in which the default setting of “vote Tory” has been reset. It is not just traditional Tory voters who backed the Liberal Democrats in this byelection. Once it became clear my party was the local challenger to the Conservatives, thousands of Green and Labour voters supporters voted for us too. That is a powerful message for the progressive future of our country – and a clear path for voting Johnson out of office. It’s important for our shared goal of beating Johnson and the Conservatives to remember that North Shropshire was not just about national issues and the national mood: it was very much also about community politics. I’ve always believed that you cannot change the country until you have won the trust of local communities. Our new MP Helen Morgan is a fantastic local campaigner rooted in her community. On doorstep after doorstep she won us support. In her, voters in Shropshire saw a community activist who shared their anger at an underfunded health service and at soaring ambulance waiting times. They saw a local resident who understands the struggles their high street shops and local businesses are facing in a time of great uncertainty. Above all, they saw someone like them, who lives and breathes their community, and is determined to make local people’s lives better. The next few months will be tough for Britain. With Covid infections rising, schools shutting early, and the soaring cost of living hitting pockets hard, we need a government that will listen and act. Yet in Johnson’s Conservatives, we have a government and a party that’s not even listening to the scientists and that’s taking people for granted. I want last night’s results to show the British public that there is an alternative to the Conservative party. The Liberal Democrats will stand up for communities and demand a fair deal for everyone. This means better schools, safer streets and an NHS given every resource necessary so everyone receives the care they need. Delivering on that fair deal starts with listening to people. In North Shropshire, just as in Chesham and Amersham, we have shown that when a political party takes the time to listen people will give them a chance. Thanks to the people of North Shropshire, the beginning of the end of Boris Johnson is finally here. Ed Davey is the leader of the Liberal Democrats and MP for Kingston and SurbitonWhy will I love it? The variegated monstera – Monstera deliciosa albo-variegata – is the ultimate hype plant. It’s rare, which in the plant world makes acquiring one of these like possessing a Picasso. Just a cutting can sell for in excess of £150. Take care, though – the leaves are mildly toxic to pets and humans when ingested. Light or shade? As a variegated plant, it requires light – but opt for bright indirect sunlight. The reduced amount of chlorophyll means it will be easier to scorch some of the near-white leaves. Where should I put it? This plant needs to be in pride of place in your living room so that everyone can admire its beauty and give you major rare plant props. How do I keep it alive? Mist the leaves once a week. The large leaves collect dust, so wipe them with a damp cloth and gently dry them. Water weekly and don’t allow the compost to dry out completely. It is happiest in temperatures of 18–27C but can tolerate those as low as 12C. Did you know … A mutation in the plant’s chlorophyll formation give it that unique marbled or half-moon appearance.The eerie hum of the Golden Gate Bridge, which has elicited comparisons to “chanting monks” and a “wheezing kazoo”, will soon be muffled. Local officials have offered a fix to the “unbearable” noise that’s been echoing in San Francisco neighborhoods – much to the irritation of some residents – on particularly gusty days since last year. The Golden Gate bridge, highway and transportation district proposed an estimated $450,000 project to install aluminum clips that will help reduce the sound created when wind hits the slats in the bridge’s hand railing. The bridge district unanimously approved the project at its meeting on Friday morning. “After studying this phenomenon extensively, we’ve determined that the sound comes from new and more aerodynamic railing that we installed on the west sidewalk,” Paolo Cosulich-Schwartz, a bridge spokesperson, told the Guardian in June. “It was part of a Golden Gate Bridge retrofit designed to protect the bridge for future generations by allowing it to withstand sustained high winds up to 100mph.” On days when the wind blew just right – either slightly north or slightly south – the bridge emitted a strange song, which some residents described as soothing and others said “sounded like a noise I could imagine jailers using to torture prisoners”. On windy days, residents reported, the sounds could be heard from miles away. “We can hear this in our house more than three miles away from the bridge. It’s crazy-making,” one resident said. Bridge officials found the sound often matches the musical note A. The plan, developed by bridge engineers and bridge aerodynamics and acoustics experts, will require placing aluminum clips containing a rubber sleeve on each of the 12,000 vertical slats on the west railing, which would reduce the sounds by 75%. The Golden Gate district estimates the cost to make the clips is $450,000. The project is expected to be completed by late 2022.A bag of Babybels, a bowl of leftover dal – even by civilian standards, there is rarely anything glamorous about the contents of my fridge. So it is with a pleasurable shiver of surprise that every time I have opened my fridge over the past week, a bottle of blush-pink Provençal rosé has been casting a rosy glow over my parmesan rinds and plastic containers. Because this is not just any wine; this is Whispering Angel, Adele’s favourite, and the most talked-about tipple of the year. If a song called I Drink Wine didn’t make her #relatable enough, the singer, who is said to be worth £140m, recently revealed her chosen tipple to be this upmarket (£18.99) supermarket wine. Adele told US Vogue that her first lockdown grocery trip was for ketchup and Whispering Angel, which “turned me into a barking dog. It did not make me whisper.” The flagship wine of Château d’Esclans, a vineyard north of Saint-Tropez, Whispering Angel is credited with not only rebooting the current trend for Provençal rosé, but turning around the entire category. Once seen as naff, rosé has exploded in popularity in the past five years – market analyst GlobalData says global consumption will climb from 2.23bn litres in 2020 to 2.63bn in 2025 – helped by Whispering Angel. It is now the bestselling French rosé in the US, drunk by celebrities from the Beckhams to Malia Obama (who was papped, still underage, with a bottle on a Miami poolside). The price and hype are driven by its champagne-style branding, but mainly its Instagrammable shade and celebrity sheen. Over the past year, a blush-pink glass, somewhere between Pantone’s ever-popular Conch shell and the much-discussed millennial pink, has become as much an influencer trope as a pumpkin spice latte or a Diptyque candle, with about 60,000 photos tagged #whisperingangel on Instagram, many against a white-sand beach or a skyscraper skyline. Last year, a case of Whispering Angel was one selling point of a £5,000 concierge service offered by a private jet charter company for US travellers to the UK – “to take the stress out of the 14-day quarantine”. There are now pop-up Whispering Angel bars in the Hamptons and the Bahamas. “The richest people I know always have a bottle chilling,” said my LA-born, UK-based, most-Hollywood friend, eyes lighting up to find one in my fridge. My other visitors – standing politely by the open door as I tried to explain – seemed bemused. She continued: taken to a dinner party, a bottle of Whispering Angel subtly says that you “have serious expendable income but are also modest and trendy”. Naturally, I asked her to join me for my first taste, as a sort of transatlantic cultural sommelier. Like everyone who knows nothing about wine, we started with the colour. Golden sand under a red sunset, I hazarded. Rose quartz? An old Glossier pouch? The pelicans in St James’s Park? Ms Hollywood shoved an image on her phone screen in my face. “The dress in Fragonard’s The Swing?” she ventured. “Rococo pink?!” Then we gave up, too pleasantly tipsy to be bothered finding more words to describe it. Whispering Angel has been said to have a “haunting, cantaloupe-tinged aroma, silky texture and bracingly dry finish”, according to one vendor. All I can tell you is that, more than any other alcohol I have tried, it slips down like water. “Dangerously so,” agrees Guardian wine writer Fiona Beckett (and a longtime rosé champion). She describes Whispering Angel as “perfectly decent”: “It’s light, it’s fresh, it’s creamy – there are very few people who wouldn’t like it.” As to whether it’s worth £20, she says that’s not really the point. She likens it to buying fancy moisturiser when a budget brand would do the job. “It’s about image … You can get decent rosé for around the £10 mark – but it’s not Whispering Angel.” (Beckett recommends Aldi’s.) In fact “ambitious” pricing, key to the perception of a premium product, has helped make rosé credible the way that Nyetimber did English sparkling wine, and Seedlip alcohol-free spirits, Beckett says: “Some will say ‘You’re joking, £19 for rosé?’, but enough people will buy it for it to take off as a category leader … They’re selling an experience you can share in without being a multimillionaire.” Whispering Angel may not yet have the name recognition in the UK that it does in the US, but it was on its way even before Adele’s unofficial endorsement. Sales have tripled in the past two years, even though most would consider £19 a splurge. Taken alongside the increase in sales of mid-priced, premium alcohol brands in the pandemic, it speaks to the collective thirst for a little luxury at a time of great constraints. As Beckett hinted, there is precedent for this: cosmetics sales have historically bucked economic recession. In 2001, Estée Lauder’s chairman dubbed it the “lipstick index”. Ten years later, a similar swell was recorded in nail polish sales. But the pandemic proved different. Housebound and isolated, many of us were left craving a sense of occasion that a new lipstick just can’t touch. Consumers were reported to be “trading up” on food and wine, spending what they were saving at bars and restaurants on recreating the experience at home. Whispering Angel, promising celebrity glitz on a supermarket budget and a name that’s easy to pronounce, was perfectly positioned. The fact that it looked good on your feed was the cherry on top. To Sacha Lichine, founder and president of Château d’Esclans, it is proof of the power of the Whispering Angel brand, built over 15 years as “affordable luxury” and turning rosé’s fortunes around. When Lichine acquired the vineyard in 2006, he says “nobody took the category seriously.” But Lichine had grown up in the wine business (his late father was the entrepreneur Alexis Lichine, the so-called “Pope of Wine”) and saw the potential for rosé to follow in the example of Cloudy Bay, which effectively created the export market for New Zealand sauvignon blanc in the mid-1980s. Lichine envisaged the same quaffable crispness, with added south-of-France sex appeal: “I said, ‘Let’s see if we can make Provençal rosé grand and good – as opposed to just cheap and cheerful’.” The next step was to get it to the right people. Lichine travelled the world with bottles in bags, persuading the “chicest and best establishments” to put Château d’Esclans wines on their lists. Soho House, Chiltern Firehouse, Château Marmont, Annabel’s of London, the top resorts of St Barts and Barbados – Lichine drops names faster than I can take them down. “We wanted to make sure it was in the right mouths and right homes,” he says. “Once you are in all these places, and people start seeing Whispering Angel everywhere, that’s when it takes off, because that’s when it becomes aspirational.” Whispering Angel went from selling 800 cases in the US in 2007, the year of its debut, to 300,000 in 2017. Two years later, Möet Hennessy acquired the controlling share in Château d’Esclans for an undisclosed sum. Lichine says they stayed away from Instagram as long as they could, fearing it would diminish the brand. He mentions a reality-TV dynasty whom he believes enjoy Whispering Angel, but adds: “I wouldn’t want to see them drinking it on social media.” Adele talking about it in Vogue is, by contrast, a “wonderful endorsement”. In our social-media driven age, says Kelly O’Hanlon, lecturer in PR and media at Birmingham City University, people want to share in the celebrity lifestyle, if only for a night: “While Whispering Angel is not the cheapest bottle on the shelf, it isn’t completely inaccessible, so will be enticing for fans who want to sample what it’s like to be Adele.” But where Whispering Angel elevates my fridge above leftover lentils, in Adele’s it shows her to be down to earth and “great craic” (to quote one representative response to her interview). Therein lies the brand’s power. For a celebrity status symbol, it is relatively affordable, but among the rich, it signals a lack of pretension that carries its own premium. When in 2018, Late Show host Stephen Colbert asked Lady Gaga how she winds down, she replied: “I drink wine and cry, just like everybody else.” To her palpable relief, Colbert produced a chilled bottle of Whispering Angel and two glasses. For luxury travellers brought down to earth by the pandemic, Whispering Angel was a taste of disrupted routines. But for most of us, it’s selling a lifestyle we’ll never know. As someone who will never fly by private jet, I was surprised by the pleasure I took from the pink bottle, glowing like a gem inside my fridge. My usual tipple is a £7 pinot grigio, but I confess that, a week after my taste of “affordable luxury”, I haven’t put the bottle in the recycling yet. • This article was amended on 19 December 2021 because an earlier version referred to “English champagne” when English sparkling wine was meant. Also a reference to a branded product was removed.Amid fraught discussions over the future of policing in major American cities, a series of mass thefts at high-end stores across California have made headlines nationwide. The incidents have drawn widespread coverage linking them to “organized crime” and spotlighting concerns from retailers about a theft crisis. They also reinvigorated a political debate over crime rates in California, prompting pledges from local and state leaders to charge those involved and increase police presence in affected areas. Meanwhile, conservatives and some local leaders have pointed to the incidents as evidence that criminal justice reform and progressive policies are encouraging crime and making California more dangerous. But despite their high profile nature, experts say there is little evidence to suggest the robberies point to a wider retail theft crisis, and that some law enforcement and industry groups are overstating the problem. Here’s what we know so far. What are the “smash and grab” robberies that police and retailers have been reporting? Last month in San Francisco’s downtown and the posh Union Square shopping district, groups broke into Louis Vuitton, Burberry and Bloomingdale’s at the height of the holiday shopping season. In suburban Walnut Creek, about 80 people, some wearing ski masks and carrying crowbars, grabbed armfuls of merchandise from a Nordstrom and fled to waiting cars in what police called a “planned event”, and a similar incident occurred at a mall in the nearby city of Hayward. In Los Angeles, more than $330,000 in goods were stolen in 11 “smash and grab” incidents over about two weeks. What are the broader trends in crime and retail theft in the region? In California in 2020, when Covid-19 lockdowns and restrictions were at their harshest, the rates of robbery and larceny theft – which includes shoplifting – decreased from their 2019 totals by 14% and 15% respectively, according to California’s attorney general. Meanwhile, homicides went up by 31% and car thefts increased by 20%. And in the two cities at the center of this upheaval robberies haven’t spiked at the levels suggested by news reports and statements from police and officials. In San Francisco, larceny, the category that shoplifting falls under, appears to have decreased from 2019 to 2020, bringing the overall property crime rate down with it, according to the San Francisco police department’s crime dashboard. The decrease in shoplifting appears to be continuing in 2021. In 2021, property crime in Los Angeles was up 2.6% from 2020 but down 6.6% from 2019, according to LAPD figures from 27 November published in the LA Times. The category that includes shoplifting – “personal/other theft”, per LAPD – is down 32% from 2019. To what extent are thefts and robberies tied to “organized” crime? While news headlines and press releases from police and retailers have emphasized that retail thefts were linked to “organized crime”, experts said authorities lacked a consistent definition, making the situation difficult to assess. Under California law, “organized retail theft” can be prosecuted if an individual works with at least one other person to steal with the intent to sell. As one state prosecutor explained, that could refer to two people walking into a store to shoplift together; a “flash mob” that is loosely organized on social media; or a more sophisticated network specializing in reselling stolen goods. In some high-profile cases, authorities have said there was evidence of coordination. The state attorney general announced earlier this month that five defendants had pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit organized retail theft after officials seized roughly $8m in stolen merchandise from CVS, Target and other major retailers. While a majority of respondents in a recent national retail trade association survey claimed that “organized retail crime” had increased over the last year, there isn’t clear research data to substantiate that claim in California, experts said. A recent San Francisco Chronicle analysis concluded that the local data is “woefully inadequate”, finding that one reported “spike” in shoplifting came from a single store that was using a new reporting system. And an LA Times investigation found that a California retail association dramatically overstated the possible losses from “organized crime” and when pressed for an explanation, said “there’s no way of knowing exactly” how much businesses lose from thefts. “Organized retail theft crimes are not new. This is something we’ve seen for years nationwide,” said Rachel Marshall, communications director for the San Francisco district attorney. “What seems to be new is the virality of the videos. But everyone deserves to feel safe in the city, and we take seriously the fears that the viral videos generate.” How has the state responded? Thus far, the immediate response to the shoplifting in San Francisco and Los Angeles has been led by law enforcement. In late September, the mayor, along with the San Francisco police chief, unveiled the organized retail theft investigation and deterrence strategy. The initiative will expand the city’s retail crime unit from two to five officers. The city will also triple the number of unarmed community ambassadors, from eight to 25. This move came after months of scrutiny driven by people breaking into cars near tourist hubs such as Fisherman’s Wharf and shoplifting attempts at Walgreens locations in the city, including one that appeared to show a man riding his bike out of a store with a trash bag filled with stolen items. That suspect was arrested and charged. Walgreens has since closed several of their San Francisco locations, citing “retail theft”, though experts have said other economic factors likely contributed to the decision. To critics of California’s leaders, store closures and reports of mass thefts seemed to confirm the narrative that California is a lawless place where officials turn a blind eye to crime, to the detriment of local commerce. Political leaders have pushed for more police, particularly in high-traffic areas. Gavin Newsom, the state’s governor, has called for California’s highway patrol to increase their presence and doubled down on his Organized Retail Crime Task Force, a collaboration between police and prosecutors that was established in July. On Friday, the governor announced a $250m proposal to help police fight organized retail theft, which would create a dedicated team in the attorney general’s office to prosecute these crimes. And London Breed, mayor of San Francisco, recently made headlines after announcing a plan to inundate the city’s long-troubled Tenderloin District with police in an attempt to address open-air drug dealing and catch people who may be selling stolen goods in the neighborhood. Are criminal justice reforms or progressive policies contributing to the problem? Republican leaders and some law enforcement representatives in the state have blamed the spate of recent offenses on the state’s criminal justice reforms, which have aimed to curb mass incarceration. Some have cited Prop 47, a ballot measure approved by voters in 2014, which reduced penalties for certain non-violent and low-level offenses, with the Sacramento district attorney saying: “There’s no consequences any more to theft.” Fact checkers and criminologists, however, have said it is false to suggest there were no consequences to theft and that there was no research-based evidence linking retail thefts in the state this year to reform measures. Prop 47 did not eliminate punishments for thefts, but directed that thefts under $950 be prosecuted as misdemeanors, not felonies (the previous threshold for felonies was $400). California’s laws also remain harsher than the majority of states, which dictate amounts higher than $950 for thefts to be classified as felonies. “There are a lot of unknowns about what’s behind the smash-and-grabs and robberies, but I’m quite confident that this is not the result of Prop 47, specifically, or criminal justice reforms more generally,” said Charis Kubrin, a professor of criminology, law and society at the University of California, Irvine, whose 2018 study found that Prop 47 was not responsible for an uptick in crimes. She noted that there were other states without Prop 47 seeing similar smash and grab cases, and also pointed out that it would be difficult to prove that a 2021 trend was the result of a law passed seven years prior. While some have also accused progressive prosecutors in LA and San Francisco of not taking these crimes seriously, advocates have noted that high-profile smash and grab cases and retail thefts had occurred in both cities before the current DAs were elected. In San Francisco, data also shows that prosecutors have filed charges for the vast majority of commercial burglary cases that police have presented to the DA this year. And in LA, advocates noted that property crime is down compared to the 2019, when the previous DA was in office.The bad news is that, at the last minute, my interview with Javier Bardem is changed from being a face-to-face encounter to one conducted by the less risky means of video chat (damn you, Omicron!) But the good news is this means I get to snoop around Bardem’s home in Madrid, where he Zooms me from, and which he shares with his wife, the actor Penélope Cruz, and their two children, Leonardo, 10, and Luna, eight. OK, I don’t actually see the whole house, but he does give me a panoramic view of his study while his kids shout and play outside. “You can see my little bookcase here,” Bardem says, picking up his laptop and giving me the grand tour. “And my map of the world. It’s very chaotic.” It is very much not a fancy oak-lined library, but a space that looks closer to most people’s junk room. Boxes of old books and DVDs are waiting to be donated to a library, Fellini film posters are hung half-heartedly on the walls and a desk is piled with what can only be described as mishmash. Like everyone else on the planet, the Bardem-Cruz household spent lockdown clearing out their home. Did he and Penélope dump all their couture Valentino dresses and Armani suits at the local charity shop? “No, we gave it to this church, where the priest indoctrinates with his own example, helping immigrants and people who have come out of jail. He made good use of the things we provided.” So if you spot some especially well-dressed former convicts in Madrid, now you know why. Bardem, the first Spaniard to be nominated for a best actor Oscar (for the gorgeous Before Night Falls in 2000), and the first to win best supporting actor (for his terrifying performance in 2007’s No Country for Old Men), has the look of a man who is happily off-duty, in his reading glasses and rumpled T-shirt. Unhappily for him, he has to talk to me about his newest film, the sparky Being the Ricardos, Aaron Sorkin’s biographical drama about the I Love Lucy stars Lucille Ball (played by Nicole Kidman) and her on- and off-screen husband, the Cuban bandleader and actor Desi Arnaz (Bardem). The film is good on the weirdness of Ball and Arnaz’s marriage, the two simulating a happy domestic life on air and living a more complicated one off it. Sorkin condenses the most tumultuous events of Ball’s life into a single week, including when the actor was questioned by the House Un-American Activities Committee about being a communist, and her husband’s infidelity was being splashed across the newspapers. Arnaz fled to the US as a near-penniless teenager to become one of the biggest celebrities in the country. But Bardem does not underplay his weaknesses, namely for other women. “In 1930s Cuba, Desi was taught to constantly prove his male power, and that [machismo culture] is something I can relate to, for sure,” he says. I Love Lucy ran from 1951 to 1957, and would often attract more than 40 million viewers a week in the US. Bardem, 52, grew up on the Canary Islands and was, at best, vaguely aware of it. But he watched and listened to all the recordings of Arnaz that he could find, and he fares better than Kidman in the film, who seems a little hemmed in doing an impersonation of Ball. Bardem is looser, and has more fun with the role, although he certainly took it seriously. Arnaz died in 1986 and every day before filming, Bardem would try to access his energy, “like a medium … I would say: ‘OK, I am here, if you want to come in and express yourself,’” he says. Just as I’m worrying we’re tipping in to thespy woo-woo territory, he laughs. “I didn’t do that when I played Pablo Escobar [in 2017’s Loving Pablo]. I didn’t want to invoke him at all!” Some complained when Bardem, a Spaniard, was cast in the role of a Cuban, although there were no objections in the early 2000s when he played the Cuban writer Reinaldo Arenas in Before Night Falls. “It was a different time, right? But this is what actors do, we create other people’s lives. That can include origins or sexual orientation, accents and behaviours. I think we sometimes go too far in blocking the freedom of creativity by framing what an actor can and cannot do,” he says. Sorkin recently compared the McCarthy era depicted in the film with the cancel culture era today. A possibly more fruitful parallel could be drawn between how Ball’s career was almost destroyed by a tabloid allegation – that she was a communist – and a popular tendency today to conflate allegations with proof. Bardem starred in Woody Allen’s 2008 film, Vicky Cristina Barcelona, and he has defended the director against repeat accusations that he is a child molester; Allen was cleared by two investigations in the 1990s. “Pointing fingers at someone is very dangerous if it hasn’t been legally proven. Beyond that, it’s just gossip,” Bardem says. Several actors worked with Allen over the past two decades, only to denounce him when the public mood turned against him. One such actor was Rebecca Hall, who co-starred with Bardem in Vicky Cristina Barcelona. Has he spoken to her about this? “No, I haven’t seen Rebecca in many, many years. To tell you the truth, I don’t follow any of that, what people said. I try to go where logic dictates, which is: let’s follow the rules that exist to establish whether someone is guilty or innocent. If the case re-opens and he is proven to be guilty, I will be the first to say: ‘What a horrible thing.’ But so far, I haven’t seen that.” This summer, Bardem’s beloved mother, Pilar, died, and he mentions her often. “Every decision I make now, I think: ‘Would this make my mother proud?’ And if not, I immediately reject it. That’s a powerful legacy to leave, but she was a very powerful person,” he says. She was, clearly, a helluva woman. A leftwing activist and celebrated actor in Spain known widely as “La Bardem”, Pilar divorced her husband when Bardem was three and later wrote in her memoirs that her ex-husband had a “violent will”. She raised her son and his two older siblings all on her own. “In 1960s Spain, it was a very hard time to be a woman, especially divorced with three kids and an actress. You were referred to as a prostitute,” he says. Bardem was not a strong student – “I can’t be sitting for five hours; I’m sorry, I’m not that guy” – and he channelled his energy into rugby and painting, then eventually acting. He comes from a long line of Spanish actors and film-makers and recalls his mother saying: “If you’re going to dedicate yourself to this craft, respect it deeply for the surname you’re carrying.” By the age of 21, he was working with directors such as Pedro Almodóvar and Bigas Luna. How would he feel if his kids wanted to be actors like their parents? He laughs. “Well, they’re very expressive and like to communicate, so it’s a possibility. I remember when Penélope was pregnant with Leonardo, we went out to dinner in New York after the premiere of Biutiful,” he says, referring to the 2010 Alejandro González Iñárritu film, for which he got his third Oscar nomination. “And God – otherwise known as Al Pacino – said hi to us and we asked him to bless the belly. I said: ‘I hope he’s not an actor’, and Pacino said, ‘Yeah, right.’ Then there was a silence and he looked at me and said smiling, ‘I hope he is.’” Bardem and Cruz never talk about their private life, but as he has given me this inch, I grab a mile. The two fell in love while making Vicky Cristina Barcelona in 2007, but they had worked together before, in 1992 on Lunas’s Jamón Jamón. Did they have feelings for one another then? “Of course we had feelings for each other, but we had feelings for everything that moved then! She was 16, I was 21, like, bags of hormones! It was the first time we went away to make a film, it was her first film. Life itself was opening in front of us. Then we went different routes and she did amazing things. So I guess those feelings were kept in a box until they were open,” he says. Does he credit Allen with getting them together? “Of course we credit him. He reunited us – lots of credit!” Did they invite him to their wedding? “No, no!” he laughs at the thought. “But I don’t think he would have come. I don’t know how sociable he is.” Bardem has said that seeing his mother’s struggle to find work proved to him that an actor can never feel entirely secure in their job. Surely three Oscar nominations and a win has given him some sense of security? “No! No, no, no, no! When I won the Oscar, I felt great, but it didn’t make any sense. It was more: ‘Wow, what is this? I need to earn this now so they don’t take it out of my hands!’” Yet no one would argue he didn’t deserve it. His performance as Anton Chigurh, the unstoppable killer in the Coen Brothers’ No Country for Old Men, made him one of cinema’s great villains. That, plus his performance as the Bond baddie Raoul Silva in Skyfall means many audiences associate him with cruelty. Yet he loathes violence. Is that because of his father? “No, no, it’s just that violence never helps, it only harms,” he says. So playing bad guys must require an extra level of acting from him. “Absolutely! But this goes back to what we were saying earlier. Making characters who are far from you … well, that’s what we do for a living.” Outside, though, the family is waiting. Making a living is all very well, but real life awaits. Being the Ricardos in UK cinemas now and on Amazon Prime Video from 21 December.The view that everyone has one book in them is disproved by celebrities, who now tend to produce at least two – a memoir and then, courting publishing’s most lucrative market, a crime or thriller novel. The autumn lists include suspense stories from both a former president and a secretary of state of the US, a former UK home secretary, three well-known British TV journalists and a leading quizshow host. In Britain, the celebrity mystery genre began with Dick Francis’s Dead Cert (1962), and continued with Jeffrey Archer’s Not A Penny More, Not A Penny Less (1976). But though known at the time of their debuts for other things – respectively as a jockey and a Conservative MP – Francis and Archer became primarily famous as writers, and so moved beyond the category they established. Also in a different category are Tony Parsons and Lynne Truss, whose recent series of crime novels - latest instalments Your Neighbour’s Wife and Murder By Milk Bottle – followed many novels in other genres. And, while the current culture secretary Nadine Dorries has published much fiction, she has not yet turned to crime. The following 10 celebrities - ranked alphabetically and scored for writing and insight - have. Tom Bradby – Triple Cross (2021) The ITN News at Ten anchor and sometime confidant of Princes William and Harry had already published six thrillers before Secret Service (2019) took his fiction to a higher level of narrative sophistication and political topicality. Kate Henderson, a senior MI6 officer, investigates data that the likely next British PM has a secret making him unfit for office (echoing doubts that surrounded Johnson and Trump’s campaigns). In Double Agent (2020) and this year’s Triple Cross, Kate continues her scrutiny of the possible traitor-leader. Given the familiarity of many aspects of the “shameless” politician James Ryan, there is enjoyment to be found in reading another chapter just after watching Bradby read the latest Westminster headlines. His publisher and readers surely hope that Bradby will next draw on his royal knowledge. Fame: 6.5 Writing: 9 Inside info: If he told us he’d have to kill us Bill Clinton (and James Patterson) - The President’s Daughter (2021) The two-term 42nd president of the US was regularly pictured getting out of presidential aircraft with his latest crime-fiction read (including Walter Mosley and James Patterson) under his arm. Post-office, Clinton has collaborated with Patterson on two thrillers: The President Is Missing (2018) and now The President’s Daughter. One appeal of such books is accidental or disguised revelation: in the fictional presidencies of Jonathan Duncan and Matthew Keating, readers will find no trace of Monica Lewinsky, little of Hillary (see below), but quite a lot of Chelsea Clinton: the second novel explores the vulnerability of presidential relatives once out of the White House. The loneliness of running a superpower and what it’s like to send people to die in war feel unimpeachably authentic. Fame: 10 Writing: 7.5 Inside info: 10 Hillary Clinton (and Louise Penny) – State of Terror (2021) Minimally camouflaged as secretary of state Ellen Adams, Mrs Clinton tackles a nuclear plot to destroy the US while settling political scores with scarcely disguised versions of Presidents Trump and Biden, plus sundry sexist politicians and journalists. The exhausting disorientation of days of plane-shuttle diplomacy across time zones is clearly lived rather than imagined, and there are surprisingly good jokes (her husband’s franchise eschews humour). Fame: 9.5 Writing: 7.5 Inside info: 9 Iain Duncan Smith – The Devil’s Tune (2003) After achieving a rare political failure – a Tory party leader deposed before he even fought a general election – the Conservative member for Chingford and Woodford Green explored a possible second career as novelist, with a caper involving art fraud and neo-Nazis. Unfortunately, it admitted him to a second small club: public figures with a single work of fiction that didn’t even make it into paperback. Fame: 3 Writing: 2 Inside info: 0 Frank Gardner – Outbreak (2021) Outbreak, the third of the BBC security correspondent’s stories featuring MI6 special operative Luke Carlton, deals with bioweapons, after earlier volumes (Crisis and Ultimatum) in which the super-spy dealt with a smuggled nuclear device and a Middle East hostage crisis. The promise of Gardner’s fiction is that he may be dramatising stuff he can’t say on TV. And, having almost been killed by terrorists in Saudi Arabia on a BBC assignment that killed his camera operator, Gardner’s scenes of threat and fear have unusual realism. Fame: 5.5 Writing: 7 Inside info: (see Tom Bradby) Anne Holt – A Memory for Murder (2021) While the Clintons are far more famous, they have a long way to go to match the achievements - 18 books to date and internationally screened spin-off TV series - of the former Norwegian minister of justice, Anne Holt, in the politician-turned-novelist market. A US president disappears on a state visit in Death in Oslo; a prime minister is somehow killed while alone in a guarded office in The Lion’s Mouth; an MP is killed by a sniper in her latest, A Memory for Murder. In terms of prolific consistency, Holt is the ex-political Dick Francis. Fame: 9 (Scandinavia) / 3 (UK) Writing: 9 Inside info: 10 Alan Johnson – The Late Train to Gipsy Hill (2021) A candidate for one of the best Labour party leaders we never had, Johnson also has a claim to be the finest prose stylist to sit in the House of Commons since an earlier Labour home secretary, Roy Jenkins. He is a more natural autobiographer – in his quartet of memoirs with Beatles-themed titles from This Boy (2013) to In My Life (2018) – than a crime novelist, on the evidence of this crime fiction debut. But The Late Train to Gipsy Hill is elegantly written and, in common with the books of the Clintons and Holt, contains details that could only come from holding high office. Fame: 5 Writing: 10 Inside info: 8 Boris Johnson – Seventy-Two Virgins (2004) The current prime minister’s only fiction (in book form, anyway) follows chaotic, philandering, Latin-speaking, bicycling Tory maverick Roger Barlow as he accidentally becomes the last line of defence against a jihadist attack on the House of Commons during a state visit. Descriptive prose and dialogue blithely denigrate anyone who is not a white, male, English Tory. And one particular subplot might leave the Élysée Palace concluding that Brexit is not the most offensively anti-French thing Johnson has done. Fame: 8 Writing: 5 (points deducted for recycled prose and bigoted jokes) Inside info: 10 (personal psychology) / 2 (geopolitical insight) Graham Norton - Holding (2016) Britain’s leading chatshow host has in his recent novels – A Keeper (2018) and Home Stretch (2020) – moved towards domestic literary fiction. However, his debut was a gentle comic crime story set in a small Irish village where the cosy old garda finally has his first case to solve. An impending ITV dramatisation may encourage Norton to try more whimsical mystery, although another TV face (see below) has meanwhile moved into the same space. Fame: 7.5 Writing: 8 Inside info: 7 (on Irish society and psychology) Richard Osman - The Thursday Murder Club (2020) Commercially, the celebrity crime novelist who sets the bar for all the rest. Cannily aimed at the older, cash- and time-rich demographic who form much of the audience for Osman’s Pointless and other TV shows, The Thursday Murder Club – about a group of elderly amateur rural sleuths - and its sequel, The Man Who Died Twice, recently achieved the prestigious feat of simultaneous hardback and paperback No 1s on the Sunday Times bestseller list. Some very harsh reviews accused Osman of ill-plotted whimsy, but he will write many more of these, and imitative attempts will be on the laptops of numerous TV stars. Fame: 7.2 Writing: 6 Inside info: 0 (Pointless fans can enjoy speculating about which homicide method 100 members of the public are least likely to choose) Robert Peston – The Whistle Blower (2021) While his ITN colleague Tom Bradby risks novels that can be seen as Johnsonian romans à clef, political editor Robert Peston’s fiction debut opts for the safety of a sub-Blair 1997 as the setting for a twisty conspiracy in which investigative journalist Gil Peck, a fairly naked authorial self-portrait, is stung by a family tragedy to hunt corruption deep in the British establishment. Perhaps Peston and Bradby could collaborate on a thriller in which a TV journalist’s disappearance may be connected to political secrets they have hidden in their thrillers? Fame: 6.5 Writing: 8 Inside info: 9 (on journalism, politics and economics)Italian activists have blocked a major road in Rome as part of a series of protests aimed at urging the government to take action to tackle the climate crisis. The activists, from the group Last Generation, which is supported by Extinction Rebellion, claim they were slapped, kicked and spat at by angry drivers after they assembled along the Maglianella viaduct on the A90 motorway. It was the eighth time that the environment campaigners have blocked a road in Rome in the past 10 days, with eight activists arrested on Wednesday. Peter, who was among seven people protesting on Friday morning, said: “I expose myself to danger and uncertainty because I am aware of the danger we are running to humanity.” It is the first time Italian climate activists have used the road-blocking method to raise awareness, and comes as a civil court case, brought by 203 plaintiffs who are suing the government for failing to address the climate crisis, gets under way in Rome. The main objective of the Last Generation activists is to force the government to establish a citizens’ assembly as a way to urge politicians to take swift action to address climate issues. “The assembly is supposed to be created by the government by the end of 2022 and the decisions taken by it will have to become law, so it’s not just about giving the government advice,” said Beatrice Costantino, a spokesperson for Last Generation. “We’re a small group of people but we’ll repeat this action until our request is accepted. We are also asking for a meeting with [prime minister] Mario Draghi and other ministers. The point of the meeting is to ask them why the government is leaving Italian citizens without any strategy to face the climate crisis.” Pledging to put the environment at the top of the agenda of his government, Draghi established a ministry for “ecological transition” after being appointed prime minister in February. About €59bn (£51bn) of the more than €200bn Italy is to receive from the EU’s post-pandemic economic recovery fund has been allocated for investment in green initiatives. Costantino said the government’s pledges so far were just “greenwashing”. “They want to give the impression they are thinking about the problem, but really it’s not enough,” she said. The plaintiffs taking legal action against the government want Rome’s civil court to order the government to adopt more ambitious climate policies, such as cutting carbon emissions by 92% by 2030. In 2019, Italy set itself a 33% target for carbon emissions reduction by 2030. Italy is particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. The melting of the country’s glaciers is picking up speed, while extreme weather events, such as the rare flooding that struck the Sicilian city of Catania in October, are becoming more frequent. Italy endured a long heatwave this summer, with a town in Sicily believed to have broken the European record for the highest temperature registered – 48.8C – in August. The heatwave also exacerbated wildfires, especially in southern Italy. “Italy is a real climate hotspot,” said Costantino. “2021 was also a bad year for Italian agriculture – we lost one in four types of fruit and almost 80% of olives.” A further roadblock is planned on Saturday. “The point of taking disruptive action is to make people agree with the cause. Some drivers have shown their support,” Costantino said. “We are not looking to be loved by people, but to talk about the problems.”Ali Martin’s report from Adelaide Here’s Ben Stokes, fronting up as ever. “It’s always going to be a tired end to the day after being in the field for that long,” he says. “But it looked a pretty easy wicket to bat on once you get yourself in, so hopefully our batters can do that.” Glenn McGrath asks him about being the enforcer and how his body is. “It’s something I’ve done before. Body’s been worse, body’s been better.” He thinks the pitch is going to be one of those that get slower and slower. “We’ve seen a lot of nicks fall short, especially with the older ball.” Yes, but will England stay in long enough for the ball to get old? Mel Farrell asks Stokes if he has a message for England fans back home, staying up all night. “On social media we’ve seen a lot of support that we’re getting back home, especially on the Barmy Army Twitter and Instagram feeds. The guys who are out in Australia too, they’re outnumbered but we always hear them and we appreciate every bit of support that we get, especially the people staying up to watch us.” He doesn’t quite manage to mention those following the OBO, but that’s a good effort. As it was in the middle, where Stokes was England’s most successful bowler, with three for 113. If only they’d had Mark Wood, to make those nicks carry and get the tailenders jumping around. That’s it from us, with England in an all too familiar position: staring disaster in the face. Thanks for your company, and I hope your day goes better than theirs. “I see both openers have failed again,” says El Nombre on Twitter. “I reckon we should drop all the bowling unit ...” Ha, very good. But the two things are related. The openers were (even) more likely to fail once the new bowling strategy had gone wrong. Whether batting, bowling or fielding, England are a mess at the moment. The umps have now called it a day/night. So England are spared what could have been a horrific last hour. They will resume in the morning, a mere 456 runs behind. “Would it save time in future,” asks Hexenkessel, “if England’s 3 and 4 went out with the openers and stood next to the square-leg umpire?” The umpires confer again and this time they take the players off, so Root gets a well-earned breather. Mitchell Starc, as he goes down the tunnel, gives high fives to several small boys, which delights them but may send panic through the ranks at the South Australia Health Authority. 8th over: England 16-2 (Malan 1, Root 4) It was raining just now, but the umpires kept the players on after conferring. The Aussies won’t mind that: they’re so confident that they have two rookies bowling at the same time, and they’re still walking all over England. Root drives for a single, which ruins Richardson’s figures. He now has 4-3-1-0. And here’s Harry Lang. “Assuming the Burns dismissal is the start of yet another abject capitulation by England,” he muses, “will this be the bottom of the bell curve in this cycle of English Test cricket? I’m just trying to work out whether I’ll see some sort of competition when I finally get to see an Ashes match live in retirement (circa twenty years from now – although likely longer). If the cycle is five or even ten years (so on the way up for five, then rollercoastering down in a progressive agony of self-doubt and nervy prodding for the next five) then I should be in luck. But if it’s a twenty-year sequence, I fear I may miss the boat. Thanks for keeping spirits up while the ship sinks!” Thank you for putting my job in a nutshell. When it comes to the cycle, who knows – but England could well regain the Ashes in 2023, with Jofra Archer, Ollie Robinson and Saqib Mahmood reducing the Aussies to rubble. 7th over: England 15-2 (Malan 1, Root 3) So both openers have gone and Joe Root, after being at the helm for 150 overs, is back out there half an hour later. He immediately edges Neser, which is understandable, but his hands are soft enough to make sure the ball drops short of the cordon. Then he plays a more purposeful shot in the same direction, a glide for three. His ability to be himself when up against it is quite something. Hasss!! Noooooo! Hameed chips to mid-on and gives Michael Neser a great big Christmas present in his first over as a Test bowler. 6th over: England 12-1 (Hameed 6, Malan 1) A third maiden from Richardson, but that won’t bother Malan, who gets through the over without being beaten outside off. 5th over: England 12-1 (Hameed 6, Malan 1) Starc hasn’t got it right yet to Hameed, who has some comfy leaves before being lured into another drive, which he mistimes. “So many of us so negative on this,” mutters AB Parker. “Easy draw with a Root double coming up. I’ll tattoo whoever takes the most wickets on my face if we don’t. Seriously, easy enough pitch and England showed they can put up 350 easily last game.” Great stuff, but, at the risk of taking things too literally, I thought they made 147 and 297? 4th over: England 12-1 (Hameed 6, Malan 1) After beating Hameed for fun in his first over, Richardson now faces a left-hander for the first time today – and beats him too, though Malan gets some credit too, for staying on the line of off stump. Richardson, who scored three runs per ball in his short innings, hasn’t conceded one yet. 3rd over: England 12-1 (Hameed 6, Malan 1) Here comes Dawid Malan, who could be jelly on the inside, but he puts on a brave face and pushes his first ball for a quick single to cover. Hameed follows up with another stylish square drive that doesn’t quite reach the rope. He’s getting ’em in threes. Starc gets Burns again! With a good ball – lifting, leaving him, drawing the edge and presenting Smith at second slip with a simple catch, which, not being English, he doesn’t drop. This could be the start of a procession. 2nd over: England 7-0 (Hameed 3, Burns 4) The new ball is shared by Jhye Richardson, as the more senior of the two stand-in seamers – he’s a vetreran of two Tests. Fortified by his three-ball innings of 9, he finds some swing and beats Hameed, not once, not twice, but three times. “That last half hour was like something out of the mid-90s,” says Guy Hornsby on Twitter. “Not only have we let Australia take the game away from us, but we’ve given their two new pace bowlers a shot of adrenaline. I hope our batters have put abject defeat out of their minds. I haven’t.” 1st over: England 7-0 (Hameed 3, Burns 4) Mitch Starc lays down his bat and picks up the new ball, which is so pink it should really be served as a drink at a children’s party. Haseeb Hameed leaves one that’s a little too close to the off bail, but then plays a lovely calm drive, through the covers for three. So... can Rory Burns survive one ball? He can! It’s straight and swinging away, but on middle rather than leg, and he gets some bat on it, rather uncertainly. Next ball, much the same but pitched up, he clips for four. That’s more like it. An intriguing email comes in from an associate professor in international strategy. “England’s dodgy fielding is historic,” says Jon Fanning of York university, “and caused by an excessively competitive schools culture which values winning above all even when the win is brought about by size and strength not skill. The result is that good batters bat, good bowlers bowl, and only the fat lads do much fielding, for which there in no training. At least the bowlers do field occasionally. It looks like the schools have changed now, but it won’t show for a few years. I use it in my teaching as a comparative study in proper planning. Indian fielding vs English.” Discuss! England ripped up their strategy, the bowlers did a lot right, and still Australia made 473. Just like in Brisbane, most of the runs were made by only three batters – Warner and Labuschagne again, with Smith replacing Head as the third man. But this time the Aussie tail wagged, merrily, to make sure that England go in to bat feeling embarrassed as well as exhausted. Their chance of winning, at CricViz, is rated at 2pc. That high? Jhye Richardson doesn’t hang about: he goes three, six, out – caught behind off Woakes. And Steve Smith calls them in, so Starc is left high and dry. 150th over: Australia 461-8 (Starc 38, Richardson 0) The wicket doesn’t stop Starc in his tracks, rather the opposite. He cuts for four, plays a forehand drive for four more (almost killing the umpire), and top-edges just out of Buttler’s reach for yet another four. So he has that quick 30, and the last four overs have gone for 46. Neser’s luck runs out as his lofted drive goes straight to Broad at deep mid-off. But what an impressive debut: 35 off just 24 balls, which will put some extra wind in his sails when he comes on to bowl. 149th over: Australia 448-7 (Starc 24, Neser 35) Woakes is slapped for four by Starc, through the covers. He responds with a loopy slower ball, so far outside off that it’s a wide. The crowd make the unmistakable sound that figures in so many English nightmares: the sheer derision of thousands of gloating Aussies. Woakes recovers to beat Starc twice outside off. And then Starc is dropped in the deep by Ollie Pope – a good effort, to be fair – running in and just getting his fingers to a slog-sweep. 148th over: Australia 440-7 (Starc 18, Neser 34) Neser tries to give Stokes the treatment and succeeds in a way, with a thick inside edge for four. A better shot, a jab to deep square, brings a single and the fifty partnership. Salt in England’s wounds. And the last two batters are padded up, so Smith is not about to declare. 147th over: Australia 433-7 (Starc 17, Neser 28) Root makes yet another bowling change, replacing Anderson with Woakes – talk about like for like. Neser top-edges for four over the slips. Woakes, looking rattled for once in his life, asks for a review, for caught behind, when Buttler isn’t interested. No evidence of a nick, so England are out of reviews. Neser celebrates by slogging for four and cutting for six! Rabble time again. “I don’t know why we’re being so gloomy about England’s current predicament,” says Grumpy Expat Dad on Twitter. “Didn’t Adelaide once host an Ashes Test where a team lost after making 550 in the first innings?” Ha. 146th over: Australia 417-7 (Starc 16, Neser 13) Root brings back Stokes, who pitches the ball up, thankfully, and concedes only three singles. Up on the roof, a bunch of tourists are enjoying the view – or perhaps not enjoying it, as there are forks of lightning behind them. In the words of the great Gilbert O’Sullivan, get down! 145th over: Australia 414-7 (Starc 14, Neser 12) Starc sees those two short mid-ons and simply chips over them for two runs. This partnership is 24 already. “Thanks to you and the rest of the OBO team,” says Stephen Schoofs, “for making our gradual descent back into Covid misery just a tad more bearable.” Our pleasure. “Having said that, what’s the best that the England team can hope for, considering a very likely first session under lights, a less than confident batting line up, a world class spinner on a pitch that offers turn, and a comfortable drop in temperature for Australia’s bowlers to look forward to? Batting for a draw or an honourable defeat at best?” There’s always hope, even for England. In this case the best they can hope for is to make 550, roll over Australia for 150, knock off the 50 required for victory and say to the world “You see, five seamers can work!” 144th over: Australia 411-7 (Starc 11, Neser 12) Starc fancies a quick 30 here. He edges a pull but gets away with it as it plops into space at backward point. Neser shows him how it’s done with a proper pull, smacked to the midwicket boundary. 143rd over: Australia 403-7 (Starc 8, Neser 7) Neser, facing Anderson, picks up two more with another controlled nick. Is it too soon to call this his trademark? 142nd over: Australia 395-7 (Starc 7, Neser 4) After only two overs, Robinson is taken off and replaced by Broad, perhaps because Starc is a left-hander. And Starc is missed! By Anderson at midwicket, just too slow to get his hands on a well-timed chip. Broad pulls that face again. Neser adds insult to insult by edging for four. 141st over: Australia 390-7 (Starc 3, Neser 0) Here’s Michael Neser walking out for the first time in a Test match, after a 20-minute tea interval to stew in, but if he’s nervous, he’s not going to show it. He sees out the last two balls of Anderson’s over and plays a nice wristy clip to square leg. “Morning Tim (from where I’m writing),” says David Hindle. “Surely the fact that Ben Stokes gets people out when finally bowling straight and pitching it up, and the fact that the Australian bowlers are a) all very good, b) will bowl at the stumps and pitch it up the whole time, means this is done and dusted? This will be a monster walloping by an innings, because the Australians have brains and use them, whilst England – oh dear. And quite a few England batsmen seem to have a terrible technical weakness. They play every line possible except that of a straight ball aimed at their stumps? Okay, the worst offender, Bairstow is gone, but Pope and Buttler (at least) are well capable of the same. It will not be pretty.” You may well be right! But there are two glimmers of hope for England: half of Australia’s bowlers in this match are beginners, albeit talented ones. And the slow scoring so far has opened the door to the draw. On WinViz, it’s a 33pc chance. England, true to form, are on 4pc. “Becoming a rabble?” snorts Nicholas Butt (137th over). “Ingerlund has always been a rabble!” I take it you’re too young to remember 2010-11. And off they go for tea. That was a shame for Carey, who had just reached a fine first Test fifty and bathed in the acclaim of his home crowd, but, like Smith’s downfall, it may not do Australia any harm. Out of nowhere, Anderson has his favourite thing: tidy figures – two for 51 off 26.4 overs of dogged rust removal. The session still belongs to the Aussies, and so do the Ashes. “It’s almost irrelevant,” says Alastair Cook, “what Australia get now.” He knows whereof he speaks. One brings two for Anderson! This may be a slower ball, as Carey plays too early and chips to cover, where Haseeb Hameed dives to his right and takes the catch as if he was playing for a team that had no trouble with their fielding. 139th over: Australia 385-6 (Carey 49) Smith stomps off looking furious and chucks his helmet down on the grass beyond the Toblerone. When he cools down, he may reflect that a clatter of wickets now could help him win the match, by making England bat under lights. The partnership, like Smith, just missed out on a hundred (91). A modest round of applause please for poor old Root, who made a double change, yielding a welcome maiden at one end and a much-needed wicket at the other. Jimmy Jimmy! The oldest swinger in town gets one to move in and keep low. Up goes the finger, Smith reviews but it’s plumb. And that’s another 90 for Australia’s collection. 138th over: Australia 383-5 (Smith 92, Carey 48) Broad is replaced by Ollie Robinson, his natural heir. He keeps Carey quiet by jagging the ball back into him and completes a maiden, which is a tiny win in the circumstances. “Never seen so many balls hit the back elbow in a Test,” says one of the commentators. That doesn’t fill you with confidence for England’s innings, when the bowling will be a lot faster. 137th over: Australia 383-5 (Smith 92, Carey 48) Smith finds the right riposte to Stokes’s bouncers: an upper-cut for four. England, after rallying this morning, are becoming a rabble again. 136th over: Australia 376-5 (Smith 87, Carey 46) Thanks Mike. This is Tim, clocking on after a slight mix-up – well, what else do you expect from an Englishman? On the field, Stuart Broad’s over begins with a FIVE as Smith takes a single and Rory Burns’s wayward shy at the stumps goes for four overthrows. Alex Carey follows up with a lordly four, whipped over square leg. Broad’s face, in his 150th Test, is less than celebratory. 135th over: Australia 366-5 (Smith 82, Carey 41) Just a single of Stokes’s next over as Smith’s off his legs again, to move onto 82. Carey remains on 41 as an off-drive and then a late cut are both straight to England men. And with that, my cameo is over, and the great Tim de Lisle will take over from here. Fun while it lasted. 134th over: Australia 365-5 (Smith 81, Carey 41) “Oh my word,” says Steve Smith as Broad’s opening ball jags away from him. Not a hint of understatement from the Australian captain’s lips there. Nothing much else to report until the final ball of the over, when Smith tickles one off his legs, and it’s nearly snaffled at leg slip. This partnership is now worth 71. 133rd over: Australia 364-5 (Smith 80, Carey 41) Evening/morning all. Thanks Geoff, stellar work as always. There’s a change to the advertised plan, and I - not Tim de Lisle - will see you through the next few overs at least. There’s a half-hearted shout with a possible sound off the glove as Carey looks to pull a Stokes bouncer, but nothing really. Carey then picks up two thanks to an overthrow and then finds the boundary to move onto 41. A good over for Australia. This time I’m out for real. Mike Hytner will be with you in the first instance. Thanks for the company. “I’m enjoying checking in on the score from a couch in Hawai’i. How’s the press box? Does it feel like it did back in the pre-covid times, or are there fewer, more distanced journos? I briefly went into the press box at the Basin Reserve once, as a journalism student. It was wonderful. Amazing view.” Hello to Tane Aikman. It’s pretty much as usual, except that everyone is wearing masks when moving around. But that’s the norm most places in Adelaide at the moment. And yes, the view from most press boxes is special. 132nd over: Australia 358-5 (Smith 80, Carey 35) Stuart Broad comes on for Woakes, with the River Torrens at his back. Carey guides a single, thanks to another misfield from Burns. Smith gets one off his legs. William Vignoles writes in. “You’re completely right about England but it’s not a new thing - you can’t always have great bowlers or batters but pretty much any team can be turned into a good fielding unit (look at India), but for the last few years England seem to drop at least a couple of chances per game and can’t get a run out for anything. Less of an issue at home but when you’re flogging yourself in 35 degrees on an Australian road you need all the help you can get, and it doesn’t seem like the Test outfit are getting something right in their prep. Cheers as ever for the OBO and TFW!” 131st over: Australia 356-5 (Smith 79, Carey 34) Root is back on, in time to nearly take another slip catch. This one from Carey off Stokes, bounces just in front again. Seem to have been a lot of those, can they creep closer? Carey responds with a nice drive for two through cover. 130th over: Australia 352-5 (Smith 79, Carey 30) Four for Carey! Gets that bit of Woakes width, increases it by shuffling back, and slashes away through deep third. Woakes to Smith... who picks him up off a length for six! A cross-bat swat, not even short enough to be called a pull shot really, but somehow Smith times it so well that it clears deep backward square into the seats. This has been a strange old innings from Smith. A lot of defence, a lot of control, and then the odd yahoo. Drinks break. 129th over: Australia 341-5 (Smith 73, Carey 25) Robinson to Smith, who keeps stepping across and trying to work the ball to leg, but doesn’t make any good contact this time around. The crowd burbling away here at Adelaide. 128th over: Australia 340-5 (Smith 73, Carey 24) Woakes in at the body of Smith who defends. Perhaps Australia have no interest in declaring for the last session. Perhaps they’ll just bat for as long as they can ahead of Boxing Day. Certainly no hurry when the bowling is tight. At last, an edge! But wouldn’t you believe it, when you have a stagged slip cordon with someone at about 1.5 and someone at about 3, it goes through about 2.5 for four. And it’s a no-ball. Woakes with the front foot this time. Smith shakes his head and scolds himself for the shot, then improves his mood as he laces a cover drive for four. 127th over: Australia 331-5 (Smith 65, Carey 24) Root is off the field for a moment, probably visiting a prayer room. Robinson gets a thick edge from Carey, near the shoulder of the bat, that rolls into the gully. No damage either way. Eventually Robinson comes around the wicket. Another scoreless over. 126th over: Australia 331-5 (Smith 65, Carey 24) Woakes is on, who has occasionally got Steve Smith out lbw, though usually after a big score. Bowls right-arm over, outside Smith’s off stump, and the stand-in captain is happy to step across and watch the ball sail by. Eventually reaches with soft hands and squirts one off the edge along the ground to Pope at around a third slip. Smith calls for new gloves. England are one wicket away from Neser on debut, but can’t find it. 125th over: Australia 331-5 (Smith 65, Carey 24) Root off, Robinson on. He bowls a very good line on the left-hander’s off stump from over the wicket. The cloud is thickening overhead. The day is still very hot, a tick under 35 degrees in Adelaide. 124th over: Australia 331-5 (Smith 65, Carey 24) Anderson tries to burrow in at Carey’s pad, but is dug out. Then gets clipped square for two. Carey tries to whip his hands through a square drive, but it’s too close to the body. Straighter again and he has to defend. This is a good battle. Carey ends up very side-on when playing Anderson off his legs. Works a single away from there to end the over. 123rd over: Australia 328-5 (Smith 65, Carey 21) The accelerator work has fallen to Carey! Plays another lofted off-drive to Root, this time hitting it well enough to get four down the ground, though the ball plugs a little on landing. Cuts a single next ball, then Smith takes his cue and lashes a wide ball through cover for four. That might be Root’s last over for a while. 122nd over: Australia 318-5 (Smith 60, Carey 16) More busy play from Carey, throwing has hands through a drive off Anderson, two runs through cover point. Anderson around the wicket, trying to settle on a line that will discomfort Carey. 121st over: Australia 316-5 (Smith 60, Carey 14) The milking continues, Smith pushing Root into the covers, Carey going aerial down the ground for a run. England drifting, drifting. 120th over: Australia 312-5 (Smith 58, Carey 12) Anderson can’t get a look at Smith. Carey soaks up the over, pushing a couple of runs through the covers. Everything moving along slowly out there at the moment. So what’s the plan? Add 100 in this session and declare some time after the next break with 400 or so on the board? The Australians are only at 2.6 per over so far in this innings, so they will need to pick it up a bit at some stage. 119th over: Australia 310-5 (Smith 58, Carey 10) Root to carry on, another couple of single from the over. Smith looks comfortable against this stuff. Root has got him out twice in Test matches, but both times Smith had made double-hundreds first. News just in: the Australian captain has had permission from South Australian health authorities to go home to Sydney rather than sit in isolation for another five days in Adelaide. He’ll drive himself to the airport and take a charter flight arranged by Cricket Australia, so that he won’t cross over with anyone else. Then he’ll complete his isolation period at home. Seems vaguely sensible. 118th over: Australia 308-5 (Smith 57, Carey 9) Anderson to partner Root from the Riverbank End. Carey takes him on at one stage too, but can’t beat point. 117th over: Australia 308-5 (Smith 57, Carey 9) Joe Root to commence after the break, and Carey pulls out the reverse sweep in quick time! Picks up three runs. They farm a few singles either side, like a one-day innings. Ellie Oldroyd on the BBC is going for “nursery tea” for that long break. Like minds. “Winning the last toss and losing this one already looks like defining England’s series (give or take some dropped catches, flakey batting and front foot no-balls),” writes Brian Withington. “Any thoughts on how England can be given some sort of handicapping advantage to even things up more? (Assuming Australia losing their captain and another front line bowler doesn’t prove sufficient…)” I’m just going to call it lunch, having lunch at 4:30 in the afternoon is perfectly civilised. A better session for England! It started with great frustration as Marnus Labuschagne was given yet more lives and raised his century, but after finally prising him out the session tally was 80 for 3. Relatively even, with the score already past 300, but at least there was some evenness in the contest. The cheering aspect for Australia will be that SPD Smith is still there, immovable, implacable, coming for the world’s tired bowlers. 116th over: Australia 302-5 (Smith 55, Carey 5) Stokes with the last over before the long break. Around the wicket, bouncing the left-hander, too short to make him do anything but duck. Gets a bit fuller and has Carey fencing, past the inside edge into Buttler’s gloves. Short again, pulled hard on the bounce to leg slip, well stopped. That’s lunch, or dinner time for babies, or whatever it is. 115th over: Australia 302-5 (Smith 55, Carey 5) Root bowling around the wicket to Carey, off-breaks to a left-hander. Conventional field, three either side of the wicket on the single, one slip, boundary riders at point and square leg. Carey drops the ball to point with soft hands and bolts a single. For Smith, the deep point comes up and a second outfielder is added behind square leg. 114th over: Australia 301-5 (Smith 55, Carey 4) Off the mark with confidence is Carey, hooking Stokes between the two deep fielders behind square, past a tumbling Malan on the rope for four. A leg bye follows. Stokes looks very weary after he bowls the last ball of the over to Smith. 113th over: Australia 296-5 (Smith 55, Carey 0) Root burns through another over, with a leg slip in place for Smith, who nudges a ball past that man for two. 112th over: Australia 294-5 (Smith 53, Carey 0) As Ali Martin has just noted next to me, some unconvincing middle-order performances from Australia both here and Brisbane have only underlined the cost of England giving so many chances to Warner and Labuschagne in those matches. It’s Alex Carey’s turn for a hometown welcome. He didn’t leave it, but he does make another low score! Bowled again! A beauty from Stokes. He finally pitches a ball up. It’s on line for middle stump but just shapes away a touch. Enough to beat the edge of a misplaced defensive stroke, and not so much that it beats the outside of off stump. Lovely piece of bowling. 111th over: Australia 291-4 (Smith 52, Green 0) It was evident immediately that Head wanted a piece of the part-time spinner. That desire brings him undone. Cameron Green comes to the middle and manages to not leave a ball that hits his stumps first ball. Talk about self-inflicted! Head charges at Joe Root and basically yorks himself. He reaches the ball as a full toss, realises it’s too full, then has a panicked slog across the line at it. Misses, I think it clips his thigh, and goes back onto the stumps. 110th over: Australia 287-3 (Smith 52, Head 14) The bouncer field is: deep third, backward point, extra cover, midwicket, square leg, short leg, deep square leg, deep backward square, long leg. That’s six-three in favour of the leg side. Truly bizarre stuff. Stokes goes short, and Smith top-edges over the keeper for four to raise his fifty. 109th over: Australia 280-3 (Smith 47, Head 12) Steve Smith is getting into his stride! A touch short from Root, and Smith lashes a cut shot behind point. A bit top-edgy, but there was enough space out there to make it low risk. The greediest run-scorer in contemporary Test cricket hasn’t had much time at the table in the last couple of years, but now he’s eyeing another milestone. 108th over: Australia 274-3 (Smith 42, Head 11) Stokes is the other bowling change, and he’s going to try the bombardment tactic like yesterday. Doesn’t work, as Smith lashes a wide short one over backward point, then an even higher bouncer gets called wide. Smith pulls a single to follow. 107th over: Australia 268-3 (Smith 37, Head 11) A couple of stutters from Head, as Root comes on for an over of spin. The batter wants to attack but isn’t in the right spot to do so. Interesting. How many runs can Root make if he has to bowl all day? 106th over: Australia 268-3 (Smith 37, Head 11) Score revision on the previous post, hit refresh if you can’t see it. Robinson bowling from the Riverbank End to Smith, who is happy to keep blocking. He gets a thick outside edge from one such shot, past gully along the ground for a couple of runs, then picks off a straighter ball through midwicket for two more. Make that three! Smith really has the foot down, going to the danger end as Broad throws back, and he demands that Head come through as well. Almost got to the non-striker’s end before Head had left. Robinson strays down leg with the final ball, off Head’s thigh pad for three leg byes. 105th over: Australia 260-3 (Smith 32, Head 11) Almost a slip catch! Head edges Chris Woakes into the cordon, in front of Burns on the bounce. Only by a few inches as Burns lunges forward. Head escapes strike from the next ball, then Smith immediately rotates it back. Head plays a big shot off the back foot but hits it too straight to mid-off. Score revision! That last ball is an overstep. From the seventh ball, Head does get his flay away, between point and gully for four! 104th over: Australia 253-3 (Smith 31, Head 6) Smith is happy to bat out Robinson, leaving him alone and forcing the bowler to go straighter. Nothing from the over, and in this heat, each over is a serious effort. In the commentary boxes, with the windows open, the heat is blasting through like it’s an open fan-forced oven door. 103rd over: Australia 253-3 (Smith 31, Head 6) Woakes after drinks, bowling around the wicket to Head and largely short of a length. Head punches away a couple of runs through the covers. 102nd over: Australia 251-3 (Smith 31, Head 4) There’s the first false shot from Smith, edging to second slip on the bounce. Rory Burns dives across to stop it, but unsurprisingly fumbles the take. Manages not to give away a run. Robinson has been the most threatening bowler, even with his front foot. Then England go up for an appeal as Smith leaves a ball that clips his thigh pad. Not sure if they wanted lbw or an edge. Anything. No dice. Good one to follow! Finally pitched up, and Robinson gets a bit of movement past the outside edge. Genuine defensive shot from Smith beaten. Only two slips awaiting a catch. Nothing coming though. Drinks. 101st over: Australia 251-3 (Smith 31, Head 4) Woakes on to bowl, and as he did to Warner yesterday, he offers short width early to the left-hander. Head crashes it away through point. 100th over: Australia 247-3 (Smith 31, Head 0) While Labuschagne frustrated England by his reprieves, at least he looked fallible. Smith has been faultless. Robinson’s in-ducker? He gets bat behind it. The away-goer? Steps across and watches it. Anything loose he has dispatched. A big score in the offing. Another extra in that over as Robinson bowls another no-ball. “Good morning Geoff from icy Piedmont,” writes Finbar Anslow. “Confidently expect Australia to get rolled for just over 300 before England’s openers knock up half of that for the first wicket. Might just go back to sleep at this point, looking forwards to dreams coming true.” 99th over: Australia 246-3 (Smith 31, Head 0) A couple of bouncers from Broad to Smith, and Smith takes him on, hooking between the two leg-side boundary riders for four. Broad has a leg slip in now, and while bowling at Smith’s hip, gets a deflection that bounces in front of Hameed in that position. Who fumbles it for a leg bye. 98th over: Australia 241-3 (Smith 27, Head 0) Huge hometown ovation for Travis Head as he comes to the middle. The torture ends for England. Bad misjudgement from Labuschagne, he leaves a Robinson delivery expecting it to go past his off stump, but instead it cuts back to hit him just about in line. The line of impact doesn’t matter because he hasn’t offered a shot. Of course he reviews immediately, because he’s Marnus. Hoping it might be going over the stumps. It’s hitting flush at the top of middle. Given out lbw, sent upstairs. 97th over: Australia 241-2 (Labuschagne 103, Smith 27) Labuschagne’s charmed life continues! Pulls a short ball from Broad through square leg, airborne. The fielder throws out a hand at the ball, which is travelling, and maybe just gets a fingertip to it as it flies by. The fielder, inevitably, is Robinson. 96th over: Australia 240-2 (Labuschagne 102, Smith 27) I know I wrote last night about luck, and I know it’s easy to get stuck into the losing team, but... these England players don’t deserve to win a Test match. They can’t do the most fundamental things right. Self-inflicted. A leg bye follows, meaning two extras are the only scoreboard adjustment resulting from the over. I had just written out the post for the wicket. At last, in anticlimactic fashion. Ollie Robinson on to bowl, decent line, Marnus pokes, low edge that Buttler takes falling to his right. At last, something going for England. Labuschagne walks off. All the way to the boundary. Then gets turned around. NO BALL. Only by a whisker. It takes a zoomed in replay. But there is no part of Robinson’s shoe behind the line. England. What even are you. 95th over: Australia 238-2 (Labuschagne 102, Smith 27) Broad to Smith, no run from the over... “Not really sure what todays play will bring,” writes Stephen Holliday. “Then again, I’m in Toronto, watching over my washing machine that refuses to drain but I still expect my clothes to be dry before England get to bat. So maybe it’s all in the suds.” 94th over: Australia 238-2 (Labuschagne 102, Smith 27) Oof! When is the last time James Anderson knocked a bat out of someone’s hand? And with a delivery at 127 kph, too. Labuschagne may - outlandish I know - have added some spice to that. A slightly shorter ball that hits up near the gloves and his bat goes flying. Two balls later though, he opens the face and steers Anderson away, between slip and gully, for four! There it is. A highly patient innings, in between two huge slices of luck. He follows it up with a brace through midwicket. 93rd over: Australia 232-2 (Labuschagne 96, Smith 27) Broad carries on with his tight line, but as soon as there’s an error, Smith leaps on it again. A length floated full, and Smith sends it flowing through the covers for four. Broad gestures to himself in annoyance about where the delivery went wrong. 92nd over: Australia 228-2 (Labuschagne 96, Smith 23) Anderson tries a couple of short ones early. Smith pulls a single, Labuschagne pulls the bat inside the line. Two slips, a fairly deep gully, cover, mid-off, mid-on, midwicket, square leg, long leg. 91st over: Australia 227-2 (Labuschagne 96, Smith 22) Stuart Broad from the Cathedral End, with the grass hill and the giant fig trees behind him. (The figs... no wonder Kevin Pietersen liked batting here so much.) He’s over the wicket to the right-handed Labuschagne, after spending so much of yesterday around the wicket. And already it doesn’t look difficult for Labuschagne to block a couple, glance a single. This was a brutal toss to lose. 90th over: Australia 225-2 (Labuschagne 95, Smith 22) A couple of leaves from Smith to begin, one pulling the bat inside the line in a way that draws a vocal response from some of the crowd. Anderson strays wide with one ball, and Smith stands up tall to force off the back foot behind point for four! Decisive shot. We’re off. Jimmy Anderson with the newish ball. Smith on strike. Tell you what, the specialist spinner will have a lot to do in these conditions... Sorry? The last bits of warm-up equipment get ferried off the ground. A couple of kids holding flags wait at the end of the players’ races. A few uninterested security guards dot the boundary. The big remote-control camera buggy prowls the outfield like a dystopian sentinel. Black Mirror cricket is about to begin. The walk down through Adelaide’s central city to the ground was slightly more intense today than yesterday. Wouldn’t fancy bowling 30 overs of pace in it. Weather update: as already mentioned, it’s hot - the mercury has now tipped 37C. But there’s also some cloud cover today, and it’s blustery out there in the middle. Think it’s fair to say there will be a degree of scrutiny on Jos Buttler today, not least from the Adelaide crowd, who were on his back towards the end of play yesterday after he spilled that late chance to send Labuschagne packing. And excitingly, here is our Guardian Ashes Daily podcast again: a collaboration between Emma, me, and Adam Collins. I wrote about Australia largely getting away with losing a captain to Covid restrictions on the first morning. Emma John naturally harked back to Bodyline, in 1932-1933. Starring Hugo Weaving as Douglas Jardine. Here’s Simon Burnton, with the day one post-play quotes. Right, what have we got for you from day one at Adelaide? Here’s the match wrap from Ali Martin, who was tapping away next to me in the press box. Good Adelaide afternoon to every other timezone around the world. The very early hours of the morning in the UK, well done if you’re awake for this. It was a long slow grind of a day yesterday, with no pink-ball dynamite moments, some very careful Australian batting, and two more dropped catches that drove stakes into the hearts of England. The only thing is to hope that today might be different, but today is currently 36.3C and it’s only early afternoon. England’s bowlers have some very tough work ahead of them, and will have to pray that some early exchanges go their way. They have a ball only nine overs old, so that may offer something. The score is Australia 221-2, with Labuschagne to resume, thanks to dual fortune, on 95, and Smith on 18.How to Eat – the series identifying the best way to eat Britain’s favourite foods – is perennially baffled by the division brussels sprouts provoke. When you consider the criminal acts that occur on the Christmas table – bone-dry, taste-void turkey; the medieval torture that is bread sauce; bitumen-like gravy; juvenile cranberry jelly; powdery husks of roast potato – how is it this member of the Brassicaceae family gets so much heat? Sprouts have been cancelled by Gen Z and rank among Britain’s top 5 most hated foods. As a nation, we should be ashamed of ourselves. Again. Add it to Britain’s list. Sprouts – subject of this month’s HTE Christmas special – are a not just delicious but essential element of any Christmas dinner. If the occasion is less a meal than a perilous ascent up a meat-and-potato mountain, the vegetables on the plate act as a resting point, a breather, an inflection of freshness as revitalising as oxygen at 24,000ft. After your 14th pig-in-a-blanket, the bitter sprout is the mineral-metallic palate cleanser, the metaphorical energy gel that makes that last push through the final mouthfuls possible. But more than that, we should be enjoying sprouts in contexts other than that of this overblown roast dinner. Despite growing abundantly in Britain from September to February and providing a healthy source of beneficial antioxidants for most people, the brassica oleracea is regularly ignored in cookbooks. The world regards sprouts as faintly comical when in fact – inhale that sulphurous promise from the stove! – they offer genuine gustatory excitement. There is a theory that people who love sprouts lack the “bitterness” gene, TAS2R38. But HTE is unconvinced by that take. As with grapefruit, coffee, jacket potatoes or west coast IPAs, it is quite possible to love sprouts precisely because there’s a bitterness folded into their flavour portfolio. That is an unusual, useful characteristic. One that deserves to be celebrated. A few years ago, it was fashionable to cook with brussels tops (the leaves from the growing stem) – it still is in some quarters – and, apparently, Los Angeles is all over the sprout. But in Britain they are often discussed solely as festive leftovers. HTE is here to change that. One suggestion at a time. Pleasant ways to eat sprouts Boiled, as is Only for the hardcore? HTE would disagree. Some swipe cake mix from the bowl. Others steal more cheese than they grate. The discerning few know that being able to snaffle extra boiled sprouts – your tongue exploring the sprout’s frilly inner leaves as it relinquishes its elemental juices – is one of the major upsides of serving Christmas dinner. Add butter and salt, if you prefer. But, eaten naked, there is something of the very soil in the sprout that makes you feel alive. Note: don’t cross the stem, just trim and boil. All the other ways, too “Why anyone boils sprouts when they could roast or fry them is one of life’s great mysteries,” Ottolenghi once wrote. Wrong, but HTE can see his point. Frying, roasting, wood-firing or grilling chars and caramelises sprouts in a way that both intensifies their sweetness and brings a toasted, fireside edge to their bitterness. And such methods also allow you to introduce pork fat to proceedings … With bacon It is a cliche of modern cooking to say: “If in doubt, add bacon.” Not everything benefits from its salty, porcine presence. Sprouts definitely do. Don’t tinker too much. Arguably, adding additional onion or garlic is over-elaboration. Working in sweet elements (cranberry sauce, honey, marsala wine), definitely is. The dish will get rich and sticky. It will lack clearly delineated flavours. Shredding or finely slicing the sprouts before mixing them with the bacon risks a lack of balance in central areas. That can easily become a bacon salad, the sprouts but a whisper on the meaty wind. Instead, you want discernible chunks of sprout seasoned with bacon and its fat. With chilli (garlic, soy sauce, sesame …) As with its close relation, cabbage, there is something magical in the interaction of fiery heat and the sprout’s vegetal density. It is like putting Christmas lights on a tree: it brings points of brightness to what could, otherwise, be just a load of dark green foliage. Halved or shredded sprouts also lean into meaty, umami Asian flavours (garlic, soy and/or fish sauce, sesame, etc) and come alive around spring onions and ginger (and Lao Gan Ma). Therefore, they can be very effectively deployed in stir-fries. Finishing cooked spouts with a spritz of citrus also lifts them, and they have an affinity with peanuts, meaning they work surprisingly well in a meat-free pad Thai, too. With gnocchi Gnocchi is frequently a soft, pillowy stomach-filler. Bland carb overkill. Sprouts are useful in bringing an astringent, adult edge to your gnocchi. Throw in some sausage meat and you are home and hosed. With chorizo Marcus Wareing is not known for his midweek teas. But he is the original source for the pearl barley, chorizo and sprout “hot pot” (think: risotto), which is a firm favourite at HTE Towers. Its main flavours – fatty, fermented pork, paprika and tomatoes, by turns sweet and smoky – are ones that sprouts play off and around brilliantly. Used to mine a pasta bake Sprouts are amazing tucked betwixt short strands of curly or tubular pasta. Aim for a nubby, stubby rubble of components. Texturally, the pasta and sprouts offer a toothsome contrast and cheese is one of the sprout’s great foils (see also gratin). On a white pizza Paired in a no-brainer with mozzarella and pancetta. Not that this approach, popularised by New York’s Motorino (Honest Crust in Manchester do a fine version), always receives a warm welcome. As Graham Faragher from Bertha’s Pizza put it in 2015: “Sprouts get a lot of bad press and this pizza is a nightmare to sell.” With chestnuts and cream As with spinach, almost any combination of cream, shallots, garlic, wine, mustard, nutmeg and sprouts is going to fly. Used up in bubble’n’squeak The greatest day of the festive season is always that evening, between Christmas and New Year, when you are struck by the urgent need to use up your remaining leftovers. But, in the dark, sleepless fug of “party season”, you find yourself incapable of cooking anything that requires great effort. Instead, you simply mash and fry everything available into well-browned, crusty pats of pleasure. Topped with an egg and doused in your preferred chilli/tomato/random sauce, this is comfort food in excelsis. Less pleasant things that can occur with sprouts Eating them raw in a slaw or salad Raw, shredded sprouts are a surprisingly neutral vehicle for vinaigrettes, mayo, mustard or Asian-influenced combos of garlic, chilli, ginger, lime, fish sauce, etc. But the texture? It is leathery rather than crunchy and harder work than food should be. It all feels a bit “cattle feed”. They encounter blue cheese No blue cheese in hot food is a rule HTE lives by. It has served it well. Please, step away from the stilton. You are asked to drink them … … in a smoothie. (Yes, this is a thing people do.) They are combined with fruit It is normally apple (due to sprouts’ affinity with pork), but you also see poor mini-cabbages married with everything from sultanas to pineapple, pomegranate molasses, fig jam or cranberry jelly. HTE tries to remain open-minded (honestly!) but combining sprouts with chunks of fruit, and/or the high-contrast sweetness of syrups and jams, feels like one of those Hey, what if it was opera … but drum’n’bass? ideas – in other words, best left on the drawing board. Shortly before breaking up the drawing board and taking it to the tip. Not all food must be sweet. Sprouts do nothing to invite that “tweak”. They are dressed with nuts The suggestion you might spruce up cooked sprouts by simply scattering almonds, walnuts, pecans and pistachios on them seems a bizarre textural collision. Possibly inspired by those who describe sprouts as “nutty” in flavour. Plainly, they are not. So, sprouts, how do you eat yours?Everton are close to signing the Ukraine left-back Vitaliy Mykolenko from Dynamo Kyiv in a €21m (£17.9m) deal that could rise to €23m with add-ons. The 22-year-old is due to complete a medical on Friday after agreeing terms on a five-year deal. His arrival could pave the way for the departure of Lucas Digne, who was recently dropped by Rafael Benítez and declared himself unavailable for Thursday’s draw at Chelsea because of illness. Mykolenko has spent his whole career with Dynamo and is a Ukraine international, playing four times at Euro 2020, including as a wing-back in the 4-0 defeat by England in the quarter-finals. He made his league debut in August 2017 and his fee is by some distance the largest spent by Everton since Benítez took over as manager this summer, when the £1.7m Demarai Gray and free transfers were signed. “I think we will have some money to spend but I don’t think that will be too much,” the manager said last month.The BBC’s Antiques Roadshow should address the legacy of colonialism when explaining the history of heirlooms and other artefacts guests bring to the programme, according to an Oxford academic. Prof Dan Hicks, the curator of world archaeology at Oxford University’s Pitt Rivers Museum, called for the show to inform its millions of viewers about the problematic and violent histories behind how objects came to the UK from its former colonies. His comments came after the programme featured a Mughal ring, valued at £2,000, which the jewellery historian John Benjamin said had “somehow found its way from somewhere near the Taj Mahal over to a charity shop here 200 years later”. The archaeologist, who jokingly tweeted “decolonise the Antiques Roadshow” in response to this explanation, said he was not trying to “cancel” the programme, which he enjoys watching. But he added: “The disappointing thing for me was that the histories of other objects on the show were told, whereas here the history was being euphemistically dodged.” In response to Hicks, Pranay Manocha tweeted: “As an Indian, this hurts. There are historian friends of mine who will never have access to these things, and the effect is that a large part of Indian history continues to be written and interpreted by the British.” Although the provenance of the ring, studded with rubies and diamonds, was difficult to ascertain as it was bought for £1 in a charity shop, Hicks said it was a missed opportunity to explain how other, better documented, Mughal artefacts “found their way” to Britain from India during imperial rule. “The BBC has a great opportunity to acknowledge the legacies of empire [and] show people how intimately bound up the global history of Britain is in the personal or the private collections of families and households across the country,” he added. “We need to start looking at the ethics and histories of the many different ways – whether by purchase, exchange, missionary confiscations, violent looting, and archaeological excavation – that objects came to Britain.” Hicks, author of The Brutish Museums, which examines the looting of the Benin bronzes by British soldiers in the late 19th century, recalled another episode of Antiques Roadshow that featured a 20th-century example of the art form. “It felt odd that there was no mention at all that there was something called the Benin bronzes that had been looted,” he added. Although Hicks said his tweet, which has received more than a million views, was originally intended as a joke, the overwhelmingly positive response to it suggested to him there was a widespread audience for colonial histories. A BBC spokesperson said: “Wherever possible, Antiques Roadshow explores the historical context of the items that are brought to the show by their owners. In this instance, as explained during the programme, the ring was found in a charity shop and there was no information about how it had come to be in the UK.” She cited two examples of where the programme had explored the provenance of better-documented artefacts: items of Georgian silver, which prompted one expert to explore the link between slavery, sugar and tea-drinking; and a Chinese table that might once have graced the imperial palace in Beijing – prompting another expert to discuss the history of the 19th-century sacking of the Summer Palace by British troops.A rush to beat Christmas shortages gave retailers a boost in November, according to official figures that showed sales jumped 1.4% on the previous month. Fears that supply chain hold-ups would limit stocks of festive toys, jewellery, clothes and homeware sent shoppers rushing to buy on the high street and online before the usual retail spending spree in December. Analysts said November could prove to be a high-water mark after the arrival of the Omicron variant, which is expected to dent sales in the weeks running up to Christmas Day and into the traditional Boxing Day and January sales period. Black Friday proved to be a bigger hit than expected, pushing sales beyond the 0.8% growth seen in October, which analysts forecast would be repeated in November. The Office for National Statistics said sales volumes across the sector were 7.2% higher than their pre-pandemic levels from February 2020. Clothing sales surpassed pre-Covid levels for the first time after a 2.9% rise. An increase in the number of people driving after disruption to fuel supplies in the two previous months also helped the sale of petrol and diesel increase 3.7%, although volumes were still 1.9% below pre-pandemic levels. Meanwhile, sales in food stores dipped by 0.2% over the month. Philip Shaw, a senior economist at Investec, said December would be hit by the new Covid-19 variant as people worked from home and refrained from going out to restaurants, theatres and pubs. He said figures from the banks on spending “point towards a degree of consumer caution over the past week or two”. Some analysts said the Bank of England’s decision to raise interest rates on Thursday to 0.25% could further dent consumer confidence but Shaw argued that households could absorb higher borrowing costs after amassing large amounts of savings over the last 20 months. Oliver Vernon-Harcourt, the head of retail at Deloitte, said month-on-month falls in online shopping were likely to reverse as Christmas approached. “Online sales in November continued to fall from a peak in February 2021, accounting for 26.9% of all retail sales,” he said. “However, more consumers may be inclined to shop online as we get closer to Christmas to avoid busy or crowded areas, given concerns around rising Covid-19 infection rates. “While we don’t yet know how in-store footfall will be impacted, a drop from usual levels for this time of year could cause headaches for bricks-and-mortar retailers.” He said shoppers had already begun to abandon trips to local high streets over concerns that they might contract or spread Omicron, while retailers have reported increasing numbers of staff falling ill who must self-isolate. Lisa Hooker, the consumer markets leader at PwC, said: “By the beginning of December, the effects of the Omicron variant had begun to impact across the UK, and footfall has already begun to drop in city centres as shoppers heed advice to work from home and reduce household mixing.”The private planes have soared off into the sunset, the keys to the Tuscan holiday villa have been posted back through the letterbox. Yes, season four of Succession is finally over, to the relief of non-watchers who have had to sit through nine weeks of me wittering on about it. This will be the last you will hear of the Roy family for a while, I promise. For those of you who were watching: what did you make of this season? The consensus view seems to be that it was something of a slow-burner that crackled into life in its final pair of episodes. Certainly that grand finale lived up to the expectations set by the endings of seasons one and two, as Logan brutally quelled his kids’ underbaked uprising, aided by turncoat Tom Wambsgans. Do check out the Guardian’s extensive coverage of that final act, including an interview with creator Jesse Armstrong (cards kept close to his chest as ever, though never less than interesting to hear from), and some predictions about what might happen when the show returns. I am holding out for that to be next year, although we may have to wait till 2023, I suspect. Before we declare Succession season officially over though, it is time to revisit our ruthlessness rankings from the start of the season. Who has wormed their way into contention, and who has been left out in the cold? Succession ruthlessness rankings 12. Roman (down 6) Had positioned himself as the heir apparent, until that saucy smartphone snafu left him on the outside looking in as dad sold off the farm. Roman did at least manage to summon the courage to join Shiv and Kendall in an attempt to stop the merger of Waystar Royco and GoJo, but when that fizzled out he was the most shocked by his father’s savagery. Meekly mewling “love” at your dad isn’t going to cut it, Romulus. 11. Shiv (down 7) A truly hideous season for Siobhan “Shiv” Roy, who managed to be outmanoeuvred by just about everyone, her own husband included. Would be bottom of the list, but for the sheer molten fury on her face as Tom comforted her, which suggests she’s probably better placed than Roman to battle through whatever comes next. 10. Kendall (down 7) Kendall utterly, utterly bottomed out this season, to the point where at least half of Succession’s viewing audience thought that he had actually died. Yet, while he remains just as royally screwed as his siblings, there was something interesting in his far more muted response to Logan’s announcement than Roman and Shiv’s. Does he know something they don’t? Or is he simply feeling unburdened, now finally free of his hateful father? 9. Frank (non-mover) Still very much a second tier figure at Waystar Royco, but at least he’s still there at all. It was striking that Frank, Karl and Gerri were all present when Logan stuck his knife into the revolting siblings: they are old stagers who have witnessed plenty of these shankings before and know best to keep their major arteries out of the way. 8. Karl (up 2) See Frank (whom he has leapfrogged by virtue of having to do less embarrassing grunt work during the excruciating shareholder meeting episode). 7. Connor (up 3) “I’m the eldest son!” Connor roared at his half-siblings midway through that final ep, annoyed that they had marginalised him. But – hey! – by the series end, Connor was looking the best placed of all of Logan’s brood. His presidential run trundles on, Willa has belatedly accepted his marriage proposal, and he’s the only Roy still allowed into Waystar HQ. It’s time to raise a glass of hyper-decanted wine to the true number one boy. 6. Cousin Greg (up 6) Who had Greg, sweet feckless Greg, ending the season by juggling two women (one a countess), and entering a lucrative partnership with the devil? OK, his grandpa’s fortune has gone and there is still a potential lawsuit with Greenpeace in the offing, but things are generally looking up. And he’s got his true love Tom in his corner (sorry, Grand Duchess of Luxembourg). 5. Marcia (up 1) Was on screen for a total of – oh, I don’t know – three minutes this season, and in that time managed to negotiate an extremely lucrative deal with Logan as penance for his indiscretions, and managed to be on the inside of the Waystar-GoJo merger to boot. Now, Logan is seemingly trying for another child with his latest “assistant”, and, if nothing else another big payday beckons for Marcia. 4. Kerry (New entry) Kerry joins the ruthlessness rankings at an impressive high position, having gone from lowly assistant/room meat to potential bearer of Logan’s heir (if that maca root works its magic). She may well recede into the background if and when Logan gets bored of her, but she’s certainly shot her shot. 3. Gerri (up 1) Installed as a puppet CEO at the start of the season, and seemingly there to bear the punishment as Waystar lurched into its latest crisis, Gerri has shown pretty impressive survival skills. Just witness the masterful lawyerly manner in which she brushed off Shiv’s concern troll questions over Roman’s unsolicited texts. And of course she was in the room, looking on impassively as Logan took his kids to the woodshed. “It doesn’t serve my interests,” she cooly told Roman as he pleaded with her to take their side. 2. Tom (up 5) Wambsgans, you sly dog, you! Kicked about by his wife all season, Tom took decisive action by throwing her under the bus (probably the closest Shiv Roy has ever been to public transport). His reward? A nice pat on the shoulder from the boss. 1. Logan (non-mover) You come at the king, you’d better not miss. And you best make sure your guns haven’t turned to sausages. Logan’s feckless kids were never going to be a match for his vast experience and lizard brain, but what was more striking was the big man’s willingness to cede control of his company and quietly recede into the shadows. Can anyone genuinely see that lasting longer than, say, episode one of the next season? If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.Rail fares in England are to rise by 3.8% in March, the government has confirmed, in line with July’s RPI inflation rate and the biggest increase in nine years. The latest increase – revealed in the Guardian after a leak this month – is less than some feared after fares went up above the RPI inflation rate in March of this year. However, with current inflation rates running much higher, and many former season ticket-holders in the commuter belt working from home, the fare rise is likely to be met with less passenger outcry than in previous years. Industry leaders have argued for a freeze to tempt passengers back to the railway, with numbers again declining with the Omicron coronavirus variant. Numbers had peaked at about 70% of pre-pandemic levels in November. However, the Treasury is keen to reduce subsidy, with the government having invested more than £14bn to keep services running during the pandemic, and said the fare rise would help meet some of these costs. The rail minister, Chris Heaton-Harris, said: “Capping rail fares in line with inflation while tying it to the July RPI strikes a fair balance, ensuring we can continue to invest records amounts into a more modern, reliable railway, ease the burden on taxpayers and protect passengers from the highest RPI in years.” The increase officially applies to regulated fares – such as season tickets, long-distance returns and anytime urban fares – in England alone, but is likely to be reflected throughout UK rail. The government said the flexible season tickets it launched this year, whose savings were widely regarded as insufficient to attract many passengers, had now been purchased by more than 100,000 people, who could still save by travelling two or three days a week. Labour, however, said that it was “a nightmare before Christmas” for rail commuters, who would see average fares rise to 48.9% more than they were in 2010. Shadow transport secretary Louise Haigh said: “Families already facing soaring taxes and bills will now be clobbered with an eye-watering rise in the cost of the daily commute. Many will wonder what planet ministers are on if they think people can afford this?” The rail industry welcomed the decision not to raise fares above RPI as some had feared. Andy Bagnall, the director general of the Rail Delivery Group, said: “It is important that fares are set at a level that will encourage more people to travel by train in the future, helping to support a clean and fair recovery from the pandemic.” But campaigners and unions criticised the rise, contrasting it with policies on road and air transport. Paul Tuohy, chief executive of Campaign for Better Transport, said: “Rail fares should have been frozen to match the fuel duty freeze for car drivers. If the government is serious about shrinking transport’s carbon footprint it should make rail the affordable choice. Instead, it is asking some commuters to pay hundreds of pounds more for their season tickets, which risks driving people off rail and onto roads instead.” Rail fares have risen at or above the higher rate of RPI inflation for more than a decade, while fuel duty on petrol and diesel for motorists has been frozen in absolute terms at 57.9p per litre. News of the fare rise comes as rail unions gear up for industrial action, with a wave of job cuts expected as train operators and Network Rail have been told to find savings of £1.5bn a year. Manuel Cortes, TSSA general secretary, said: “Fares rises are staggeringly counter-productive. Rail should be incentivised and the government should look at free travel – as many other countries do – as a positive way to change travel behaviour and cut emissions.”When the Galloway hoard was unearthed from a ploughed field in western Scotland in 2014, it offered the richest collection of Viking-age objects ever found in Britain or Ireland. But one of the artefacts paled in comparison with treasures such as a gold bird-shaped pin and a silver-gilt vessel because it was within a pouch that was mangled and misshapen after almost 1,000 years in the ground. Now that pouch has been removed and its contents restored, revealing an extraordinary Roman rock crystal jar wrapped in exquisite layers of gold thread by the finest medieval craftsman in the late eighth or early ninth century. About 5cm high, it may once have held a perfume or other prized potion used to anoint kings, or in religious ceremonies. It had been carefully wrapped in a silk-lined leather pouch, reflecting its significance. The hoard, which included about 100 objects, was buried around AD900 and contained artefacts from the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms, Ireland and as far away as Asia. It was unearthed by a metal detectorist on what is now Church of Scotland land in Kirkcudbrightshire. After a fundraising campaign to raise £2m, it was acquired by National Museums Scotland in 2017. Dr Martin Goldberg, NMS’s principal curator of early medieval and Viking collections, described the jar as “really beautiful” and all the more exceptional because his research has led him to conclude that the rock crystal carving was in fact Roman. It was perhaps 600 years old by the time it was transformed into a gold-wrapped jar. He said: “So it’s a really surprising and unique object.” Dr Leslie Webster, former keeper of Britain, prehistory and Europe at the British Museum, said: “Rock crystal is unusual in itself. It … was greatly prized in the antique world for its transparency and translucency, and so it’s associated with purity. So it was, I think even in its time, very, very special … “I’ve seen a lot of Anglo-Saxon finds over the years in my professional career, some of them amazing. But this absolutely knocks them all into a cocked hat.” The restoration has revealed an unexpected Latin inscription on the jar’s base. Spelled out in gold letters, it translates as “Bishop Hyguald had me made”. This is crucial evidence that some of the hoard’s material may have come from a church in the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Northumbria, which included Dumfries and Galloway and stretched as far north as Edinburgh and as far south as Sheffield. At the start of the 10th century, Alfred the Great was pushing back the Danes, laying the foundations of medieval England and Alba, the kingdom that became medieval Scotland. It is unclear whether the hoard was buried by a Viking – Norse sagas refer to riches being buried to be accessed in the afterlife – or someone fearing Viking raids at a time when ecclesiastical treasures were being robbed from monasteries. Goldberg said that silk was then a particularly luxurious and exotic material: “It’s come from Asia, so it’s travelled thousands of miles. It’s an example of how precious they thought this object inside was,” he said. Although Bishop Hyguald may have been a prominent figure in Northumbrian ecclesiastical circles, church chronicles of the period are incomplete, partly because of the Viking invasions. Goldberg expressed excitement at finding the name. “So much of the past is anonymous, especially when you’re looking at very early history,” he said. “There are very few names to work with. But this is adding new information, building a much richer picture.” The rock crystal design resembles the capital of a Corinthian column, with carved lobes that look like foliage, he realised. “It’s almost a perfect model of a Corinthian column, but the scale is minute,” he said. There is the possibility that this jar still bears trace elements of the potion it once held and that its precise chemicals can be revealed. Goldberg said: “The type of liquid that we would expect would be something very exotic, perhaps a perfume from the Orient, something’s that’s travelled in the same way that the silk has. There were certain types of exotic oil that were used in anointing kings and ecclesiastical ceremonies.” Ninety-seven of the hoard’s artefacts are included in a touring exhibition, titled The Galloway hoard: Viking-age treasure. It is at Kirkcudbright Galleries, near the site of its discovery, until 10 July, transferring to Aberdeen Art Gallery from 30 July to 23 October. The jar is undergoing final work but, from Monday, a new film and digital model will be featured.Aston Villa face Burnley with a new lease of life with Steven Gerrard in the dugout. The sample size is still small but four wins out of six compared to five defeats in succession before his arrival is undeniably outstanding and has led to Villa moving up to 10th. Phasing out Danny Ings, the usual injury problems making that decision easier, for last season’s driving force Ollie Watkins appears to be working well. Sean Dyche will naturally be concerned by their uptick in form but he can count on his stalwarts to block and batter the opposition. Dyche’s biggest problem is focal attacking point Maxwel Cornet looking likely to miss another game through injury. No Cornet signals little threat and a chance for the Gerrard regeneration to gain further momentum. Graham Searles Saturday 3pm Venue Villa Park Last season Aston Villa 0 Burnley 0 Referee Andrew Madley This season G8 Y14 R2 2.25 cards/game Odds H 3-4 A 4-1 D 3-1 ASTON VILLA Subs from Archer, Hause, Bogarde, Tuanzebe, Ings, Young, Marshall, Philogene-Bidace, Trezeguet, Iroegbunam Doubtful None Injured Traoré (hamstring, Jan), Bailey (hamstring, unknown), Nakamba (knee, unknown), Sanson (Covid-19), Steer (Covid-19), El Ghazi (Covid-19) Suspended None Discipline Y35 R1 Form WWLWLW Leading scorer Watkins 5 BURNLEY Subs from Hennessey, Norris, Pieters, Bardsley, Thomas, Lennon, Long, Rodriguez, Cork, Collins, Vydra Doubtful Cornet (hamstring) Injured Barnes (hamstring, unknown), Roberts (illness, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y34 R0 Form WDDDLD Leading scorer Cornet 5Across 8 Disraeli 1/LEAR’S/ID (rev) 9 quartz quarts (hom) 10 catholic C  OLIC 11 abjure A/B(ook) + JU(ne/ly) + RE(ad) 12 non-intervention NON + IN  VENTION 15 thanx THAN/X(vote) 16 boxer BO  ER 20 supplementarily SUPPLE/MEN/TAR(d)ILY 21 zenith ZEN/(w)ITH 23 reabsorb RE(d)/ABS/ORB 25 legato LEG/AT/O 26 finances FI  OOK 14 theorising THE/O(ld) + RISING 17 Nureyev RUN(rev)/EYE/V(ery) 18 wear off WE/AR(e) + OFF 19 clerked CLE(aner/wo)RKED [deleting letters 4 to 9] 22 Iraq I  Q 24 Ainu A(rea)/IN/(honsh)U &amp;LitExhibition of the week Anish Kapoor Explosions of colour and intimations of horror: the paintings of a great sculptor who’s not afraid to try something totally new. • Modern Art Oxford until 13 Feb Also showing Louis Wain This witty cartoonist who loved cats also adored Christmas. The exhibition at the hospital where he spent much of his later life is a moving seasonal treat. • Bethlem Museum of the Mind, Beckenham, until 14 April More! Oliver Twist, Dickens and Stories of the City The atmosphere of Charles Dickens’s world, including his love of Christmas, is well preserved at this museum whose current exhibition celebrates one of his most enduring heroes. • Dickens Museum, London, until 14 March Sickert A Christmas ghost story of sorts - the spooky Edwardian music halls of this brilliantly uneasy painter chill you nicely on a dark day. • Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, until 27 February Anicka Yi Kids in the holidays may be diverted by Yi’s floating alien entities wafting curious perfumes in the Tate Turbine Hall. • Tate Modern,London, until 6 February Image of the week A rare photograph of the Rossetti family, including poet Christina and painter Dante Gabriel, taken by Alice in Wonderland author Lewis Carroll, came to auction at Bonhams. What we learned New York’s Met museum is to remove the Sackler family’s name from its galleries The digital artist behind Instagram’s @metaverse has the account unfrozen by Facebook A new exhibition celebrates the Benton End art colony, which nurtured Maggi Hambling and Lucian Freud … … and A House for Artists was unveiled in east London, offering affordable rental flats to 12 families The radical innovations of Hokusai’s Great Picture Book of Everything went on show at the British Museum Banksy has designed T-shirts to support alleged slaver-topplers the Colston Four Bridget Riley at 90 is still fresh and vital A Robert Capa photo of the Spanish civil war now hangs alongside Picasso’s Guernica in Madrid The Portrait of Britain award winners showed off the changing faces of Britain Renaissance Tuscany is back on the map at Florence’s Uffizi gallery Furniture design meets film noir with Martin Reznik The craze for NFTs, turning digital images into tradable assets, now adds up to a $22bn market Masterpiece of the week Studio of Bernardo Daddi: The Nativity, c 1340-80 The relationship between mother and child is central to this medieval Nativity, not the various gangs of men whose visits to the stable dominate so many seasonal paintings. Mary stands, her statuesque nobility striking, as she raises the infant towards her. Tiny angels pray beneath her and loyal beasts attend the newborn. This powerfully intimate scene is surrounded by glitter and gold. It marks a new age in art when Italian painters, inspired by Giotto, were dramatising human relationships with unprecedented intensity. Earlier depictions of the Nativity in Byzantium and Europe show Mary lying down. Here she gets up to play her starring role in the story. • Wallace Collection, London Don’t forget To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. Sign up to the Art Weekly newsletter If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here. Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comThe year’s best film is a western, based on a novel from the 1960s when the western was a more accepted and popular genre than it is now. But it modifies that genre, creating something more elusive and unmanageable: western psychodrama? Western gothic? And it tackles issues around sexual politics, toxic masculinity and family dysfunction in a very contemporary way. The Power of the Dog is Jane Campion’s first feature film in more than a decade, the last 10 years having been mostly taken up with her hit streaming-TV series, Top of the Lake, with Elisabeth Moss. Maybe that project influenced the element of murder mystery in this latest film, whose title is taken from Psalms 22:20: “Deliver my soul from the sword, my precious life from the power of the dog!” Benedict Cumberbatch and Jesse Plemons play two brothers, Phil and George, who run a cattle ranch in 1920s Montana. Phil is a sweaty roughneck: an instinctive and vicious bully who calls his brother “fatso”, encourages the ranch-hands to mock him and jeers at George’s pretensions to fancy clothes and hats. In his self-important and self-congratulatory way, Phil is obsessed with the fact he is the one with the hands-on, practical know-how to make the ranch work, unlike his milksop brother, because he learned these skills from a veteran rancher, now dead, called Bronco Henry. But Phil is also repressed and utterly reliant on George emotionally: the two men share a bedroom in their large house like little kids. But which of these two is putting on airs? Who is putting on the act? The two brothers come from money: their rich, sophisticated and politically well-connected parents staked them in the business. There is an excruciating scene when the elderly couple come for dinner: George insists on dressing up in a tux. But Phil embarrasses everyone by showing up sweaty and dirty. The existing tensions between the brothers explode into the open when George reveals to Phil that he has got married, to Rose (Kirsten Dunst), the widow who runs the cafe in town and whose sensitive teenage son Peter (Kodi Smit-McPhee) is now to be George’s stepson and heir. Rose is going to move in as the mistress of the house and Phil, sensing the imminent diminishing in his own status, subjects Rose to a hateful campaign of harassment and makes Peter the subject of homophobic bullying. But then a strange turnaround takes place: he makes friends with young Peter and declares he will take him riding in the remote hills where he will school him in the ways of ranching and being a man – the way Bronco Henry schooled him. Cumberbatch makes Phil a vivid and horrible monster, all the more disquieting for his flashes of intelligence and cunning. When Rose brings her piano into the big house (an irresistible echo of the earlier Campion classic) and attempts to play Strauss’s Radetzky March on it, Phil mischievously joins in on his five-string banjo, putting poor Rose off her stroke and revealing that he is, in fact, rather more musically talented than she is. But Smit-McPhee’s performance as Peter matches him in presence and potency, and the story doesn’t at all go where you think. It is a movie with lethal bite.Stories from the NHS frontline don’t make for obviously festive listening, especially given the current state of Britain’s hospitals. But make an exception for Adam Kay, a former doctor of obstetrics and gynaecology, as his stories are quite the ride. Twas the Nightshift Before Christmas is the seasonal follow-up to This Is Going to Hurt, Kay’s megaselling debut that cemented his status as a comic writer par excellence and thorn in the side of the Department of Health. Spanning 2004 to 2010, it features diarised dispatches from the sharp end of healthcare over the festive period. To spare their blushes, patients are referenced by their initials, which is just as well for the woman who visited A&amp;E to have a Mars bar wrapper removed from her vagina, used in place of a condom, or for the man who turned himself into “the human equivalent of a Ryvita” after dressing up as a Christmas turkey and wrapping himself in tinfoil. Elsewhere, a woman discovers she has a nut allergy after using peanut butter as a lubricant. Kay is the narrator, and deploys the same smart comic timing and amusingly long-suffering tone that have made his live readings such a hit. Yet it’s the moments of seriousness that really elevate this recording, such as his recollections of performing a termination for a woman whose heart condition meant she wouldn’t survive the pregnancy. “I feel it in my soul,” he says. “There are things they never tell you about when you apply to this specialty. They couldn’t. You’d run a mile.” • Twas the Nightshift Before Christmas is available from Picador, 2hr 20min. The best of the rest Christmas Days: 12 Stories and 12 Feasts for 12 Days Jeanette Winterson, Audible, 9hr 8min A miscellany of short stories, with interspersed recipes, read by the author and Imogen Church. The Christmas Bookshop Jenny Colgan, Hachette Audio, 11hr 24min A cosy winter warmer of a tale in which a woman tries to turn around a failing Edinburgh bookshop. Eilidh Beaton narrates.The dining year began somewhat hopelessly: shutters down, tables up. There were times during February 2021, which seemed to last at least 77 days, when I wondered if Britain would ever eat, drink and be merry again. Before my mother’s sparse, heavily restricted cremation, my brother and I kicked about an idea of holding an illegal wake at the drive-thru McDonald’s just off junction 44 of the M6. It was the only place open and serving, and besides, Mam always enjoyed a cheeseburger and fries more than anywhere fancy we took her. We didn’t, in the end, because breaking the rules on mourning wouldn’t have been fair. If strangers had passed by and spotted us in a car park, all dressed in black and holding Big Macs and strawberry milkshakes, they might have said, “Why didn’t we think of that?” and been rightfully furious. This all feels ridiculous now, though; all those wasted, bright, spring days, sat indoors, far from loved ones, doing practically nothing. I’d make an entire morning out of visiting a baker just to smell the fresh baguettes or perhaps choose some elaborate biscuits, before the slow trudge back home for more house arrest. Restaurants and cafes have always been a hobby, a passion, but now that they were closed, I realised that they were more vital for my sanity than I’d ever figured. On 12 April, in England at least, we were permitted to engage in outdoor dining, so I booked in for breakfast at the Corinthia in London with my friend Hugh, which was the fanciest-schmanciest way to eat scrambled eggs on a patio possible. If I’m honest, the whole eating outdoors era of 2021, which lasted all the way until June, took a lot of Pollyanna-level positivity. “I’m so grateful to be out of the house!” I’d think while dining in a repurposed loading bay as gale-force winds attacked the hastily assembled gazebo. Alto at Selfridges was chic and Sicilian, but, let’s be honest, it was still on an Oxford Street rooftop. At the Alma in Crystal Palace, I ate the Korean cauliflower weekly, sitting in the pub’s Noah’s ark-style extension that provided refuge for half of SE19. Another issue that started to raise its head in restaurants around this same time was staffing. Many focused, dedicated, instinctively brilliant hospitality staff had quit the business over lockdown, leaving gaps to be filled by people who had never before carried a plate or mixed a cocktail. Chaos was common, so much so that at times it seemed advisable even to bring your own loo paper. A sense of order began seeping back into the life of this particular restaurant critic only some time around early summer, when lunches at Henrock in Windermere and the Barn at Moor Hall in Lancashire reminded me why Britain is so good at fine dining. A solo Saturday in Hexham, before a book festival, led me to dinner at the Beaumont hotel and a plate of charred mackerel, gooseberry and samphire that alone made the 600-mile round-trip worth it. Honourable mentions for restoring my joie de vivre this year also go to an afternoon spent on the Cheese Barge, eating course after course of fromage in a boat on the Paddington Basin, and to Heritage in Dulwich – modern Indian in an ornate but still hearty manner – where dinner led to an ongoing pining for its shatkora jhinga king prawns and black lentil dal makhani. This was also when things suddenly began to feel wildly positive. It seemed that the worst of times was behind me, so I donated a mountain of flour, pasta and tinned beans, via Olio, to people less cosseted than myself. A balmy summer Saturday on the patio at Adam Handling’s The Loch &amp; Tyne in Old Windsor was utterly perfect: we ate tattie scones with melted blue cheese and gingerbread trifle, and drank cocktails made with Irn-Bru, then drove home listening to loud Deacon Blue and Big Country. Special mentions this year should also go to new noodle chain Marugame Udon, which taught me the joys of tempura egg, kakiage and the £3.45 kamaage (AKA plain, slippery udon dipped in a smoky fish dashi). And to Sessions Arts Club in Clerkenwell, where Florence Knight’s food shot it directly into the top three places I send people seeking an exciting London dining experience that won’t feel stuffy, seen-it-before or simply a rip-off. Cafe Cecilia in Hackney is similarly cool and delicious, but you’ve got more chance of getting in to see Pope Francis for a quick chinwag than scoring a table there before next Easter. As I write this, I worry that we’re again slipping towards the dark days of midwinter restrictions. Each time I sit in a busy dining room, full of laughter and chatter, I wonder whether we’re very quietly back on the brink of forced closures, rules of six and “let’s all eat in the car park”. And of “let’s have a wake in a McDonald’s drive-thru with double nuggets and a McFlurry with Smarties”. But, actually, let’s not, because the rules say we can’t, and it would be rude to other sad people to break them. It’s been a hell of a year in more ways than one. Next year, though, I have literally no idea what’s on the menu. • Episode nine of the second series of Grace’s Comfort Eating podcast is released on 21 December. Listen here or wherever you get your podcasts. • This article was amended on 18 December 2021. The Cheese Barge is at Paddington Basin, not Wapping Basin as an earlier version said.This list is compiled by the Guardian film team, with all films released in the US during 2021 in contention. Check in every weekday to see our next picks, and please share your own favourite films of 2021 in the comments below. 50 The First Wave Overwhelmingly emotional documentary shot inside a New York hospital at the start of the Covid pandemic, a remarkable film that feels like it could become a time capsule. Read the full review. 49 Sabaya Extraordinary film that follows a team of volunteers as they infiltrate the dangerous al-Hawl camp in Syria to liberate Yazidi women trafficked as sex slaves. Read the full review. 48 Worth Michael Keaton excels as the lawyer tasked with allocating funds for those who lost someone during the terrorist attacks in 2001, a story brought to the screen with sensitivity and care. Read the full review. 47 Boiling Point Dizzying single-take drama featuring a potent lead performance from Stephen Graham as a chef enduring a nightmarish evening. Read the full review. 46 Last Night in Soho Thomasin McKenzie, Anya Taylor-Joy and Matt Smith star in Edgar Wright’s horror-thriller that takes a trip to the sleazy heart of London’s past and toxic 60s glitz. Read the full review. 45 Titane Julia Ducournau’s follow-up to her smart 2016 debut, Raw, is a freaky Cronenbergian body-horror that facetiously explores identity with yucky flair. Read the full review. 44 State Funeral The eerie last rites of Stalin’s Soviet Union are enacted as massed mourners hail the dictator’s flower-clad body in a film that gives long-lost footage, assembled by In the Fog director Sergei Loznitsa, a new and unnerving lease of life. Read the full review. 43 Shiva Baby Writer-director Emma Seligman’s debut about a young woman running into her sugar daddy at a family event is an amusing, transparently personal piece, a black comedy festival of excruciating embarrassment. Read the full review. 42 C’mon C’mon Written and directed by Thumbsucker’s Mike Mills, this coming-of-age heartwarmer, shot in classy monochrome and starring Joaquin Phoenix, oozes prestige as it tackles weighty themes. Read the full review. 41 The Reason I Jump This documentary inspired by the bestselling book of the same title is an empathic study of nonverbal autism that takes us into the world of young neurodivergent people across the world. Read the full review. 40 New Order Director Michel Franco leaves no room for sympathy or redemption in this violent, cynical thriller, a brutally unforgiving attack on Mexico’s super-rich that delivers a vivid warning against the consequences of inequality. Read the full review. 39 Pig A familiar revenge thriller setup with Nicolas Cage hunting for a stolen animal turns into something quieter and stranger with an unusually restrained performance from its outsize star. Read the full review. 38 Annette Adam Driver and Marion Cotillard brim with nervous energy in this bizarre musical collaboration between Leos Carax and the Sparks brothers, which kicked off this year’s Cannes film festival. Read the full review. 37 Censor A woman working as a film censor in the 80s is shocked to discover a horror movie that recreates a traumatic incident from her childhood in Prano Bailey-Bond’s disturbing descent into video nastiness. Read the full review. 36 Never Gonna Snow Again A mysterious masseur visits a dysfunctional gated community in this absorbing fairytale from Polish film-maker Małgorzata Szumowska, resulting in a rich brew of strangeness in an unsettling vision of suburbia. Read the full review. 35 About Endlessness Swedish auteur Roy Andersson’s mesmerising odyssey to the heart of existence is a masterpiece of the human condition, ranging from the evils of war to the redemptive power of love. Read the full review. 34 The Velvet Underground Todd Haynes’ documentary about the celebrated art rockers, with insights from former members and friends, takes its job seriously and gets under the band’s skin. Read the full review. 33 House of Gucci True-crime fashion-house drama directed by Ridley Scott as a pantomimey soap following a stylish Lady Gaga, as Patrizia Reggiano, as she plots to kill her ex, Maurizio Gucci. Read the full review. 32 I Care a Lot Rosamund Pike is exquisitely nasty in J Blakeson’s toxic thriller, playing a black-hearted con artist who drains the bank accounts of well-off elderly patients after gaining legal guardianship of them. Read the full review. 31 The Tragedy of Macbeth Denzel Washington and Frances McDormand hit top form in Joel Coen’s austere, noirish reimagining of Shakespeare’s Scottish bloodbath. Read the full review. 30 Rose Plays Julie Uncanny and transgressive film from writer-directors Christine Molloy and Joe Lawlor about a young woman who tracks down her birth parents is the film-makers’ best work yet. Read the full review 29 Procession Robert Greene’s extraordinary documentary follows the stories of six men abused as children by Catholic priests in Kansas City with remarkable care and creativity. Read the full review. 28 tick, tick … BOOM! Lin-Manuel Miranda’s heartfelt tribute to Broadway features Andrew Garfield as Rent composer Jonathan Larson, in his early years, in a sugar rush of showbiz highs and lows. Read the full review. 27 The World to Come Katherine Waterston and Vanessa Kirby play two wives who fall in love amid the grinding exhaustion and violence of pioneer life in a tale of secret passions in frontier-era America. Read the full review. 26 The Killing of Two Lovers A humiliating marital breakdown triggers a riveting portrait of male rage in Robert Machoian’s thought-provoking thriller, starring Clayne Crawford and Sepideh Moafi. Read the full review. 25 The Worst Person in the World Joachim Trier’s captivating and witty study of a young Oslo woman struggling with who she is, and who she should be with, featured a fantastic breakout performance from Renate Reinsve, who was rightly rewarded with the best actress prize at Cannes. Read the full review 24 Bergman Island Mia Hansen-Løve’s ruminative drama, stars Vicky Krieps and Tim Roth as a film-maker couple who visit Fårö, the Swedish island where Ingmar Bergman famously lived and worked. 23 Identifying Features First-time director Fernanda Valadez conjures up a vision of real evil in her story of the horror and heartbreak faced by migrants into the US in Mexico’s borderlands. Read the full review. 22 Passing Rebecca Hall’s directing debut is a stylish and subtle study of racial identity, starring Tessa Thompson and Ruth Negga as friends who are both “passing” for what they are not, in an adaptation of Nella Larsen’s 1929 novel. Read the full review. 21 A Cop Movie Arresting Mexican docudrama from Alonso Ruizpalacios that starts off as an addictive cop show, breaks the fourth wall and then rebuilds it in a film bristling with ideas. Read the full review. 20 Red Rocket Sean Baker’s follow-up to Tangerine and The Florida Project is a vivid study of a washed-up porn star, another lo-fi comedy about lives at the margin of US society. Read the full review. 19 Limbo Heart-rending portrait of refugees stranded in Scotland that announces Ben Sharrock as a master of atmospheric film-making, in a stirring drama about a Syrian migrant. Read the full review. 18 Summer of Soul Questlove’s magnificent documentary of the forgotten 1969 Harlem cultural festival gives moving context to rediscovered footage of Stevie Wonder, Mahalia Jackson, Nina Simone et al. Read the full review. 17 Getting Away With Murder(s) David Nicholas Wilkinson’s epic investigation into the Nazis who escaped a postwar reckoning is a powerful call for Holocaust justice and lays out the difficulty of prosecuting a technocratic atrocity. Read the full review. 16 Quo Vadis, Aida? Through the eyes of a translator moving between the different ethnic factions, director Jasmila Žbanić musters real tragic power and clear-eyed compassion revisiting the Srebrenica massacre 25 years on. Read the full review. 15 No Time to Die The long-awaited 25th outing for Ian Fleming’s superspy James Bond has Daniel Craig saying goodbye to 007 in a weird and self-aware epic with audacious surprises up its sleeve. Read the full review. 14 The French Dispatch Wes Anderson’s ode to print journalism has amazing visuals, lots of laughs and an A-list cast – including Bill Murray – making it a real treat. Read the full review. 13 The Souvenir Part II Joanna Hogg’s autobiographical study of a young film-maker is less detached, more emotionally engaging, as we enter Julie’s world for a second time in a superb sequel. Read the full review. 12 Mass Excruciating drama deals with a school shooting’s aftermath as two sets of parents meet up years after the devastating tragedy, in a difficult and impeccably acted film about forgiveness and blame. Read the full review. 11 = West Side Story Steven Spielberg’s thrilling remake of Stephen Sondheim’s Romeo &amp; Juliet-inspired musical delivered smart, subtle updates as well as a pitch perfect cast of diverse actors singing and dancing memorable songs back into the multiplex. Read the full review. 11 = Belfast Kenneth Branagh’s euphoric eulogy to his home city stars Jamie Dornan and Judi Dench in a scintillating Troubles-era coming-of-age tale in which nightmarishness meets nostalgia. Read the full review. 10 The Lost Daughter Maggie Gyllenhaal’s accomplished directing debut makes humid, sensual cinema of Elena Ferrante’s psychodrama of a novel, and boasts a superb central performance from Olivia Colman. Read more. 9 Azor Unnervingly subtle drama from Andreas Fontana, about a Swiss private banker visiting clients in Argentina during the period of the military junta and “disappearances”. Read more. 8 The Humans Stephen Karam’s Tony-winning play makes the leap to film with ease. A masterly drama that is an extraordinarily well- acted, uncomfortably intimate look at a family at Thanksgiving. Read more. 7 Licorice Pizza Paul Thomas Anderson’s funniest and most relaxed film yet, a romance about a teenage boy wooing an older woman starring two extraordinary newcomers and stuffed with fabulously hammy A-list cameos. Read more. 6 Dune Denis Villeneuve’s awe-inspiring take on the sci-fi classic starring Timothée Chalamet, Oscar Isaac and Zendaya has been given room to breathe, creating a colossal spectacle and an epic triumph. Read more. 5 Flee Thrilling documentary made with a blend of animation and archive footage tells an immensely powerful tale of a gay Afghan survivor, a remarkable story with heart and audacity. Read more 4 Drive My Car Ryûsuke Hamaguchi reaches a new grandeur with this engrossing adaptation of a Haruki Murakami short story about a theatre director grappling with Chekhov and his wife’s infidelity. Read more. 3 Petite Maman A spellbinding ghost story from Portrait of a Lady on Fire’s Céline Sciamma. A girl meets her mother as a child in the woods in a moving tale of memory, friendship and family. Read more. 2 The Green Knight Dev Patel rides high in the director David Lowery’s sublimely beautiful quest, which conjures up visual wonders and metaphysical mysteries from the anonymously authored 14th-century chivalric poem Sir Gawain and the Green Knight. Read more. 1 The Power of the Dog Jane Campion’s superb gothic western is a mysterious and menacing psychodrama about two warring brothers (Benedict Cumberbatch and Jesse Plemons) on a ranch in 20s Montana. Read more.Monday “How are things over there? It’s mad over here.” Until recently that line, delivered by people in the UK to people in the US, gave rise to some smugness among the Americans. During late summer and autumn, the pendulum of who was having a better pandemic had swung firmly towards those in the UK. Enviously, we in New York looked across the Atlantic to British kids sitting unmasked at school, at indoor playdates and parties, and at the conviction, voiced by many in Britain, that everything was more or less back to normal. Now you all seem to have Covid and Christmas is cancelled. No one here is talking about cancelling the holidays. Or at least, they weren’t. While infection rates in Britain hit all-time highs this week, the US in general, and New York in particular, are sufficiently behind the UK’s Omicron curve to preserve the Christmas period from the likelihood of shutdowns. This week, Omicron crept up to an estimated 13% of new cases in New York and New Jersey, but the positivity rate remained lower than in Britain. The first sign that things were changing here was last weekend. In the city, long lines for boosters appeared outside the mobile vaccine trucks. There’s one parked on the south-west corner of Central Park, outside a Christmas market popular with visitors and the queue went all the way down the block. By the beginning of this week, office parties in midtown were starting to be cancelled. A trickle of emails came in calling off events I hadn’t been intending to go to in the first place, on account of continuing problems with desocialisation. Broadway, latterly operating at full capacity, started shutting down shows. By midweek, the rate of positivity across New York state had surged by 40% in one day. And still the vibe in the city remains cheerful. In the eyes of most New Yorkers, our adherence to the rules has been sensibly cautious; by UK standards, it has been histrionic. New York’s instinctive catastrophist outlook at least forestalls disappointment. The advantage of never quite having unclenched, is that even as the numbers shoot up, not much in the way of adjustment is required. Tuesday My kids know the story of Hanukkah from school but they wouldn’t know the nativity if it stood up in their soup. I can’t understand how this came about; American public schools are supposed to be stripped of all religion and every December, there’s low-level tension in New York about whether the Christians are sneaking Christmas into schools via the backdoor, that is through crafty pictures of Santa to colour in, in art. I’m not fussed about who wins that particular fight. Ideally, however, I would like someone else to explain the miracle of Jesus to my kids, just so they have it for reference. No one does, however, so needs must. “What are we celebrating on Christmas?” I ask them. “God’s birthday,” says one, and I’m taken aback. “That’s right! Actually Jesus’s birthday, but he’s God’s son and ... our Lord, so technically it’s the same thing.” We pause to digest this. Then I have a crack at Mary and Joseph and the flight to Bethlehem, grope to remember what happened with Herod and the census, overlook the Three Wise Men and have to go back for them, and do a bad job with the immaculate conception. “Did God plant the seed?” says a child, confirming that I’ve leaned too hard on plant analogies. “Something like that, anyway it was a miracle, we don’t need to dwell on the details.” Wednesday The real holy trinity, Carrie, Charlotte and Miranda – light of one fallen angel – are brunching in the bar at the Whitney, downtown. I was never head-over-heels with the original Sex and the City. When I first arrived in New York, I watched a million reruns and found the show cheerful and soothing. I also found it infused, here and there, with the animating force of so much of the fashion industry, that combination of fetishisation and contempt. The reboot, And Just Like That, takes this tone to absurd extremes. It’s not merely that the three women appear to have woken collectively from a coma they went into in 1973. The rendition of the city itself is bizarre. In this version, New York is a place in which straight people are prudes, non-straight people talk exclusively about sex and smoke weed in elevators, and fiftysomething women haven’t heard of podcasts. Carrie and Big appear to live opposite the News Corp building in a part of town most pigeons would hesitate to occupy. Miranda’s grey hair is a topic of conversation but no one mentions what Charlotte’s done to her face. Carrie has, apparently, never said the word “masturbation” out loud. Miranda is relearning how to talk. It’s dumb, and infantilising, and more than that seems actively to despise its own characters. The actors are so familiar that some of the old warmth still shines through, but Michael Patrick King seems to be apologising for these women who had the temerity, 15 years ago, to have lunch and talk about their lives. As a self-contained world, the original Sex and the City was no more closed off than Breaking Bad, or Succession for that matter, but of course, as Lena Dunham discovered a decade later, shows led by women are held to different standards. There is one, touching Norman Maine moment in the first episode, in which Chris Noth stops Carrie on her way out the door. “I’m just looking at you,” he says, a moment I found genuinely touching, before the conversation around Noth changed. Incidentally, Big’s character alone is permitted to be rakish and chill and as devil-may-care as he ever was, suffering no need to apologise or reform. Wonder why. Thursday Enough has been said about the profile of Jeremy Strong in the New Yorker to confirm that, after years of puffery towards actors in the press, no one knows what a real hatchet job is any more. Strong sounds like a lovely man who might benefit from watching Ian McKellen explaining, to Ricky Gervais in that episode of Extras, how he acts. (“I imagined what it would be like to be a wizard, and then I pretended, and acted, in that way, on the day. And how did I know what to say? The words were written down for me in a script.”). Anyway, as anyone who is paying attention knows, the real virtuoso of that show is Matthew Macfadyen. Friday Some good news at last. If you have been following the story of the Fox News Christmas tree, cruelly set alight last week in a literal enaction of the War on Christmas, you’ll be happy to know the cable news network has found a replacement. Last week, Fox ran rolling news on the unfolding tree fire as if it were rockets over Falluja not a burning fir on Sixth Avenue. Now, a new tree stands proudly outside the News Corp building, on what hacks of insufficient seniority to score an invite to the tree lighting refer to as Forecourt of the Damned. Across the street, Carrie must’ve had a perfect view.Christiane Taubira, the former justice minister and leading figure on the French left, has said she is considering running for president in the spring and will announce a final decision next month. In a video posted on social media she promised to “use all my strength” to unite the divided left. Taubira’s supporters had for months been calling on her to run to be France’s first Black female president to counter the rise of the far right. Taubira introduced same-sex marriage in 2013, in the face of street demonstrations and heated debates in parliament, when she served in as justice minister for the Socialist government under François Hollande. She is also well-known for being the driving force behind the 2001 law recognising the slave trade as a crime against humanity. Taubira, who was first elected to the National Assembly as an independent member of parliament in 1993, has been described by the professor of political science Rémi Lefebvre as “the moral conscience of the left”. A recent poll by L’Obs magazine found she was the preferred candidate of voters on the left – even before it was clear she might run. The same L’Obs poll found that 86% of leftwing sympathisers would like one single candidate to stand for a united left. Currently the French left is divided into many different candidates and shown in current opinion polls as unable to reach the final run-off next April, which is forecast to feature Emmanuel Macron facing a candidate from either the right or the far right. In her video, Taubira said: “I won’t be just one more candidate”, suggesting that between now and mid-January she would be part of efforts to bring together rival leftwing candidates before announcing a final strategy. She said she could see the current “deadlock” on the left and had always promised to take responsibility, which meant she was considering launching her own presidential bid. She said what counted were the daily lives of voters and ensuring French people could live together. She said people were facing daily difficulties, and uncertainty about their future and there was “fragmentation at work in French society”. She said it was important to “reinforce social cohesion without excluding anyone” and to act on the climate. The French left has never fielded so many different presidential candidates at this stage of the race. They include the Socialist mayor of Paris, Anne Hidalgo; the Greens’ Yannick Jadot; Jean-Luc Mélenchon of La France Insoumise, who has a more left-wing programme than the Socialist party; and the Communist party’s Fabien Roussel. All have so far refused Hidalgo’s plea to unite and submit to a citizens’ primary vote in January to chose the best-placed single candidate. Apart from Hidalgo, all candidates insist they will still run separate campaigns, despite opinion polls currently placing each of them at no more than 10% and unable to reach the final. The difficulties on the left have been heightened by the rise in support for the far right. The combined leftwing candidates currently account for a total of only 24–29% in April’s first round vote. Meanwhile, the far right is becoming the country’s strongest force and has taken working-class voters from the left. Polls show the far right currently has at least 30% support, with two major candidates. The historic far-right figure Marine Le Pen is running for the third time, but she has competition from the high-profile, far-right TV pundit Éric Zemmour, who has convictions for inciting racial hatred, and who has launched an outsider presidential bid, warning immigration and Islam will destroy France. Taubira, from Cayenne in French Guiana, has been praised on the left for her charisma, her oration in parliament and her pithy TV debates. Her supporters in Paris this weekend said they felt she would be a good opponent against the TV polemicist, Zemmour, who the Socialist Hidalgo has likened to a “merchant of hatred”. Taubira first ran for president 20 years ago, in 2002, where she took just over 2% of the vote in the first round. That election was a historic moment in French politics where the far-right Jean-Marie Le Pen made it to the final round run-off against the right’s Jacques Chirac. An OpinionWay poll earlier this week – when it was not known whether Taubira would run or whether others on the left might make way for her – placed her at 2% in the first round next April. Last month, Taubira told a French TV show: “I refuse to accept that the presidential election is lost for the left”. She felt the left was the only means to “re-establish social justice” in France, build a form of “living together” and deal with the climate emergency.Thomas Schreiber spent the morning of 7 April visiting his father’s grave – it was the eighth anniversary of his death – and in the afternoon worked on an abstract painting while downing gin and tonics. Art was Schreiber’s passion, firing his imagination and soothing his mind. Drinking regularly and heavily was another mechanism for trying to keep despair at bay. As the day wore on, Schreiber left his makeshift studio in the snooker room at Moorhill, the Dorset mansion he was sharing with his mother, Anne Schreiber, and her partner, the wealthy landowner and hotelier Sir Richard Sutton, and appeared in their part of the house. The mood was horribly tense. For almost 20 years since his parents split and Anne moved in with Sutton, Schreiber had seethed at the relationship. He felt the couple had neglected his late father, David, and believed his sisters, Rose and Louisa, were the favourites. Schreiber also resented his reliance on Sutton’s money – he had never settled on a “proper” career – and believed his family did not take his art seriously. To make an ugly situation worse, the three had been locked down together during the Covid pandemic. Schreiber felt trapped, later telling a psychiatrist that lockdown was a “full frontal” attack on his mental health. Quite what ignited the explosion of violence may never be known. Anne Schreiber has fleeting memories, Sutton did not live to tell the tale and the account Schreiber gave cannot be trusted. But piecing together the evidence of blood stains, trails and broken glass, the best bet is that a drunken Schreiber attacked Sutton in his study, glassing him the face with a whisky tumbler. He then went into the kitchen, grabbed a knife and stabbed his mother repeatedly. She was so brutalised that she looked as if she had been in a road crash and was left paralysed. Sutton tried to raise the alarm but Schreiber pursued him upstairs, where he finished him off. The smouldering buildup to the attack appears to have begun in Schreiber’s teenage years when his family lived in a farmhouse in the Dorset village of Stalbridge Weston, nine miles from Moorhill. Anne Schreiber is a physiotherapist originally from Denmark, and her ex-husband David was a translator. David was charismatic and theatrical but a problem drinker. He was known for discharging guns drunkenly outside the farmhouse and often threatened to kill himself. But Schreiber doted on him and was devastated at the collapse of his parents’ marriage in 2002 when he was 16. At about the same time, Sutton’s relationship with his wife, Lady Fiamma Sutton, broke down. The Sutton family, whose ancestry can be traced to the time of William the Conquerer, is hugely rich, owning thousands of acres of farmland in the UK and the US as well as London hotels including The Athenaeum. The Schreibers and Suttons were friends but Thomas was taken aback when his mother revealed that she – and her children – were to move into Sutton’s mansion. “I didn’t know what was going on,” Schreiber said. “I didn’t know if my mother was in love with this man.” Schreiber did not stick around. In his late teens he went to school and college in Denmark before studying music technology in London. He DJ’d and collected vinyl records, flitting from job to job in the capital. Back in Dorset, David Schreiber’s drinking worsened. Sutton suggested he could move into Moorhill if he agreed to go into rehab. David refused and in 2013 died, suffering from a chronic memory disorder caused by his alcohol misuse. Schreiber felt Sutton and the rest of his family had not done enough for his father. His hatred and jealousy deepened, though Sutton was generous, giving him £100,000 and a £1,000-a-month allowance, hoping this would help him become independent. In 2016, Schreiber moved to Australia with his then girlfriend but they split up and in January 2019 he was back in the UK and moved into Moorhill. He was supposed to spend only a few weeks there but became a permanent, angry fixture. In March 2019, he went to see a therapist, who found him a deeply hurt man, a “lost child” who felt abandoned by his parents and financially imprisoned by Sutton, his problems exacerbated by alcohol. Schreiber could be physically aggressive to his family. In the summer of 2019, he punched his mother, possibly after she said he was a drunk, like his father, and a leech. Still, he stayed put and when Covid hit he was marooned, locked down with Sutton and Anne. Schreiber began to tell friends that he planned to take revenge on Sutton and his “gold-digging” mother. By the start of 2021, he was thinking about murder day and night. “I want them to suffer,” he said. In the witness box during his trial, Schreiber claimed that on 7 April a voice told him: “Attack, attack, attack.” Afterwards, Schreiber jumped into Sutton’s Range Rover. He rang friends and family to tell them he planned to take his own life. Instead he drove to London, chased by the police at speeds of up to 135mph, until officers carried out a “hard stop”. When armed police smashed their way into Moorhill they found the bloodbath he had left behind.With the booster programme at full tilt across the UK, immunity against Covid is rising – so it is perhaps not surprising that the concern shown by experts over the steep rise in Omicron infections has left some bemused. For while the new variant is believed to dodge Covid vaccines to some degree, it is thought the jabs still offer good protection against severe disease – particularly after a booster. And greater levels of immunity mean a lower ratio of hospitalisations to cases – something we have seen before in the UK, where about 22% of cases in those aged 65 and older ended up in hospital in early 2021, when Alpha was dominant but few had received a vaccine, compared with about 6% after the vaccine rollout was well under way. In other words, even if the disease caused by Omicron is not inherently less severe than previous variants – something that remains unclear – most people will experience only mild symptoms thanks to their immune response either from vaccination, prior infection or both. But this is not about individuals. This is about the population. In most regions of the UK, Omicron infections are doubling more quickly than every two days, with Dr Susan Hopkins, thechief medical adviser for the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), noting infections could reach 1m a day by the end of the month. While it is not yet clear what the ratio of hospitalisations to cases will be with Omicron, no vaccine offers 100% protection, meaning a proportion of those infected will still end up in hospital, while many have yet to receive all of their doses of the jabs. And, as many experts have pointed out, even a small proportion of a very large number is still a large number. The point was made last week by Hopkins after data was released by the UKHSA showing two doses of a Covid vaccine offered far less protection against symptomatic infection with Omicron than Delta. “The biggest worry is that if we have very high numbers of people getting infected at the same time, with the doubling rate that we’re seeing at the moment, then it will find all those people who had less immune responses, or those people who have yet to get their booster dose, or have not been vaccinated yet, remembering there are still significant numbers of people in the population – more than 5 million in England – who have not yet received a single dose of vaccine,” she told journalists. A large wave of Covid hospitalisations would, on its own, be a big problem for the NHS but that is not the only concern – as Prof Chris Whitty has pointed out, the NHS itself will be affected by Omicron through staff sickness and isolation. “So you’re going to have both a reduction in supply and an increase in demand in the health service over a very short time period, and that really is the reason why we’re all taking this extremely seriously,” England’s chief medical officer told MPs on Thursday. With the UK now breaking records every day for the number of reported cases, the question is not whether hospitalisations will rise, but for how long can the NHS cope?It has been two years since Boris Johnson shattered Labour’s “red wall” of northern seats to secure the Conservative party’s biggest majority since Margaret Thatcher’s 1987 victory. But while the prime minister was lauded by the Tory faithful in the months after that result, and was helped by a successful vaccine programme to weather questions about the government’s handling of the Covid pandemic, a succession of sometimes self-inflicted reversals has put his position in peril. Chesham and Amersham byelection (17 June) Alarm was triggered at Conservative HQ after the Liberal Democrats pulled off an extraordinary byelection victory in what had been considered the ultra-safe Tory seat of Chesham and Amersham, in Buckinghamshire. Johnson was immediately under pressure to rethink planning changes in Tory heartlands, which were partly blamed for the shock defeat. Owen Paterson and sleaze (4 November) Johnson performed a screeching U-turn after MPs were initially instructed to vote to block the suspension of the then Tory MP Owen Paterson. A report that found a Conservative former cabinet minister broke lobbying rules was later approved, but the affair provoked fury among Tory backbenchers and put a spotlight on the wider question of sleaze, which continues to shine brightly. Jennifer Arcuri (20 November) A fresh inquiry has opened into Johnson’s relationship with the tech entrepreneur Jennifer Arcuri, after she agreed to help officials, paving the way for the prime minister to face a possible criminal investigation. Arcuri formally offered to allow the Greater London Authority (GLA) ethics watchdog to inspect extracts of her diary entries chronicling her affair with Johnson, and agreed to be questioned for the first time by investigators about the relationship. Peppa Piggate (22 November) Johnson was criticised by senior business leaders and Conservative MPs, and ridiculed by the opposition and the public, for a “rambling” speech to top industry figures in which he extensively praised Peppa Pig World, compared himself to Moses and imitated the noise of an accelerating car. The prime minister’s sprawling address to the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) was accused of lacking seriousness and professionalism. He lost his place during the speech and spent 20 seconds repeating “forgive me” as he shuffled pages. Christmas partygate (7 December) Johnson was facing accusations of lying after senior No 10 officials were filmed joking about a lockdown Christmas party that Downing Street says did not take place. It came after reports emerged of a party on 18 December 2020, at a time when Britain was subject to strict Covid measures, and Johnson told the House of Commons that “all guidance was followed completely in No 10”. His former press secretary Allegra Stratton resigned after she was shown in the footage laughing and joking with colleagues about a non-socially distanced wine and cheese party. Police inquiries are under way into a number of parties. The reignition of flatgate (9 December) After accusations earlier in the year of planning for donors to “secretly pay” for work on the No 11 Downing Street flat where Johnson lives with his family, the Electoral Commission ruled the Tory party broke electoral laws over the controversial funding. Johnson could face sanctions involving suspension from the House of Commons, as MPs piled pressure on the standards commissioner to investigate spending on his flat after a serious censure by the Electoral Commission. Johnson’s ethics adviser, Christopher Geidt, has demanded an explanation after the prime minister was accused of misleading him over the flat scandal, with sources suggesting Lord Geidt could resign if the answer does not satisfy him. Tory backbench Covid rebellion (14 December) Johnson was humiliated after 99 Conservative MPs voted against plans for vaccine certificates, despite surging infections and personal lobbying by the prime minister. Rightwing, libertarian MPs who have long been agitating, and who are unhappy with the ideological basis for Covid restrictions, were at the forefront of the rebellion, joined by others who were closer to the centre of the party. The prime minister had pleaded with the 1922 Committee of Tory backbenchers before what was by far the biggest rebellion of his premiership. North Shropshire byelection (16 December) Johnson is facing his most seriously backlash from Tory MPs after the Liberal Democrats clinched an extraordinary victory in the North Shropshire byelection with a 34% swing. The result, which was worse for the government than even pessimists at Conservative campaign headquarters had feared, led one senior backbencher, Roger Gale, to warn that Johnson must take personal blame for the result.Not a spider – and not a man – but the most powerful teenage kid in pop-culture history. Spider-Man is the lonely, sensitive, adolescent underdog whose high-school miseries and humiliations, combined with his secret superheroic triumphs, have been comic-book crack for generations of fascinated fans and a gateway drug to the Marvel world itself. He first appeared in Marvel Comics almost 60 years ago: the orphaned young science prodigy, Peter Parker, bitten by a radioactive spider at an educational exhibit. (Like Godzilla, Spider-Man is a product of the nuclear age.) He acquires the proportionate strength of a spider, a tingly “spider sense” for danger, and the ability to climb up walls. He designs his own body-hugging web-motif costume and web-shooting wrist modules and becomes a superhero, battling people such as the Green Goblin and Doctor Octopus. But he is somehow unable to reveal his secret to his high-school crush Mary Jane Watson and, as humble Parker, gets bullied by the high-school jock Flash Thompson who – ironically – fan-worships Spider-Man. So Spider-Man’s victories coexist with despair and depression: he fails to save his Uncle Ben, killed by a street criminal, and his entire superhero career is driven by that primal scene of failure and guilt – a Rosebud of wretchedness. Spider-Man is the arachnid Harry Potter (or is it truer to say that Potter is the humanoid Spidey?) and the new film, Spider-Man: No Way Home is now crushing the box office and crashing booking websites all over the UK. In these times of woe, it seems we want the established favourite: Spider-Man, in his wacky outfit, defying the laws of physics to swing through the big city on his super-strong web. Sometimes he’s a high-schooler, sometimes he’s a college student, or older, but always resets and reboots to his true teenage self. Spider-Man was invented by Stan Lee in 1962 to speak to Marvel’s surging new teen readership and first introduced to British fans with the UK’s Spider-Man Comics Weekly in 1973, spun off from The Mighty World of Marvel. For 40 years, Spider-Man was a potent brand favourite, with TV and video game spin-offs. But in the new century, movies took the Spider-Man legend to the next level: a trio of films from director Sam Raimi with the sleepy-eyed Tobey Maguire in the lead role, culminating in a much-loathed threequel, Spider-Man 3, in which the 32-year-old Maguire was obviously too old. Then there were the two reboot movies, starring the smart, gawky, more emotionally available Andrew Garfield – but Garfield was to become disenchanted with the grind of representing a corporate icon. And then another Brit, the fresh-faced Tom Holland, became a hit as Spider-Man as the hero joined the Marvel Cinematic Universe. An animation, Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse, was headspinningly witty and surreal. Why are billions of people so addicted to Spider-Man? Partly, it’s his superb and superbly illogical solution to the superheroic issue of flight. Superman can fly; Batman can’t (to use two examples from the rival DC comics franchise) but Spider-Man has somehow split the difference. By shooting his streams of super-strong web which splat hyper-adhesively against buildings, Spidey can swing like Tarzan high above the sidewalks. But wait. In reality, this would need a horizontal surface overhead (or conceivably a flag pole); just attaching the web to a vertical surface like a wall means that Spidey would hit the ground or the wall before the downswing was complete. It doesn’t make sense, which is why Spider-Man can only exist on the page or the screen. When a spectacular Broadway stage musical called Spider-Man: Turn Off The Dark was unveiled in 2010, with dire musical numbers from U2’s Bono and the Edge, it was an unspeakable disaster – at least partly because the “flying/swinging” scenes were so terrible. At one moment, Spider-Man flew off over the audiences towards the balcony and a wire malfunction meant that he just stopped (like the notorious picture of Boris Johnson with his union jacks) and dangled mortifyingly. The real world exposes the absurdity of Spider-Man’s web-borne defying of gravity. Then there’s that web-shooting technology itself. Is it all in the, erm, wrist action? It has exerted a terrible, inexplicable fascination for young male Spidey fans for 60 years. Poor lonely Peter Parker, deeply unlucky in love, obsessed with a certain young woman, but now endowed with the ability to shoot jets of sticky stuff using a controlled, convulsive movement of his wrist. Once you see the psychological subtext of Spider-Man’s webslinger heroics, it cannot be unseen. And in fact, part of the fascination of Spider-Man’s superpowers is that they somehow feel like histrionic enlargements or dramatisations of his existing weaknesses. And then of course there is also the question of identity, that issue which has a new relevance. Shy, cerebral Peter Parker is bullied by someone at school who idolises Spider-Man. And also Peter Parker makes a few bucks selling photos of Spider-Man in action to the irascible newspaper editor J Jonah Jameson (who in the later movies is to evolve into a gruesome Alex Jones shock-jock figure) and this media monster hates Spider-Man; is Spider-Man-phobic in fact. Some of the movies are about the issue of whether Spider-Man should “come out” as a superhero or keep his double-life a secret. This too has resonated with armies of young people all over the world. Spider-Man continues to have audiences enfolded in his sticky web.A girl of 17 and a woman of 43 have been arrested on suspicion of murder after the frozen body of a newborn baby was found at a house in Doncaster. The body, wrapped in a plastic shopping bag inside a freezer, was discovered by a neighbour, who alerted the police, according to local newspaper reports. The child was pronounced dead at the scene in Rossington. After calling police, the neighbour, Carol Hirst, 28, asked her partner, Darnell Jackson, to come to the property. “Straight away I could tell it was a dead baby,” Jackson said. He said he “felt physically sick” as he waited for the police to arrive. Temporary Supt Jamie Henderson, of South Yorkshire police, said: “This is an extremely tragic case and I know the local community, and those farther afield, will be very upset to hear about what has happened. At this time our investigation into the circumstances surrounding the baby’s death is in the very early stages and we ask the public not to speculate about the case.” Officers are appealing to anyone with information that could help with inquiries to call 101.The Sami, the only indigenous people left in Europe, have more than 100 different words for snow. From seaŋáš, a fluffy, grainy snow that moves easily, to tjaevi, flakes that stick together and are hard to dig, the names are based on its texture, depth, density, and the harsh conditions of the Arctic winter. But the Sami of Sápmi, who are traditionally fishers, trappers and reindeer herders, do not yet have a word for what they are seeing more often on the ground. “This new snow has no name,” said Lars-Anders Kuhmunen, a reindeer herder from Kiruna, Sweden’s northernmost town, near the Norwegian border. “I don’t know what it is. It is like early tjaevi, which normally comes in March. The winters are warmer now and there is rain, making the ground icy. The snow on top is very bad snow and the reindeer can’t dig for their food.” The Arctic is warming not twice as quickly as the rest of the world, as previously believed, but four times as fast, according to a paper published in Science this week. Sápmi, an area that stretches over parts of four countries – Sweden, Finland, Norway and Russia – and is hemmed by three seas, recorded its hottest temperature for more than a century in July this year, hitting 33.6C (92.5F) during a summer heatwave. Kuhmunen and other reindeer herders, who spend their days and often nights tending the herds scattered across vast tundras, are on the frontline of the climate crisis. Their reindeer, a semi-domestic species that has adapted to the harsh conditions of the polar region, are being pushed to the limit by the changes, they say. The animals use their shovel-like hooves to dig for lichen, their main winter food supply, as well as other plants that grow under the snow. But finding food is increasingly difficult. Warmer than average temperatures mean the snow that was semi-permanent throughout winter turns to rain, which in turn freezes on the ground, trapping lichen under the ice, so the animals cannot reach it. Thick snowfall, which also happens more often, adds to the problems by making it impossible for the animals to find the lichen by smell. These freeze-thaw and rain-on-snow events happen naturally in the Arctic, but they are happening more often and on a larger scale. There have been mass starvations of reindeer, in 2013-14 in Russia and in 2018-19 in Norway, and the herders have to go much farther afield in the past few years to find grazing ground. Kuhmunen, 43, a father of three, said the changing weather and shrinking grazing lands had made his job much harder. Speaking from the forest, six miles (10km) north of Kiruna, where he is following his herd, he said: “It’s hard to keep the herd together, so I have to work harder. They spread out more because they can’t find food. Now there are only four or five hours of daylight. When the polar darkness comes it will be harder.” He adds: “Reindeer are losing their habitat, because of logging and mines. My father’s generation used to go on skis to the reindeer. We use snowmobiles because the distances are greater. I worry about it every day.” The herding of reindeer is already threatened by human expansion, with forestry and mining activities moving into traditional grazing grounds. One study in Norway found that in the last century, undisturbed reindeer habitat had shrunk by 70%, including grazing lands flooded for hydroelectric dams. The climate challenges faced by the Sami – and the impact on their rights and livelihood – have been researched and documented by the Environmental Justice Foundation (EJF), one of four charities in the Guardian and Observer’s 2021 climate justice appeal, as part of an international effort to lobby politicians to take climate action. The Sami portraits, film and stories were used in exhibitions in the European parliament, the National Theatre in London, and the international art exhibition Venice Biennale, reaching hundreds of thousands of viewers and provoking far-reaching discussions on climate policy. Aslat Simma, 42, a herder and former chief of the Lainiovuoma tribe, said: “This is December. The temperature should be minus all the time. A normal winter has temperatures of -20 to -25C. Now the temperature can be zero or positive.” Increasing rainfall in the autumn also leaves the lichen full of water, making it less nutritious for the deer, he said. “We are living with nature and we are dependent on the weather and the reindeer for all we do. But the reindeer are using up all their energy trying to find grazing land and to dig. They are living on the edge of how an animal can adapt. When the changes in climate come so fast, they can’t adapt. They have already adapted so much.” Henrik Blind, a member of a herding family from the town of Jokkmokk, said: “When you live so close to a creature, you see the world through their eyes. You see how hard it is to live in these conditions. Everything is upside down. “Our livelihoods depend on a planet that is not on fire. We are an Arctic people and our culture is written in snow. But climate change means the snow will get less and less. “We must realise we can’t overconsume our planet. This is urgent. We need to listen to all the indigenous people in the world who know how to live in harmony with the planet.” Donate to our charity appeal here.Has your Christmas party been cancelled? Or perhaps you never got an invitation in the first place. Fear not. However socially distanced this festive season becomes, you can always soak up some fun from the great party scenes in art. Would you rather dance in the village square with beered-up peasants from the paintbrush of Pieter Bruegel the Elder, or glug red wine and get your clothes off with Titian’s boozy revellers? They are not so different. After all, everyone’s the same after a few drinks. Although painted nearly 50 years apart, at different ends of Europe, Titian’s Bacchanal of the Andrians and Bruegel’s Peasant Dance both depict large crowds united in a wild yet graceful rite in which there’s room for many telling details: two villagers snogging to the sound of bagpipes, a youth balancing a pitcher of wine at a dangerous angle, a rustic couple dancing hand in hand, a woman lying back in satisfaction. What you really need to get a great art party going is a good group – it doesn’t matter if they’re Flemish yokels or Venetian aristocrats. Add to this a nice space, indoors or outdoors, and plenty of liquid refreshment. At this time of year, a cosy inn or kitchen is best. In their paintings of Twelfth Night revels, the Dutch masters David Teniers and Jan Steen take us into half-timbered interiors to see Christmas parties in full swing. The time to open bottles 500 years ago was at the end of the holiday season. In Teniers’s Peasants Celebrating Twelfth Night, a man in a wooden crown drinks deep, while another parades in a jester’s hat. The lord of misrule who has his glass in Jan Steen’s painting A Twelfth Night Feast: The King Drinks looks like he’s prepared for the part by taking a few drops earlier. His features are already dulled by alcohol and the party’s just getting going. Steen is one of art’s party throwers. It doesn’t really matter in his paintings if it’s a Christmas bash, or one to celebrate a new baby, or just lads and lasses hanging out at a tavern, so long as the beer flows, the waffles are warm and plenty of eggs get broken. He actually owned a tavern, full of drunks to observe: he is often detectable among them, grinning, smoking, raising a glass. It was Bruegel who started this Dutch and Flemish tradition of depicting drunken get togethers, in his great works of the 1560s. It was said he also sampled the beer himself. The painter and his friends would dress as peasants, visit weddings and fetes claiming to be on the guest list, guzzle beer and stuff themselves with pancakes. In The Peasant Wedding, the pancakes are brought on wooden platters to seated guests in a barn. And in his greatest party picture, The Fight Between Carnival and Lent, he includes so many manic details you seem never to quite finish taking it all in. Bruegel depicts the lord of misrule sitting on a giant beer barrel jousting with an emaciated figure who embodies Lent. In the carnival half of the painting, revellers, some wearing masks, booze at an inn, dance, get street food, play games, dangle from windows: the fun never ends. Except it will, when Lent comes. In Renaissance Venice, however, the old rituals got confused by artists who didn’t care what time of the year it was. They, and their rich clients, just wanted to party. In Titian’s early painting Le Concert Champêtre, (the title’s French because it’s a treasure of the Louvre), two men and two women are doing just that. The women have got their clothes off, yet the men are looking deeply into each other’s eyes. Titian may be mourning his friend Giorgione, who not only painted party scenes but led a reveller’s life, it was said, playing the lute under ladies’ balconies and getting invited to every party going. Which was quite a few in Renaissance Italy. Titian’s younger friend Veronese took Venetian partying to provocative extremes. Commissioned to paint an enormous canvas of The Last Supper for a Venetian monastery, he appears to have said to himself: “Wait a minute – that evening meal for 13 in the specially hired upper room of an inn wasn’t The Last Supper, it was a farewell bash!” So he painted a Last Supper with wine waiters, jesters, dwarfs and fancily dressed disciples. This depiction of one of the holiest New Testament moments as a boozy party did not please the Inquisition. Veronese was called before the religious court to explain why he put “Germans” – known for their drinking – and other unseemly types in his Last Supper. He answered that an artist should have a fool’s licence. Instead of changing the scene he simply renamed it Supper in the House of Levi, a less sensitive subject. Venetian banquets belong to a world we still inhabit, where the party can get going anywhere, any time, unless there’s a lockdown. The orgiasts in Thomas Couture’s 1847 painting The Romans in Their Decadence won’t stop until the empire falls. And in The Death of Sardanapalus by his contemporary Delacroix, people cavort in sensual abandon while they wait for the poison they have drunk to take effect. Couture’s pupil Manet turns a disabused modern eye on Renaissance partying in Le Déjeuner sur l’herbe, which revisits Titian’s pastoral frolics with two men in suits accompanied by two undressed sex workers. It’s a cold and clinical observation of 19th-century good times. At Andy Warhol’s Factory in the 1960s the party never seemed to stop. Warhol famously turned his Manhattan studio into a playground with silver foil on the walls and balloons and cameras. A mixture of studio employees, celebrity guests, uptown visitors and house band The Velvet Underground made it an endless Bacchanal that for many defines the 1960s. Photographs of the Factory, however, suggest a constant, low-key dissolute atmosphere rather than the gogo party film-makers love to imagine. There’s a sadness to these party snaps. A photograph by Stephen Shore captures Edie Sedgwick looking alone and lost in the crowd. Another shows a very young looking Lou Reed out of it in a corner among the empties. What a shame, people say, that Warhol himself never painted the Factory (although it is the setting of his films). And yet he did. Warhol’s late series The Last Supper, silkscreen paintings based on Leonardo da Vinci’s famous fresco, show a farewell party as a fading hand-me-down image. He captures the flickering memory of the Factory, and sees something sacred in it. Warhol’s Last Supper is the most deathly party in art. Well, almost. The Young British Artists in the 1990s were as notorious for their partying as the hangers-on at the Factory were. It was doubtless with a rueful grin that Sam Taylor-Johnson staged her 1996 image Wrecked, in which the Last Supper is a chic urban party. In a 2016 work recreating those days called The Memory of Your Touch, Tracey Emin found an old snapshot of herself lying face down semi-naked on a bed at a party and blew it up to a monumental scale. But the definitive image of the hangover this article has been headed for all along has to be Damien Hirst’s Party Time. This 1995 sculpture is a giant ashtray containing a thick layer of fag butts and ash collected from parties. It’s so disgusting, it sobers you completely. The drink has run out. The music’s over. Fancy a night in?Nothing but good happens in The Repair Shop, a thoroughly commendable television show in which pleasant men and women bring beloved but damaged objects to a team of equally pleasant craftspeople who will repair them and make them like new. At the start of every show we see an ancient thatched barn as Bill Paterson’s reassuring voice sets the scene. This is a place where “precious and faded treasures are restored to their former glory”; where “heritage craft skills passed down the generations” are exercised; a place where, not least, the conversation between owners and restorers “unlocks the story” inside every object. Inside the barn, the craftspeople are already at work: sandpapering, sawing, sewing, stuffing, burnishing, painting, soldering, hammering, chiselling. The barn is real enough. It was built in around 1700 for a farm in Hampshire and relocated 40 years ago to the Weald and Downland Living Museum in West Sussex, where the series is filmed. But as real barns go, the Repair Shop is unusually smart, its wooden frame robust, its reed-thatch immaculate, and its interior beautifully lit. There is a slight suggestion of Hansel and Gretel or even Wagner. Something mythic. The barn sits among trees. No cars or roads can be seen. Customers, three or four of them to every episode, walk like pilgrims along stony paths that wind to the front door, where they show their broken keepsakes to the workshop’s gaffer, Jay Blades, who wears heavy-rimmed spectacles and a distinctive (because permanent) cloth cap. The object is unwrapped and Blades, a cabinetmaker-cum-community worker by trade, summons one of the show’s specialists – a furniture restorer, say, or a soft-toy repairer – to advise on how it can be repaired. It might be an accordion that no longer squeezes, a rocking horse that no longer rocks, a ventriloquist’s dummy with its mouth clamped shut, a stained watercolour, a stopped clock, a half-wrecked liner made of matchsticks, a model locomotive minus three of its wheels. Britain has a cornucopia of damaged goods. After a diagnosis, the object is taken in, rather like a patient. Blades shakes hands with the customer and promises to see them soon. More sandpapering, stitching and soldering follows. Words are few. “Hi, Will, take a look at this,” says Jay. “Brilliant!” says Will. Nobody shows off; everyone behaves with dignity. This isn’t the real world. These dedicated artisans never break a promise, never say, “It’s 300 quid with VAT included but I’ll take 100 off if we’re talking cash.” Money never needs to be mentioned. The wages are paid by the production company (Ricochet, a subsidiary of Warner Brothers) that makes the series for the BBC. Nonetheless, in their reticence and friendship, the workers in The Repair Shop seem closer to ordinary life than the players in the average TV reality show. Or at least closer to ordinary life as some of us like to imagine it is – or was once and might be again – which is to say more collaborative than competitive, less selfish and less greedy. In Antiques Roadshow, the luckiest participants gasp when they’re told the value of what they hold in their hand. The Repair Shop’s customers are spiritual in comparison. “Amazing!” they say when the cloth is pulled from their refurbished heirloom. “How fine it looks. If only Uncle Bill could’ve seen it – he’d have been so pleased.” Wisely, the programme makers decided against a notion, raised at an early planning meeting, that the value of a piece would be estimated before and after restoration. Profit on the one hand and fond memories of Uncle Bill on the other (this was his stuffed crocodile, after all) don’t sit comfortably together. I like The Repair Shop. I like the shots of trees, pastures, ponds and birds that are spliced with the scenes inside the barn. I like the absence of cars, the light pizzicato on the soundtrack (a sure sign nothing bad can happen), the seductive artifice that has created William Morris’s utopia in West Sussex. Millions of us watch it. A show that began life early in 2017 as a series of cheap half-hours for BBC2’s daytime schedules now has a 60-minute slot during the evening peak on BBC1. More than 250 episodes of varying lengths have been made (some have still to be shown) and another 50 are at different stages of production. New episodes (there are many repeats) achieve average audiences of between 3 million and 4 million. The formula has been sold in half a dozen countries. “Really good stories, told cost-effectively” has been the basis of the sales pitch. We come to the business of crying. Another reason to like The Repair Shop is that nobody in the show, so far as I know, has asked the question that TV journalism currently finds irresistible. “How did you feel when … your cancer was diagnosed/your little daughter died/your house vanished in the tsunami?” The tears on this show come unprompted. Some customers are tearful and others not, which must also be true of the audience. In a September episode, Pamela from Devon arrived with a chipped, discoloured musical box in which almost no moving part worked. It looked like a souvenir from Venice, mid-20th century in style and attractive in its unabashed souvenir-ness. Pamela’s older sister, Vera, had been the original owner, until she died 50 years ago aged 15 after a long illness. The two girls had been close; for years they shared a bedroom. The music box was a reminder of her sister and the fun they’d had. The only reminder, in fact, because everything else of Vera’s had been destroyed in a terrible fire that gutted the house some time later. An awful tragedy had been revealed in few sentences. Two craftsmen, Will Kirk and Steve Kember, set to work on the box and restored it beautifully, so that when Pamela came back to the barn she could open the lid and hear Around the World in 80 Days. She said it was “amazing” and “incredible” and “thank you so much”, but thankfully she didn’t cry. There comes a point when tears can look like exploitation, both of the subject and her audience. When the great Irish nationalist Daniel O’Connell read of the death of Little Nell in The Old Curiosity Shop, he is said to have thrown away the book in disgust, shouting, “You should not have killed her!” Dickens had been laying it on too thick. Television can do the same. Pamela didn’t cry, but I did. A capricious, wayward thing, crying, and never to be mistaken as a guarantee of sincerity or depth of feeling. A certain combination of music, words and images can bring it on. I cried at neither of my parents’ funerals, and yet I can cry at several points in It’s a Wonderful Life, not least in its last few moments, when James Stewart reads the inscription in the copy of Tom Sawyer that Clarence the Angel has given him: “Remember no man is a failure who has friends.” Clarence the Angel! Hiroshima and Nagasaki had been obliterated only eight months before Frank Capra began filming in 1946; Belsen had been liberated exactly a year before; as a bomber pilot, Stewart himself had been helping to flatten German cities as recently as 1944. Covid will probably cancel our seasonal excursion to see It’s a Wonderful Life this year, but The Repair Shop has a Christmas Special (unpromising phrase) on BBC1 next Friday. Common to both is the occasionally tearful pleasure of escapism in difficult times. Ian Jack is a Guardian columnistBradford City have confirmed they have received a bid for the club from an American consortium which plans to fund a takeover using cryptocurrency but deny a sale is imminent. The League Two club received an offer from the investor group WAGMI United on Thursday. It aims to raise capital and funds through the sale of non-fungible tokens, known as NFTs, and intends to rely on data and analytics to make key decisions about running the club. Its goal, it says, is to use the model to take a club to the Premier League. The group, whose backers reportedly include the president of the NBA franchise Philadelphia 76ers, Daryl Morey, publicly stated its intention to buy an EFL club on Thursday without naming Bradford, who are owned by the German businessman Stefan Rupp. Rupp confirmed on Friday that Bradford were the club in question but said: “Despite various reports claiming a change of ownership is imminent, I can confirm it is not. Yesterday, I received an email from a representative of the WAGMI United group with an offer to purchase Bradford City AFC. That is all I have received, nothing more, and no further action has taken place.” The Guardian has been told any deal is a long way from completion, with serious doubts over whether it will go through. WAGMI United has conceded it has little knowledge of the intricacies of English football. The volatile nature of cryptocurrency, which can fluctuate in price dramatically and quickly, has caused some concern among the Bradford fanbase about the plans, which would be the first of their kind in the sport. WAGMI has been contacted for comment. Rupp bought the club in the summer of 2016 and the Bantams reached the League One play-off final in 2017 but were beaten by Millwall. Two seasons later they were relegated to League Two, where they remain. The fan mood towards Rupp’s ownership has been hostile for a number of years, with Rupp based in Germany and seldom seen at games, particularly of late because of Covid restrictions. Some supporters shared their excitement at the news of a potential takeover on Thursday when the consortium held a live Twitter Spaces event, but others were far more cautious.Welcome to the 2021 Fiver Christmas Awards. For anyone counting, this is the fifth year of us admitting that we’ve lost track of how long we’ve been doing this, so the all-time total has to be in double figures at least, 11 or 14 or 23 maybe, something like that. Sound right? So here we are again, happy as can be, all good pals and jolly good company. And while we’re on the subject of contrived bonhomie and forced festive spirit, pour yourself a large glass of Cillit Bang, top it up with a little Bold, pop in a cube or two of Calgon, and let yourself slip into an effortless, decadent, back-of-the-cupboard-under-the-kitchen-sink-fuelled reverie, enough to get you through the rest of this email and then some. Enjoy! Try to enjoy! THE GUY FAWKES AWARD FOR SUPPORTING THE NATIONAL TEAM Team Ingerlund were in a major final for the first time since the launch of the Mk2 Ford Cortina and there was only one way for the country to celebrate. Across the nation, pubs were filled from breakfast time and in London itself, Leicester Square was full of those who chose to kill their pre-match nerves by tramping on broken bottles, singing about the second world war and hoofing the jazz salt. One b@nter merchant upped the ante on “no pyro, no party” by thrusting a lit flare betwixt his buttocks. “I’d been on the p1ss since half eight in the morning and had had at least 20 cans of Strongbow,” howled Charlie Perry, a roofer from Sunbury-on-Thames, with “Benidorm Bunters” tattooed on one of his cheeks. “It was the biggest day of my life.” Charlie also claimed to be one of the mob who “jibbed” into the Euro Not 2020 final itself, storming the gates and putting others in danger. “The threats, aggression, violence, smoke and flare use, throwing of missiles – including faeces – excessive consumption of alcohol and cocaine all combined to fuel a febrile atmosphere,” concluded a report published in December. THE DEL AMITRI AWARD FOR STAYING HOME TOO SOON In 1954 Scotland went out in the group stage. In 1958 Scotland went out in the group stage. In 1974 Scotland went out in the group stage. In 1978 Scotland went out in the group stage. In 1982 Scotland went out in the group stage. In 1986 Scotland went out in the group stage. In 1990 Scotland went out in the group stage. In 1992 Scotland went out in the group stage. In 1996 Scotland went out in the group stage. In 1998 Scotland went out in the group stage. At EN 2020 Scotland … as soon as the Czech Republic’s Patrik Schick smashed one in at Hampden from somewhere near Prestwick airport, the Ally MacLeod die was cast. Still, at least they beat England 0-0 at Wembley. THE NYTOL AWARD FOR MANAGING TO SLEEP LIKE BABIES This prestigious award, which for the last couple of decades has been dominated by supporters of compunction-lite powerhouses Manchester City and Chelsea, goes to those Newcastle United fans who have spent the last couple of months in blithe indifference to the source of the money that will fund their 2022-23 promotion bid. Some of the mental gymnastics performed have been of an Olympic standard, with a difficulty tariff of 5.8, while the volume of whataboutery has reached levels never before registered outside Ibrox or Parkhead. Well done, everyone! Melatonin gummies all round! THE IT CROWD AWARD FOR THROWING OPPRESSED MINORITY GROUPS UNDER A BUS This goes to Toon LGBTQ+ supporters group United with Pride. Not so much for going out of their way to welcome new owners connected to a regime more than happy to imprison, beat, whip and torture gay people, though there is that, or for sacking off the Pride In Football network in a fit of pique soon after, but mainly for this stone-cold demonstration of elite-level handwashing: “We could look at the situation in Saudi Arabia and we could rightly condemn it, but it’s not really our responsibility as a group to act on something.” A blasé shrug would have equally done the trick, but hats off for going the extra mile. Mind you, not winning a domestic trophy since 1955 is a form of suffering too, right? Solidarity! THE NEAL CASSADY AWARD FOR PARKING THE TEAM BUS The €uropean $uper £eague was a bad thing, carved up by clubs who wanted more of the loot having previously overspent all of the loot. It was doomed from the moment its website launched late on a Sunday night and appeared to have been constructed on Dreamweaver version 1.0. And though Florentino Pérez may still claim the project is the best way to save footbal … sorry, Real Madrid, it was dead in the water as soon as fans in England took to the street to protest. Chelsea bailed just as their fans raged on London’s fashionable King’s Road, and the other Premier League clubs involved (including, er, Spurs) swiftly followed suit. “We got it wrong, and we want to show that we can put things right,” grovelled Joel Glazer in an open letter to Manchester United fans on 21 April. Not good enough, retorted United fans. “We decide when you play,” screamed a bedsheet at the club’s training ground. A forecourt protest on 2 May caused the Liverpool game to be cancelled, the resourceful blockade having stopped the team buses being able to leave their hotels. “A game has been called off today and the fans have spoken,” roared Ché Neville, developing his taste for a protest movement. THE MAHATMA GANDHI ‘MARCHING’ FROM A PUB WE WERE GOING TO BE IN ANYWAY TO A FOOTBALL GROUND WE WERE GOING TO GO TO ANYWAY AWARD FOR INEFFECTIVE PROTEST Tired of their free-spending owners lavishing their squad with expensive signings and appointing highly decorated Big Cup-winning managers, assorted Everton fan groups finally decided they’d had enough and tried to organise a walkout in the 27th minute of their game against Arsenal. The result was nothing if not predictable: at the appointed minute, a handful of fans were seen making for the exits, possibly oblivious to any protest but intending to visit the toilets or get their drink on. The vast majority who remained in their seats got to cheer their team on to a 2-1 win. Have that, Farhad Moshiri! THE HERBERT BAMLETT AWARD FOR MANAGERIAL EXCELLENCE Bamlett’s managerial career was a mixed affair, to say the least. On the one hand, he came within one point of leading Oldham Athletic to the title in 1915, which was no small achievement. On the other, he was in charge at Old Trafford in 1930, when his Manchester United side lost their first 12 games and went on to suffer an ignominious relegation. So, y’know, let’s not dwell on the more problematic aspects of Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s time at the wheel, he wasn’t that bad. In fact, not only did Ole keep United up, his win percentage of 54.17 compares very favourably to Bamlett’s 31.15, and is only bettered in United history by José Mourinho (58.33), Lord Ferg (59.67) and, statistically the daddy of them all, 66.67’s Michael Carrick. So well done, Ole! Chapeau! Having said that, Bamlett’s 1930-31 rabble still managed to beat Liverpool 4-1 at home, while Ole’s men … well, OK, but let’s not kick a man while he’s down. THE BOAS-MATTEO AWARD FOR PROFESSIONAL OVERREACH AND UNFLATTERING JUXTAPOSITION Frank Lampard. Oh Thomas. Did you have to make it so obvious? THE DAVID COOTE AWARD FOR VAR-RELATED TOMFOOLERY So much to choose from but Martin Atkinson and his video assistant referee Darren England had a collective shocker during Manchester United’s league win over West Ham at the London Stadium. Sawn in half by Aaron Wan-Bissaka in United’s penalty area, not only did Tomas Soucek not get a penalty but was actually penalised for a foul himself. Later in the game, Cristiano Ronaldo was denied a clear penalty after being fouled by Vladimir Coufal, then another less obvious spot-kick moments before West Ham galloped upfield and didn’t get a penalty of their own for a blatant Luke Shaw handball. That decision was at least overturned in the time it took David Moyes to send Mark Noble off the bench to take the crucial spot-kick with his first and the last kick of the game. He missed. THE FORREST GUMP LIFE IS LIKE A BOX OF CHOCOLATES AWARD FOR WORST ANALOGY When the Premier League sent out its self-serving attack dogs to pour cold water all over Tracey Crouch’s fan-led review, Aston Villa chief suit Christian Purslow parroted the entirely inaccurate and ill-informed Tesco v Corner Shop analogy previously used during lockdown by his Crystal Palace counterpart Steve Parish. “Hold my beer!” announced Leeds United managing director Angus Kinnear, who subsequently staked his winning claim for the award by comparing the appointment of an independent football regulator to a totalitarian Maoist collectivisation policy that led to the deaths of at least 15 million people. Perspective, Angus. perspective. THE SAM KERR AWARD FOR DOING SAM KERR THINGS When a presumably drunken lout stormed the Kingsmeadow pitch during the Women’s Big Cup match between Chelsea and Juventus, he got more than the selfie he bargained for. Sam Kerr, the flamin’ Chelsea and Matildas striker, barged him to the ground in the style of a rolling maul. Hurrah for Sam? No, referee Sara Persson waved a yellow card and it later turned out that the invader was not even eligible for arrest, due to the antiquated Football (Offences) Act 1991 not including women’s football in the definition of a “designed match”. THE CALIGULA PONTOON AWARD FOR THROWING GOOD MONEY AFTER BAD Footballers these days are trendsetters. “Influencers”, the kids call it. They are also cash machines, as middling indie-landfill protagonists Hard-Fi once had it. The money continues to roll in while the rest of us wonder whether to wear an extra jumper or foot the gas bill. That doesn’t mean new revenue streams are turned away. Oh no. Non-fungible tokens and the wonderful world of crypto give clubs and players chances aplenty to flog the latest load of old tat on various Social Media Disgraces. What do you get for your NFT, other than the ownership of an easily CRTL-C’ed graphic resembling one of the Garbage Pail Kids? Yeah, good question, and until football authorities wake up – Crypto.com sponsors VAR in Serie A – this is the Klondike Gold period for absolutely nothing being sold for a lot of something. THE GARY LINEKER IMODIUM AWARD FOR GETTING CAUGHT SHORT AT AN INOPPORTUNE MOMENT Scottish co-commentator Bobby Bulloch was late back for the second half of a match between Hamilton and Ross County and apologised to viewers, saying he “went away for a wee jobby at half-time”. The Accies suits were suitably understanding when it came to Bulloch’s “very poor attempt at humour” and announced they “didn’t find this funny and the person will not be used again”. THE BORIS JOHNSON AWARD FOR FRONTING UP LIKE A GROWN MAN As captain of Manchester United, and for the second year running, Harry Maguire clocked up more than 200 hours of brutally honest post-match deconstruction, in which he held up his hands, fronted up, promised to do better and admitted it isn’t good enough for a club like Manchester United. Every minute of it delivered in a serious tone while wearing the Politician’s Frown of Grave Concern. Bravura performances. THE DOMINIC RAAB AWARD FOR EFFICIENT POST-BREXIT LORRY MANOEUVRABILITY And it’s yet another gong for £80m Harry Maguire! BUMPER ONE-OFF FESTIVE TV &amp; RADIO SPECIAL: ALL THE HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE CHRISTMAS AND NEW YEAR PERIOD Right, aye. You are joking, aren’t you? MAIL! MAIL! MAIL! Send your emails, presents and Christmas cards to the.boss@theguardian.com. HAVE A MERRY CHRISTMAS AND A HAPPY NEW YEAR, WE’LL BE BACK ON 3 JANUARYGeorgia state representative Bee Nguyen has seemed destined to wage epic battles in her fast-changing state ever since replacing Stacey Abrams in its legislature four years ago when the now-nationally-recognized Democrat announced her first bid for governor. Or maybe it’s since former president and Georgia native Jimmy Carter decided, more than 40 years ago, to double the number of refugees admitted to the US from Vietnam – including her parents. Nguyen was born in Iowa, but has lived in Georgia since her parents moved here when she was seven. Now, events of recent months have made it clearer than ever what’s at stake for Nguyen in her next bid: becoming Georgia’s secretary of state, responsible for overseeing elections and other duties in a state that seems set to be at the center of 2022’s midterm elections and also a key battleground in the 2024 presidential race. Since becoming the first Asian American woman in Georgia’s legislature, she has led her party’s fight against Republican-backed restrictions on voting. Now, if she becomes her party’s nominee for secretary of state, her ideas may prove vital to building election integrity and restoring voter confidence in Georgia, and by example, elsewhere in America at a moment when US democracy itself seems in peril. She may have just received a boost last week when Abrams announced her intentions to run for governor again. If successful, Abrams would become the nation’s first Black woman governor. Having Abrams on the ballot should “mobilize resources and get people aware of the seriousness” of the midterm elections next year, said Adrienne Jones, political science professor at Morehouse College. Having Abrams in office may provide a backstop to protecting elections in Georgia as well, Nguyen said. “We need Stacey Abrams to veto further erosion of voting rights,” she said – especially if federal voting rights legislation isn’t passed. Still, the challenges Nguyen faces include Georgia being one of three states where Donald Trump has endorsed Republican candidates for secretary of state who believe the 2020 election was “stolen”, along with Arizona and Michigan. The plan is to help elect election administrators who will make it difficult for Trump to lose in 2024. The former president has already visited Georgia to stump for current member of Congress Jody Hice, who is hoping to oust incumbent Brad Raffensperger – the same official who taped Trump’s 2 January phone call, in which the former president asked the current secretary of state to find “11,780 votes”. Fulton county district Attorney Fani Willis is leading an investigation to determine if Trump committed a crime in that call and other efforts to change last year’s election results. These events, along with continuing threats against Georgia election officials and poll workers, have made Georgia emblematic of the chaos surrounding voting and elections in the US. The resulting situation has given the once-overlooked office of secretary of state new importance, Nguyen said. In that context, “We’re no longer looking at this as a Georgia issue,” she said. “It’s an American issue.” At the same time, the challenges for Georgia’s next secretary of state aren’t limited to overseeing elections in a state where millions of voters still believe the 2020 election was stolen. Or even sorting out the impacts of the state’s new election law, which allows the Republican-controlled legislature to take over local election boards, and is the subject of a handful of lawsuits alleging that the law makes it harder for thousands to vote. If elected, Nguyen will also have to face the fact that Georgia had already been struggling with election cybersecurity issues before 2020, resulting in a federal judge ordering former secretary of state and now governor Brian Kemp to scrap the entire state’s system – a historical first. Then the legislature ignored top cybersecurity experts and bought another vulnerable system – first used statewide in last year’s election. There’s also a 2018 US Commission on Civil Rights report that rated Georgia among the nation’s worst for violating the rights of voters. Against this backdrop, Nguyen has adopted a clear-eyed, practical approach to her campaign. Reached by phone after returning to Atlanta from meetings with community groups in coastal Georgia, she mentions a query she got about the Republican-controlled state legislature certifying elections under the new law. “I said, there’s nothing we can do about that. The secretary of state’s office is a safeguard to democracy – but it’s not a silver bullet.” Communicating transparently with the public, combating disinformation, and evaluating past elections for successes and failures are all key to protecting elections, said John S Cusick, counsel at the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund who is representing plaintiffs in one of the suits against Georgia’s new law. “While there are limitations, there are also opportunities,” he said. Nguyen has a host of ideas to “help offset” the new law, as well as restore voter confidence. They include building cybersecurity expertise into the secretary of state’s office, she said. “What I envision is hiring top-notch security experts,” she said. Their duties would include monitoring threats to the election system, as well as disinformation and conspiracies online, and communicating with the state’s 159 counties and their election officials in real time. As a legislator, Nguyen voted against the current $100-plus million computerized elections system, chosen despite top cybersecurity experts recommending that the state use hand-marked paper ballots, as in many other states. This decision is what Richard DeMillo, chairman of Georgia Tech’s School of Cybersecurity and Privacy, calls the “original sin” underlying Georgia’s current situation. “They denied the ground truth … that these are opaque systems with vulnerabilities,” he said. “This is independent of whether the [2020] election was hacked, of which there is no widespread evidence.” Still, scrapping the entire system now would mean that Republican legislators “would have to admit they made an error”, said Nguyen. Her plan would at least make cybersecurity part of the central function of the secretary of state’s office, a first. She hopes to pay for it with federal funds. Other ideas include communicating by mail, text and email with registered voters when trying to maintain rolls current, instead of using only mail and then “purging” voters from the rolls when they don’t respond. “The state should be doing everything they can to notify voters,” she said – including about changes such as new deadlines for requesting absentee ballots or new polling locations. Also, she would make more information on voting available in languages other than English – a practice still controversial in Georgia. And, she would like to install computerized kiosks in grocery stores located in areas with spotty Internet access, to enable voters to do everything from updating registrations to sending in absentee ballots. As for election workers – the historically anonymous and now increasingly threatened key to running elections – “what I have witnessed as a member of the Government Affairs Committee [of the legislature] is that the secretary of state isn’t acting as a collaborative partner” with local election boards, Nguyen said. She wants to change that, improving training, and, she hopes, using federal funds to help counties obtain the equipment they need to avoid such issues as long lines due to a lack of voting machines. Although Nguyen allows that some of these ideas may seem “unsexy”, she says they are “necessary pieces to safeguard democracy. It’s like, ‘Here’s what we can do.’” One thing that Nguyen recognizes as necessary to run for secretary of state in the post-Trump era is a personal security plan. As an Asian-American woman in the public eye, she has become accustomed to bigotry; she noted that someone had posted on Twitter several days before we spoke, “Go back to your shit-hole country.” But “before last year, there was general harassment,” she said. “Now it’s more death threats.” Late last year, Nguyen personally contacted voters from a list Trump lawyer Rudy Giuliani’s team had compiled, after the Big Lie promoter alleged they had voted fraudulently. Nguyen proved the accusation to be wrong. Video of her testimony was widely seen. The death threats increased. She contacted law enforcement officials; they advised that she remove personal information from the Internet as much as possible. “I asked family members to lock down their social media accounts,” she added. Police drove by her house. The situation is not without irony for Nguyen. “I have a frame of reference from my parents,” she said. “They saw a loss of civil liberties. My Dad was imprisoned by the government for three years. They have said to me that they never believed they would lose their country. I’m very concerned – we’re facing threats, disinformation, people actively trying to dismantle democracy. I believe we have a limited time to redirect ourselves.”Marcelo Bielsa tends to keep his head bowed during virtual media briefings and, staring determinedly down, invariably seems to be addressing the table top in front of him. On Thursday lunchtime things changed. The Leeds manager was asked whether he feared the sack and suddenly Bielsa sat up straight, stared directly into the camera and started talking with unusual animation. Attenders did not need to be able to understand Spanish to detect the passion in the 66-year-old Argentinian’s voice and no one will have been surprised at the translation delivered by Bielsa’s interpreter, Andres Clavijo. “Do you think I’m so vain I don’t think I can be sacked?” said a manager clearly not merely hurt but mortified by Tuesday night’s 7-0 thrashing at Manchester City. “But I’m going to continue fighting until the end of the season, without any doubt. I hope nothing happens that doesn’t allow me to do that. I always think a manager in adversity has to fight.” Bielsa possesses a humility rare among peers but he is also, justifiably, a proud man and there was a discernible, if slight, bristling in his body language when a journalist asked for his thoughts on the theory that he has taken Leeds as far as he can. The former Argentina, Chile and, among other clubs, Athletic Bilbao, manager inquired whether the reporter subscribed to that view before querying the assumption underpinning it. “To say I’ve taken them as far as I can is to say it’s a closed cycle,” he pointed out. “Do you think the cycle is closed?” It is a key question which will doubtless weigh on the minds of Leeds fans gathering at Elland Road for Saturday evening’s match against Arsenal. After only two wins in the past 10 Premier League games and having conceded 10 goals in their past two fixtures, Bielsa’s team are desperate for victory but even the manager’s harshest critics are unlikely to regard the performance as a litmus test of his enduring suitability for the job. That has rather less to do with Arsenal’s abilities than the number of Leeds players trapped in the treatment room. While Covid outbreaks have seen several Premier League fixtures postponed, Bielsa’s squad – thanks to his powers of persuasion one of the division’s most heavily vaccinated – were virus-free on Thursday afternoon but are increasingly plagued by injuries. If the absence of England’s midfield anchor Kalvin Phillips and last season’s leading scorer Patrick Bamford will again be particularly keenly felt, Leeds must also face Arsenal without Liam Cooper, Pascal Struijk, Daniel James, Rodrigo and Jamie Shackleton as well as the suspended Junior Firpo. Sheer bad luck is partly responsible but this shortfall highlights the arguable folly of Bielsa’s insistence on working with an unusually small nucleus of experienced senior professionals. He has long believed strength in depth is not merely uneconomical but detrimental to harmony and only reluctantly concedes Leeds are understaffed in vital departments. “I don’t want to use as an excuse the amount of players I have,” he said. “But I never said I don’t want any [new] players in January.” If that can be interpreted as a tacit plea for assistance from his board, it comes hedged with caveats. As Bielsa pointed out, any incomer must be better than players already on the books, available and affordable. Whereas some counterparts are cavalier about spending, he treats the Leeds bank account as if it were his own. “The club has invested £130m in the construction of this squad,” said Bielsa. “And I don’t know if they can or cannot invest more but I’m not going to demand anything. It wouldn’t be fair.” His integrity is refreshing, yet given the real risk of a ruinously costly relegation there is a clear argument for Leeds speculating to accumulate. Bielsa, though, has always preferred to find solutions by improving players on the training ground. Perhaps part of the problem is that he has been in West Yorkshire for three and a half years and the sheer intensity of his coaching is leaving certain players initially transformed by his methods a little mentally fatigued. Tellingly, the previously immensely influential Stuart Dallas appears to have taken a step or two back this season. “You have to show fortitude at this time,” Bielsa said. “The 7-0 is the worst of all moments I’ve had at Leeds. It’s not just another defeat; no one has the tolerance to listen to the explanation of a conductor who has a 7-0 loss. But it is part of my job to face the most difficult moments and to come out of them correcting things, taking things on board and not delegating the reasons why to others.” It is far from impossible that a coach who agrees only one-year contracts will avoid overstaying his welcome by departing Leeds this summer, but no one doubts that between now and May Bielsa will do his utmost to prove his largely glorious cycle at Elland Road is not yet quite closed.There is a scene early on in Spencer, Pablo Larraín’s cinematic fable starring Kristen Stewart as the unhappy princess trapped inside a chilly Christmas castle, in which Diana’s wardrobe for the festivities is wheeled on a rack to her suite. There are gowns for dinners, suits for lunches, a hat for church, tweed for outdoors. Sally Hawkins, playing Diana’s dresser, groans and puffs under the weight as if she is dragging a grand piano. We mere civilians don’t tend to sit by the tree in Chanel skirt suits. We do not risk a diplomatic incident by being insufficiently groomed. (“But madam … your hair isn’t set”, Diana is admonished.) But that doesn’t mean there are no rules. For most of us the rules of Christmas dressing come in the form of tradition or ritual. Or they are phrased in terms of manners, perhaps, or couched in the language of getting into the spirit. If everyone around your table is expected to put the idiotic paper hat that falls out of their cracker on their head – even if its completely the wrong colour for their outfit – that’s a rule, every bit as much as wearing the correct tiara. This year, I am all-in for festive fashion. For any outdoor urban seasonal activity – gift shopping at a Christmas market, frankly even just a take-out hot chocolate in a red cup – you will find me channelling a strong Pushkin vibe in plush white knitwear and tight-laced boots. No matter that I’m in London not St Petersburg, nor that I haven’t set foot on an ice rink since the 20th century. If there’s anything remotely Christmassy at the cinema, you can find me queueing for popcorn in black velvet and my best Wolford tights, dressed as if for a box at the ballet. Whether it’s tartan pyjamas or novelty sweaters, the clothes we wear at Christmas would look eccentric at any other time. Christmas, soundtracked by carols and scented with gingerbread, binds us for a few days to a genteel Victorian jollity at odds with 21st-century life. So our Christmas Day outfits, with their velvet and ribbons and feathers and textured knits, are the Sunday best of modern life. And even if you love Christmas as much as I do, there is no denying that it is a demanding time of year. Christmas Day is a long day. If you have children, it gets going at warp speed while it is still dark outside. If you are cooking, the day can feel like a to-do list that lasts till teatime. You are torn between wanting to look glamorous and the urgent need for fresh air; between the lure of the afternoon movie and the scatterings of wrapping paper and satsuma peel. And someone needs to put the book tokens somewhere safe and do we have any more AA batteries? With fashion, as with the rest of Christmas, the best way to stay calm is, counter-intuitively, to embrace the chaos. Glittery tights with a sequin skirt? Absolutely. Pyjamas with high heels and jewellery? Why not. This is not the time to go for understated chic. A fitted little black dress and high heels is hopeless for a day when you need to be able to duck swiftly under the kitchen table to retrieve the crucial new Lego wotsit before the dog eats it. Flats and comfortable clothes, jazzed up with colour and sparkle, seem to me a practical choice. But what do I know? Christmas is different behind every front door. Except that everyone, everywhere has to wear that ridiculous paper hat, right?‘Here’s the thing,” says Sarah Phelps, talking about the Duchess of Argyll. “The first time I heard of her, she was referred to as The Blowjob Duchess.” The screenwriter has made this duchess, Margaret of Argyll, the heroine of A Very British Scandal, a new BBC drama starring Claire Foy and Paul Bettany as the aristos whose divorce transfixed the nation in 1963. Thanks to a censorious judge, the vile behaviour of the duke, a series of photographs showing the duchess performing fellatio on an unidentified man and her own altruistic, if high-handed, refusal to defend herself, the sexual ins and outs of this separation are a matter of incredibly detailed historical record. “It was,” says Phelps,” all about, ‘Who’s the man?’, ‘Who’s the headless man in the photos?’, ‘How many men did she fuck?’, ‘Who was she blowing?’ And I almost thought, ‘I actually don’t give a shit. I want to know about her. I want to know who she was.’ So the blowjob matters to me in one way. But it matters less in the prurient sense of needing to know who was on the other end of that erection.” To unpack this all a bit: Ian Douglas Campbell, the 11th Duke of Argyll, accused his wife of infidelity and produced a list of 88 different men. Some were gay and had never been involved with Margaret but she chose not to challenge the account, since homosexuality was still a crime and it would have implicated her friends. The presiding judge concluded that she was a “completely promiscuous woman … Her attitude to the sanctity of marriage was what moderns would call ‘enlightened’ but which in plain language was wholly immoral.” The key evidence at the trial, however, was not the list but the so-called “headless gentleman” in a set of photographs, showing the Duchess fellating someone unidentifiable. The drama is “about as explicit as the BBC can be”, Phelps says. There’s a wonderful scene in which Julia Davis, playing a savagely caustic woman with a collection of hopping golden phalluses and the unwieldy title of Maureen, Marchioness of Dufferin and Ava, has just seen some bonobos in the zoo. Famously, these likeable primates are at it all day long, and Davis’s lip curls in exhilarated disgust as she describes their constant play and foreplay, before she concludes: “And I thought, ‘That’s just like Margaret.’” The duchess replies: “It’s not my fault if you don’t like it and aren’t any good at it. I do like it, and I am extremely good at it.” Davis, speaking by phone, seems surprised to have made the leap from comedy to drama. “If I was being really honest, part of me thinks, ‘Maybe I’ll be offered some other good work from this.’” Davis recalls feeling like the leads were in a different league. “I felt like I did when I first started out. I was getting all this work suddenly and I hadn’t been to drama school. I didn’t know really basic things, like when they say, ‘Can you stand on your mark?’ I didn’t know what that meant. And I would keep standing anywhere but that mark.” She was also surprised to be so interested in the story. “It’s rare for me to like something like that,” she explains. “But when I read it, it didn’t feel like some cosy, British period piece. To me, this show doesn’t feel like The Establishment. I think Sarah Phelps has a similar anger, rebel thing to me.” That’s exactly what distinguishes the drama from everything you could name with a similar focus on the British aristocracy: not that it’s raunchier or more adult in attitude and storytelling than, say, Downton Abbey or The Crown, but that it doesn’t have that fawning love of poshness that can be off-putting. “I find it really uncomfortable, the level of subservience we have in this country,” says Phelps. “I find it really strange. We love to serve the big house. We love to know that if we keeled over in our tithe cottage, the squire might come down and give us a farthing. It’s, ‘If I can stand next to this, I’ll be protected. If I’m standing under their umbrella, maybe the rain won’t fall so hard on me.’” Phelps’ writing implicitly rejects this notion, that the leisured class has more dramatic momentum and potential than average folk. She traces Margaret back to the child and young woman she was before taking her title, finding “a little girl who’d been brought up highly isolated, to live entirely within the male gaze of her father’s approval”. She was born not into class but money, and a lot of it. She had a terrible stammer, probably the result of being a left-hander forced to write with her right, and a restless, traffic-stopping beauty. She was rumoured to have had an affair with David Niven when he was 17 and she was 15. “I like to think it’s true,” says Phelps, “but I couldn’t put it in the script because it’s just hearsay.” Margaret’s first marriage was to Charles Sweeney, a businessman. Lasting 14 years, this union has in previous histories been consigned to a footnote in Margaret’s life, Sweeney himself being neither as rich as her father nor as famous as many of her other lovers. But Phelps places this marriage, or at least the events of it, at the centre of her character’s story. “She had to give birth to a stillborn child. On its own, that is absolutely heartbreaking. And after that, she had miscarriage after miscarriage after miscarriage after miscarriage – having her own two children nearly damn killed her. It’s to the point where it doesn’t matter how much money you’ve got. It doesn’t matter whether or not that mink stole you threw so casually round your shoulders was the most photographed mink stole that day.” So even though the script takes the contemporary perception of Margaret of Argyll, up to a point – “she was boastful, she was vain, she wanted to be the cynosure of all eyes” – this portrait represents a fundamental revisionism. The Duchess was reviled at the time, and is periodically reclaimed as a feminist icon for her sex-positivity and as a proto-LGBTQ+ ally. But she would never have described herself as a feminist. “I’m not convinced she really liked women that much,” says Phelps, “because what could a woman give her? Not what she craved, which was adulation, sex, jewels, validity.” Part of what makes this drama so gripping is the detective work that’s gone in, not to sift truth from fiction in this mightily unusual divorce trial, but in finding a breathing, believable human under the layers of frivolity and scandal that history lacquered on. A Very British Scandal is fascinated by class and its effects, while being repelled by notions of superiority and servility, yet it is never so revolted that it’s not trying to figure out what’s going on with the people locked within it. Which is an attitude that’s always been discernible in Phelps’ work, since she dropped out of school, left home at 16, began looking after horses and made this discovery: “Never mind cocaine as God’s way of telling you you’ve got too much money – polo is a different league.” A Very British Scandal is the latest piece of Phelps’ work in a career spurred by indignation at polo players in Bentleys calling for the army “to be sent out against the striking miners” – causing her to end up at Cambridge as a 23-year-old mature student. Eventually, in 2002, she wrote the first of what would be 94 EastEnders scripts. This is a drama, therefore, that comes from the same stable as ’Stenders golden era storylines – the apex of the Slater sisters’ story arc, the time when everyone said it might be as good as Corrie. It follows Phelps’ adaptations of Agatha Christie (five in total – and I loved And Then There Were None) and Dickens (Oliver Twist in 2007, Great Expectations four years later). These are works that had been rendered on screen before, some multiple times, and they may not have warranted revisiting, had it not been for Phelps’ distinctive outlook, part iconoclast, part psychoanalyst. Phelps mines her characters for the rebel inside. With Margaret of Argyll, the scandal may feel very British, but the rebel Phelps uncovers is a citizen of everywhere. A Very British Scandal is on BBC One at 9pm on Boxing DayFor a decade, Tunisia’s revolution has been remembered on 14 January, the day autocratic ruler Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali fled to Saudi Arabia and the political elite declared the revolution complete. From today, by President Kais Saied’s decree, the event will be marked on 17 December, the day street trader Mohamed Bouazizi set himself on fire in protest at state corruption and the faltering economy. The self-immolation became a catalyst for Tunisia’s uprising and the wider Arab spring. The subsequent 11 years have brought mixed blessings to Tunisia. While the gains have been significant, the daily grind of rising prices, declining living standards, the ravages of the pandemic and the squabbling of politicians unmoored from the greater good have all left lasting scars. Not for nothing did many Tunisians bridle at being congratulated on being the sole success of the Arab spring long before Saied’s dramatic intervention into the country’s political life on 25 July this year, securing one-man rule for himself and effectively silencing such platitudes. On Monday, after almost five months of speculation, including the appointment of a token cabinet in October, he finally spelt out his plan for constitutional reform, committing to a July referendum to vote on a fresh constitution, before further elections on this day next year. While much of the president’s energy remains invested in political reform, no answer to the chronic financial problems that gnaw away at the marrow of daily life appears any closer than it has for the last 11 years. In the overlooked and occasionally volatile working-class neighbourhood of Zahrouni, on the edges of the capital, 29-year-old Yassine rifles through the skips, searching for the empty plastic bottles he can sell by the sack for recycling. It is a common sight in most big cities in Tunisia. International Alert estimates that 8,000 Tunisians earn a living this way. Yassine says he’ll get anywhere from 2 to 3 dinars, (50p and 80p) a sack. “I can sell up to five sacks a day,” Yassine says, “though four is more usual. I’ve been doing this a long time; sometimes construction, but often this.” Asked what he wants, Yassine states: “A job.” Tunisia’s economic decline started long before the revolution it helped trigger. However, over the years since, politicians have consistently shied away from confronting the root causes for that decline, preferring instead to focus on political projects where the heroes and villains are clearer. It’s a trend that shows no sign of ending. The problems are profound. As the country negotiates a fresh loan from the International Monetary Fund, its general trade union has openly questioned whether the state can pay its hefty public sector salary bill. Unemployment, one of the primary causes of the revolution and, in districts such as Zahrouni, a source of social unrest, remains unimproved. In 2010, joblessness ran at 13%. Today, it’s 18%. During the past two years, coronavirus has hammered the economy, wiping out its tourism sector and leading to an unprecedented wave of clandestine migration. “People are tired,” says Amine Ghali at the Kawakibi Democracy Transition Centre. “They want better schools, better transport, better health care.” For Ghali, while the president has accrued much of the political power of the state, economic reform remains a distant country. “He’s not an economist,” says Ghali. “He has no clever ideas. All his efforts are directed at changing the political system, or pushing the corruption cases he talks about.” Saied continues to ride high in Tunisia’s notoriously shaky polls – likely as much a rejection of past party elites as an embracing of his unique style – but the first signs of cracks can be seen. During a bitter dispute over the site of a landfill with precisely the kind of impoverished neighbourhoods that Saied has championed, the president was forced to send in the country’s police force to deal with protesters. With January and February – Tunisia’s traditional months of protest – looming and no sign of economic development, the prospects of confrontation with a president who has drawn nearly all political power to himself are significant. For Yassine in Zahrouni, little of this carries weight. He has listened to the promises of politicians for years and is still collecting bottles to support a household of five. “It doesn’t matter if I support the president or not,” he says, “None of this will help my situation.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Boris Johnson has said he accepts responsibility for his party’s crushing defeat in the North Shropshire byelection but also defiantly blamed the media for focusing on “politics and politicians” following a string of allegations about Tory sleaze and breaches of lockdown rules. The prime minister said he understood “why people were and are frustrated” in North Shropshire, where the Lib Dems overturned a huge Conservative majority to take the seat by 6,000 votes. Wearing a mask on camera, he told broadcasters: “Clearly the vote in North Shropshire is a very disappointing result. I totally understand people’s frustrations. I hear what the voters are saying in North Shropshire. In all humility I have got to accept that verdict. “I understand that what voters want us, as the government, to be doing at all times is to focus on them and their priorities.” However, Johnson went on to claim that the biggest problem of the last few weeks was that what “people have been hearing is a litany of stuff about politics and politicians and stuff that isn’t about them and things we can do to make life better”. He brushed off questions about his personal responsibility for the scandals over how a Tory donor funded his wallpaper in Downing Street and the allegations of parties in Downing Street during lockdown, appearing to blame the media for focusing too much on these issues. Pressed on what needed to change, Johnson said: “With all humility and respect, those questions are exactly the kind of questions about politics, politicians, the running of government – I’m going to have to fix of course – but the real issues people want to focus on is NHS – investment we’re putting in – and what we’re doing to tackle pandemic. That’s the number one priority for the government.” Asked about the Tory MPs who are warning him that he could be removed as leader if he does not get a grip in No 10, Johnson refused to answer on the grounds that it was a question about politics and politicians. “Can I remind you of everything I’ve been saying in this interview? That is exactly the kind of question that breaks the golden rule,” he said. “We’re focusing on getting the job done. We’re focusing on trying to make sure we don’t only have the fastest vaccine rollout, fastest booster rollout, as we’ve already done, but we’re able through the get boosted now campaign to avert the most serious consequences of Omicron. “That is what the government is going to do now, that’s what I’m focused on, and do you know what, I think that’s what people would want me to be focused on.” Following the result, some Conservative MPs have warned Johnson that he is on his last chance, with the 1922 Committee allowing letters of no confidence to be emailed to it over the Christmas holidays. Earlier this week, he suffered the biggest rebellion of his premiership, with 100 MPs voting against his plan B of Covid restrictions to deal with Omicron, meaning he had to rely on Labour votes to get the curbs through parliament. Sir Roger Gale, a veteran Tory backbencher, said the prime minister was living on borrowed time. “I think this has to be seen as a referendum on the prime minister’s performance and I think that the prime minister is now in last orders time,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “Two strikes already: one earlier this week in the vote in the Commons and now this. One more strike and he’s out.”For several weeks this summer, Agnes Olowogboye was simultaneously monitoring flight tickets to Lagos from her home in London and checking the news for updates on Nigeria’s coronavirus restrictions. Unable to visit Nigeria last year because of the pandemic, she was giddy with excitement at the prospect of being reuniting with family and friends – and partying. “Ticket prices were going up every single day and within a few minutes of checking, the cost went up by another £100,” says the 27-year-old financial regulations consultant, who finally booked her flight in early September. “This is my chance to do Detty December, enjoy the nightlife and go for parties with all of my friends.” In Birmingham, the digital media strategist Bolu Ayeye was doing a similarly rigorous flight search. “It’s almost the same way English people love their summers,” says Ayeye. “December in Nigeria is a compressed festival period. Being around Nigerian food, Nigerian entertainment and friends … I’ve discovered that I like my family much more than I realise.” Thousands of Nigerians from around the globe make a triumphant return home every December not just to reunite with relatives and friends, but also to participate in one of the world’s biggest Christmas extravaganzas. They have been nicknamed IJGBs – a reference to the phrase “I Just Got Back”, which peppers conversations. In recent years, this seasonal hedonism has been christened “Detty [a corruption of dirty] December”. Beyond the cities and towns, some Nigerians also reunite in their villages. But the effect is felt most in Lagos, the lifeblood of an entertainment industry projected to be worth $10.5bn (£7.9bn) by 2023, and a hub of the Yoruba ethnic group, for whom the art of partying or faaji is a cardinal element of life. According to the World Bank, remittance inflows accounted for 4% of Nigeria’s GDP last year; that purchasing power comes to the fore when the diaspora arrives. All of these factors combine to turbo-charge the already frenetic pace in this megacity of an estimated 18 million people with more than enough energy to overshadow its infamous power cuts and security concerns. Traffic jams intensify, obliging drivers and their passengers to take in the flamboyant decor and lighting that pops up at roundabouts and along main roads. The celebrations take place at house parties, street carnivals, beach hangouts and nightclubs spanning the mainland and island districts of Lagos. It is soundtracked by Afro-pop, which donated at least two of the world’s most popular anthems this summer – WizKid’s Essence and CKay’s Love Nwantiti – and other genres from fuji to highlife and the alté sound. Jokes resurface about relationships being invaded by free-spending, accent-toting dating prospects. Multinationals and the state government struggle to outdo each other with boisterous end-of-year concerts graced by superstars, laid on for free. From mid-December, promoters also make a killing from concerts that are pricey by local standards but relatively affordable compared with shows by the same artists in Europe and the US. Fireboy DML, one of the breakout artists of the last couple of years, says these homecoming gigs allow performers to engage with their fans and spread positive energy. “I wanted something totally intimate and chill, but with the energy I’m getting since I announced the show, it’s gonna be a rave,” says the musician, whose first headline show in Lagos this December will be sandwiched between tours of the US. “It’s the time when the city fully comes to life and everyone’s in high spirits. The hustle continues, but we also love to have fun so, despite the restraints of Covid-19, we still find ways to enjoy ourselves.” The Afrobeats star Davido told CNN in a recent interview that playing Lagos in December was like performing at “our own Super Bowl”. The party season is also a boon for the city’s hospitality and tourism sector. Oluwatoyosi Adegunle, a representative for Xenia Lifestyle, a Lagos hospitality brand which launched a flat-rental service last March, says that December has been the busiest month for reservations. “We have noticed a 55% increase in extended-stay bookings (four nights or more),” she says. “The recent happenings around Covid-19 and the Omicron variant seemed like a major blocker, but with the restrictions being lifted we are primed to be fully booked for the rest of the year.” Returnees are also lured by weddings, which are often scheduled to coincide with friends and families converging for Christmas, and are routinely all-day affairs with after-parties. Some have had to cancel their trips this year due to unforeseen challenges, such as the recent decision by Emirates to suspend flights to Lagos against the backdrop of a quiet diplomatic row between Nigeria and the UAE. Others, optimistic about travel restrictions lifting and the health situation improving, have jetted in or are preparing to do so. For returnees like Olowogboye, early preparation was worth the stress, and she cannot wait to – among other things – dance uninhibited to biripo, the folk music of her home town, Ondo, in south-western Nigeria. “When I was planning this trip, I actually checked YouTube because lots of people vlog their Detty December journey, concerts to go to, hotspots, what to avoid,” she says.Cheaper Jacob’s Creek and Hardys wines, Tim Tams and surfboards for Britain, cut-price Scotch, cars and clothing for Australia. While things might not be going so well for the England cricket team in Australia, the UK government is talking up Anglo-Aussie relations. Almost six months on from an agreement in principle, the UK and Australia have signed a free trade deal described as “historic” for its status as the first negotiated from scratch since leaving the EU. Ministers expect the deal to unlock £10.4bn of additional trade, saying it will boost Britain’s economy, increase wages and eliminate tariffs on 100% of UK exports. For a government under as much pressure as England’s toiling batsmen, it’s a rare bit of good news to talk about while everything else looks a bit grim. In economic terms, however, the agreement is expected to cut prices of Australian products in British shops by little more than a pound a year per household, and had been expected to add just 0.02% to the size of the UK economy over 15 years by the government’s own admission. Updated estimates released by the international trade department on Friday – using a refreshed modelling approach and accounting for the finer details of the deal agreed in principle – suggest it could now be worth as much as 0.08%. Still, it remains more golden duck than golden goose. British farmers are concerned the deal could damage their industry, while Greenpeace has warned that UK consumers could be eating Australian beef linked to deforestation, flown across the world at a time when demands are growing for sustainable produce with fewer miles between farm and fork. Union leaders are also concerned the deal has no effective means of enforcing labour rights, or protections for migrant workers from exploitation. The TUC warns that public services are not sufficiently protected, while there is a lack of safeguards on the usage of workers’ data and NHS data. Advocates argue the deal does not lower standards or expose British businesses to unfair competition. Company bosses have broadly welcomed the deal, saying there are opportunities for exporters with speedier, cheaper access, as well as generous provisions on labour mobility for under-35s. There are hopes to export more green technologies and digital services, with lower barriers to trade, opening up Australia for UK businesses and providing more choice for British consumers. The government’s critics may say there are similar, bigger opportunities closer to home. Trade with the EU was worth more than £550bn in imports and exports last year, compared with £15bn with Australia. However, Brexit imposes barriers that will have a lasting impact. According to the National Audit Office about 64% of total UK trade is covered by free trade deals, against the government’s aim of bringing 80% under such deals by 2022. Beyond cold hard economics however, such deals can support broader geopolitical objectives and expand Britain’s influence. But the audit office warned the benefits were difficult to quantify, while chiding ministers for racing to sign new deals without sufficient parliamentary scrutiny. But the deal may be crucial for the government’s trade strategy in the near future, with Australia viewed as a gateway to UK membership of the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTTP). Australia is a key member of this free trading area, one of the largest in the world, covering £9tn in GDP across 11 Pacific nations including Japan, Canada, Mexico, New Zealand and Vietnam. UK trade with the group was worth £111bn in 2019 and is growing fast. The deal also follows the Aukus security pact between the UK, US and Australia, under which Canberra was given access to nuclear submarine technology. Ultimately, however, distance matters in global trade. Links such as shared language, common history and like-minded government may help, but eliminating tariffs and opening up market access will only do so much to bring Britain closer to a country on the other side of the world. And as cricket fans might know best, the middle of the night is not always the best time to do business.Deion Sanders is the ultimate jack of all trades. As a college athlete at Florida State he starred at football, baseball and track. Selected fifth in the 1989 NFL draft Sanders instantly proved a triple threat as a cornerback, special teams returner and situational wide receiver. When he wasn’t dazzling on the gridiron he wowed Major League Baseball as a bag-swiping outfielder, becoming the only player to appear in a World Series and Super Bowl. Throughout Neon Deion crackled with charisma and swagger – delighting the masses with his brash fashions, touchdown dances and gift of the gab. In retirement he continued to enthrall as a television analyst, preacher and reality TV star. Still: when the football hall of famer decided to try his hand at coaching football, it felt like a gig too far. Although he gathered some experience at the high school level in Texas, Sanders looked ill-prepared to make the jump to Jackson State – a south-central Mississippi outpost at quite a remove from the spotlight. A historically black college (or HBCU), Jackson State competes in the shadow of the Alabamas and Michigans of the land and operates under an anemic athletic budget. Sanders’s bold move looked like a bored celebrity trying his hand at coaching and threatened to go down like his attempt to run a charter school, an abject failure. But in less than a year Sanders has established himself as a whiz at this job, too. This fall he led the 11-win Tigers to their first conference title in 14 years, and was named as one of the nation’s best college football coaches. On Saturday the Tigers play South Carolina State in the Celebration Bowl — the de facto championship game for HBCUs. His son Shedeur, the Tigers’ star quarterback, was recognized as one of the nation’s best freshmen. All the while the Tigers broke attendance records, averaging more than 42,000 spectators. The star power of Coach Prime – that’s his name; don’t leave out the “coach” part – has turned out to be an effective lure for top-shelf talent. On Wednesday he shocked college football by signing Travis Hunter, the nation’s top-rated high school prospect. A multi-talented player in the Sanders mold, Hunter chose Jackson State after committing to Florida State, the college where Sanders made his name. Clips of Hunter’s dramatic commitment reveal were quickly followed by images of Florida State fans burning Sanders’s jersey. This wasn’t a one-off. This was a turning point. This was the first year the NCAA allowed players to profit from their name, image and likeness. Sanders, a shrewd businessman who once ranked among pro sport’s highest earners, pledged to get his players paid as soon as the rule went into effect. At midnight on 1 July Tigers defensive tackle Antwan Owens was first to cash in. (Although Sanders has shot down speculation that the potential for endorsements is what put Hunter’s commitment over the top.) This year also saw ESPN add historically black college games to its broadcast slate, a major coup for schools that held a monopoly on Black talent until the 1970s, when the best high-school players started to commit to well-funded programs where the student and staff body are overwhelmingly white. The tipping advantage has had coaches as well as players in the Black football community reconsidering HBCUs as a viable career path. Recently, former NFL head coach Hue Jackson and Heisman trophy winner Eddie George took jobs at Grambling and Tennessee State, respectively. Where Sanders breaks from the herd is that he’s a bona fide celebrity, one who not only resonates with young athletes – and, unlike many coaches, enjoyed playing success at the very highest level – but meets them where they are. He has social media clout too; a few weeks ago Sanders opened his program to a buzzy Jackson State alum named Brittany Renner, an Instagram-famous model with a self-styled reputation for dating athletes for money rather than love. (A recent post-partum uncoupling from Charlotte Hornets forward PJ Washington has made her regular gossip blog fodder.) It’s difficult to imagine Nick Saban convening a similar clinic. On a recent episode of his podcast, 21 and Prime, Sanders said, “if I had her in my ear, if I had been sitting in that room at Florida State and had her come and lay it out like she laid it out, if I had I would be at least $20m richer.” Still: for as much as Sanders is out there, the spotlight has a way of finding him – not the other way around. For all of his flash as a player, his work ethic and commitment to his craft were unassailable. When he decided to abandon his baseball career to focus on the NFL, he swung the fortunes of the San Francisco 49ers and Dallas Cowboys, helping them to Super Bowl victories. At the ebb of his career in Washington and Baltimore, Sanders was a celebrated mentor. At Jackson State, Sanders gives lie to the idea that coaches can either win the press conference or win the locker room. Not surprisingly, the ease with which Sanders has found success has led to considerable speculation about his future. He has reportedly interviewed for multiple jobs with teams from the Power Five, the elite level of college football. The longer he stays in Jackson, it seems, the more likely his rivals will be circling to halt his progress by any means necessary, not least uncovering potential NCAA violations. For the moment Coach Prime is firmly in his element. Who knew he’d be a master of this one.People who wear “anti-5G” pendants to “protect” themselves from radio frequencies emitted by phone masts have been told by the Dutch nuclear authority that their necklaces are dangerously radioactive. Owners of “quantum pendants” and other “negative ion” jewellery have been advised to store them away, as they have been found to continuously emit ionising radiation. The product alert was issued by the Dutch authority for nuclear safety and radiation protection (ANVS) in relation to 10 products. “Exposure to ionising radiation can cause adverse health effects,” the safety agency said. “Due to the potential health risk they pose, these consumer products containing radioactive materials are therefore prohibited by law. Ionising radiation can damage tissue and DNA and can cause, for example, a red skin. Only low levels of radiation have been measured on these specific products. “However, someone who wears a product of this kind for a prolonged period (a year, 24 hours a day) could expose themselves to a level of radiation that exceeds the stringent limit for skin exposure that applies in the Netherlands. To avoid any risk, the ANVS calls on owners of such items not to wear them from now on.” As governments across the world have started to establish the infrastructure for fast 5G internet, a range of groups have emerged voicing fears over the health effects of mobile telephony. The concerns vary from questioning the level of research that has been done into the impact of radio frequencies and close proximity to masts, to allegations that 5G is the cause of anything from headaches to immunodeficiencies. The World Health Organization has said that 5G is safe and that there is nothing fundamentally different about the physical characteristics of the radio signals produced by 5G compared with those produced by 3G and 4G. Despite this, an industry suggesting that certain types of jewellery, including one product mentioned in the Dutch alert that claims to “utilise pure minerals and volcanic ash that are extracted from the Earth,” has burgeoned. Last year, 15 EU member states called on the European Commission to address a spate of conspiracy theories that had led to arson attacks against telecommunications masts.Conservative MPs have been taking out their frustration on England’s chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, for what they see as his promotion of “lockdown by stealth”. Chief among them is Joy Morrissey, who said Whitty should “defer” to politicians like her. In a now deleted tweet, Morrissey, who is on the government payroll as a parliamentary aide, said: “Perhaps the covid unelected public health spokesperson should defer to what our ELECTED members of parliament and the prime minister have decided. I know it’s difficult to remember but this is not how democracy works. This is not a public health socialist state.” So who should the public trust on the pandemic – the chief medical officer or the MP for Beaconsfield? Their respective CVs may offer a clue. Prof Chris Whitty CB FRCP FFPH FMedSci Age: 55. Occupation: chief medical officer for England and practising NHS consultant physician. Previous jobs: acting chief scientific adviser; director of research at the Department for International Development; chief scientific adviser to the Department of Health; head of the National Institute for Health Research Education; consultant physician at University College London hospitals; professor of public and international health at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine. Education: doctorate in medical science from Oxford; two diplomas, in tropical medicine and hygiene, and economics; three master’s degrees, in epidemiology, medical law and business administration. Awards: Companion of the Order of Bath; fellow of the Academy of Medical Science; honorary doctorate for medical work in the community from the University of Plymouth. What people say about him: Prof David Mabey, an infectious disease specialist at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine says: “Chris is a polymath. He is really extraordinary. Since I’ve known him he’s done a diploma in economics, a degree in law and an MBA in his spare time. And in terms of his research, he covers all the disciplines: clinical medicine, epidemiology, health economics, social science. That’s really what makes him unique. He is the best man for the job, we are extremely lucky to have him.” Joy Morrissey MP Age: 40. Occupation: member of parliament for Beaconsfield and parliamentary private secretary to the justice secretary, Dominic Raab. Previous jobs: Ealing councillor; actor including a role in a “bonkfest” TV movie called Geek Mythology, about a man who acquires a magical statue that makes him irresistible to women. Education: master’s degree in European social policy from the London School of Economics. Awards: shortlisted for the Conservative London mayoral candidacy in 2021 but beaten by Shaun Bailey. What people say about her: The Financial Times said she was a “passionate Brexiteer motivated by social injustice”. Morrissey has said of herself: “I don’t really care that much what people think, particularly if I think I’m right.” Her campaign to offer all homes and businesses a portrait of the Queen was dismissed as “Stalinist”.At hand is a plot to destroy American democracy from within. Its organizers have infiltrated the highest echelons of state and federal government, and have instigated and condoned acts of violence directed against our elected officials. This might sound far-fetched. But the threat is real and the seditious group is none other than the Republican party. Its target is the 2024 presidential election. Less than a year ago, Donald Trump limped from the White House a badly discredited figure, roundly condemned for having instigated a shocking attack against a coordinate branch of government. The 6 January insurrection seemed like a wake-up call to Republican lawmakers. No longer could they indulge the self-serving story that Trump was simply an uncouth, untraditional president. The reality was stark and undeniable. The president was at heart a petty autocrat, willing to torch democracy to cling to power. The wake-up call went unheeded. The critical inflection point came during the second impeachment trial, when Republican senators had the opportunity to join Democrats in condemning Trump. And while seven Republican senators voted along with all 50 Democrats to convict, this still left the Senate 10 votes short of the 67 needed to hold Trump to account. Emblematic of the Republican refusal to reckon was the stance adopted by Mitch McConnell, who only weeks before had lost his position as Senate majority leader. On the floor of the Senate, McConnell delivered a powerful condemnation of Trump – only then to vote to acquit. Insisting that an ex-president was “constitutionally not eligible for conviction”, McConnell cynically overlooked the fact that the purpose of the trial was not to remove Trump from office but to bar him from ever running again. And while McConnell presumably was hoping to mollify the Republican base while keeping Trump himself sidelined, that strategy backfired grandly. The acquittal served as the first step to Trump’s rapid rehabilitation and the further radicalization of the Republican party. Ten months ago, McConnell castigated Trump for spinning “increasingly wild myths about a reverse landslide election that was being stolen in some secret coup”. Now these same myths have been elevated to first principles of the Republican party, as the party has come to effectively close its doors to those unwilling to lie about the 2020 election. In George Orwell’s 1984, Winston Smith had to be tortured into declaring that 2+2=5. In the case of today’s Republicans, no torture has been necessary. Opportunism and cowardice has more than sufficed to make Republicans across the land espouse a noxious falsehood as an axiomatic truth. No less ominous has been the whitewashing of the insurrection itself. Ten months ago, McConnell declared the “mob … assault[ed] the Capitol in [Trump’s] name. These criminals were carrying his banners, hanging his flags, and screaming their loyalty to him.” Hardly a day passes without fresh revelations from the House select committee, documenting the shocking steps Trump contemplated in his effort to remain in the White House. Yet despite the intrepid work of Liz Cheney, the larger Republican response has been to distort and suppress the committee’s findings. Paul Gosar, the Arizona congressman who recently posted an animated video that depicted him slashing to death his House colleague Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, has recast the insurrectionists as patriots. Others, including Wisconsin Senator Ron Johnson, have insisted the attack was a false-flag operation, a conspiracy theory given traction by Tucker Carlson’s three-party series. Republican state lawmakers have in turn weaponized the lies about the 2020 election and the 6 January insurrection to gain control over the local administration of elections. Bad enough are the 33 laws that have been passed in 19 states designed to make it harder for persons of color to vote. But more disturbing still are the Republican party’s radical efforts to purge officials who resisted Trump’s attempt to subvert the 2020 results and replace them with loyalists who have bought into the big lie. Republican lawmakers in Wisconsin are seeking to eliminate the state’s bipartisan elections commission altogether and to install themselves as the sole arbiter of state election results. And more than a dozen other red states have similarly enacted laws to transform the counting and review of ballots cast into a carefully monitored partisan exercise. By the time insurrectionists stormed the Capitol on 6 January, the 2020 election was a fait accompli. True, Trump tried desperately to forestall Congress from counting and accepting the duly certified state electoral certificates attesting to Biden’s victory. What ultimately frustrated Trump’s putsch attempt was the fact that election officials in Arizona, Georgia, Wisconsin, Michigan and Pennsylvania had already accurately and honestly reported the results. Many of these officials were Republicans. They acted in simple defense of democracy and were rewarded with death threats, ostracism and now ouster. Come 2024 these quiet custodians of democracy will have been replaced with loyalists and hacks ready to muddy the waters or supply the votes to secure a Trump win. The 2024 election will not witness a repeat of the events of 6 January. By the time Congress tallies the electoral votes on 6 January 2025, the putsch could be complete. And if it is, it will have been staged in the small offices of the election officials in the key swing states. And it’s all being scripted now. Lawrence Douglas is the author, most recently, of Will He Go? Trump and the Looming Election Meltdown in 2020. He is a contributing opinion writer for the Guardian US and teaches at Amherst CollegeHeather Knight has said that her England side will “fight fire with fire” when they travel to Australia in January aiming to secure a first Ashes series win since 2014. “We’ve got to take the game to Australia,” Knight said. “Any team that’s been successful against them has gone at them. The Aussies are at their best when they’re on top of you and trying to exploit weakness, so we’ve got to make sure we’re trying to punch first and be aggressive, and try to win those key battles early. We’ve got to be bold.” When the sides last met in summer 2019, England were humiliated in a 12-4 series defeat – the lowlight being a 194-run capitulation in an ODI at Canterbury. It was a debacle that led to coach Mark Robinson being fired and a total overhaul of the domestic system, including the introduction of the first domestic professional contracts. The forthcoming multiformat series, which begins with a Test in Canberra from 27-30 January and is followed by three T20s and three ODIs, will be a touchstone of progress towards the ECB’s aim of “catching up” with Australia’s world-leading domestic setup. Australia, the T20 world champions, go into the series as firm favourites but Knight, the England captain, said the memory of the 2019 series had “created real motivation” for her side to perform better this time around. “We’ve improved as a team, we’ve got more leaders in the side since 2019. It would be one of the biggest achievements of my captaincy if we are able to get the Ashes back down under.” There are few surprises in the 17-strong squad which was announced on Friday – it is almost identical to the team which faced New Zealand at home in September. The 17-year-old Alice Capsey, who starred for Oval Invincibles with a 50 on debut at Lord’s during the Hundred, is one notable omission. She is, however, one of 12 names included in the England A squad which for the first time will accompany the senior group throughout the tour, participating in warm-up games against the main squad and matches against an Australian A team. “She’s definitely one for the future, but I do think we need to be careful not to overegg our players,” Knight said of Capsey. “She’s young, she’s very talented. We’ll see how she develops and how she goes on Australian pitches.” With England flying straight from Australia to defend their 50-over World Cup title in New Zealand, there is also a chance for A-squad players to make a case for selection in that tournament. The left-arm spinner Kirstie Gordon, who lost her England contract this year, will be one of those keen to fight her way back into contention. For now, the challenge for the selected players is to avoid contracting Covid over the Christmas period as the Omicron variant wreaks havoc. “We’ve got to do the best we can to mitigate as much risk as we can,” Knight said. “We know the consequences if we are to catch it. I think the girls will take that responsibility seriously.”Quentin Blake’s ascent to national treasure status has been fuelled by a 70-year career as an illustrator, most prominently of children’s books, and works by one writer in particular. His distinctive and revelatory conjuring of Roald Dahl’s world is one of the glories of late-20th century illustration, but it has sometimes masked other aspects of a remarkable career that’s been about a lot more than just the genius misanthrope of Great Missenden. A new BBC documentary, Quentin Blake: The Drawing of My Life, allows for a wider appreciation, opening as it does with the 89-year-old illustrator confronted by 30ft of empty canvas and an invitation to fill it with an artwork that tells the story of his creative life. The broad brush of biography is soon filled in: his 1930s upbringing in suburban Sidcup, south-east London, from where Blake first got his work published in Punch while still at school; his decision to read English at Cambridge rather than going to art school; his 60s career as an in-demand illustrator (his Penguin paperback jackets for the likes of Kingsley Amis’s Lucky Jim have an attractively louche appeal); and as an author himself, most notably A Drink of Water, made with the writer and longtime friend and collaborator, John Yeoman. Blake’s association with children’s literature began to properly cement itself in the 1970s and the BBC has unearthed some evocative period clips of Blake’s first forays into children’s literature, sporting big-collared shirts and luxuriant sideburns while drawing on children’s shows such as Jackanory. A string of luminaries including David Walliams, Lauren Child and Michael Rosen dissect what we might call Blakean characteristics: his attraction to the eccentric, mischievous and anarchistic; his strong sense of empathy, and his understanding of characters – people, animals, whatever – outside the mainstream. “I like to think of books as taking people away,” he says, “not just to places but to experience how other people feel and live and react. It’s about how to live more.” Blake’s many commissions have taken him far away from children’s books. He has a long association with France, where he was awarded the Légion d’honneur, and has illustrated, among other things, The Hunchback of Notre Dame and Voltaire’s Candide. He has provided paintings for maternity centres, and depicted moments from a defiantly ordinary everyday life (washing up, walking in the rain) for an eating disorder unit, to offer the patients glimpses of normality and stability. An exhibition, We Live in Worrying Times, initially opened for just a day before lockdown last year (“Suddenly the title seemed awfully appropriate”). In it, Blake “wanted to do something that reflected the distresses we read about all the time”, adding that he has he found things in the project “that I hadn’t done before. I mean it’s partly age, I expect, as anything else. He adds: “I’m not so committed to cheering everybody up, you know.” Not that Blake expects this to be his last word. He recalls doing a drawing of himself that said: “From now the rules of semi-retirement will come into play and there will be a lot of saying no.” “That was 1998,” he says, “and I haven’t stopped since.” Quentin Blake: The Drawing of My Life is on Christmas Day, 4.10pm, BBC Two. Blake’s progress: from the BFG to birthing pools The BFG by Roald Dahl, 1984 (pictured top) Over a dinner, Dahl and Blake went into detail on the BFG’s clothing: aprons, boots, belts and hats. Eventually they agreed on everything but his footwear and Blake returned home. Shortly after, a parcel arrived, containing one of Dahl’s own sandals. “They are Norwegian I think,” says Blake, “I’d never seen them anywhere else. And that was his origins. That’s what the BFG wears.” Mural in the Kershaw ward at Kensington &amp; Chelsea Mental Health Centre, London, 2006 The Drawing of My Life spotlights Blake’s hospital projects, which include a series of murals for a centre looking after older people with mental health problems, filled with lively folk climbing trees to play instruments or swing from the branches. “They encourage us to do all the things we’re not supposed to do,” says one resident. Drawing for the delivery suites at Rosie Birth Centre, Cambridge, 2012 This image of a mother and baby in water was made for the walls of the birthing pool. A midwife at the unit, Susan Prytherch, says Blake picked up on the way that new mothers “gaze and gaze and gaze” before touching their babies: “We see this gaze all the time.” From Hard-Boiled Legs by Michael Rosen, 1987 Blake began working with Rosen in the mid 70s and they have collaborated ever since. Back then “the idea that you wrote about childhood in a sort of rumbustious sort of way was a bit new”, recalls Rosen. “I was enjoying naughtiness and Quentin picked up on that.” • This article was amended on 19 December 2021 to remove a paragraph that had been duplicated in error.I don’t know about you lot, but a full week before Christmas never used to count as last minute in my book, and I know many of you will have got your Christmas supplies stashed away already. That said, there are inevitably things you will have forgotten – bottles that have already been drunk, say, or unexpected invites to take account of. The drinkers who get short-changed most often are those who aren’t actually drinking, so it’s exceptionally good news that I’ve found an Australian alcohol-free sparkler (see today’s pick below) that is a pretty decent, if medium-dry, substitute for champagne. And if, on the other hand, you still need to top up on full-strength party fizz, Majestic’s attractively creamy Mademoiselle Marguerite Blanquette de Limoux (12%) at £9.99 on the mix-six deal is a decent late standby. Thinking of the main event, we often tend to plan a wine to go with the turkey, but you may well want something different on Boxing Day or the days after that. I’d suggest a beaujolais to go with the turkey sandwiches – the Co-op’s delicious Chiroubles in today’s pick, say – a riesling if you’re giving the leftover bird a post-Christmas Asian spin, and a creamy chardonnay or chenin if you’re turning it into a pie or pasta bake. Meanwhile, if you’re worried that you haven’t got enough basic whites and reds in, I’d recommend hitting your local Lidl. The store has just introduced its latest Wine Tour, and I’m a big fan of the rich, generous, warming Séguret Côtes du Rhône Villages Les Aumoniers 2020 (14.5%). At £7.99, it isn’t exactly bargain basement (prices have gone up at Lidl, as elsewhere), but it is still good value for money. Tesco’s excellent Finest Côtes-du-Rhône Villages 2020 at £8 (or £7 if you’re a Clubcard member) would be an equally sound choice. And I know I keep banging on about this, but do please buy at least one bottle from your local independent, especially if you’re on the lookout for something a little different. I recently discovered a brilliant bottleshop and deli in Bristol called Cave, and fell madly in love with an extraordinary Greek red from Ktima Ligas called Bucephale (14%), named after Alexander the Great’s horse. It’s made only in exceptional vintages (in this case 2018) from the xinomavro grape, but tastes like barolo, and is one of those magical wines you can’t stop thinking about. At £42.50 (or £210 for six bottles from North &amp; South Wines), it’s expensive, I know, but it would make a great present for a wine-lover or Christmas treat for yourself. Five last-minute bottles Edenvale Sparling Cuvée £4.99 Averys, Laithwaites. One of the best alcohol-free fizzes I’ve ever tasted. Off-dry, but pleasantly so, and a bit like a sparkling riesling. Chiroubles Beaujolais Cru 2019 £10 selected Co-ops, 13.5%. Bright, fresh and deliciously fruity: perfect for the turkey sarnies. Cimarosa Mendoza Malbec £4.49 Lidl, 13.5%. A useful, very cheap and surprisingly drinkable red that you can cook with, mull or take to a party. Winemaster’s Lot Vacqueyras Blanc 2020 £9.99 Aldi, 13.5%. A richly textured, savoury white that you could drink with the turkey or roast pork. Brilliant value, too, and a good bottle to gift. Pillitteri Vidal Icewine 2018, £13.99 a half-bottle Lidl, 10.5%. Wonderfully lush, gloriously sweet Canadian ice wine that would make a great gift (it comes in a neat box, too). More for sipping on its own than with a dessert. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.comBirdwatchers around the world are being called on to turn detective and help in a search for some of the rarest birds on Earth. The global Search for Lost Birds, launched today, presents researchers, conservationists and the global birdwatching community with a Top 10 Most Wanted list of birds that have been lost to science, including the Siau scops owl, which was last seen in 1866. “The Siau scops owl is known from the small Indonesian island of Siau,” said Roger Safford, of BirdLife International. “A stuffed specimen was brought back to Europe in 1866, then nothing. Most of the forest on Siau has since been cut down. “But there have been rumours of an owl on Siau. To find a species that hasn’t been seen for over 150 years … imagine that.” The Most Wanted list, a joint effort between Re:wild, American Bird Conservancy and BirdLife International, also includes the South Island kōkako in New Zealand, Peru’s Vilcabamba brush-finch and the Himalayan quail in northern India. The 10 birds are an extension of Re:wild’s Search for Lost Species programme, which was launched in 2017. There has not been a documented sighting of any of the 10 birds in the wild for at least a decade. Reasons for their disappearance include climate change, habitat loss and logging, mining, hunting and invasive species. But none are classified as extinct on the IUCN red list of threatened species. It is hoped the search could be a catalyst for greater conservation efforts. “Birds are declining globally, but some have seemingly vanished to science,” said Barney Long, at Re:wild. “If we know where these lost species are, we can put in conservation measures to conserve and recover them.” Birdwatchers are being encouraged to register any sightings of the 10 species on the eBird platform of Cornell University’s Lab of Ornithology. “These Top 10 lost birds are really just the most extreme examples of gaps in our collective knowledge about birds,” said John C Mittermeier, at American Bird Conservancy. “But there are many mysteries to solve and findings to contribute that are incredibly useful for science and conservation. “Maybe there’s a local park where no one has recorded any recent bird sightings; a species that hasn’t been confirmed breeding in your local state or county; or a town where no one has done a Christmas bird count before. In some cases, all it takes to confirm the rediscovery of a lost species is a phone camera, as was the case with the black-browed babbler last year.” Two expeditions are planned next year to search for the Siau scops owl in Indonesia and dusky tetraka in Madagascar. “The world’s birds are not in great shape,” said Safford. “There are around 11,000 species on the planet, and nearly half are declining. One in eight is threatened with extinction.” The threats include agriculture, logging, hunting and trapping, invasive alien species, residential and commercial development, fire and the long-term threat of the climate crisis, he said. “Birds don’t get the attention that large mammals, like lions, tigers, elephants and pandas attract,” added Safford. “But birds play a huge role in preserving ecosystems that humans and life on this planet are part of. Birds control pests, clean up waste and spread seeds. Around 5% of plants that humans use for food or medicine are pollinated by birds.” Searching for “lost” birds also offers potential knock-on effects for nature. “Of course it matters whether Siau scops owl or other lost birds, like the Negros fruit-dove, survive or not,” Safford said. “Every extinction matters. We should do all in our power to find them again. Assuming we succeed, we must then use what we learn to conserve them and also help the many other species that share the extraordinary places where they live.” The Top 10 Most Wanted Lost Birds Dusky tetraka, last documented in 1999 in Madagascar South Island kōkako, last seen in 2007 in New Zealand Jerdon’s courser, last seen in 2009 in India Prigogine’s nightjar (also known as Itombwe nightjar), last seen in 1955 in the Democratic Republic of Congo Cuban kite, last seen in 2010 in Cuba Negros fruit-dove, last seen in 1953 in the Philippines Santa Marta sabrewing, last seen in 2010 in Colombia Vilcabamba brush-finch, last seen in 1968 in Peru Himalayan quail, last seen in 1877 in India Siau scops owl, last seen in 1866 in Indonesia Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresHaving just the right words to explain what’s happening keeps you from feeling, well, crazy. When the world learned of the passing of bell hooks, the renowned feminist, public intellectual, author, and professor on Wednesday, at her home in Berea, Kentucky, it was the value and accessibility of her words that resonated with Black women, whose understanding of themselves and their own work was transformed by hooks. One day in her 20s, the right words came to Natalie Bullock Brown. Her then boyfriend gave her copy of Sisters of the Yam: Black Women and Self-Recovery (1993), which made her feel seen and loved. Through tears and hard swallows, Bullock Brown, now a documentary film-maker and interdisciplinary studies professor at North Carolina State University, revealed how the world broke open when she first inhaled those pages. hooks “inspired and motivated me to want to understand what I was experiencing,” said Bullock Brown, describing the ways she had come crashing into sexism and racism as a girl, then a woman. “I felt pricked. I felt like, ‘Oh my, God, she’s talking to me.’ I wanted to heal. That’s really what Sisters of the Yam is about.” For so many, the beauty of hooks, known for such titles as Ain’t I A Woman? (1981), All About Love (1999), and Teaching to Transgress (1994), was her ability to bring philosophy to the people, said Saida Grundy, a feminist sociologist of race and ethnicity and a professor at Boston University. “There is this idea that of all the humanities, philosophy is sort of the most erudite, the most prestigious or the most inaccessible, and what she’s doing is inviting Black people in particular but really marginalized people [in general] into this space of thinking about their own experience in ways of critical thinking or esoteric exercise,” Grundy said. In empowering people “to have some command over how you think about yourself”, hers was a language that radically changed how Black women process their lives, Grundy said. “There is nothing that should be inaccessible about marginalized people being able to make thought of their own lives. That’s powerful.” kihana miraya ross, a professor of African American studies at Northwestern University, said hooks’ writing had gripped her as a graduate student. “Her writing is so powerful and so important, but it’s also so clear. She has always been a role model for me in that way: no shade to people who don’t write like that, but I think that when you can say things clearly it means you understand what you’re saying.” The accessibility of hooks’ words was exactly what Bullock Brown said she needed at a time when she felt all over the place. “I didn’t really realize my value,” she said. “I didn’t recognize the issues that are specific to Black women and the ways that I was experiencing them. It was like a beautiful, really loving way to just kind of help me to begin to be centered and grounded in some reality and truth that may have taken me longer to really reconcile.” Like me, Bullock Brown grew up in what I describe as “the remnant aura” of the civil rights movement in my book US Civil Rights Trail: A Traveler’s Guide to the People, Places, and Events that Made the Movement (2021). Surrounded by Black striving and excellence, there was a palpable energy that suggested to Black girls that it was up to us to make good on the opportunities won by that movement. I’ve realized I grew up bound up in a sense of duty to excel but also a requirement to know my place. This surfaced in big and small ways, like on Sundays when my teen cousin, Reginald, would stop by for dinner, and my grandmother would order me to set a plate at the head of the table for him. I didn’t mind feeding him, but resisted the social programming to promote him to a place of honor simply because he was born male. Similarly, Bullock Brown said she spent years unpacking the social messages to conform to specific, and limiting, ideas of what a woman is supposed to be – married with children – messages imparted in particular by her father. “Part of the reason why I needed language is because there was a way my potential, my ability, even my own brilliance, to whatever extent that might exist, was muted because I’m a woman, because I was a girl,” she said. “A part of that experience was also not being encouraged to trust my own thoughts.” A bespoke language created by hooks helped Bullock Brown learn, grow, and forgive. hooks matters because she helped so many of us Black women and girls to trust ourselves and articulate why. “Our experiences as Black women and femmes is not going to be universal in the sense that we all go through the same thing; we’re not a monolith,” Bullock Brown said. “And yet, there’s a way that I think bell describes our experience that is both universal and specific.” Deborah Douglas is the co-editor in chief of The Emancipator, a collaboration between Boston University and the Boston Globe, set to begin publishing original commentary in 2022A long post-election hiatus in the Czech Republic has ended after a new government took office, promising urgently to tackle rampant Covid-19 infection rates, inflation, energy prices and a ballooning budget deficit. Ten weeks after decisively winning a general election, a five-party coalition headed by Petr Fiala, the new prime minister, was sworn in by the Czech president, Miloš Zeman, who urged it do “something useful” amid dire warnings of an incipient crisis in the central European country. Zeman, whose ill-health and long hospital stay delayed the government’s inauguration, issued his rallying call at a swearing-in ceremony at the presidential retreat in Lány Castle in rural Bohemia, after which Fiala laid a wreath at the grave of Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk, the founder and first president of Czechoslovakia. “The easiest thing to do would be to just wish you success, but that’s not very specific,” Zeman told the 18-member new cabinet, all of whom underwent Covid tests before being allowed to participate. “I would therefore like to wish you something useful to leave behind. It sounds obvious, but it is not obvious.” Fiala, 57, a former political science professor, becomes the Czech Republic’s 13th prime minister since its formation in 1993 after Czechoslovakia’s dissolution. He replaces Andrej Babiš, a billionaire former oligarch, who has been positioning himself to run for the Czech presidency when Zeman’s term ends in 2023 after his populist government was defeated in last October’s poll. Fiala, leader of Civic Democrat party (ODS) and head of the two-bloc coalition’s biggest faction, Spolu (Together), promised to waste no time in addressing the country’s “huge problems”. “We are not starting in an easy situation, a lot of things in our country have been neglected,” he said. “We want to work from the first moment,” he said. The first meeting of the cabinet on Friday afternoon was scheduled to consider whether to extend a state of emergency instituted last month by the outgoing government to tackle the Covid pandemic. The Czech Republic has one of the world’s worst fatality rates from the virus, with more than 35,000 deaths in a population of 10.7 million. Commentators say any honeymoon period will be short, with Babiš promising stern opposition, helped by his ownership of two daily newspapers and a popular radio station. “Petr Fiala is taking over in easily the most difficult circumstances facing any post-communist prime ministers,” said Albin Sybera, a Czech political analyst. “He could easily and quickly find himself in a crisis situation whipped up by ANO [Action for Dissatisfied Citizens, Babiš’ party] and the far-right Freedom and Direct Democracy, who remain formidable forces.” The new prime minister, an admirer of Margaret Thatcher, has already won a trial of strength by rebuffing Zeman’s attempt to veto the appointment of the new foreign minister, Jan Lipavský, on the grounds of supposedly poor academic qualifications and an allegedly critical stance towards Israel. In an apparent piece of petty score-settling, Vratislav Mynář, the head of Zeman’s office, obliquely referenced the disagreement during Friday’s ceremony by announcing the new foreign minister as “Master … I’m sorry, bachelor, Jan Lipavský”. The slip was seen as a contrived allusion to Lipavský having only a bachelor’s rather than a postgraduate degree, a purported reason for the failed veto effort. Analysts suggested Zeman’s move was aimed at retaining influence over foreign policy, which he has tried to orient towards support for the authoritarian regimes in Russia and China.Like me, you probably cannot BELIEVE that after hubris comes nemesis. If only there’d been some clue to this in all that Ancient Greek stuff Boris Johnson is forever wanging on about. Anyway. The prime minister woke this morning in a pre-title sequence set in a silent bedroom. We see the detritus of many discarded lateral flow tests. We see something nasty on the bedsheets. (Less of a horse’s head, more of a Kendall Roy special.) We see a couple of rats slink out of his hair and think: Christ, if that’s what’s front-facing, the picture in his attic must now be technically classed as a biological weapon. Suddenly, the eerie silence is punctured. Ambulance sirens rend the air outside, while in the bedroom, multiple phones start ringing. Somewhere in the house, a baby begins screaming, while the frozen expression on the prime minister’s face simply says: “What just happened?!” Cut to black. CAPTION: “45 DAYS EARLIER …” On 2 November, bubbly British premier Boris Johnson was flying back from Cop26 on a private plane, laughing off world-beatingly high Covid transmission rates at a time when light interventions would have reduced them, and nicely set for dinner with mid-Mesozoic influencer Charles Moore at the all-male Garrick Club. At this fateful repast with his former boss, the newspaper columnist who runs Britain cemented a plot to stop Owen Paterson – rule-breaking MP for ultra-safe North Shropshire – from having to serve a mere 30-day suspension from parliament, apparently on the basis that Johnson’s people can do whatever they like. This morning, North Shropshire has fallen to the Liberal Democrats with the third-biggest swing against the Tories since 1945, with the many, many rule-breaking Christmas parties held last year by Johnson’s people turning out to be a nuclear issue on the doorstep. What can you say? I strongly recommend laughing over spilt milk. Unable to pass legislation on the biggest issue of his premiership and the era without Labour support, Johnson has lost control of the voters who voted to take back control, to say nothing of his batshit backbenchers. His Downing Street lectern reads “Get boosted now”, but might as well say “BEHOLD YOUR WEAKLING KING”. At a Downing Street briefing this week, the chief medical officer explained: “What we’ve got is two epidemics on top of each other.” Yeah, and two press conferences on top of each other. One is being held by Chris Whitty; the other is being gibbered through by a knock-off Richard II, surrounded by useless cronies and unsuccessfully begging parliament for money. (Put that in your Shakespeare book, mate.) “Don’t mix with people you don’t have to,” advised Whitty, who agonisingly has to mix with Boris Johnson. As for the aforementioned backbenchers, of COURSE all the Tory free-speech nuts are now demanding Whitty be silenced, at the same time as refusing to believe that the NHS is under the sort of meaningful pressure that might require even plan B. When they become the last to know about the mind-bending Omicron numbers, and cancer services and so on get even further screwed for the coming year, do remember to thank the likes of Steve Baker for their endless fricking “vision”. The rest of us will mildly observe that the Conservative party is yet again under the control of its bastards. Aside from the New Labour interregnum, the Tory party has been chained to these lunatics and their political ancestors since the early 90s. And so, by extension, has the country. But listen: don’t worry. Because of course – OF COURSE – there is renewed chatter about a leadership contest. A standout report for me this week had Rishi Sunak “quietly letting it be known to Tory MPs that he argued against the introduction of plan B at this stage”. Presumably he let this be known from California, where the chancellor of “the party of business” is twatting about while the hospitality trade collapses. Meanwhile, foreign secretary Liz Truss is “hosting drinks receptions for potential supporters at a discreet private members’ club in Mayfair”. Adorable. What’s not to love about this traditional moment in the Conservative snuff movie cycle? All you have to remember is that no matter how terrible the horrors raining down on the nation, the party will always find time for homicidal self-pleasure, in the form of a mooted leadership contest. We could be standing in the post-apocalyptic ruins of our country, with said apocalypse even caused by the last leader they decided had “special sauce”, and the likes of Liz Truss would still be hosting receptions for supporters at discreet clearings in the rubble. “If you want a drink, you’ll have to distil your own urine – and all I’ll say about the canapés is that you need to catch them first. Anyway: MY VISION.” Speaking of canapés, the prime minister was this week still standing by his allegedly rule-breaking staff, defending them on the basis that they “have worked blindingly hard for a very long time in cooperation with people around the government and across the whole of the public services to do our very best to keep people safe”. What self-pitying bollocks. Is there anything more pathetic than this idea that desk johnnies in Westminster work harder than anyone else in this country? Do me a favour. It’s not going down a mine, is it? It’s not evacuating people from Afghanistan. More to the point, it’s hardly working in an ICU. You don’t actually have to wash public service down with cheese and wine when no one else is allowed to. Honestly, they all want to be in the room where it happens, and when they are, they moan about the hours. So as we seemingly stare down the barrel of another grim and restrictive winter – in which no one has done more to undermine their own public health message than they themselves – Downing Street staff, from the prime minister downwards, are reminded that there is a very easy solution to all this. Other jobs are available – why not start looking around? Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistAn aspiring artist has been found guilty of murdering one of the UK’s wealthiest landowners and attempting to murder his own mother while being locked down with them at their Dorset mansion because of Covid. Thomas Schreiber, 35, attacked Sir Richard Sutton, 83, in his study and followed the multimillionaire upstairs to deliver the fatal blows as he tried to call for help. Schreiber repeatedly stabbed his mother, Anne Schreiber, 66, in the kitchen, injuring her so badly that she remains in hospital eight months later and is unlikely to walk again. A jury at Winchester crown court heard Schreiber’s mental health deteriorated in the weeks before the frenetic knife attack, which took place on the eighth anniversary of the death of his father, David Schreiber. Wearing a blue suit and tie with a pink shirt, Schreiber closed his eyes as the verdict was announced. A cry of “yes” could be heard from the public gallery, where some members of Sutton’s family were sitting. Anne Schreiber watched by video link from hospital. Adjourning the case for sentencing on Monday, the judge, Mr Justice Garnham, told Schreiber: “The only sentence I can pass is of life imprisonment but for the offence of murder I have to set the minimum number of years and I also have to sentence you for the attempted murder of your mother.” Outside court, DI Simon Huxter, of Dorset police, said: “This violent attack happened in the family home and this case is another sad reminder of the often tragic consequences of domestic abuse, which can take many forms. This was an utterly tragic and senseless incident.” He praised the police officers and medics who saved Anne Schreiber’s life. “It was thanks to the efforts of the first officers to arrive at the scene and subsequent medical assistance from paramedics and hospital staff that this case only involved one fatality and not two. While Anne sadly suffered serious life-changing injuries, the outcome could have been even worse.” Schreiber was deeply affected by his father’s death and felt hatred for Sutton and his “gold-digging” mother after she set up home with the landowner. He resented Sutton’s huge wealth, even though he took generous handouts from him, and felt he and his mother did not take his art seriously. The idea of taking “revenge” on the couple built up when Schreiber, who had flitted from job to job throughout his adult life, was locked down with them during the Covid pandemic. After the attack on 7 April, Schreiber took Sutton’s Range Rover and led police on a high-speed chase before officers carried out a “hard stop” in west London and shot him with a stun gun as he stabbed himself. Schreiber admitted killing Sutton but denied murder on the grounds of diminished responsibility and pleaded not guilty to attempting to murder his mother. Schreiber claimed a voice in his head shouted “attack, attack, attack” and he could not stop stabbing the couple. The jury was told he had a history of major depressive disorder and alcohol misuse. It was also possible he may have had attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, which can lead to impulsive actions. He had struggled with low self-esteem since he was a teenager and was deeply affected by the “complete hell” of his parents’ separation, believing his father, whom he doted on, had been badly treated. He told a psychiatrist that lockdown had been a “full frontal attack” on his mental health. Following Schreiber’s conviction, Sutton’s family said in a statement: “How could any family recover from such a sudden and devastating loss. We can never bring back Sir Richard but his spirit will very much live on, alongside the very happy memories we have of our incredible father, brother and grandfather. His values of being warm, generous and compassionate to everyone he met will be carried forward by future generations, and will never be extinguished.”Russia has put forward a highly contentious list of security guarantees it says it wants the west to agree to in order to lower tensions in Europe and defuse the crisis over Ukraine, including many elements that have already been ruled out. The demands include a ban on Ukraine entering Nato and a limit to the deployment of troops and weapons to Nato’s eastern flank, in effect returning Nato forces to where they were stationed in 1997, before an eastward expansion. The eight-point draft treaty was released by Russia’s foreign ministry as its forces massed within striking distance of Ukraine’s borders. Moscow said ignoring its interests would lead to a “military response” similar to the Cuban missile crisis of 1962. Vladimir Putin has demanded that the west provide Russia “legal guarantees” of its security. But the Kremlin’s aggressive proposals are likely to be rejected in western capitals as an attempt to formalise a new Russian sphere of influence over eastern Europe. The demands, spelled out by Moscow in full for the first time, were handed over to the US this week. They include a demand that Nato remove any troops or weapons deployed to countries that entered the alliance after 1997, which would include much of eastern Europe, including Poland, the former Soviet countries of Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia, and the Balkan countries. Russia has also demanded that Nato rule out further expansion, including the accession of Ukraine into the alliance, and that it does not hold drills without previous agreement from Russia in Ukraine, eastern Europe, in Caucasus countries such as Georgia or in Central Asia. Those proposals are likely to be viewed extremely negatively by Nato countries, in particular Poland and the Baltic states. They have warned that Russia is attempting to re-establish a sphere of influence in the region and view the document as proof Moscow is seeking to limit their sovereignty. A senior US official said on Friday that the Kremlin knows that some parts of its proposals were “unacceptable”. The Nato head, Jens Stoltenberg, has already ruled out any agreements denying Ukraine the right to enter the military alliance, saying it is up to Ukraine and the 30 Nato countries. There are already major obstacles to Ukraine entering the alliance, including its territorial dispute with Russia over annexed Crimea. The Russia document also calls for the two countries to pull back any short- or medium-range missile systems out of reach, replacing the previous intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) treaty that the US left in 2018. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said the US had seen proposals from Russia to start talks and was speaking with its European allies and partners, Reuters reported. “There will be no talks on European security without our European allies and partners,” Psaki told reporters. The Russian deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, said on Friday that there was no deadline for talks but that Russia wants to begin negotiations “without delays and without stalling”. “We can go any place and any time, even tomorrow,” he said in animated remarks. Asked whether he thought the requests were unreasonable, he said no. “This is not about us giving some kind of ultimatum, there is none. The thing is that the seriousness of our warning should not be underestimated,” he said. Dmitri Trenin, the head of the Carnegie Moscow Center, wrote that Russia’s public release of its proposed agreements “may suggest that Moscow [rightly] considers their acceptance by west unlikely”. “This logically means that [Russia] will have to assure its security single-handedly, most probably by mil-tech [military technical] means,” he wrote. Western countries have warned that Russia may be preparing an invasion of Ukraine in January as Russian tanks, artillery and missiles have massed near borders. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has called on the west for additional aid in case Russia decides to launch a broader offensive. On Friday, Ukraine said one of its soldiers was killed during fighting with Russian-backed separatists in the east of the country. He was reportedly killed in an attack using grenade launchers and mortars. The latest death brings Ukraine’s toll in the simmering conflict to 65 since the start of the year, according to an AFP tally based on official figures, compared with 50 in 2020. The conflict in eastern Ukraine has so far left more than 13,000 people dead. Russia has massed about 100,000 troops on its side of the border. Joe Biden has warned Putin of “sanctions like he’s never seen” should his troops attack Ukraine. On Thursday, European Union leaders urged Moscow to halt its military buildup and return to talks led by France and Germany.Byelection earthquakes don’t come much bigger than North Shropshire. The result – the former 23,000 Conservative majority overturned into a 6,000-vote win for the new Liberal Democrat MP Helen Morgan – is a bombshell for Boris Johnson, a wake-up call for the Conservative party and a life-enhancing triumph for the Lib Dems. It is also, perhaps, a sign that party politics is emerging from a period largely defined by the Brexit referendum of 2016, with tactical anti-Conservative voting now playing an increasingly important role. Thursday’s 34% swing to the Lib Dems was spectacular by any yardstick. The Tory share of the vote collapsed by 31 percentage points, almost a modern record. This enabled Ed Davey’s party to come from a distant third place 10% share in 2019 to reach 47%. That surge produced the biggest Conservative to Lib Dem swing since the Christchurch byelection in 1993. Back then, the Lib Dem win was a damning verdict on a Conservative government’s economic competence. The verdict in North Shropshire is no less damning; but this one was focused squarely on the prime minister’s own abject performance and lack of integrity. Mr Johnson campaigned early in Shropshire. But it was notable that he did not return for the business end of the contest. Even so, he was rarely out of the headlines and, in what has been an extraordinarily torrid political month for the government, none of it was flattering. There was wide anecdotal evidence in the constituency that Mr Johnson’s many recent humiliations – the Christmas party rule-breaking, the Peppa Pig speech debacle and this week’s backbench revolt among them – all fed into the defeat. Neither Mr Johnson nor the party should be in any doubt that he owns this result. The other person whose share of responsibility should be confronted is Owen Paterson. The former MP’s financial greed and rule breaches, followed by his involvement in arrogant efforts to get the MPs’ standards rules changed for his benefit, triggered this byelection. Voters do not like to see their MPs taking advantage. Many in North Shropshire duly took it out on the new Tory candidate by staying at home. It should be unthinkable for Mr Paterson ever to be given the peerage that is sometimes rumoured. If the Tories hope to regain North Shropshire, and for the sake of politics more generally, they should make that clear. North Shropshire confirms that the Liberal Democrats are very much back in business as an electoral force after their post-coalition eclipse. Their victory in June’s Chesham and Amersham byelection led to speculation about Conservative vulnerability in a small number of similarly remain-voting seats in which the Lib Dems are in second place. North Shropshire blows that theory wide open, since the constituency was heavily leave-voting, the Lib Dems came third in 2019, and HS2 (also sometimes blamed for the earlier defeat) was many miles away. The implications of the slump in Mr Johnson’s personal appeal, combined with Ms Morgan’s win, may therefore go considerably further. North Shropshire suggests many more English Tory seats are vulnerable to tactical voting against the Conservatives. The swing to Labour in Old Bexley and Sidcup two weeks ago may be part of it too. Add to this the poor showing of the minor pro-Brexit parties in North Shropshire, and it begins to look as if the Brexit divide no longer shapes everything in British elections. The thought that Mr Johnson may be losing the election-winning touch that, for a lot of Tory MPs, is the only reason they support him, should send shivers down their spines this Christmas. For many, it is bound to bring to mind Oliver Cromwell’s imposing rebuke: “In the name of God, go.”Members of Germany’s Christian Democratic Union (CDU) have elected stalwart rightwinger Friedrich Merz as their designated new leader, as the conservative party seeks a new direction in opposition following the departure of Angela Merkel. Merz, who has twice come second to centrist candidates in previous leadership races, won a surprise majority in the ballot, beating Merkel’s former chief of staff Helge Braun and foreign policy specialist Norbert Röttgen with 62% of the vote, thus eliminating the need for a run-off vote. The vote comes as the rudderless behemoth of German politics is seeking to reinvent itself after crashing to the worst result in its history at September’s federal elections, in which Social Democrat Olaf Scholz was elected as Merkel’s successor in a power-sharing deal with the Greens and the Free Democratic party (FDP). For the first time in its history, the CDU decided to hand a say over its future leadership to its 400,000 members, of which 248,360 participated by postal and digital ballot. The party members’ vote is not binding and will have to be confirmed by CDU delegates at a party summit scheduled for 21 and 22 January. One of the central questions for the post-Merkel era will be how the CDU seeks an answer to the enduring strength of the far-right Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) in the states of the formerly socialist east that were once firmly in the hands of the centre-right. Merz has previously promised that a conservative realignment of his party could win back voters who have drifted off to the AfD, rather than embolden the rightwing party. His two competitors on the ballot both hailed from the liberal wing of the conservative party and promised to continue Merkel’s centrist course on the domestic stage. Helge Braun, a 49-year-old medical doctor who gained 12% of votes, had served as Merkel’s chief of staff and minister for special affairs during her last term in office and took on a prominent role in coordinating pandemic measures. Norbert Röttgen, 56, who came second with 25.8%, is a former environment minister who was fired from Merkel’s cabinet in 2012 after failing in a run to become state premier of North Rhine-Westphalia. He subsequently rebuilt his profile as chair of the Bundestag’s foreign affairs committee, in which he called on the government to take a more confrontational stance in dealings with Russia and China. Röttgen, who lost out to outgoing leader Armin Laschet in the CDU leadership earlier this year, had pitched himself as the modernising candidate, arguing the conservative party needed to rejuvenate its image to stay relevant. Both he and Braun had vowed to pick a woman as the party’s next general secretary. For Merz, it was the third attempt to seize control of the political party that has governed Germany for longer than any other. A favourite with the CDU’s ageing membership, he twice ran out of steam in runoff votes, against Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer in 2018 and to Laschet in January this year. Having previously pitched himself as the “anti-Merkel” candidate by promising to restrict Germany’s immigration rules – even once suggesting scrapping the constitutional guarantee to asylum – Merz has tried to strike a more consensual tone at his third attempt. In a debate in the run-up to the membership vote, Merz promised the CDU under his leadership would speak to both Wählerinnen und Wählern, female and male voters, and even showed a reluctant openness towards a quota for female-held posts in the party.‘I didn’t see that coming’ It’s an amazing result from North Shropshire – I didn’t see that coming. Please, please don’t remove Johnson, though. He will only be replaced by someone equally as dangerous but more smooth-talking and less prone to stupid mistakes, like Rishi Sunak. The Tories will then make out like all of the scandals were just to do with Johnson, rather than a far wider party-wide issue, they’ll rebrand themselves and win the next election. Leave Johnson in power for as long as possible; the longer he stays, the more likely the Tories will be to lose the next election. MTBO85 ‘Boris is a goner’ The problem with Tories, as with certain sections of the Labour left, is that they think if they’re performing poorly, while they correctly conclude it’s because they’re not giving people what they want, they then go on to assume that what the public want is a more extreme version of what they’re currently offering. Boris is a goner and rightly so, but I fear the Tories are going back rightwards as a result, rather than to the centre. I’m actually quite hopeful they’ll lose the next election but they’ll do a lot of damage first. QuesoManchego ‘It seems odd that a pro-Brexit constituency voted Lib Dem’ It seems odd that a pro-Brexit constituency voted for the Lib Dems, who were the most pro-EU party. It does show the contrary view of our electorate. However, in the Brexit campaign people were told that when we left the EU we would have all the advantages of membership (access to the single market and less red tape) with none of the disadvantages (cost, accepting EU rules, restriction of immigration, trade deals with other countries). While it does not take much analysis to realise that was not going to happen and a compromise was required, the hard Brexit negotiated by the Tories is impacting us badly and hitting the agricultural sector badly. Hence dissatisfaction in rural areas. KSCWEL ‘The voters seem to have seen through this administration’ It’s wonderful news. At last, the voters seem to have seen through this Tory/Ukip administration that has been responsible for the UK losing international respect. Johnson no longer looks invulnerable. It raises the possibility that we could even get rid of Raab here in Esher. Harry Wiles, 77, retired diplomat, Esher, Surrey ‘People are reading too much into this result’ People are reading too much into this result. Byelection voting is a bit like flashing your lights at another car: you are trying to send a signal using a very blunt instrument. North Shrophire is true blue Tory Brexit country. The Lib Dems and the wider progressive movement are trying to spin this as an indication of people turning more towards the centre, but the people of North Shropshire have not swung to the left. It is obvious that a leadership challenge will come from the hard right. These people are looking for tax cuts and public spending cuts, right reason or none. Either Boris will need to go even more blatantly populist or he faces being replaced by someone who is. Superstriker ‘A real kick up the arse’ First, it’s good that the Tories lost the seat, instead of just being run close. That means it’s a real kick up the arse and can’t be ignored. It also means there have been material consequences to the party for the disgraceful way they tried to bury the Paterson sleaze. Conservatives should hope that this is not about policy. Because if the government’s chosen implementation of Brexit is not the policy that even places like this want, then who is that policy aimed at? Johnson’s Brexit has always been inferior to May’s Brexit in my opinion – and judging by recent polling, it’s beginning to lose its shine with the people that supported removing May and installing Johnson, too. Johnson has nothing except his facade, and aspects of the Covid response have really exposed that. FFC800 ‘I cannot get excited by this result’ I cannot get excited about this result. Johnson is only going to be replaced by another individual I don’t want anywhere near power. I find it depressing that apparently none of the previous appalling things Johnson and the Tories did have been of equal concern to their voting demographic. He’s implemented so many things that caused damage to this country, and to democracy (or in some instances, achieved this by not implementing things he should have). It’s sickening he can mismanage a pandemic, slash support for the vulnerable, cause untold damage with his hard Brexit, and yet it’s a pizza party that finally “the people” object to. GreenAppleRedApple ‘Culture wars is a declining market’ Culture wars is a declining market, less takers on both sides of the divide. So much of it was driven by a US media ecosystem that went into overdrive under Trump. The Tories have really bet the ranch on it, but their voters have had broadly favourable economic conditions. The pandemic and Brexit are still playing out. No guarantees it will continue to wash, and that will favour the alternatives. Illegal migration will always be a hit with some voters, but it favours rabble-rousers like Farage. It’s much more difficult when you’re actually in power and have made endless promises about it. All that really gives the Tories favourable conditions in the next election is how much they can game the system like their peers in Poland and Hungary. LesterBoggsA 27-year-old woman has been arrested on suspicion of child neglect after a house fire in south London caused the death of two pairs of twin boys, who had been left alone at the property. The boys, aged three and four, were given CPR by firefighters at the scene in Sutton. They were taken to hospital, where they died. The cause of the blaze on Thursday evening is being investigated by fire teams and the Metropolitan police. Chief Supt Dave Stringer, borough commander for Croydon, Bromley and Sutton police, confirmed that the children were related. He said: “There was nobody else inside the property at the time of the fire.” The woman arrested on Thursday night remains in police custody, he said. Stringer said: “London fire brigade colleagues acted heroically in recovering the children and I want to pay particular tribute to them. I know this incident would have a lasting impact on them and other police officers and paramedics who are involved. We will make sure they get the support they need.” Mourners laid floral tributes, candles and teddy bears outside the police cordon throughout the day on Friday, with a message on one bouquet reading: “To Kyson Bryson Leyton + Logan. Sleep well. Love Grandad.” Eight fire engines and about 60 firefighters were sent to Collingwood Road in Sutton shortly before 7pm in response to reports of a fire. The first firefighters arrived three minutes after being called and faced an “intense blaze” throughout the ground floor of the mid-terrace house, they said. The blaze was under control by 8.36pm. The London fire brigade deputy commissioner, Richard Mills, said that after attempting to resuscitate the children on the street, some of the firefighters had followed the ambulance to hospital to make sure resuscitation efforts were not interrupted. Some of the firefighters, he added, have needed counselling as a result of the tragedy. “Entering a building and rescuing life is always a very difficult place to be,” he said. “The age of the children, the fact they are so young, will have a profound impact on them [the firefighters].” The roads around the scene of the tragedy remained closed as people laid floral tributes, candles and teddy bears for the four children. A local woman, who did not want to give her name, said the four boys often came to her shop with their mother. “They were always all holding hands, they were so well behaved, so polite,” she said. Another person who lived nearby said: “It’s absolutely devastating. Those children have passed my house many times and they were always very happy, very polite young boys. She was a good mum. How did this happen?” The Rev Frances Arnold at nearby St Nicholas church said: “It’s a great shock and tragic loss of life, young children, and so we’ll continue to offer our prayers for the family, the friends, the community here, the emergency services.” Matt Gray, the manager of Sutton United football club, laid yellow-and-black team scarves outside the police cordon at the scene. He said it was “such a tragic event to happen on our doorstep” and “a huge shock and obviously very devastating”. Two of the boys were pupils at Westbourne primary school in Sutton. In a statement, the school said: “Westbourne Primary School and its entire community are devastated at the news of the tragic loss of the four children; our hearts, thoughts and prayers are with the family and anyone else affected by this heartbreaking event. We will continue to support the children, the staff, the families and the community through these very difficult times.” The home secretary, Priti Patel, tweeted: “My thoughts and prayers are with the families and loved ones of the four young children who tragically lost their lives in the fire in Sutton yesterday. I am being kept updated by the emergency services and I would like to thank them for their work in such sad circumstances.”The Welsh government has said it had no choice but to close nightclubs to counter the Omicron “storm” after modelling suggested half of the UK’s population could become infected by the strain. The first minister, Mark Drakeford, described Omicron as the “most serious development” in the pandemic to date and admitted that other parts of the economy might have to be shut to counter the threat. Drakeford said the government would spend £60m helping clubs and other businesses affected by the measures that it was introducing on 27 December. But he called for the UK Treasury to commit to a new furlough scheme if Wales and other parts of the UK were forced to order further shutdowns and restrictions. Drakeford said: “Our ability to provide and sustain longer-term economic support is severely constrained by the position of the UK Treasury and its refusal to open vital support schemes, such as furlough. These schemes should be available for all nations when they are needed and not just at the point at when restrictions are introduced in England.” In Wales, as well as nightclubs closing, social distancing in offices will be reintroduced and safety measures in shops and pubs brought in after Boxing Day. The Labour-led Welsh government said it may also introduce restrictions that would affect sporting events such as the Welsh Grand National in Chepstow as well as big rugby and football matches. Drakeford, insisted the measures were proportionate, fair and necessary to counter a “brewing storm”. He said pubs, bars and restaurants would be allowed to stay open, but explained: “It’s the nature of the nightclub that people go there to be up close and personal. Omicron is particularly likely to lead to super-spreader events.” The first minister revealed that modelling he had seen showed the Omicron wave could mean “half of the population of the United Kingdom will fall ill with coronavirus”. The first minister said he believed the “epicentre” of the Omicron storm in Wales would be in January and hoped the country would be past the peak in February. He said there were no plans to stop people travelling into Wales as Omicron was so fast-moving it would not be an effective measure. Over the festive period, the government is “strongly advising” people to adopt safety measures such as taking a lateral flow test before they go out, but is not making these a legal obligation. Representatives of the night-time economy and hospitality industry said the rules would lead to businesses closing and jobs being lost and some are considering taking legal action. Peter Marks, the chairman of the board at Rekom UK, which owns the Cardiff super-club PRYZM, said: “This damaging decision targets the very people whose wellbeing is affected the least by Covid-19. These are decisions that have destroyed their education and social lives. This has to stop.” Cerys Furlong, of the Wales Independent Restaurant Collective, said it felt like deja vu for the sector. “It’s pretty bleak,” she said. “It’s clear the Welsh government don’t have enough resources or financial levers to sufficiently support businesses haemorrhaging cash right now. We need the UK government to act now to prevent massive job losses.”A trailblazing cultural theorist and activist, public intellectual, teacher and feminist writer, bell hooks, who has died of kidney failure aged 69, authored around 40 books in a career spanning more than four decades. Exploring the intersecting oppressions of gender, race and class, her writings additionally reflected her concerns with issues related to art, history, sexuality, psychology and spirituality, ultimately with love at the heart of community healing. Using storytelling as effectively as social theory, she was creatively agile in a range of genres, including poetry, essays, memoir, self-help and children’s books, as well as appearing in documentary films and working in academia. However, her outstanding legacy may be her pivotal contribution to Black feminist thought, first articulated in her 1981 book Ain’t I a Woman: Black Women and Feminism, which examined both historical racism and sexism, going back to the treatment of Black women from enslavement to give context to continuing racial and sexual injustice. The daughter of Veodis Watkins, a postal worker, and his wife, Rosa Bell (nee Oldham), she was born Gloria Jean Watkins in the small rural town of Hopkinsville, Kentucky, and her upbringing was affected by being part of a working-class African-American family in the US south, initially educated at racially segregated schools. A gifted child, she enjoyed the poetry of William Wordsworth, Langston Hughes, Elizabeth Barrett Browning and Gwendolyn Brooks, and was encouraged to write verse of her own well before she reached her teens. Scholarships enabled her to study at Stanford University, in California, where she earned a BA in English in 1973, and she took an MA in English from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 1976. That year she began teaching at the University of Southern California, and during her time there her first publication, the poetry chapbook And There We Wept (1978), appeared under the pseudonym bell hooks – a name she adopted in tribute to her maternal great-grandmother, styling it in lowercase so as to keep the focus on her work rather than on her own persona. She had begun writing her major work, Ain’t I a Woman – its title referencing a celebrated speech by the 19th-century Black abolitionist Sojourner Truth – as an undergraduate. Harshly criticised from some quarters, the book eventually achieved influential status as a classic that centres Black womanhood. Another key title, Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center (1984), is a critique of mainstream feminist theory in which Black women exist only on the margins, with the women’s liberation movement being primarily structured around issues relevant to white women with class privilege. The journalist and media consultant Joan Harris recalled the historical context, when “it was almost considered anathema, almost traitorous, if you were Black also to be a ‘feminist’” and joining a white women’s group was not an option, given the differing concerns at the time. Harris said: “Bell’s work clarified things … Her work, her presence, made me, and so many others, feel validated during a truly fraught time.” During the 1980s and 1990s, hooks taught at a number of educational institutions, among them Yale University, Oberlin College and the City College of New York. In 2004 she joined the faculty of Berea College in her native Kentucky, where in 2014 the bell hooks Institute was established. She received the American Book awards/Before Columbus Foundation award for Yearning: Race, Gender and Cultural Politics (1990) and was nominated for an NAACP Image award for her 1999 children’s book Happy to Be Nappy. An advocate of anti-racist, anti-sexist and anti-capitalist politics, she produced radical writings that shaped popular and academic discourse. Her books illuminated a wide range of topics, evidenced by just a selection of the titles: Talking Back: Thinking Feminist, Thinking Black (1989); Breaking Bread: Insurgent Black Intellectual Life (with Cornel West, 1991); Black Looks: Race and Representation (1992); Reel to Real: Race, Sex and Class at the Movies (1996); We Real Cool: Black Men and Masculinity (2004); and Soul Sister: Women, Friendship, and Fulfillment (2005). Her writing resonated far beyond the US, and her work was translated into 15 languages. Invited to London for the International Book Fair of Radical Black and Third World Books in 1991, she spoke and took part in debates and readings, engaging with local activists. In my 1992 anthology Daughters of Africa I included the title essay from her collection Talking Back, which in many ways encapsulates the origins, motivation and inspiration that propelled her forward from early in life. “In the world of the southern black community I grew up in, ‘back talk’ and ‘talking back’ meant speaking as an equal to an authority figure. It meant daring to disagree and sometimes it meant just having an opinion,” she explained. For a child, to speak when not spoken to was to invite punishment, so was a courageous act, an act of risk and daring. It was in that world that the craving was born in her “to have a voice, and not just any voice, but one that could be identified as belonging to me … Certainly for black women, our struggle has not been to emerge from silence into speech but to change the nature and direction of our speech, to make a speech that compels listeners, one that is heard.” Her spirit refused to be crushed by the somewhat harsh reception her first work received and, tellingly, she wrote: “Now when I ponder the silences, the voices that are not heard, the voices of those wounded and/or oppressed individuals who do not speak or write, I contemplate the acts of persecution, torture – the terrorism that breaks spirits, that makes creativity impossible. I write these words to bear witness to the primacy of resistance struggle in any situation of domination (even within family life); to the strength and power that emerges from sustained resistance and the profound conviction that these forces can be healing, can protect us from dehumanisation and despair.” For hooks, it was “that act of speech, of ‘talking back’, that is no mere gesture of empty words, that is the expression of our movement from object to subject – the liberated voice”. She is survived by four sisters, Sarah, Valeria, Angela and Gwenda, and a brother, Kenneth. • bell hooks (Gloria Jean Watkins), writer, born 25 September 1952; died 15 December 2021Seeing streets lined with fluffy white snow on 25 December was already a rarity. So in a year that saw extreme weather catastrophes (from wildfires in Canada to severe floods across Europe), what is the future for Britain’s white Christmases? I asked Prof Lizzie Kendon from the Met Office. I normally start these interviews with some weather-based chitchat, but I guess it doesn’t have the same effect with someone from the Met Office. Actually, we’re all quite enthused about the weather, though some people get more talk than they bargained for. I’m game! What makes a white Christmas, a white Christmas? The official definition is one snowflake observed on 25 December, somewhere in the UK. In that case I’m happy to be observed. Get it? Because I’m a millennial snowflake? OK, moving on – one snowflake doesn’t seem much. I’m sure I saw snowflakes last Christmas. Technically, 2020 was a white Christmas: eight stations recorded snow falling and five recorded snow on the ground. But it is a lenient definition and not people’s perception of a white Christmas, which is lying snow. The last white Christmas like that was in 2010, although that was very unusual. Why’s that? Since the 60s, the UK’s winters have become less snowy; overall, it’s because of the warming of our climate. It’s no coincidence that 2020 was one of the least snowy years on record and one of the warmest. It doesn’t only affect snow, it also affects rain. Last year was also the fifth wettest. Hmm, “I’m dreaming of a wet Christmas” doesn’t have the same ring. Does that mean winter is disappearing, or is it that the seasons still occur but at different times? It snowed in April this year. In the climate model projections I run, we’re seeing evidence of a change in seasonality, particularly the sort of summer downpours that are driven by convective events. Convective events? Convection is a process in the atmosphere where warm air rises then cools and condenses, forming storms, which release a lot of rainfall in a short period of time. There’s evidence that there’s a lengthening of the convective season. So we might start to get the intense summer downpours in autumn. Seeing snow in April is not related to that, though. We will still get cold events, just less frequently. Cold enough for snow? The projections of a warmer, wetter winter don’t preclude us from having a cold one. In terms of snow, though, we are expecting decreases. It depends on greenhouse gas emissions, but if we follow a high-emission scenario, we could get almost an entire loss of lying snow over many low-lying regions. What! That means no more white Christmases for parts of the UK! How many years do we have until they’re gone? What about our Cop26 commitments? I can’t really answer how many years. What I can say is the scenario I’m talking about is a 3C warming for the UK by the 2070s – so higher emissions than the targets set at Cop26. But looking at the pledges being made, it’s fair to say that the likelihood of keeping below 1.5C is fading. Here’s hoping for some strong gales of merriness this year, in spite of it all. Thanks, Lizzie – I can’t wish you a white Christmas, so I’ll wish you a merry one instead. Merry Christmas!Nicola Sturgeon struck a sombre tone as she confirmed on Friday that Omicron had replaced Delta as the dominant Covid strain in Scotland. Addressing the public for the third time this week, Scotland’s first minister said: “The tsunami I warned about last week is starting to hit us.” Hammering home Scottish government advice to limit social contact ahead of festive celebrations, she asked people to “think about whether its worth it to you to run the risk of not being with your family on Christmas Day.” Sturgeon’s language and tone has taken on a palpable urgency over the past week, first urging the postponement of work Christmas parties, then limiting indoor mixing to three households and by Thursday appealing directly to the public to “please stay at home”. There is an inescapable contrast with the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, who is not only suffering from the fallout over revelations about last year’s Christmas parties, but also continues to insist they should go ahead this year, proclaiming that the booster jab rollout signifies “a great national fightback”. At Friday’s briefing, with her trademark insistence that she is not scoring political points, Sturgeon expressed her hopes for further talks with the prime minister about emergency funding. Although the Scottish government is putting £100m into the food and drink supply chain, wholesalers, culture and wedding sectors, she reiterated that the crisis “now needs the type and scale of financial support available earlier in the pandemic that can only come from the UK government – because it has borrowing powers that the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish governments simply do not have”. Officials working closely with the first minister characterise this as a week of growing frustration for the Scottish government: the Treasury press release on what turned out to be over-spun funding sent out as Sturgeon stood up to deliver her Covid statement on Tuesday; the belated realisation that the chancellor was in fact out of the country as they tried to discuss a fuller financial support package; the scheduling of Wednesday’s Cobra meeting with the devolved governments at the same time as Boris Johnson’s statement. It was the sobering data discussed at that meeting that directed Sturgeon’s grave tone on Thursday in the Holyrood chamber. Conveying strong and data-driven concern, says Linda Bauld, professor of public health at the University of Edinburgh, “is a motivator for the public to change their behaviour, particularly in Scotland where you have a high level of trust in government. Part of the purpose of these briefings is to encourage behaviour change in a context when most things are still open.” As one former health adviser observes: “She is reaping the benefits of clear messaging. Compared with Johnson, she is so much clearer about the situation and rationale and this is really critical, because it produces trust and compliance, and that’s all the more important right now when people are fed up.” But if Sturgeon is banking on her personal trust to encourage lockdown behaviour without introducing lockdown regulations, she must also face accusations of “lockdown by stealth” as hospitality businesses report devastating cancellations while high streets and shopping centres experience reduced footfall. Asked at Friday’s briefing about glaring inconsistencies, for example as weekend football matches go ahead as planned, Sturgeon said: “I can’t give more straightforward advice on events, to say ‘Don’t go’, when I can’t compensate people.” Earlier on Friday, her Welsh counterpart, Mark Drakeford, who is bringing in nightclub closures from Boxing Day, said it was “unfair” that it was up to the Treasury to decide if more UK funds should be released to help. Bauld said: “I think policymakers would have probably taken harder action to prevent overwhelming the NHS, but the financial support has not yet been forthcoming”. What they are acutely aware of, she says, is the accumulation of harms – from businesses going bust to children’s education disrupted to operations cancelled – across the population. “The vast amount of people will do the right thing and follow guidance, but unfortunately people are suffering more continued harm and will do if there’s tougher restrictions. It sucks basically.”Large US companies are now pulling back on plans to return to in-person work in light of the Omicron variant’s rapid spread across America. Employers planning to call remote workers back into the office in the new year are now pausing those efforts, and they are wary of setting new return dates only to push them back once again in the face of continued uncertainty and risks from the pandemic. The pandemic is also driving changes in how in-person employees work, with a renewed push for strikes and unionization across several industries where workers have frequently faced long hours and unsafe conditions. Alphabet’s Google, Meta, Apple, Uber, Lyft, Ford, DoorDash, DocuSign and Fidelity are among the companies that have delayed returns to the office. “It’s warranted, given the uptick that we’ve seen in cases,” Bradford Bell, director of the Center for Advanced Human Resource Studies at Cornell University’s ILR School, said. The delays also depend on where the offices are located, he said. “They’re very much looking at this on a location-by-location basis.” Apple CEO Tim Cook told employees in a memo on Wednesday that the partial return to offices, planned for 1 February, was now pushed to a “date yet to be determined”, after several other delays over the past two years. Cook offered employees a $1,000 bonus to help improve their home offices. Apple’s offices remain open and employees are still going in to work in countries with lower Covid rates, he said. But he specifically pointed to the global rise in cases and the emergence of the Omicron variant as a cause for concern. Google and Uber were among the first to announce the indefinite delays in early December after planning for early January returns. Google planned to reopen offices fully no later than 10 January, but has now delayed that deadline indefinitely, though offices in several places have already reopened. Meta was planning to open early in 2022 but is now allowing workers to come back as late as June. Janelle Gale, the company’s vice-president of human resources, said “some aren’t quite ready to come back”. In contrast, Twitter went fully remote forever in October. Lyft’s offices will open in February, but workers can stay remote for the entirety of next year – one of the longest delayed returns, partly due to worries over Omicron and other variants that may emerge. Fidelity Investments said on Monday it was pausing its return-to-work plans. DocuSign has delayed its fourth attempt to return. DoorDash’s corporate employees were going back to the office in 2022 in a hybrid approach, but now the company is waiting to see what the new plan should be. Ford planned to return with a hybrid work model for employees working at the headquarters in January, but that is now planned for March. Notably, hourly employees at Ford returned to in-person work in May 2020. And gig workers at Uber, Lyft, DoorDash and elsewhere have continued working through the pandemic, despite frequently feeling unsafe on the job. About half of full-time workers surveyed in the US said their jobs could be done remotely, according to a Gallup poll. And nearly one-third of the workers said they never wanted to work in the office; the majority wanted a hybrid model. In September, 45% of full-time employees were working remotely some or all of the time, with nine out of 10 remote workers wanting to continue that way, according to a Gallup poll. One-third of employees who could work remotely are doing so, according to a survey from Willis Towers Watson, a global advisory firm. That number was expected to decline in 2022, before the advent of Omicron. One of the challenges for companies is “trying to build momentum in terms of getting people back into the office”, Bell said. Companies are worried that if they open their offices before employees are ready, the momentum will stall – and they’re wary of forcing anyone back with office mandates. “So they’re waiting for the right time to really make that happen,” Bell said. The pandemic could bring lasting changes to the ways we work – for those who have jobs that can be done remotely. “It’s certainly a real issue” for those who can’t work remotely, Bell said. “I think that’s why we’ve seen an uptick in strikes and other things over the last several months where people are wanting – not necessarily a level playing field, but want their sacrifices recognized by their employers.” In-person employees should continue to have support for working safely, including masking, distancing and vaccination mandates. “All those things matter,” Bell said. The US is experiencing record-low unemployment even as cases surge. “It’s a fraught moment, and it’s a time where I think the power dynamic has really shifted, with the Great Resignation and the labor shortages,” Bell said. “It’s put labor in the driver’s seat,” with moves like the first Starbuck union, in Buffalo, New York, he said. “Employees realize that they, to a certain degree, have the upper hand and so can really start bringing these issues to the forefront.”Frank Thomson* has been a social worker for more than a decade, but describes a short stint in Bradford council’s child safeguarding team as “without exaggerating, the scariest place I’ve ever worked in”. This week, the spotlight has turned to the troubled social work department after the murder of Star Hobson, a 16-month-old toddler, who was beaten to death by her mother’s partner last September. On Wednesday, Savannah Brockhill, 28, was sentenced to 25 years in prison for murder; Frankie Smith, 20, Star’s mother, received an eight-year sentence for causing or allowing her death. Thomson said he was not surprised when he read that there had been at least five safeguarding referrals to Bradford’s social services in Star’s case. Social workers visited on four occasions, and closed the case three times. The first referral was in January 2020, not long before Thomson began working as a locum social worker in the department. “I wasn’t surprised … because my experience reflected what I was reading,” he said. “Chaotic, everything was reactive and they couldn’t retain staff.” Thomson, who has no knowledge of Star’s case, said his experience of the department was poor processes, inexperienced, overworked staff and a culture of trying to close cases or “put plasters on them”. “It’s what social workers do when they’re really under the cosh. They can’t cope with the caseloads or if they’re on duty all the time, they try to get control of it. “Sometimes that happens – when social workers are under a lot of pressure to make very quick decisions, sometimes you get them wrong. That’s what can happen when you work in that kind of culture. That’s why I left, because I thought, I can’t control the work I’m doing, something might happen.” Thomson said he reported concerns to a manager before he left. “Normally as an agency worker, you read the Ofsted report before you go in, so you know what you’re going into. When there is a lot of agency workers en masse, it is usually quite chaotic,” said Thomson. What he read was that inspectors had deemed Bradford’s children services “inadequate” in 2018, saying that a spike in demand for services at the same time as the loss of a significant number of experienced social workers and managers had left children at risk of significant harm. Despite this, Thomson found “Bradford was different” from other authorities he had worked in. “It was in an absolute state of flux. You couldn’t control any of your work. You’re kind of in this spiralling kind of vortex, that’s what it felt like. And I’ve been doing locum work for quite a few years. I thought, this is not a safe place to work, so I left very quickly.” Several other agency staff, all experienced social workers, also left within a few weeks, he said. Despite a recruitment drive to attract permanent staff last year, Bradford spent £17.4m on agency children’s social work staff in 2020-21, and £11.7m the year before. Thomson said he was given a large caseload in a matter of weeks. “I’m quite an experienced social worker, but if you come in and face 27 cases, you think, where the hell do I start with this? And then you look at the date of the referrals, some were three or four months ago.” Thomson described an overly convoluted IT system which slowed the number of visits he was able to go on, leading some staff to devise “their own system to cope” where they would print referrals and then handwrite notes on top. “The work wasn’t even on the system. So I had all these handwritten notes that I couldn’t make any sense of whatsoever. I’ve never had that before.” Thomson has worked in several boroughs across the north, including Liverpool and Manchester. “I’m used to big cities, so I’m used to a very high pace of work. But Bradford made Manchester feel like it was a provincial, rural community,” he said. Some of that is down to the challenges facing the council – Bradford District has one of the highest levels of child poverty in the country, with 30.4% of children in absolute low-income families, compared with the England average of 15.3%. It is also one of Europe’s youngest cities – almost a quarter of the district’s half a million people is under 16. A spokesperson for Bradford council said: “We’re committed to improving outcomes for children and Ofsted has recognised improvements have been made. The Council is working closely with the government-appointed commissioner and partner agencies to accelerate improvement. “A new children’s services management team is in place. They are listening to staff and acting on their suggestions to introduce improvements. These include dedicated practice supervisors, extensive programmes of training, and improved terms and conditions. Since 2020, £31m has been invested by the council to improve services, including enhanced IT systems, so we can better support frontline social work.” * Not his real name.I’m 26 years old, and have been having a really hard time in the past few months due to a breakup I brought upon myself. Last year I started a long-distance relationship with a girl. I loved her, but felt I was constantly struggling with my emotions and honesty due to my insecurity. This caused me to be needy, desperate and always seeking some sort of validation from her, and we had a few breaks because of this. We officially became a couple after chatting online for about four months, but broke up in the summer, because of my escalating issues. This resulted in me using dating apps to try to find a one-night-stand to get my mind off things. I felt that she was the love of my life and I was willing to settle down with her. I keep telling myself she suffered a lot because of my decisions and now wants nothing to do with me, but I’m feeling very miserable. I don’t know what to do. All I want is for her to forgive me and give me one last chance to prove I’m capable of being a better man and boyfriend. I am sorry you feel so miserable: it’s horrible to feel you’ve messed up, but if you can look beyond what happened for a moment, to why it happened, it will help you learn more about yourself, so you won’t repeat your mistakes. This girl has made it clear she doesn’t want “anything more to do with you”, so you must respect that. The fact that you want her to forgive you is out of your control. Taking responsibility for one’s actions can be tough, but essential to become a better person. You realise your insecurities and need for validation, and that’s a positive. I consulted psychotherapist Tamara Sears (psychotherapy.org.uk), who wondered: “If you are constantly going to someone else [here, your ex] for validation, how much validation would be enough? Is there an end point or is it a bottomless well? That’s quite an ask of someone.” What was your early life like? Growing up, what made you feel secure and validated and, indeed, did you ever get that? Sears asked:“Insecurity and anxiety,” explained Sears, “is a really useful alert to something you need to be aware of. Were there issues in the relationship that triggered these insecurities?” I know this relationship felt perfect in hindsight, but in reality it wasn’t giving you what you needed. It’s interesting that you broke up after you felt more committed. This again can be a sign of fearing loss: you want the relationship, but the fear of it going wrong is enough to make you end it – or sabotage it so the other person ends it. “I wondered,” said Sears, “what it would mean for you to prove you’re a ‘better man’. Would it change the guilt? Guilt and shame are useful. You can’t ignore them; they’re there to remind us what not to do.” The problem with guilt and shame is when they don’t teach us but hold us back. You need to talk about yours, as you have started to do here, with someone you trust, (a friend, a counsellor) so you can start to forgive yourself and fold this back into your life. And move on. Other people’s forgiveness isn’t as powerful as us forgiving ourselves. In your next relationship, Sears recommended being more honest with your partner. There’s no shame in saying you need reassurance or to be shown a bit of TLC. Maybe not on a first date, but knowing what you need and asking for it – as long as it’s reasonable and not expecting your partner to fill the “bottomless well” Sears talked about, is healthy and in itself validating. Sears asked why you would want to be with someone you didn’t trust? That’s a useful question to ask yourself, maybe it feels familiar, which isn’t the same as being good for you. A period of introspection may be appropriate. Time spent looking at yourself will pay dividends and help you discover who you are. Once you know that, a partner becomes a bonus, not a necessity. • Every week Annalisa Barbieri addresses a family-related problem sent in by a reader. If you would like advice from Annalisa on a family matter, please send your problem to ask.annalisa@theguardian.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Conversations With Annalisa Barbieri, a new podcast series, is available here. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site. Conversations With Annalisa Barbieri, a new podcast series, is available here“On last orders” and “one strike and he’s out”, ran the headlines on many newspaper websites, reacting to the North Shropshire byelection in which the Liberal Democrats gained what was considered a safe Tory seat after a 34-point swing. The Mirror was one of many outlets to quote the Conservative MP Sir Roger Gale’s verdict on the result. “Tory says Boris Johnson is on ‘last orders’ and ‘one more strike and he’s out’”, one of the paper’s headlines read on Friday morning, on an article saying Gayle had warned that the prime minister could face a leadership challenge, “though even some of his most ardent critics think that’s still unlikely”. The Telegraph led on the same “one more strike” line, and ran an analysis piece titled “The big question for Tories: is Boris Johnson still an electoral asset, or becoming a liability?” A comment piece by Janet Daley said: “Defeat in North Shropshire marks a turning point for chaotic Boris Johnson … In mere weeks, the government has managed to extinguish virtually all public goodwill.” The Independent led with the headline “PM warned after Lib Dems crush Tories in formerly safe seat”, while the Times went with “Tories warn PM: ‘One more strike and you’re out – stark message from backbenchers after byelection disaster”, before referring to a “humiliating defeat” for the Conservatives. An analysis piece in the Times said: “Leave voters lose faith in Johnson’s ethics and competence – not quite unprecedented but certainly a spectacular rejection of the Conservative party.” Mail Online went even further with the headline “Tory MP’s warning for ‘failed’ prime minister after byelection ‘earthquake’ sees 23,000 majority in true-blue, Brexit-backing North Shropshire routed by Lib Dems”. It continued: “The astonishing result immediately fuelled a seething uprising against the PM, who suffered one of the biggest Commons rebellions ever over Covid measures this week, and has been battling allegations of sleaze and lockdown-busting parties in Downing Street.” The Sun decided to focus on other stories on its website on Friday, with no sign of the byelection result on its homepage. A story tucked away in the politics section was headlined “Throwing a Shrop – Huge blow to Boris Johnson as he loses safe North Shropshire seat to Lib Dems.” An Evening Standard headline read “Boris Johnson told get a grip in 3 months or risk leadership challenge”, quoting Sir Geoffrey Clifton-Brown, the treasurer of the influential 1922 Committee of backbench Tory MPs. Clifton-Brown told the paper: “If the self-inflicted wounds go on for three months I think the party would be looking for a change in leader.” The sentiment was echoed by the Financial Times’ Robert Shrimsley, who commented that the “Tory mauling” in North Shropshire was “self-inflicted by Boris Johnson”. In a comment piece for the Yorkshire Post, the former cabinet minister Justine Greening wrote: “I completely understand the frustration of MPs with the prime minister and his No 10 Downing Street operation,” citing “catastrophic miscalculations” and “lack of grip”.Ben Stokes never gives up on a Test and after England’s latest chastening day at the hands of Australia in Adelaide he said: “If we don’t believe, we’re beaten already.” The 30-year-old vice-captain, who returned for this series after a four-month break, looked to present a calm exterior after day two of the second Test which has proved tough for the team so far but not something that has led to any personal regret about his decision to come back to the side. “It’s been a tough two days,” said Stokes, after England shipped 473 for nine in the field, and then closed on 17 for two. “It’s never ideal but you have just got to love the dirt when you get that deep [in a bowling innings] and understand what you’re playing for. “I’ve loved every minute of [my comeback]. Walking out on to the field and wearing the Three Lions is one of the great feelings as a cricketer. “Playing at these grounds in Australia, obviously being away from home makes it a little bit more difficult with crowds and stuff like that. But it’s fantastic fun as well as being a huge honour. “And if you don’t feel sore coming off the field, and if you don’t feel sore waking up in the morning, you’ve probably not done what’s required of you.” Such physical discomfort was looking inevitable for the all-rounder after 25 overs of typical heft that returned figures of three for 113. He was ever-willing for his captain, Joe Root, not least when delivering a short-ball barrage on day one that, while tactically questionable, did offer a point of difference. Asked to explain this plan, prompted by the absence of England’s solitary outright pace bowler in Mark Wood, Stokes replied: “I was just trying to create a different type of environment out there for the batters. It does look odd when you’re trying to run in and bowl 11 overs of short stuff. But the first couple of spells I felt like it created chances. “[The run rate] wasn’t really going anywhere. It wasn’t until the third session today that it started to leak a few runs.” Stokes also said there is more to life than events on a cricket field after Thursday’s tragedy in Devonport, Tasmania, that claimed the lives of five children when a bouncy castle was torn from its moorings and lifted into the air by a gust of wind. “Obviously the reason why the Australians were wearing the black armbands today puts a lot of things into perspective,” he added.Of the 25 seats that the Conservatives have lost in byelections to the Liberal Democrats and their predecessor parties, only one produced a bigger swing than North Shropshire. What happened then should discomfort today’s Liberal Democrats locally – and the Tories nationally. In 1993, the Lib Dems captured Christchurch on a 35% swing. Diana Maddock won with a majority of 16,427. At the following general election, the Conservatives recaptured Christchurch – but crashed to their heaviest national defeat in living memory. The Tories have recovered nationally from other byelection losses, notably when Margaret Thatcher was prime minister; but their support never slumped as much in those midterm byelections. The swing in North Shropshire was almost as high as in Christchurch: 34%. The Tories might well recover the seat next time; but will they recover enough across the country? As those financial advertisements remind us, the past provides no guarantee of future performance. But there are good reasons for Boris Johnson to feel exceedingly nervous this weekend. His main – some would say only – claim to the loyalty of his party is that he is a vote winner: for his candidate to crash to such a massive defeat raises obvious question about his electoral appeal. Polls provide supporting evidence. Ipsos Mori has been measuring prime ministers’ satisfaction ratings for more than 40 years. Johnson’s current rating is not the worst, but it is heading in the wrong direction. His latest figures are: satisfied 28%, dissatisfied 65% – a net score of -37, compared with +3 in the wake of his 2019 election victory. A separate YouGov survey finds that 57% regard Johnson as incompetent. Only 31% say the same of Keir Starmer. To add to Tory woes, this month’s two byelections show clear signs that tactical voting is making a comeback. Two weeks ago in Old Bexley and Sidcup, where the Lib Dems stood no chance of coming close, let alone winning, Labour’s share was up and the Lib Dem share down. This week in North Shropshire, those trends were reversed. Byelection campaigns develop their own momentum: tactical voting in general elections is never as great. But back in 1997, when Tony Blair and Paddy Ashdown led their respective parties, tactical shifts of just a few percentage points cost the Conservatives about 30 seats they would otherwise have held. Nothing like that happened in 2019. Lib Dems could not bear the thought of helping Jeremy Corbyn – indeed some Lib Dem candidates report losing supporters to the Conservatives, to be sure of keeping Corbyn out of Downing Street. Jo Swinson, the then Lib Dem leader, was not actively disliked by Labour supporters but neither did she have the positive appeal of Ashdown two decades earlier. Today, with Starmer and Ed Davey at the helms of their parties, tactical voting seems to be enjoying a revival. Suppose it has the same impact at the next election as in 1997. The Tories would have lost heavily then, even without tactical voting. Next time it could make the difference between the Conservatives having enough MPs to continue in office, or Johnson being replaced by Starmer, at the head of a minority Labour administration. Given the size of the mountain Labour must climb to achieve an overall majority – a lead of about 12% in the popular vote – a minority government may be the best real hope for Labour and the biggest threat to the Tories. Which gives us the paradox that the slump in Labour’s vote in North Shropshire should cheer Starmer and terrify Johnson. Peter Kellner is a political analyst and former president of YouGovMarching alongside her fellow Liberal Democrats through Oswestry, their orange placards thrust triumphantly in the air, North Shropshire’s new MP insisted her sensational byelection win was about more than just voters aghast at recent headlines. “It was moving towards us even before the Christmas party stuff last week,” Helen Morgan argued. “We found that people really felt they’d been taken for granted here. When we told them they could have an MP who would listen to them and fight their corner, that message really resonated.” Something certainly resonated. Morgan’s win counts as one of the biggest byelection shocks ever, turning a near-23,000 Tory majority in the 2019 election to a Lib Dem victory margin of just under 6,000. “When did we know we were going to win it?” Morgan said. “Well, you never know until the day. But we were starting to feel more confident as the campaign progressed. People here really wanted change, and they wanted to send a message to Boris Johnson.” The victory was not without effort. “The Lib Dems have worked so hard here, the volume of literature and the number of calls, and the overall visibility of their campaign has been really fantastic,” said Jessie Miller, who works at an organic food shop in the town and voted for the party for the first time. Others certainly noticed the all-out Lib Dem campaign, likened by one weary rival to “carpet-bombing”, with households reporting they had been sent up to 15 leaflets. This was seen as the only way to stand a chance in what one Lib Dem campaigner called “the truest of blue Tory seats”, which in its various forms has had a Conservative MP for all but two of the last 189 years. John Biffen, who held a series of cabinet posts under Margaret Thatcher, was the local MP for 35 years. He was followed by Owen Paterson, born and bred in the area, who served for 24 years until his resignation after breaching lobbying rules in November. Initially, there was talk of opposition parties giving way to an “anti-sleaze” unity candidate, as happened in Tatton in 1997, when Martin Bell overturned a Tory majority of more than 22,000. Bell was also reportedly approached by the Lib Dems to stand for them, but declined. In the end, Paterson’s name and the lobbying scandal came up fairly little. But it was still a “toxic cocktail of local and national issues”, as one Lib Dem campaigner described it, that conspired to overturn the Tory majority. Access to healthcare and ambulance waiting times are a huge issue in the seat, with many voters telling the Guardian this was one of their main priorities when deciding how to vote. All four of Shropshire’s community ambulance stations, including in Oswestry and Market Drayton, closed in October to much local outcry. According to a West Midlands ambulance service boss the county “ran out” of ambulances on one day in November because all vehicles were queueing outside hospitals. A Lib Dem tally of the wording used on the many leaflets sent in the campaign said that while sleaze was mentioned 13 times, ambulances were raised 72 times, and farming on 41 occasions. But then nine days before polls opened, the party was handed extra ammunition through repeated reports about parties at Downing Street in December last year, prompting nationwide anger. “It was like Barnard Castle on steroids,” one Lib Dem campaigner said. The party went full throttle, promoting a photograph of a Conservative HQ Christmas party, complete with buffet, to North Shropshire voters on Facebook within an hour and a half of it emerging. “Tell them the party is over,” quickly became their tagline. After his defeat, the Conservative candidate, Neil Shastri-Hurst, said the party would need to “reflect upon the result” and some Tory campaigners have been quick to blame “partygate” for the loss. But a number of voters also told the Guardian they were frustrated the Tories had not chosen a local candidate and felt Shastri-Hurst, a lawyer living in Birmingham, had little in common with the community. Tactical voting also played a major role in a seat where the Lib Dems, with Morgan standing, came third in 2019, with just 10% of the vote. In a speech on Friday morning, the former Lib Dem leader Tim Farron thanked “people who support Labour and the Greens who chose to lend us their vote”. Considering Labour has been the runner-up in every general election in the constituency bar one for the past two decades, the local Labour campaign was irked at the Lib Dems’ unilateral declaration that only they could challenge. But there was no doubt the Labour candidate, Ben Wood, faced a lack of complete party HQ support. His campaign team say their chances were hampered all the more when one of the party’s MPs, Yasmin Qureshi, said in a radio interview: “Labour are never going to win North Shropshire. The Lib Dems do have an opportunity to do so.” Jessie Miller was among those who switched: “I always voted Labour, pointlessly, sadly, so this is the first time I felt like my vote has counted.” The Lib Dems were pushing the message that the shock result had burst the “Boris bubble”. “If we can win North Shropshire we can win anywhere,” Morgan said. But questions remain about whether the shock result shows a genuine shift in the tide of UK politics, or was itself the product of a byelection bubble.There is often discussion and debate, friendly and fiery, over which league tops the rest in terms of competitive balance, investment and the quality of the product on the pitch. In many ways these are abstract discussions to which we will never really have a clear answer. That is in part because women’s football is not a static beast but a living, breathing creature with its development constantly in flux and uneven, which means finding a fair barometer is close to impossible. Some, mainly in the US and prompted by frustrations at the lack of US or US-based players in the Guardian top 100 female footballers, pointed recently to the success of the NWSL’s Portland Thorns over Lyon in this summer’s Women’s International Champions Cup to champion the US league’s superiority over European leagues. The reigning European champions, Barcelona, were beaten there by their predecessors, Lyon, and the Thorns progressed to the final against Lyon having beaten Houston Dash on penalties. Except that is a friendly tournament, played in the middle of the US season but in the European pre-season, and far from a true competitive test between the continents. The new Champions League group stage, though, has given us a much clearer and less distorted view of the state of play among Europe’s top leagues. The exit of Chelsea, who suffered a 4-0 defeat at Wolfsburg on Thursday, Arsenal’s struggle out of their group with bruising 4-1 and 4-0 defeats by Barcelona and a 4-1 loss to Germany’s third-place side Hoffenheim, plus Manchester City’s earlier qualifying campaign collapse against Real Madrid have helped to put the strength of the Women’s Super League into the spotlight. There are contributing factors to the European struggles of WSL teams. City have spent much of the season battling an injury crisis and had not played a friendly before their qualifying campaign opener on 31 August. Arsenal’s surprise loss to Hoffenheim came not long after an FA Cup final collapse against Chelsea and a second defeat by Barcelona which have rattled confidence. The Gunners are also only four months into a first season under Jonas Eidevall and have suffered a spate of injuries. Chelsea, Champions League runners-up last season, were in the toughest group, with Juventus and Wolfsburg as well as the Swiss side Servette, and their emphatic 3-0 FA Cup final win over Arsenal was followed three days later by a leggy 0-0 home draw with Juventus, then by a shock 1-0 loss to Reading in the league and the capitulation in Wolfsburg. The WSL is increasingly competitive, as Brighton’s and Tottenham’s rise, Chelsea’s loss to Reading and Spurs’s point against Arsenal have shown. That causes problems for teams competing in Europe. The schedule is heavy but with fewer easy games there is little opportunity to ease off around European fixtures to prioritise them. That is not a problem unique to England. Wolfsburg drew with Bayer Leverkusen before they welcomed Chelsea and have played as many games since the international break, albeit a straightforward league game rather than a cup final. Their performances in a first European campaign are a testament to the growing competitiveness of the Frauen Bundesliga. In addition to an increase in the number of games between September and December as a result of the welcome introduction of a Champions League group stage, Chelsea and Arsenal have had the 2020-21 FA Cup run to finish this season – a hangover from the Covid-delayed campaigns – and it was cruel timing that the final fell straight after an international break and before the penultimate round of Champions League games. Despite these woes, though, the manner of Chelsea’s exit and the way Arsenal limped over the line in a 4-1 defeat are inexcusable for teams boasting deep squads and with the lofty ambition of lifting Europe’s premier prize. In many respects the new group stage has exposed the bluster of the WSL. It is a well-financed and growing league. However, the league’s top clubs have not pulled clear of the rest of Europe’s top teams as a result of the large support for the league, far from it, and until the clubs have the same or greater ideological and financial buy-in as Europe’s other elite clubs that gap will remain. In previous editions of the competition this was masked. Progress to the latter stages, where the big teams would finally meet, was straightforward and teams could point to their quarter-final or semi-final forays as signs of growth. A late exit, a tight result, being one or two steps removed from the cup, all painted a rosy picture. Now, with big teams going head-to-head early on, and with the world watching thanks to a broadcast deal with Dazn and YouTube that means every game is streamed for free, the view is less forgiving.“I have a suggestion and I’m not sure you’re going to like it,” my wife said, one evening in 2016. I knew what was coming. My wife isn’t someone prone to suggesting we suddenly up sticks and move to Arkansas, or begin new careers in mime artistry. And we’d been talking about names for our imminent first child. Girls’ names had been a particular problem: we’d ended up with a rotating cast of names from Mad Men – Peggys and Bettys and the like – but weren’t fully convinced. I braced myself for a “Gertrude”. “What about Romy?” she said. Instantly, I loved it. The name’s roots are basically a Germanic twist on the Latin name Rosemary, but it seems to be more popular in France these days. My wife had been following the rather glam daughter of the editor of French Vogue on Instagram, who called her own daughter Romy. As it turned out, I’d recently done a phone interview with Romy from the xx and was struck by how lovely she’d been to chat to. We loved that there weren’t many Romys, and that all the ones who existed seemed to be extremely cool: Romy Schneider, the tragic German-French actor. Sofia Coppola and Thomas Mars of the band Phoenix have a daughter called Romy. And there is the film Romy and Michele’s High School Reunion, which I still haven’t seen but am assured by film buffs is right up there with Chinatown and Citizen Kane. We had found the perfect name for our perfect girl. When she was born, an extremely kind colleague managed to get a signed seven-inch vinyl sent from Romy xx herself with the message “From one Romy to another” written on it. It wasn’t all plain sailing for our Romy. There were the colleagues who insisted on calling her “Rommy” no matter how many times I said the name with added emphasis (Roe-Mee). Then there was our move from Hackney’s hipster enclave, where we had never encountered another Romy, to a quiet spot in southeast London only to discover there was another Romy living over the road. And one in her year at primary school. And one in the year above. And one in the year below. In fact, there seem to be five, or possibly even six, Romys at her school alone – we’ve genuinely lost count. Still, all the other Romys are lovely, and seem to enjoy the experience of spotting each other out in the wild. Only cool parents, we reasoned, would ever choose the name Romy. Now the terrible thing has happened. I hesitate to say it’s the worst thing Boris Johnson has done, but for about 40 seconds yesterday it felt like it. Romy? Romy?! As one of the 27 WhatsApp messages I received shortly after his daughter’s name was announced put it: “Noooooooooooo!” One friend even claimed they would have to tear down the portrait our Romy had drawn and signed from their refrigerator (she now says she was joking, but I will be making an unannounced visit to spot-check this at regular intervals over the next decade). Romy is a very cool name and now the least cool person on Earth has used it. I’m talking about Carrie Johnson – who I’m presuming, as someone who at least knows how many children she has, chose the name. There’s no escaping it: Carrie is a person less cool even than Boris Johnson, on the grounds that she married Boris Johnson. In terms of cool, Carrie Johnson makes Samantha Cameron look like Megan Thee Stallion. A lot of people have spent the past half-decade or more feeling like Boris Johnson is ruining their lives. While this latest development is an extremely minor transgression in the grand scheme of things, it does feel weirdly like he is personally trolling me and my wife. Anyway, I will wish this new Romy well – the sins of the father should not be visited on the newborn daughter, and that holds true even if said sins include gaslighting the entire nation on a daily basis while looking like the estranged sibling Worzel Gummidge is embarrassed to be seen around. Romy Iris Charlotte Johnson will be her own person, but she should at least know this, just to keep her grounded: you may have been born into a world of staggering wealth, contacts and privilege, but you will never receive a signed seven-inch from a member of the xx. Tim Jonze is the associate editor of Guardian CultureDeforestation has made outdoor work unsafe for millions of people in the tropics over the past 15 years, a study has found. The rise in temperatures and humidity caused by tree loss has reduced the number of safe hours in the day for people to work, especially for those performing heavy labour. “Because of climate change, these areas in the tropics are already on the edge of what’s considered safe or comfortable for working in the late morning to afternoon,” said Luke Parsons, a climate researcher at Duke University in North Carolina and lead author of the paper published in the journal One Earth. “And then you take deforestation on top of that and it pushes these regions over into even more unsafe work conditions.” A growing body of research has shown that deforestation is linked to an increase in local temperatures, as it decreases the cooling benefits trees bring to an area. For example, in the areas of the Amazon in Brazil which have been heavily deforested, over the past two decades the temperatures have been as much as 10C higher than forested regions. For this study, the researchers parsed satellite and meteorological data between 2003 and 2018 in 94 countries with tropical forests, looking at temperature and humidity. They found that almost 100,000 people, 90% of whom live in Asia, have lost more than two hours of work time a day. Almost 5 million people have lost at least half an hour of safe work time each day, the majority of them outdoor workers doing heavy physical labour. The effects are disproportionately felt in deforested locations; in the Americas, 5% of forested areas lost at least half an hour of safe work time a day, while 35% of deforested areas suffered the same loss. “We couldn’t go to every single location where people are working and measure when they stopped working,” said Parsons. “We can make this assessment of lost safe work time, but people may often in fact choose to continue to work when it is too hot and humid, at the detriment to their health.” Continued global heating and forest loss is expected to amplify these impacts, reducing work hours for vulnerable groups even more over coming decades. Exposure to heat could affect mood and mental illnesses, as well as reduce physical and psychological performance, including lapses in concentration, fatigue, irritability, increasing the risk of accidents, said Beatriz Oliveira, researcher at the Sergio Arouca National School of Public Health in Brazil, who was not involved in this study. The researchers say their findings provide an economic incentive for local populations to maintain intact local forests on top of the environmental benefits.It was billed as the programme that would revive Simon Cowell’s fortunes – but his new primetime television format, Walk the Line, has instead been comprehensively beaten in the ratings by the high-brow quizshow Only Connect. The new ITV show began its six-night run on Sunday night, in the hope that the format could bring back the success of his now defunct The X-Factor. Instead, Walk the Line’s ratings have fallen off a cliff as Cowell struggled to recapture the combination of emotional backstory, audience excitement and musical appeal that gave him two decades of television success. Part of the problem might be that an increasingly media-savvy audience is aware of how backstories are used to manipulate audiences, according to the culture writer Scott Bryan. He said: “Musicians can now just use the internet to get famous. We’re cynical of the sob stories and the whole thing whiffs of being done to artificially create emotions like X-Factor. We can now look through it.” Walk the Line features five acts performing every night in front of judges, with Cowell deciding to stay off-screen and instead letting the likes of Craig David and Dawn French offer their verdicts on each performance. In each episode, the previous night’s winner has the choice of either going home with a modest sum of money – or risk “walking the line” and going head-to-head in a vote with the latest winner for the chance to secure a £500,000 prize. The Guardian’s own review described the show as like “hooking up the corpse of The X-Factor to an electrical current and making it jerk about for kicks”. Walk the Line attracted only 3 million viewers for its hyped launch episode on Sunday night, despite having a high-profile host in the form of Maya Jama and benefiting from people tuning in for the final of I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here!. By Monday, the audience for Cowell’s primetime singing show had fallen to 2.1 million, according to figures provided by Digital-i. By comparison, during the same timeslot 2.7 million viewers tuned in for the latest episode of BBC Two’s hieroglyph-fixated programme Only Connect, where teams attempted to work out the connection between George Orwell, the former health secretary Jeremy Hunt, the Wilkins family, and Paddington Bear. The answer, incidentally, was that they all had a connection to marmalade, with Hunt having run a disastrous business venture exporting the breakfast spread to Japan, only to find out there was little appetite for it locally. Cowell’s company – which has hopes of selling the Walk the Line format to other television channels around the world – may wish to take note.Vaccines and high levels of prior exposure to coronavirus in South Africa appear to be protecting against the more severe symptoms seen in the previous three waves of the pandemic, according to the country’s health minister. The suggestion that previous exposure to another variant of coronavirus – or vaccination – might provide protection from the Omicron variant echoes analysis by South African experts earlier this week that suggested prior exposure or vaccination gave a degree of protection from serious disease. That has been backed by several reports, including by public and private health providers, that suggest a lower level of hospital admissions during the current wave. Echoing the findings of Shabir Mahdi, a vaccine expert at the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, the health minister, Joe Phaahla, told a news conference: “We believe that it might not necessarily just be that Omicron is less virulent, but … coverage of vaccination [and] … natural immunity of people who have already had contact with the virus is also adding to the protection. That’s why we are seeing mild illness.” While there has been an increase in hospitalisations and deaths in South Africa in recent days, driven by the surge in cases of the Omicron variant, along with continuing infections by the Delta variant, health officials say it remains at lower levels than in previous waves. Michelle Groome, from the National Institute for Communicable Diseases, said: “[We are] starting to see a slight increase in deaths nationally, but once again this level is very much lower even than the baseline period we were seeing between the second and third waves.” She added that these were “relatively small increases in deaths”. Wassila Jassat, also from the NICD, said the number of people requiring oxygen was lower than in any previous period. “Patients do seem to stay for a shorter duration,” she said. Phaahla said early indications were that infections may have peaked in Gauteng province, where cases initially surged. However, the latest figures from the NICD showed Gauteng continued to account for most new Covid infections as of 16 December, at 27%, followed by KwaZulu-Natal (23%) and Western Cape (19%). His comments came as the G7 group of countries called the Omicron variant the “biggest current threat to global public health”, saying it was “more important than ever” for countries to “closely cooperate”. While South Africa’s experience with Omicron has been carefully watched around the world for evidence of how infections may progress, experts say populations with larger numbers of older and more vulnerable people may experience it differently. Given how infectious the Omicron variant is, one of the most pressing concerns is that the very rapid and concentrated burst of infections that it provokes could overwhelm health systems because of the sheer numbers. The South African press conference on Friday, however, goes to the heart of a number of the unknowns about the Omicron variant. While it has been established that Omicron is more infectious and more able to evade neutralising antibodies provided by vaccines and prior exposure, questions remain over whether other aspects of the body’s acquired immunity to Covid-19 may be mitigating against more serious disease. According to some experts, while Omicron may be more easily able to evade key neutralising antibodies that stick to the virus’s spike protein, other tools in the immune system’s repertoire of defences, including so-called killer T cells, may still be doing their job. A presentation given by Wendy Burgers, of the University of Cape Town, at a World Health Organization symposium into evidence of Omicron evading immunity earlier this week indicated preliminary research appeared to suggest that the body’s T cell response remained strong against Omicron. That, however, remains in question, with England’s chief medical officer telling the House of Commons this week that there was a lack of “very good T cell studies” to establish whether this was happening. South Africa has given 44% of its adult population at least one dose of Covid-19 vaccine, more than many African countries but well short of the government’s year-end target. Among the over-50s vaccination coverage levels are more than 60%. The latest information out of South Africa came as Omicron continued to spread rapidly around the globe with India – which suffered a devastating Delta outbreak earlier this year – reporting 101 cases in 11 provinces. Denmark’s prime minister, Mette Frederiksen, said theatres, cinemas, concert halls, amusement parks, museums and art galleries must shut down to contain the spread of coronavirus in some of Europe’s toughest new measures. The German health minister, Karl Lauterbach, also warned that he expected the Omicron variant to lead to a “massive fifth wave” of the pandemic. Lauterbach, a former epidemiology professor, said during a visit to the Lower Saxony region that Germany must prepare for a challenge “that we have never seen in this form before”.The online ethical grocer Farmdrop has gone out of business a week before Christmas, leaving hundreds of customers who had ordered turkeys, geese and other festive food scrambling to find alternatives. The company confirmed it had gone into administration and was “permanently closed”, so it would not be delivering any orders from Friday onwards. Those who have paid will have to approach their bank or card company to ask about getting their money back. Thursday was the final day of deliveries. Anxious customers who had been expecting a delivery over the next few days asked on social media what would happen now and if they should attempt to source items from elsewhere. Moira Doyle tweeted: “My delivery today is cancelled. Payment taken yesterday for Xmas order. Refund??” She added that it would be “back to Tesco” for her. Another tweeted: “Well @farmdrop have gone bust, and with that, my Christmas food delivery ... anyone got any intel on places still selling goose?” Jane Tidey was one of those tweeting she had just received an email saying her order for Christmas Eve was cancelled. Meanwhile, Rhiannon Litterick tweeted the company to say her order had not arrived and the phone line was closed. “Please help! We’re isolating, so are relying on this order,” she added. The London-based company was set up by the former City broker Ben Pugh in 2012 after he became frustrated by what he saw as a lack of decent local food available in London, and spied an opportunity to connect farmers with consumers using the internet. Farmdrop specialised in responsibly sourced, homegrown and organic produce from independent producers, and sold hundreds of different items, from organic pigs in blankets to recycled toilet paper. According to trade magazine the Grocer, Farmdrop had 10,000 customers at the start of 2020, though it expanded rapidly during the pandemic, enjoying “unprecedented growth” in orders as large numbers of locked-down households switched to online deliveries. But earlier this year it warned “the growth in orders and sales has not translated into profitability”. Its latest accounts filed in July showed the company reported pre-tax losses of £10m compared with £11m the previous year. Farmdrop’s demise deals a heavy blow to its 450-plus producers, some of whom said on social media they were owed money. John Malseed, the director of Frenchbeer Farm in Newton Abbot, Devon, one of Farmdrop’s main suppliers of turkeys, said the news was “a bit of a kick in the teeth”. He said there were hundreds of its turkeys in a warehouse in London and “we are trying to get our stock back”. Malseed said he was hopeful he could send them on to the customers who had ordered them, but that it was too early to say for sure what would happen. His farm had more than doubled the number of birds it produced this year, Malseed said, adding: “We will try to fulfil as many of their orders as possible.” Farmdrop began by delivering produce from local farmers to libraries, community centres and pubs, but later upgraded to a fleet of electric vans so it could offer next-day deliver directly to people’s homes. In June 2018, the company said it had raised £10m from investors, including the founder of Skype, Niklass Zennström, to take its home delivery service to the north of England. Other shareholders include Wheatsheaf Group, part of the Duke of Westminster’s Grosvenor Estate, and Impact Ventures UK. Another high-profile backer is Alex Chesterman, the founder of property website Zoopla. In the accounts filed in July, the firm’s auditor talked about the financial challenges facing the business and said: “These conditions indicate the existence of a material uncertainty that may cast significant doubt on the company’s ability to continue as a going concern.” In an email to customers, Farmdrop said it had been working to secure the support and capital it needed to continue, but “it has become apparent that we have exhausted all possible options … We will no longer be able to serve our cherished customers.” In another email, it said: “If you have paid for an order with us, we would recommend getting in touch with your bank or card supplier to initiate a chargeback as the refunds now sit with the administrators. If you have booked a delivery but have not yet been charged, you will not be charged.”Can Marcelo Bielsa and Leeds bounce back in the wake of Tuesday’s 7-0 dissection at Manchester City? Only time will tell but their task against Arsenal is complicated by the injury induced absence of Patrick Bamford, Kalvin Phillips, Pascal Struijk, Rodrigo, Liam Cooper, Jamie Shackleton and Daniel James. At least Bielsa can welcome back his German defender Robin Koch from a long-term pelvic problem. In marked contrast Mikel Arteta is able to continue without his former captain Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang on disciplinary grounds. The striker has not travelled to Yorkshire with his teammates. Louise Taylor Saturday 5.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Elland Road Last season Leeds 0 Arsenal 0 Referee Andre Marriner This season G9 Y40 R2 4.89 cards/game Odds H 3-1 A 5-6 D 11-4 LEEDS Subs from Klaesson, Cresswell, Drameh, Summerville, Greenwood, McCarron, Jenkins, McKinstry Doubtful None Injured Bamford (hamstring, Jan), Phillips (Hamstring/shoulder, Feb), Struijk (foot, unknown), Cooper (hamstring, unknown), Rodrigo (foot, unknown), Shackleton (achilles, unknown), James (hip, unknown) Suspended Firpo (one match) Discipline Y47 R1 Form LDWDLL Leading scorer Raphinha 7 ARSENAL Subs from Hein, Okonkwo, Chambers, Marí, Holding, Soares, Tavares, Lokonga, Elneny, Maitland-Niles, Pépé, Balogun, Martinelli, Nketiah Doubtful None Injured Kolasinac (ankle, Jan), Leno (groin, unknown) Suspended None Unavailable Aubameyang (disciplinary reasons) Discipline Y26 R1 Form LWLLWW Leading scorer Smith Rowe 6It won’t be the most important reminder of the continuing scourge of Covid-19, but another poignant edition of the BBC’s Sports Personality of the Year awaits on Sunday. A week ago, the national broadcaster was looking forward to hosting more than 600-700 people from the world of sport, all of them dashing through Salford Media City in their frocks and tails to attend a gala ceremony full of light and sparkle. It would be a return after last year’s locked down event. Now, however, that crowd is to be comprised of “essential” individuals only and the favourite for the award is in quarantine in Abu Dhabi. Emma Raducanu is the star in lockdown, the teenage tennis sensation halfway through her quarantine for a case of Covid-19 which thankfully appears to have brought only mild symptoms. She remains odds-on favourite with the bookmakers to become the first woman to win the award since Zara Phillips in 2006. The BBC will hope for a video link-up with Raducanu on the night, but anything more ornate or personalised will be out of bounds. An inability to properly celebrate Raducanu’s fairytale success is only the chief frustration in a year that deserves to be commemorated with gusto. Other names on the shortlist for the main Spoty award cover most of the spectacular achievements of the past 12 months. Raheem Sterling is named, the leading figure in England’s run to their first major football final since 1966. Second favourite Tom Daley and Adam Peaty represent British success at the Olympics, with Daley also winning hearts and minds with his persistence (winning gold at his fourth Games) and his pioneering representation of the LGBT community. Peaty, meanwhile, is a straightforward performance monster, unbeaten in the 100m breaststroke in seven years, and the same can be said of Dame Sarah Storey, who became the most successful British Paralympian of all time with dominant performances in four different events. In making an appeal for Spoty votes on social media, Storey acknowledged the eerie nature of competing in Covid times. The number of messages of congratulation she had received, Storey said, “just go to show what amazing support there is out there, just as we had out in the Games in Tokyo. I don’t think I had ever anticipated just how overwhelmed I was going to be by the idea of an empty stadium when I finished that first race in the individual pursuit, we really felt the difference in not having the fans there too.” Storey also declared her nomination an “incredible honour … in such an incredible year”. This is certainly more than Tyson Fury managed, the heavyweight boxer – who emerged victorious from one of the all-time great title fights in October – makes the shortlist but had threatened to sue the BBC if he did. This week, he appeared to have dropped the legal threats, though his antipathy towards the BBC remained. “Even if they want to give me another Special Award, which they did once, I won’t be making another speech for them,” he told the Mail. “Anyhow, I believe my four nominations are a record.” It’s fair to say that Storey’s remarks come closer to the spirit of Spoty than Fury’s do. It will indeed be difficult for the ceremony to shake the gloom everyone is feeling, and perhaps the regret of not being able to do more with this spectacular year. However, the ceremony is at its best when celebrating the success of those who triumph despite adversity, most specifically in the special Helen Rollason award. In the end Spoty increasingly shines when it celebrates human as much as sporting achievement, and that will still be in evidence on Sunday night.Boris Johnson has been accused of spending too little time on protecting Britain’s national security in a highly critical letter sent directly to Downing Street by the chair of a cross-party watchdog. The chair of the national security committee, the former Labour foreign secretary Dame Margaret Beckett, writes: “We are deeply troubled by the persistent signs that our nation’s security is no longer a priority for the government”. The former minister raises concerns about the fallout from the withdrawal from Afghanistan – and complains to the prime minister that there has been “a significant reduction in your personal engagement” compared with his predecessors David Cameron and Theresa May. Accusing Johnson of “a more relaxed approach to national security”, Beckett writes that the prime minister was now expected to chair only 12 meetings of the national security council a year, after a recent internal revamp. That contrasted with about 35 meetings a year under the old system created by Cameron, in which the powerful committee, composed of senior ministers plus military and intelligence officials, met weekly whenever parliament was sitting to agree a common response to the key security issues of the day. “While we understand the pressing need to rebuild the economy after the pandemic, we fear that complacency may be creeping in,” Beckett writes in the letter, on behalf of the 22-member body of MPs and peers. Though chaired by Beckett, the committee’s members also include several senior Conservative backbenchers, including Tom Tugendhat and Tobias Ellwood, the chairs of the foreign affairs and defence select committees. On Afghanistan, Beckett said committee members said they had been struck by “the apparent complacency and lack of urgency” across Johnson’s government “in the wake of a disastrous experience for the UK”. The prime minister has repeatedly ruled out holding a public inquiry into the chaotic withdrawal from Kabul. There was a complaint from the chair that the UK had “acquiesced to US strategic thinking on Afghanistan for too long” – including both former president Donald Trump’s decision to strike a deal with the Taliban and Joe Biden’s final announcement to withdraw troops in the summer. The messy exit, an emergency airlift supervised by US, British and other troops, suggested “a systemic failure by the government to prepare properly for a scenario that it had, in fact, foreseen”, Beckett says, highlighting again the recent devastating testimony of the Foreign Office whistleblower Raphael Marshall. The committee chair asks whether the Foreign Office’s “crisis response capabilities are fit for purpose”, given how many Afghans desperate to be evacuated were left behind and why the Home Office “still cannot commit” to launching the planned Afghan citizens resettlement scheme by March 2022. There was also a complaint about the “relegation of national security as a spending priority” in the last two spending reviews. Defence and the Foreign Office will receive “the smallest annual, real-terms growth” of all government departments, while cuts to the aid budget amount to £5bn a year until 2023-24 at the earliest. In her conclusions, Beckett calls on Johnson to spend more time on national security, by chairing the national security council “at least once per fortnight”. To support her argument, she quoted Britain’s wartime leader: “Sir Winston Churchill once said: ‘I never “worry” about action, but only about inaction.’”At last. For the first time since he became prime minister, Boris Johnson is paying a direct price for his actions. For two long years, he seemed to defy the laws of political gravity, somehow floating high in the sky when his conduct, whether his lies or his failures, should have seen him crash to the ground. His mishandling of the first phase of the pandemic was so disastrous, he presided over both the highest death toll in Europe and the deepest economic slump in the G7. It was a record of both calamitous misjudgment and corruption, as contracts worth hundreds of millions were funnelled to those with friends in high Tory places. He appointed useless ministers, several of whom became mired in scandal. And yet Johnson remained aloft, riding the warm air currents of consistent leads in the opinion polls. His admirers said he was a politician like no other, immune to the pressures that would bring down lesser mortals. That immunity fed a sense of impunity. But in the early hours of Friday morning, among the fields and farms of North Shropshire, Johnson fell to earth. The Tories took a beating in this byelection, losing a seat they had held for the best part of two centuries. Only once before had they seen a bigger collapse of their vote to the Liberal Democrats (or its predecessor parties), and that was three decades ago. Talk to those involved, on all sides, and they agree that voters were driven chiefly by fury with the prime minister – over the revelations of Downing Street partying when the rest of the country was locked down against a killer disease, and what one minister calls the general “shitshow” of this government. This result, coupled with a now steady if not huge Labour poll lead, has Conservative MPs rattled. They are alarmed especially by the way the anti-Conservative voters of North Shropshire organised themselves, as Labour and Green supporters put aside their affiliations to vote for the candidate best placed to defeat the Tory. Tactical voting cost the Conservatives about 30 seats in 1997: if the next general election is close, and that pattern were repeated, it could make the difference between victory and defeat. No less troubling for Conservative HQ is the prospect of Lib Dems revived: if Labour is to be in power, it needs the Lib Dems to do well, capturing Tory seats that are out of Labour’s reach. Little wonder twitchy Tory MPs are now debating how long they should give Johnson to get his act together: “one more strike and he’s out” or let him stagger on to contest the local elections in May. He has, says Ruth Davidson, been “put on warning by his MPs”. Of course, we should not get carried away. It’s only one byelection, fought in deeply inhospitable conditions for the government – asking voters to back them in a contest triggered by an MP resigning in disgrace. That said, it’s the specific contours of North Shropshire that should have Conservatives seriously worried. For they suggest that the formula that won the party its 80-seat majority in 2019 is disintegrating. A core ingredient two years ago was Brexit. Johnson’s promise to Get Brexit Done forged a new electoral coalition and seemed to presage a realignment of British politics, allowing the Tories to make inroads in historically hostile territory. That should have made North Shropshire doubly safe, not only as a Tory bastion since the Great Reform Act, but as a place where 60% voted leave. And yet the constituency spurned Johnson as vehemently as any remainer city. To be clear, this was not a repudiation of Brexit – though farmers in the constituency, like others across the country, are livid at post-Brexit free trade deals that will, among other things, dump cheap Australian beef into the UK market. Rather it means that exit from the EU no longer performs the function it once did, acting as the glorious, redemptive promise for which all other sins might be forgiven. In 2019, voters were ready to overlook any misgivings they might have had about the Tories – including, in those “red wall” seats, the fact that they were Tories – for the prospect of getting Brexit done. Now, even in the Conservative heartland and even among hardcore leavers, departure from the EU is not enough to wash away the sins of booze, nibbles and party games, or Paterson’s fat Randox contracts. A second ingredient was Johnson himself, the famed Heineken politician. Except in North Shropshire he became the man who repelled the parts every other Tory leader used to reach. That’s a reverse Heineken. Throughout his career, including as mayor of London, Johnson’s trick, revered by his devotees as a superpower, was to appeal to voters who didn’t much like Tories. Indeed, his appeal was tacitly predicated on an understanding that the Conservative party was a damaged brand. But the events of recent weeks have seen that trick unravel, with Johnson becoming the very embodiment of the “same old Tories”. One Conservative frontbencher says the prime minister has confirmed the suspicion many voters always had: that “when you peek behind the curtain, Tories are privileged, sneering elites who take the rest of us for fools”. Once cherished for defying the Tory stereotype of stuffy formality, Johnson now incarnates a much more poisonous set of tropes: that Tories believe it’s one rule for them, one rule for everyone else; that they look out for themselves and their mates; that they’re pampered and spoilt, laughing at those who are less lucky. That grates on those who lent their votes to Johnson in 2019, believing he was not like the others. But it rankles too with traditional Tories, like those who voted on Thursday, who have, says that Tory MP, concluded that the prime minister is “someone whose morals and character they don’t like or respect”. None of this is going to get better soon for the Conservatives. There is discontent across the kingdom, with voters in the north angry that “levelling up” remains more rhetorical than real, voters in the “blue wall” south angry about ugly housing developments dumped in their backyards, and all of them hit by the rising cost of living, rising interest rates, rising taxes and the prospect of losing their homes to pay for social care. For Labour, a couple of big questions now loom. First, can it rely on tactical voting to work as smoothly in a general election as it did in North Shropshire, or does it need to make currently unspoken alliances with Lib Dems and the Greens more explicit? Second, does it serve the party better to see the Tories remove the prime minister, or would a wounded, tainted Johnson be easier to beat? As dilemmas go, these are far more comfortable than the ones that have tended to afflict the party in recent years. Indeed, with a newly vigorous shadow cabinet, Labour can look to 2022 with rather more confidence than it has felt for most of the last decade. The Tories may yet defy the odds and even the fates – but they can no longer defy gravity. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnistSeth Meyers Seth Meyers continued his deep dive into evidence of GOP efforts to overturn the 2020 election on Thursday’s Late Night, such as text messages from Republican lawmakers to former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows. Just after the election, one unnamed lawmaker suggested a plan to have swing states declare themselves for Donald Trump before the results were declared. “HERE’S and AGRESSIVE STRATEGY [sic],” the lawmaker wrote. “Why can t [sic] the states of GA NC PENN and other R controlled state houses declare this is BS (where conflicts and election not called that night) and just send their own electors to vote and have it go to the SCOTUS.” “Anytime someone starts a text with the words ‘here’s an aggressive strategy’, don’t open the attachment,” said Meyers. “Also the random capitalization is a hint that whatever that person is telling you is going to be super insane.” “Despite all of this incontrovertible evidence – the text messages, the secret memos, all the smoking guns we’ve found out about in the last year – propagandists in the GOP and on Fox News are still trying to rewrite history,” Meyers continued. He pointed to Fox News contributor Lara Trump, who tried to argue on-air this week that the president warned Congress about the 6 January attack on the Capitol. “They all know that Donald Trump didn’t orchestrate this whole thing,” Lara Trump said. “He didn’t tell people to go to the Capitol and break in. He said, ‘Let’s peacefully and patriotically make our voices heard.’ But he tried to warn them.” “I’m sorry, what?” Meyers marveled. “Trump tried to warn people about the coup he fomented? Do you mean like the way a serial killer tells the cops about his next move? Stephen Colbert On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert tore into Republican congressman Jim Jordan of Ohio, who the day before the insurrection texted Meadows with a plan to prevent the legitimate winner of the election, Joe Biden, from taking office. “On January 6, 2021, Vice-President Mike Pence, as president of the Senate, should call out all electoral votes that he believes are unconstitutional as no electoral votes at all,” Jordan texted. Jordan has said he forwarded the message written by Joseph Schmitz, a former US defense department inspector general who outlined a “draft proposal” to pressure Pence to refuse to certify the election results, and that Meadows knew the message was forwarded. “Well, so what? That’s not a defense,” said Colbert. “That’s like saying, ‘I didn’t cook the meth, I just sold it at the Gymboree. Those toddlers are going to lose their teeth anyways.’” Colbert also ripped the “months-long campaign of subversion” by half a dozen Republican lawmakers, including Jordan, Scott Perry, Paul Gosar, Louie Gohmert, Mo Brooks and Andy Biggs. The “Steal Team Dicks” fomented distrust over the election result and planned to derail the symbolic certification of the election before the insurrection thwarted the vote. “So they were ready to reject the delegates, seize the ballots and overturn the election, but they were interrupted by the out-of-control mob their lies had created,” Colbert explained. “It reminds me of the words of founding father Benjamin Frankenstein: ‘I’m hearing reports it was Antifa who destroyed the village!’” Trevor Noah And on the Daily Show, Trevor Noah explained how China is building up influence in Africa through binding investments. In recent years, China has pumped money into the continent with large infrastructure projects funded by China’s Export Import bank. “That’s right, baby, China has been making it rain in Africa,” Noah explained. “It’s the most money anyone has sent to Africa without being guilt-tripped by a celebrity singalong.” The funding is presented as no strings attached, since “China doesn’t care about your government, or human rights, or anything”, Noah said. “They’re basically the cool mom of international finance. ‘Oh, you and your friends, you want to come party this weekend? Well come to our basement with your child soldiers, we didn’t hear a thing!’” Well this can be a good arrangement for countries looking to build up their infrastructure after decades of extractive colonialism, “it won’t come as a surprise that China isn’t just giving away billions of risky loans to Africa out of the goodness of its heart”, said Noah. China has used its investments to pressure countries toward its political agenda; the more a country agrees with China’s voting line in UN general assemblies, the more infrastructure money they receive. “That’s the power of money right there,” said Noah. “Enough of it, and it can make you switch allegiances, change your principles, do anything. Hell, for enough money, you could probably get Africans to start saying that Africa is just one country.” Because these projects create mostly low-paying jobs for locals, with managerial positions and resource control going to Chinese companies and nationals, “when you start to examine this relationship as a whole, it actually starts to look a lot less like a loan and a lot more like a new kind of colonialism”, Noah said. Especially when those loans aren’t repaid – many have accused China of engaging in “debt colonialism”, or providing loans they know countries can’t pay off, thus trapping them in deals which shift natural resources and influence into Chinese hands. “What China’s doing is a lot like ‘terms and conditions’,” Noah concluded. “They know Africa can’t afford not to take the deals that they offer. And then, when Africa can’t pay it back, the Chinese are like, ‘Right, we’re taking all your shit, and if you don’t like it, read the fine print!’”Eric Clapton has won a legal case against a 55-year-old German woman selling a bootleg live CD for €9.95 (£8.45), Deutsche Welle reports. The woman, known as Gabriele P, claimed she was unaware that she was committing copyright infringement by listing the CD titled Eric Clapton – Live USA, which contains recordings of performances from the 1980s, on eBay. She told the court that the listing was removed after one day. Lawyers for the 76-year-old rock star pursued the case, and sent a Düsseldorf regional court an affidavit stating that the recordings were illegal and made without Clapton’s consent. In response to a standard letter from Clapton’s German legal team, the woman replied: “I object and ask you not to harass or contact me any further”, and told them “feel free to file a lawsuit if you insist on the demands”. An injunction was filed and the court found in Clapton’s favour. The woman appealed, stating that her late husband bought the disc in 1987 at a popular German department store, but lost. The judge said it was irrelevant that she did not buy the CD herself. The court stipulated that she must pay the legal fees of both parties, which total £2,889. In the highly unlikely event that she continued to list the CD for sale, she could under German copyright law face a fine of up to £212,353 or six months in prison. Clapton’s manager, Michael Eaton, told the Guardian: “Germany is a country where sales of bootleg and counterfeit CDs are rife, which damages the industry and customers with poor quality and misleading recordings. Along with a number of other major artists and record companies, over a number of years Eric Clapton has, through German lawyers, successfully pursued hundreds of bootleg cases in the German courts under routine German copyright procedures. “Costs are usually minimal unless the case is argued in court, which is what happened here as the lady instructed her own lawyers. Now that the full facts of this particular case have come to light, the intention is that the formal German proceedings will not be pursued any further.” The woman’s lawyer told Bild that they intended to appeal again. The Guardian has contacted her legal representatives for further comment. Clapton has made headlines in the past 18 months for taking a staunch stance against Covid-19 protective measures such as lockdowns, vaccines and vaccine passports. He claimed to have experienced a severe physical reaction to his first dose of the AstraZeneca jab, and referred to scientific research – which has found vaccines to be safe and life-saving – as “propaganda”. In December 2020, he collaborated with another noted vaccine sceptic, Van Morrison, on the song Stand and Deliver, which likens adherence to government restrictions to slavery. The song prompted the Black blues musician Robert Cray, who was born in segregated Georgia, to withdraw from supporting Clapton on his US summer tour as planned, the Washington Post reported. On that tour, Clapton was photographed posing with Texas governor Greg Abbott, who signed into law the country’s most restrictive abortion legislation and a measure to limit who can vote in the state. In October, Clapton told a site run by a prominent anti-vax campaigner: “Over the past year, there’s been a lot of disappearing, you know – little dust around with people moving away quite quickly. And it has, for me, refined the kind of friendships I have. And it’s dwindled down to the people that I obviously really need and love.”Attempts to salvage the 2015 Iran nuclear deal are “rapidly reaching the end of the road”, European negotiators have warned, as talks in Vienna adjourned to allow the Iranian negotiator to return home for consultation – a pause described by the Europeans as disappointing. “We hope that Iran is in a position to resume the talks quickly, and to engage constructively so that talks can move at a faster pace,” France, Germany and the UK said. “As we have said, there are weeks not months before the deal’s core non-proliferation benefits are lost. We are rapidly reaching the end of the road for this negotiation. “Iran’s nuclear programme is now more advanced than it has ever been … [and] it is critical that Iran avoids further escalatory steps.” The talks are likely to resume before the end of the year. Overall the European countries believe they have wrenched the Vienna talks closer to the point they had reached when the talks were suspended in June to give time for a review by Iran’s new hardline government. Iran’s new negotiators came back to the resumed talks three weeks ago with new texts, including lines on future nuclear commitments that tore up most of the prior compromises reached with the previous government. The European diplomats argue they have now got back closer to the previous starting line. European negotiators accept it is hard to judge Iran’s motives, but believe Iran is giving just enough to prevent a collapse in the highly technical talks, including on the UN nuclear inspectorate’s access to sites in Iran. The lack of access, and knowledge of the contemporary state of Iran’s nuclear programme, makes it harder to set baselines for what Iran’s must do to avoid the risk of proliferation. The US has participated indirectly in the talks because it withdrew from the accord in 2018 under President Donald Trump. His successor, Joe Biden, has signalled that he wants to rejoin the deal. Europe had been planning to demand an emergency board meeting of the UN nuclear watchdog, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), on Monday. The meeting may well have led to a vote of censure on Iran for failing to cooperate with the IAEA inspectors. In a sign of the difficulties over inspections, Rafael Grossi, the director general of the IAEA, on Friday cast doubt on Iranian claims that critical footage from a surveillance camera at an Iranian centrifuge-parts workshop at Karaj had gone missing after an apparent sabotage attack in June. He described the Iranian explanation as “very strange”. One of four IAEA cameras placed at Karaj near Tehran was destroyed in an apparent attack often attributed to Israel. Iran removed the cameras and showed them to the IAEA, but the destroyed camera’s data storage device was never presented. The IAEA and western powers have been demanding Iran produce the device since the Karaj workshop is used to make advanced centrifuges, essential to making enriched uranium. Grossi, setting out details of his latest agreement with Iran on access to its nuclear sites at a press conference this week, accepted he had not reached an agreement with Iran on locating the data storage medium from the damaged camera. Asked if it was credible the data storage medium had simply vanished, as Iran claimed, he replied: “We have doubts about that. This is why we are asking them ‘where is it?’ I am hoping they come up with an answer because it is very strange it disappears.” Grossi said it was right to presume the plant is producing advanced centrifuges. His challenge to Iran’s credibility will provide ammunition to those western diplomats that say Iran is stalling at the nuclear talks in Vienna, and hiding its true intentions. Grossi also confirmed that his agreement this week allowing new cameras to be restored at the Karaj workshop in the coming days contains the vital proviso that the IAEA will not have access to the camera’s memory cards until US sanctions are lifted and an agreement is reached on the restoration of the nuclear deal. It might take many months for Iran to verify sanctions have been lifted. The IAEA has not had access to the memory cards since February. Grossi insisted it will be still possible once the IAEA has access to the memory cards to put together the puzzle about what has been happening at Karaj, but said if access was denied for years a reconstruction would be impossible. The initial deal for the IAEA cameras to continue filming, but for IAEA not to have access to the memory card, was struck in February. That deal, Grossi said, had only been conceived as a temporary stopgap, and a bridge to a better permanent arrangement. Some Israeli defence and intelligence officials have alleged that Iran has used the period of shutting out the IAEA since June to smuggle portions of its 60%-enriched uranium to clandestine sites either to proceed covertly toward a nuclear weapon or to preserve the option to do so.South African researchers examining how the body’s immune system responds to the Omicron variant have identified that T-cells in people who have had the Pfizer vaccine continue to be robust in potentially protecting against severe illness despite Omicron’s ability to evade other defences. The research raises hopes that similar responses may be present with other vaccines and within unvaccinated individuals who have been infected with coronavirus. T-cells are a type of white blood cell that determine our bodies’ immune response to antigens – foreign substances – in the body. While neutralising antibodies produced by vaccines are designed to prevent infection happening, which Omicron appears able to sidestep, T-cells recognise the virus once it has infected cells and then moves to kill them. The data is the result of some of the earliest lab testing to examine how effective T-cell response is against Omicron and suggests that in samples of those double-vaccinated with the Pfizer vaccine the T-cell response remained 70%-80% effective. Wendy Burgers from the University of Cape Town, who collaborated with Alessandro Sette and his team at the La Jolla Institute for Immunology in California, presented evidence of her team’s findings at a World Health Organization (WHO) symposium earlier this week. Speaking to the Guardian, she said the findings had confirmed their expectation that the body’s wider repertoire of immune responses to Omicron might help prevent more severe illness. “Our research studied T-cells,” Burgers said. “Antibodies are always a good starting point for trying to see if a vaccine works because what the antibodies do is block the pathogen getting into the cell in the first place. “When it breaches the defences and cells become infected, that’s when T-cells come in and clear infected cells so they don’t keep replicating and become viral factories. They nip it in the bud.” The issue of T-cell response to Omicron has been a missing part of the puzzle since the variant first emerged, amid evidence it was not only more infectious but able to avoid antibody responses acquired from vaccination. “So far we have been looking at samples from people who have had two doses of the Pfizer vaccine,” said Burgers. “Unlike antibodies in sera, we look at cells themselves which is why assays and data are slower to come out, because it is more specialised and challenging.” According to Burgers, while the neutralising antibodies, which recognise and glue to the virus’s spike protein to prevent infection, appear to be sidestepped by Omicron’s 32 mutations in the spike protein, T-cells recognise the virus across a much wider part of the protein and appear less inhibited by Omicron’s mutations. “From what we know about T-cells’ work we thought there might be a little loss in how T-cells combat infection and that is what we see experimentally in the first data, with 70%-80% of effectiveness being maintained. “We’ll have more data out next week from other vaccines, primarily from the J&amp;J [Johnson &amp; Johnson] vaccine, and we are also looking at unvaccinated infected people who have had prior infection, although we expect it to be quite consistent.” Burgers is cautious, however, of using evidence of continued T-cell effectiveness as an explanation of why so far South Africa anecdotally appears to have experienced less severe illness from Omicron than other variants. “It’s difficult to tease apart, and we will see different experiences of Omicron in different populations in different parts of the world. “But what we know about T-cells in general and in particular with Covid-19 is that while T-cells don’t prevent infection, they do work to give a level of protection against severe disease. And in that respect the data is reassuring if what we are seeing is right.” That same message was echoed in Nature on Friday, which reported on Sette’s work at La Jolla, cautioning that while “there is no way to draw a direct line between the degree of T-cell reactivity and protection against severe disease … previous studies have found that robust T-cell reactions to Sars-CoV-2 are correlated with lower viral loads and less severe disease”.Time to recap The pressure on UK companies is mounting, as insolvencies hit their highest level since the pandemic began in November. Experts fear more companies will collapse as omicron hits the hospitality sector, costs rise, and supply chain problems continue. The Bank of England’s chief economist has predicted that interest rates will continue to rise, after yesterday’s surprise hike, if inflation continues to rise as expected. UK rail passengers face higher ticket prices, with fares to rise 3.8% next year. Halifax has predicted that the UK’s house price boom will end next year, as household budgets are squeezed by rising inflation. Retail sales were stronger than expected last month as people rushed to avoid Christmas shortages, but consumer confidence has since been hit by the Omicron variant. Hundreds of customers have been left in the lurch, just a week before Christmas, after online ethical grocer Farmdrop collapsed. Germany’s economy has also weakened, with business confidence falling this month and the Bundesbank cutting its growth forecasts. Turkey’s currency crisis has escalated, with the lira hitting record lows and shares tumbling. In other news: Good night, and best wishes for the weekend. GW In the City, the FTSE 100 index has ended the day 9 points higher, or 0.13%, at 7270. Travel and retail stocks had a good day, with airline group IAG gaining almost 4% and Primark-owner AB Foods up 3.6%. European markets finished lower, though, with France’s CAC down 1.1% and Germany’s DAX losing 0.7%. The online ethical grocer Farmdrop has gone out of business a week before Christmas, leaving hundreds of customers who had ordered turkeys, geese and other festive food scrambling to find alternatives. The company confirmed it had gone into administration and was “permanently closed”, so it would not be delivering any orders from Friday onwards. Those who have paid will have to approach their bank or card company to ask about getting their money back. Thursday was the final day of deliveries. Anxious customers who had been expecting a delivery over the next few days asked on social media what would happen now and if they should attempt to source items from elsewhere. Moira Doyle tweeted: “My delivery today is cancelled. Payment taken yesterday for Xmas order. Refund??” She added that it would be “back to Tesco” for her. Another tweeted: “Well @farmdrop have gone bust, and with that, my Christmas food delivery ... anyone got any intel on places still selling goose?” Jane Tidey was one of those tweeting she had just received an email saying her order for Christmas Eve was cancelled. Meanwhile, Rhiannon Litterick tweeted the company to say her order had not arrived and the phone line was closed. “Please help! We’re isolating, so are relying on this order,” she added. Here’s the full story: The rise in UK insolvencies last month suggests the UK economy will suffer more company failures than hoped. Tim Symes, insolvency partner at Stewarts law firm, points out that recent high court figures show a 32% year-on-year rise in the filing of winding up petitions in November. That follows the lifting of restrictions in September, which temporarily curbed creditors’ use of statutory demands and winding up petitions. Symes explains: “The figures are showing a strong rebound in the use of winding up petitions since restrictions on their use were lifted, with petitions now 32% higher than the same time last year. High Court records also show that the filing of new petitions is rising rapidly. In the month of September just 13 petitions were presented, but once the restrictions were lifted (on the effective date of 22 October), 58 petitions were presented up to 15 November, and then a further 98 since then. We were always going to see a ‘reset’ of corporate insolvencies back to normal levels once support measures and restrictions lifted, but to see figures exceed pre-pandemic levels so soon suggests the UK economy is set to suffer more deeply, and for longer.” Germany’s economy could be dragged into recession next year by the latest wave of Covid-19 cases. The fall in business confidence this month to its lowest since February (see earlier post) suggests the economy has come to a standstill at the end of the year, says Carsten Brzeski of ING: Despite a strong start to the fourth quarter in terms of industrial activity, ongoing supply chain frictions, higher inflation in general, and higher energy and commodity prices in particular, do not bode well for the short-term outlook for the German economy. The fourth wave of the pandemic could now actually push the economy to the brink of stagnation, or even into a technical recession, even if, admittedly, the adaptability of the economy to lockdowns, supported by government and central bank measures, has clearly increased since March 2020. In another blow, the Bundesbank (Germany’s central bank) has lowered its growth forecasts today. It cut its German growth forecasts this year from 3.7% to 2.5%, and for next year from 5.2% to 4.2%. The Bundesbank warned that the German economy will experience a setback in the final quarter of 2021 and the first quarter of 2022 due to the pandemic, adding: While pandemic-related restrictions and supply bottlenecks for intermediate goods will stall growth in the final quarter of 2021 and the first quarter of 2022, according to the Bundesbank’s projections, private consumption is expected to rise substantially from spring onwards. The FT says: Economists are warning that Germany risks sliding into recession this winter after the country’s main indicator of business confidence slumped to its lowest point since February and the central bank slashed its growth forecasts. Germany’s vast manufacturing sector has been hamstrung for months by delays and shortages of materials caused by supply chain bottlenecks. But now its larger services sector is also being weighed down by new restrictions to contain a surge in coronavirus infections. The worsening outlook for Europe’s largest economy was underlined by the Bundesbank cutting its growth forecasts for this year and next year, while warning output was likely to fall at the end of this year. Stocks are sliding in New York too, as Wall Streets ends a volatile week in the red. The Dow Jones industrial average has fallen by 507 points, or 1.4%, to 35,390 points, with most of its 30 members in the red. The broader S&amp;P 500 has dropped 1.2%, with banks, energy stocks and materials producers are leading the selloff. Investors are worried about the omicron variant, and the hawkish turn from some central banks this week, with the US Federal Reserve deciding to end its stimulus programme faster, and the Bank of England raising interest rates. Turkey’s financial woes are deepening today. The lira has crumpled by another 7% to a record low, a day after the Turkish central bank cut interest rates again, despite soaring inflation and a currency crisis. The lira crashed as low as 17 to the US dollar, and has lost more than half its value this year. Bank shares slumped too, forcing trading in Istanbul to be briefly suspended. The benchmark BIST 100 index has cratered by 7%. Yesterday, President Tayyip Erdogan announced that the minimum wage would be lifted by 50%, to help workers handle the currency crash and spike in inflation to over 21%. Erdogan has pushed the central bank into several rate cuts this year, despite warnings it risks a financial crisis. Althea Spinozzi, senior fixed income strategist at Saxo, explains: The Turkish central bank lowered the policy rate 100 basis points to 14% as expected [yesterday], even as the lira has lost more than another 10% in the few sessions before the meeting. The central bank committee said that this would be the final cut for now, but signaling from Turkey’s president Erdogan will be more critical from here, as the central bank is under his political sway as he has cast the lira devaluation and fight against the high rates needed to shore up confidence in the lira as a fight against foreign speculative interests and that lower rates are a boon to the economy. Yesterday, Turkey announced a 50% increase in the minimum wage, risking a wage-price spiral. Reuters is reporting that Turkey’s authorities are working on possible relief measures for banks caught between a currency crash and existing capital requirements, including a potential capital injection for state banks, according to three sources familiar with discussions. Oil prices are heading for weekly losses, as the surge in Omicron cases threatens to slow the global recovery. Brent crude has fallen over $1 per barrel today to $73.83, wiping out yesterday’s gain and putting it down around 1.6% this week. Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst, Hargreaves Lansdown Fears that a tidal wave of Omicron cases will dent growth in many countries have resurfaced with politicians and scientific advisors again urging extreme caution in the weeks to come. With expectation that demand will be hit, the oil price has slipped, hurting energy stocks like Shell (-1.5%) and BP. Here’s Stian Westlake, CEO of the Royal Statistical Society, with evidence of how hospitality bookings have slumped: The 1,674 company insolvencies recorded in England and Wales last month was the highest reading since since January 2019. Reuters points out that it was a similar story in Scotland, where company insolvencies rose in November to their highest level since monthly records started in January 2019. The volume of business closures dropped sharply last year, when many businesses were kept on life support by government COVID support programmes. Court capacity was reduced and creditors faced restrictions on taking legal action until recently, slowing the process of company dissolutions. Rail fares in England are to rise by 3.8% in March, the government has confirmed, in line with July’s RPI inflation rate. The latest increase – revealed in the Guardian after a leak this month – is less than some feared after fares went up above the RPI inflation rate in March of this year. However, with current inflation rates running much higher, and many former season ticket-holders in the commuter belt working from home, the fare rise is likely to be met with less passenger outcry than in previous years. Industry leaders have argued for a freeze to tempt passengers back to the railway, with numbers again declining with the Omicron coronavirus variant. Numbers had peaked at about 70% of pre-pandemic levels in November. However, the Treasury is keen to reduce subsidy, with the government having invested more than £14bn to keep services running during the pandemic, and said the fare rise would help meet some of these costs. More here: More hospitality firms are likely to collapse into insolvency unless the government heeds calls to provide more support. Claire Burden, partner in the Advisory Consulting team at Tilney Smith &amp; Williamson, explains: We hear much of hospitality and entertainment businesses facing mass cancellations as customers choose to stay at home over the busiest time of year, when cash is generated to trade through the quieter spring months. Although the discounted VAT rate and business rates relief continue until March 2022, we expect increased insolvencies in the sector if no additional government support is forthcoming. But issues are not just restricted to hospitality and entertainment. Companies are now having to pay back their government-backed covid loans and HMRC arrears whilst also dealing with issues from this wave of Omicron. Organisations that rely heavily on people are also struggling to operate as normal given high levels of staff absences and self-isolation. Office districts are once again quiet, with work from home guidance impacting sandwich shops and other office support businesses. In addition, outside of covid, businesses are still struggling with inflationary cost hikes, interest rate increases and international supply chain issues. The number of UK company insolvencies has jumped above pre-pandemic levels for the first time, as experts warn that some directors may feel their firms can’t survive in the current climate. There were 1,674 registered company insolvencies in England and Wales in November, the Insolvency Service reports, up from 1,405 in October. That’s 88% more than a year ago, and 11% more than in November 2019, before the pandemic. The Insolvency Service says: For the first time since the start of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, the monthly number of registered company insolvencies was higher than pre-pandemic levels. The number of creditors’ voluntary liquidations (CVLs) - where a company chooses to put itself into liquidation because it cannot pay its debts - doubled year-on-year. Christina Fitzgerald, vice president of insolvency and restructuring trade body R3, explains: “The monthly increase in corporate insolvencies has been driven by a rise in Creditor Voluntary Liquidations (CVLs) to the highest number in more than two and a half years. “The increase in the use of this process suggests that a rising number of company directors are choosing to close their businesses, perhaps because they feel that survival is impossible in the current climate. “Times are tough for businesses in England and Wales as the pandemic continues to take its toll on the economy and the firms that drive it. Over the last few weeks, businesses have been hit by the triple whammy of increased costs, supply chain issues and rising COVID cases. “They have also been operating in the face of low consumer confidence and anaemic economic growth in recent months, which, coupled with an increasingly difficult COVID situation, has led to changes in people’s shopping and spending habits and taken its toll on revenue levels. Other types of company insolvencies, such as compulsory liquidations, remained lower than before the pandemic. And for individuals, 630 bankruptcies were registered, which was 33% lower than November 2020 and 54% lower than November 2019. John Bell, senior partner at Clarke Bell Insolvency Practitioners in Manchester, fears more firms will collapse as pressure builds from Brexit, the pandemic, inflation, loan repayments, and higher interest rates: “People have been talking about a ‘tidal wave’ of companies going bust. However, it’s not here yet. As the latest corporate insolvency statistics for England &amp; Wales show, there were 1,674 registered company insolvencies in November – of which 1,521 were Creditors’ Voluntary Liquidations (CVLs), which is double the number in November 2020. “Conditions are creating a perfect storm for this ‘tidal wave’ of corporate insolvencies – Brexit, Covid, supply and staffing problems, increasing CCJs, Bounce Back Loans due for repayment and the rising of both inflation and interest rates. “A lot of companies that were surviving thanks to the low-interest rates and government support have now run out of money and time. And there will be more. Business confidence in Germany has fallen, as the latest wave of Covid-19 hits companies. The IFO institute’s business confidence gauge has dropped to 94.7 this month, down from 96.6. That’s the 6th fall in a row, and weaker than expected. Companies reported that current economic conditions had weakened, and their expectations for future growth also fell. Ifo economist Klaus Wohlrabe told Reuters that supply chain problems were hurting the economy. “Father Christmas has fewer presents for the German economy this time, partly because not everything can be delivered. “Procurement problems for raw materials and intermediate products have worsened,” There is a silver lining for 2022, though - expectations in the industrial sector have risen as order books grow. In Moscow, Russia’s central bank has lifted its key interest rate to its highest since 2017. The Bank of Russia raised its policy rate from 7.5% to 8.5%, the seventh rate rise this year. The central bank said in a statement that borrowing costs could keep rising as it tries to tame inflation, which hit a five-year high of 8.4% last month. “If the situation develops in line with the baseline forecast, the Bank of Russia holds open the prospect of... further key rate increase at its upcoming meetings.” Euro zone inflation surged to its highest rate on record in November, the European Union’s statistics office Eurostat has confirmed. Consumer price jumped by 4.9% per year, matching the ‘flash’ estimate, rising by 0.4% in November alone. That’s the highest since the euro was created, and well over the eurozone’s 2% target. Still, it’s not quite as hot as the UK’s inflation rate (5.1%) or the US (6.8%). Energy prices remained the biggest factor driving up the cost of living, up 27.5% year-on-year, but food, alcohol &amp; tobacco (+2.2%), goods (+2.4%) and services (+2.7%) all rose too. Yesterday the European Central Bank raised its inflation projections, but cut its 2022 growth outlook as the pandemic and supply chain disruptions slow the euro zone’s economic recovery. It also took a small step towards rolling back its crisis-era stimulus yesterday, by wrapping up its pandemic bond purchases next March. But it also temporarily doubled the pace of another scheme to cushion the blow, and doesn’t appear close to raising interest rates. The boom in UK house prices is likely to end next year as household finances become increasingly stretched, according to Halifax. The mortgage lender said it expected the red-hot increases in average house prices over the last two years – 8% so far this year and 6% in 2020 – to end, with growth forecast to be “broadly flat” in 2022. More here: Bank of England chief economist Huw Pill also told CNBC that it’s not clear if Omicron will increase or dampen inflationary pressures. “We need to move forward now cautiously, in the sense that we need to assess whether Omicron is going to lead to some reversal of the strength of the dynamics in the economy - and particularly in the labour market - that we have seen over the last six months-plus.” “But I think it is also important to keep in mind that Omicron-related uncertainty is two-sided, at least as it is reflected in our core objective, our ambition in terms of the inflation outlook over the medium term.” Bank of England chief economist Huw Pill has said the central bank would need to raise interest rates further if inflation persists. Speaking a day after the BoE raised rates for the first time since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, Pill signalled that Thursday’s increase from 0.1% to 0.25% won’t be the last. Asked on CNBC television if there would be “a lot more rate hikes to come,” if inflation remained at its current level, Pill replied: “Well I think that’s true.” He added: “Underlying, more domestically generated inflation here in the UK, probably centred around wage pressures in a tightening labour market, are going to prove more persistent through time.” (thanks to Reuters for the quotes) Deutsche Bank have dubbed yesterday’s Bank of England rate rise ‘the hike before Christmas’, triggered by worries about the rising cost of living. Their UK economist, Sanjay Raja, explains why ‘prudence around inflation’ led the BoE to act: First, unlike in previous pandemic easing cycles (March, June, November), current inflation (and inflation prospects) sits at a very different place. With CPI crossing 5% y-o-y in November, and expected to hit 6% next April, the Bank’s projections were no longer consistent with an ultra easy policy stance. Second, the MPC’s lambda – i.e., the trade-off between excess inflation and weaker growth – has also shifted. The departure of inflation from target is now more sizeable, that getting inflation back to target in two to three years’ time has become slightly less certain. Put differently, while the Bank still expects inflation to get back to target in the medium term, action now maximises their chances of meeting their mandate in two to three years’ time Banking giant HSBC has been fined £64m by UK regulators for serious weaknesses in its anti-money laundering controls. The Financial Conduct Authority imposed the penalty for a series of anti-money laundering failings over eight years, from March 2010 to 2018. These included not properly considering if its systems picked up the risks of suspicious activity such as money laundering or terrorist financing, not testing and updating the systems fully, and not checking the accuracy and completeness of the data being fed into them. Mark Steward, Executive Director of Enforcement and Market Oversight at the FCA, said: “HSBC’s transaction monitoring systems were not effective for a prolonged period despite the issue being highlighted on numerous occasions. These failings are unacceptable and exposed the bank and community to avoidable risks, especially as the remediation took such a long time. HSBC continued their remediation to address these weaknesses after the relevant period.” HSBC didn’t dispute the FCA’s findings and agreed to settle at the earliest possible opportunity, which meant it qualified for a 30% discount. Otherwise, the FCA would have imposed a financial penalty of £91,352,600. Passenger-car registrations in the European Union have fallen for the fifth month running, as supply chain problems continue to hit production. New car registrations declined 20.5% year-on-year to 713,346 vehicles in November, the European Automobile Manufacturers Association (ACEA) reported. ACEA says it’s the lowest November total on record, going back to 1993. Double-digit losses were recorded in many EU markets, including three of the four major ones: Germany (-31.7%), Italy (-24.6%) and Spain (-12.3%). France saw a more modest drop of 3.2% last month; Bulgaria, Ireland and Slovenia were the only EU markets posting growth. And over 2021 so far, registrations were slightly lower than in 2020, as the microchip shortage hit vehicle output. Just Eat has entered the fast grocery delivery market by partnering with Asda in its first tie-up with a supermarket in the UK. From January, Just Eat customers will be able to add a range of products to their baskets starting with five Asda stores, with the exact locations to be announced in the new year. “We live in an on-demand world,” said Andrew Kenny, the UK managing director of Just Eat. “We want to make sure we are getting our customers the food they want, when they want, when they want it. Our tie-up with Asda means we can help people access everything from store cupboard essentials to fresh groceries in a matter of minutes.” Just Eat follows rivals Deliveroo and Uber Eats, which already have fast delivery deals with some of the UK’s biggest supermarkets. European markets have dropped into the red. Tech stocks, carmakers and oil firms are all lower as investors ponder how omicron will hit the economy next year. In the City, the FTSE 100 index has inched a little higher after November’s jump in retail spending cheered the mood. Burberry (+2%), Next (+1.9%), Primark-owner AB Foods (+1.7%) and DIY chain Kingfisher (+1.6%) are among the risers. Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst, says retailers were on track for a merry Christmas, before omicron hit confidence. “It looked like Santa had got the memo from retailers and was on track to deliver them the kind of Christmas they could only dream about in 2020. With the exception of food, sales were up across the board in November as people shopped early and shopped hard. “More cash was spent on clothing as people got their glam ready to socialise in the run up to Christmas, sales actually soared above pre pandemic levels for the first time as people grew more and more confident about their festive plans. “Toys, games, jewellery, and electronics were snapped up and squirreled away, wrapped and ready to find their place under the tree. People had started hunting for those perfect presents early, something demonstrated by the revised numbers for October which actually saw sales hitting 1.1%, up from 0.8%, but the pent-up pennies kept tills ringing right through Black Friday. Omicron worries are weighing on the market too. Crude oil has dropped, pulling down shares in Royal Dutch Shell (-0.8%) and BP (-0.75%). This leaves the FTSE 100 up 17 points, or 0.2%, at 7277 points. People in Britain have grown more pessimistic this month, as the Omicron variant and rising inflation hits confidence. The GfK Consumer Confidence Index dipped to -15, having risen in November for the first time in four months to -14. GfK’s survey found that consumers are growing less inclined to make major purchases, showing that the appearance of Omicron at the end of November has hit confidence. Joe Staton, GfK’s client strategy director, said the lack of Yuletide cheer is evident following the emergence of the latest Omicron variant, with people slightly less confident about their personal finances and the economy over the next 12 months. “We end 2021 on a depressing note and it looks like it will be a bleak midwinter for UK consumer confidence, possibly with new COVID curbs, and little likelihood of any real uplift in the first months of 2022.” Halifax’s Russell Galley adds that house prices could rise or fall by much greater margins than their +1% forecast. It depends on how the pandemic develops, and any further policy interventions to protect the economy. Galley warns that the inequality in the housing market between generations, and richer and poorer households, has worsened in the last two years: “As has been consistent for several years pre-pandemic, the key long-term issue for the housing market remains the inequality between generations and across the income spectrum, and specifically the ability of the young and lower-paid to access good quality housing that meets their needs. This disparity has only intensified over the last two years, increasing the need to prioritise improved housing availability and affordability. The UK house price boom is set to end next year, mortgage lender Halifax has predicted. It predicts that British house prices might only inch up by around 1% in 2022, after surging around 8% during 2021, as pressure builds on household budgets: In its housing market outlook for 2022, Halifax says: The housing market once again proved surprisingly robust during 2021, as government policy support combined with pandemic-driven shifts in housing preferences to keep transaction demand elevated. House prices are expected to maintain their current strong levels, but growth to be much flatter in 2022, at around 1%. However, forecast uncertainty remains very high. The pandemic has further worsened inequality across different demographics, including income and age, increasing the need to improve the availability of good quality, affordable housing. Russell Galley, managing director at Halifax, says: “Looking ahead, with the prospect that interest rates may rise further in 2022 to subdue rising inflation, and with government support measures phased out, greater pressure on household budgets suggests house price growth will slow considerably. Nevertheless, interest rates will remain low by historic standards and property prices will continue to be supported by the limited supply of available properties. “We expect, therefore, that house prices will maintain their current strong levels but that growth will be broadly flat during 2022 – perhaps somewhere in the range of 0% to 2%. Even with that range in mind, there is still a large degree of uncertainty around this forecast, particularly around the extent to which savings accrued during the pandemic continue to boost housing transactions and prices, and how lasting the recent shifts in housing preferences prove to be. Good morning, and welcome to out rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. There are only 8 days to Christmas, but many people have got their festive shopping in early, it seems. British retail sales jumped by 1.4% in November, data just released show, thanks to strong trading around Black Friday and in the lead up to Christmas, the Office for National Statistics says. It puts retail sales 4.7% higher than a year earlier when many shops had to shut in England’s 2020 lockdown. Spending at clothes stores jumped by 2.9%, lifting clothing volumes above their pre-coronavirus levels for the first time. Other non-food store, such as computer stores, toy stores and jewellery stores, racked up 2.8% growth. And the proportion of retail sales online fell to its lowest since the first lockdown in March 2020 - making up 22.6% of spending -- as people returned to high streets and retail malls. Retail sales also rose in October, after five months of falls. Today’s figures suggest consumer spending had held up well -- before the omicron variant hit the economy at the end of the month. The ONS’s deputy director for surveys and economic indicators, Heather Bovill, says retail sales picked up last month: But omicron is now casting a shadow over the economy, of course. The work-from-home guidance introduced last week under plan B measures in England has left city centres depopulated, and hospitality firms warn that trading had plunged. And yesterday’s surprise interest rate from the Bank of England, and the possibility of more next year, could also weigh on spending. The agenda 7am GMT: Retail sales across Great Britain for November 7am GMT: New European Union car registrations for November 9am GMT: German Ifo business climate survey 10.30am GMT: Bank of Russia’s interest rate decision Noon GMT: Bank of England quarterly bulletinIn 2017, Steve Smith began what can now be mapped as his highest batting peak. Three centuries in four Tests while leading a tour of India, a feat no visiting captain has bettered, while holding his team in the series until a final defeat 2-1. Then home for an Ashes series that he opened with a match-winning hundred at Brisbane, followed with a double in Perth, and sealed with a hundred in Sydney, winning 4-0 with 687 runs at an average of over 137. Three months later came the Cape Town sandpaper affair, and his year-long ban ended up being an absence from Test cricket of 16 months. What has happened since has been the waste of Smith, the squandering by Cricket Australia of their most extraordinary batting talent since Don Bradman. On his return from the ban in 2019, he managed four Tests in England for the Ashes and five in the home summer. Then the world galloped into the pandemic era, and cricket in some countries shut down. Smith had a break of nearly a year – the same stretch as the ban that had once seemed so onerous – before CA deigned to host India for four Tests in 2020-21. Then another year of waiting before this home season began. The pandemic itself is a smokescreen here. Australia cancelled two Test tours in that time: two matches in Bangladesh and three in South Africa. This was already baked into the proposed touring programme by an administration that wanted to reduce the Test footprint, pulling back home seasons to five matches instead of six, and keeping overseas trips minimal. While England had plans to play 12, 15, even 17 Tests in a year, Australia’s schedule was for seven or eight. It was and remains an astounding approach to the game for an administration that already knew it had one of the game’s greats in its ranks. From his breakthrough Ashes in 2013, four and a bit years at the crease brought Smith 57 matches and 23 Test centuries. From his ban in 2018 until the start of the current Ashes, nearly four years has meant 13 matches and four centuries. Four years ago, Smith looked a certainty to surge past Ricky Ponting’s 41 centuries at the top of the Australian tree. Now, he remains on 27, exceptional but still short of what his talent could have achieved. For a while on the second day of the Adelaide Test, Smith was back exactly where he should be. In the middle of a Test match on a baking hot day, fighting for ascendancy in a match where his performance would be central to Australia’s hopes. It was a situation favouring Australia, with Smith resuming on 18 with the score at 221 for two. But the work still had to be done, and after a morning session in which England finally held catches, bowled legal deliveries, and took three for 90, the work fell to Smith. In contrast to Marnus Labuschagne’s 103, which got more scrappy as it went on, and which ended soon after the start of play after a series of reprieves, Smith’s 93 did not offer a chance until his dismissal. The closest England came were a couple of edges that were bounced into the slip cordon from soft hands. Through the rest of 200 deliveries until Jimmy Anderson trapped him leg before, Smith was in total control. The most prominent part of his game was his leaving, knowing that the thermometer was past 37 degrees and that England’s bowlers were suffering through every over. Anything that Smith did not like was ignored, as he stepped across his stumps to inspect balls travelling by to the wicketkeeper. Anything that looked useful he would knock into a gap of his choosing. Occasionally, when he did fancy something more than most others, he would play a shot that was audacious either for its conventionality or the absence of it. Stuart Broad was pulled, Anderson was cut, Joe Root was driven through the covers, as precisely as you like. But equally, when Smith was so minded, he might flap a delivery over slip. With a leg-theory field, he hooked Ben Stokes over the wicketkeeper. One entirely respectable length ball from Chris Woakes was swivel-pulled into the seats of the Max Basheer stand. By the time Smith was done, just before the end of the second session, Australia had 385 on the board, England had bowled 139 overs, and the five hottest sessions of the match had been played out. All that was left was for Australia’s bowlers to bash a few runs, then put England in and take a couple of wickets. The script was duly followed. At the centre of it, as so often in the past, was Steve Smith. The question of whether he should be allowed to captain Australia again remains live, and the doubts on that score have merit. As a pure player though, he was exactly where he should have been, so much more often, through years that have now been lost.Asked on Friday whether he took personal responsibility for the disastrous North Shropshire byelection result, Boris Johnson suggested the problem was that everyone else was talking about the wrong issues. “My job as prime minister is to get the focus on to the things that matter for all of us,” he said. Yet after weeks of self-inflicted crises and the drip, drip of stories about lockdown-busting parties at the heart of Downing Street, many of his MPs believe it is Johnson himself who is the real problem – and some are warning he is now on borrowed time. Johnson faces an intensely challenging period. The Omicron wave is breaking over Britain, but his MPs are in open revolt against Covid restrictions; the economic backdrop is deteriorating just as taxes are about to rise, and Simon Case’s inquiry into the rule-breaking parties is yet to report. As one frontbencher put it: “We’re starting to enter a perfect storm of shitness.” As the storm clouds gather, Conservative MPs are united in believing that if the government is to regain the public’s trust, Johnson will have to change his approach significantly – but divided about whether he is capable of doing so. “He has to take some drastic action. He needs to show tangible action to show he gets it,” said one frontbencher. Byelections, where opposition parties can pour resources into a single seat, are unrepresentative of what might happen at a general election – Lib Dem leader Ed Davey visited North Shropshire five times, for example. But scores of anxious Tory MPs will nonetheless have been scrutinising the result and wondering what their own fate might be if the voters continue to feel they want to give the Tories “a kicking”, as the party chair Oliver Dowden put it. A much smaller swing against the Tories than the extraordinary 34% seen on Thursday would put scores of Conservative seats into the Liberal Democrats’ sights. A 20% swing would wipe out Michael Gove in Surrey Heath, Dominic Raab in Esher and Walton and Steve Brine in Winchester, for example, among many others. Johnson has few genuine friends in the parliamentary Conservative party, and his popularity with colleagues was always contingent on his campaigning prowess. Yet one fear his MPs now have is that the very qualities that once made Johnson a winner with the public – his roguishness and devil-may-care approach to politics and life in general – are precisely those that have become electorally toxic. Paula Surridge, an elections expert at the University of Bristol, said: “My instinct is that he’s in real trouble now, because I think what you’re getting is a blend of the grief and anger and emotion of the last 18 months attaching itself to these endless stories of parties and rule-breaking, and I think that’s going to be a really dangerous combination and really difficult for both Boris Johnson and the Conservative party more generally to shake off. “These issues attach themselves to people when they feed into the perceptions people already have of them. I think this does now feed into that perception, both of what Boris Johnson’s like but also the ‘one rule for them, another rule for us, not looking out for the little guy’ perception of the Conservative party. You’re back to the nasty party.” With the polls now consistently giving Labour a modest lead, one veteran Conservative said MPs with small majorities were likely to panic. “A lot of my colleagues are driven by fear, and they’ll get angry if they see their future being put at risk,” they said, adding that recent events had “taken the Teflon off Boris”. The North Shropshire result – a Liberal Democrat win in a leave seat – also raised questions about whether Brexit was starting to lose its hold over the electorate. That could be bad news for Johnson, who was able to unite voters in disparate seats in 2019 by promising to “get Brexit done”. If Brexit is starting to become a less crucial determinant of voting behaviour, he will need to find another potent argument to hold his electoral coalition together – and many MPs are not convinced “levelling up” is it. Johnson’s colleagues are now calling for a reset, including an overhaul of the prime minister’s Downing Street operation and a new chief whip, after a series of poorly handled recent votes including this week’s humiliating rebellion on Covid restrictions. Others would like to see heavyweights such as Jeremy Hunt, Greg Clark and Liam Fox brought back into cabinet. But senior MPs are also sceptical about how much Johnson is likely to be able to sharpen up his act. “It’s not about ‘Downing Street’, it’s him,” one minister said. “We have the problems we have because either he’s caused them, or his whole approach means other people do things they really shouldn’t. So it will be down to what he chooses to do.” If they come to believe Johnson is no longer an electoral winner, they could decide to trigger a vote of no confidence – which if Johnson lost, would mark the end of his premiership. It takes 54 Conservative MPs to kick off such a vote, but a much larger 181 to win it. Sir Graham Brady, the inscrutable chair of the backbench 1922 Committee, never reveals how many letters of no confidence he has received until the threshold is reached. Few backbenchers believe many more than a dozen, perhaps 20, are likely to have accumulated so far, but with each crisis – particularly when self-inflicted, like the Paterson fiasco – more are likely to drop into Brady’s inbox. The veteran backbencher Sir Roger Gale spoke for many colleagues on Friday morning when he said: “Nobody wants a leadership challenge in the middle of the pandemic but one more strike and he’s out.”Labour fell into third position in the North Shropshire byelection, losing vote share compared with 2019 rather than gaining ground. But those around Keir Starmer are not downhearted, they say, because it illustrates the depth of unhappiness with Boris Johnson’s administration. “It proves the polls are right. It is showing the mud is beginning to stick,” says one of them. Labour takes comfort partly from the fact it expended little effort or money on the seat, allowing the Lib Dems to declare themselves in the best position to challenge the Tories. And partly it is encouraged because it shows Johnson is not all-conquering even in Brexitland, with scandals from the Owen Paterson lobbying affair to the lockdown-busting parties in No 10 finally having the prized quality of “cut-through” to the electorate. One senior Labour source explains: “The party’s resource and staffing is really limited at the moment so we can’t just throw money at these things. It was obvious that neither Bexley or North Shropshire were winnable so we basically decided to hold back, particularly in the latter. “It also shows that the push on Tory sleaze, competence and the ‘one rule for them’ stuff has been an incredible success. Don’t forget – after Hartlepool and success of initial vaccine effort, there were siren voices saying that it had all been a misstep. But over the past 18 months we’ve done enormous damage to both Boris Johnson and the Tory brand more widely.” While victory and celebration belong to the Liberal Democrats, Labour is claiming credit for the success of its mantra that it is “one rule for them and another rule for everyone else”. This significance of this sentence uttered by a voter was first spotted by Starmer’s former communications director Ben Nunn, following Dominic Cummings’s bending of the rules for a trip to Barnard Castle. Since then, Labour has hammered it home relentlessly and believes it has stuck, with it appearing on both the Sun and Mail front pages in recent days. The party is also pleased by the sense that voters in leave-backing North Shropshire were able to put Brexit behind them in endorsing the pro-remain Lib Dems, with one Labour aide saying it was like Johnson had been “trapped by his own slogan” of claiming to have “got Brexit done”. Starmer and his team are “under no illusions there is loads more work that needs to be done”, the senior source says. But they remain buoyed up by Labour’s successive poll leads and believe North Shropshire shows potential for anti-Johnson feeling rather than being a meaningful sign of the opposition’s failure to exploit it. James Morris, a former Labour polling adviser, agreed that the key takeaway from the byelection for the party was the sense that Starmer had the opportunity to position himself as competent versus a chaotic governing party. “Labour has been trying to rebuild trust in its capability to manage a government since 2007,” he said. “This result opens up more political space for Labour to finally make progress on that goal. By adding to the sense that the Conservative party is chaotic, it creates room for Labour to position itself as the competent capable party that’s fit for government.” The two recent byelection successes for the Lib Dems – in Chesham and Amersham as well as North Shropshire – have also revived serious discussion of a potential post-election partnership with Labour. The Lib Dems have long been thinking of such an option, although it does not suit their strategy of appealing to soft Tories to be too explicit about such an aim. Some within Labour are also open to such an idea. Andrew Harrop, the general secretary of the Fabian Society, says North Shropshire was “basically, really good news” and believes Labour’s prospects at the next election will be “massively increased, if the Lib Dems do well and pick up 20 or 30 Conservative seats”. The Labour thinktank has identified 25 Tory-held seats that the Lib Dems could target with a Labour vote of more than 5,000 to squeeze, mostly in the south of England, from Chippenham to Witney. “It’s completely obvious whether you should vote Liberal Democrat or Labour in almost every seat in England and Wales the Conservatives might plausibly lose,” he says, arguing this means there is no need for a formal alliance where one party agrees to stand down. “For non-Conservative parties to do well, Labour and the Lib Dems both need to scoop up a whole load of seats and probably the best outcome Labour can reasonably expect at the next election is a partnership with the Liberal Democrats of some sort,” he said. “It would be great if the party got the 123 seats needed to win a majority but it’s a very big ask. However if the Lib Dems got 20-odd more seats then you could start to think about Labour reaching 300 MPs and not having to work with the SNP.” That view is not universally held in Labour though, with some on the left believing North Shropshire shows Starmer’s weakness, while a few on the right of the party believe he could have made more of an effort to show he was not writing off a “middle England” seat. One Labour MP on the left of the party said it was “problematic for Labour with our vote collapsing from second to third place from a practical point of view”. “This is a seat that we on paper should have been telling others to stand down in,” the MP said. “Despite the Brylcreem and flag-shagging we are not winning back the Tory switchers coming to us. I fear this means we are just going to double down on what we are seeing.”A protester who set fire to police vehicles during a riot that followed a “kill the bill” demonstration in Bristol has been jailed for 14 years. Ryan Roberts led chants of “ACAB: all cops are bastards” outside Bridewell police station on 21 March before throwing cans, bottles and placards at officers, as well as verbally abusing and kicking them. The 25-year-old, who had taken cocaine and been drinking, then smashed windows of the police station, Bristol crown court was told. Roberts, of no fixed address, was also caught on film pushing pieces of flaming cardboard under two police vans and placing industrial bins around an already partially burnt-out police car and setting them alight. He told an officer inside one of the vans he would “go bang”. He smashed in the windows of a mobile police station and encouraged the crowd to help roll it over, before setting light to the cab while hundreds of people were close by. Giving evidence, Roberts said he got “carried away” fighting for freedom of speech during a protest against the government’s police, crime, sentencing and courts bill. Roberts told the court the bill aimed to ban peaceful protest altogether, saying the demo was about freedom of speech. He said the mood of the protest changed when police donned riot gear as night fell and officers started “pushing, shoving and hitting” the crowd with shields and batons. “I was fighting for a cause I felt strongly about,” Roberts said. Two officers, who had served in the armed forces, described the night as the “most frightening incident in their careers”. Another described the rioting as “ferocious, prolonged and determined violence”. The riot was one of a series that took place in Bristol earlier this year with police accused at times of reacting heavy-handedly. A jury convicted Roberts of rioting, attempted arson with intent to endanger life, attempted arson being reckless as to whether life was endangered, and two counts of arson being reckless as to whether life was endangered. Nicholas Lewin, defending, said Roberts had been diagnosed with ADHD and was not a “sophisticated criminal”. “Mr Roberts is not a rampant fire starter, twisted or other,” he said. “The issue of impulsive behaviour becomes more acute for someone who suffers from that condition.” Jailing Roberts, Judge James Patrick said: “You were actively involved in committing violence over a period of five hours. You were actively encouraging the crowd from an early stage and your actions encouraged the violence against police officers. “You carried out a leading role in the encouraging of others in the setting of other fires.”Ten minutes before tea on Friday evening the sky above Adelaide had retreated behind a potent-looking white veil as Jimmy Anderson came on to bowl the 139th over of Australia’s innings. Even from the other side of the world it looked like vicious, sweaty work, in a city where the heat clings to you like a woollen three piece suit. Australia were cruising at 383 for five, sucking time and possibilities out of the game, the day, the series. Steve Smith and Alex Carey had put on 89. Anderson narrowed his eyes, grimaced and ran in to bowl his 26th over, legs pounding the turf like legs that will still pound the turf when you really, and very strongly, order them to do it. His first ball was clocked at 77.6mph. Smith defended with almost satirical caution, a man hunting for traps. The second was on leg stump and flicked for one with a yelp. The third was also flicked away by Carey as Anderson chuntered to himself. The ball had swung in to the left-hander. Here was a faint flicker of life. Anderson looked eager now, an idea stirring, something to kill the time. The fourth and fifth balls were delivered on a perfect line outside off stump, seam angled at the stumps in search of the in-nipper: inviting a fatal leave but drawing a late counter-block from Smith, who read the plan, and perhaps even saw the stitching. Ball six was the same ball, just marginally straighter. This time it kept low, hitting the left pad – Smith stands square, legs together – with a soft, slightly mocking thunk. Anderson went backward-skipping down the wicket, hands Charlestoning. The appeal was a thin “Aeeeee” that drew an instant raised finger. Smith reviewed it, fruitlessly, then walked off in a state of misery, a man deceived by low bounce, and by a trick he saw and covered all the way. As Mike Tyson so famously said: everyone has a plan until they get hit below the knee-roll by a 78mph in-skidder. And with that, one and a half defeats into this pre-doomed England Ashes series, Anderson had his first wicket of the tour. On the stroke of tea he had his second, drawing Carey into a lame plink to cover with another ball that gripped a little. As the players walked off Anderson had figures of 26.4-10-51-2, decent for a man who hadn’t played cricket since September; and who was, although this seemed later to be retracted, not fit to play in Brisbane. This was not, repeat not, a flicker of Ashes hope. Detailed analysis shows Australia have been better in three key areas so far: batting, bowling and fielding. Otherwise things have been pretty even. It was at best a flicker of a false dawn. But there was something else here too, a sniff of a more competent timeline; of the series, as they used to say on Bullseye, that you could have had. These Ashes feel doomed already after a day in which England were reduced to 17 for two, 456 behind. And yet, with all due respect to Australia’s good batting and excellent seam bowling, this has been a case of self-dooming. And self-dooming on two fronts, most obviously the muddled internal management of Chris Silverwood and Joe Root. This, for England, is the key “takeaway” from day two in Adelaide. In the past there has been a feeling of inevitability about England Ashes defeat. Test cricket is great like that. You get what you deserve. But here was a reminder that this isn’t a bad England team, that there is serious, generational talent here. And that England are being asked to play Test cricket while wearing leg-weights and a lead-lined saddle. With the bowling this has come from within. England have dropped seven catches in this Test. How’s the prep, the planning, the angles? Are they first rate? But the bowling has been OK otherwise. Everyone has looked good at times, except for Jack Leach who was fed to the dogs, unforgivably, by a captain who didn’t see it coming. They have been let down more fundamentally by an over-thought selection plan, a rotation policy that in trying to seem very clever, has revealed only the depths of its own stupidity. Chris Woakes and Ollie Robinson are essentially the nicer, less mean iteration of Anderson-Broad. Why did we play the own-brand version on a green pitch at the Gabba? Why not play the killers with a lead there to be snatched? How weak, how fearful to wait until you’re already losing before giving it the gun. How good might Broad and Anderson have been here, with a game already in their legs? Why unleash Stuart Broad on David Warner only once Warner has a leg up and a nice start, a textbook case study in how to dismantle your own strength? As for the batting, well, here we have Part Two in the anatomy of an Ashes self-dooming. Rory Burns fenced at a good one late in the day. Haseeb Hameed played a weird shot. The problem here is there are very few alternatives. The ECB has gifted us a system that disdains red ball cricket in the chase for a quick buck; and which awards itself vast executive bonuses for this act of vandalism. England still have Root and Ben Stokes to come, and the talent to stage a fightback even now. But they will be doing so self-hobbled; not to mention teased by, as they were by those glimpses of the Anderson before tea, the series they might have had.Okay, that’s full-time for today, folks. As it stands, we still have five Premier League games going ahead. Watch this space though; that could change. Thanks for reading. Saturday Aston Villa v Burnley (3pm) Leeds v Arsenal (5.30pm) Sunday Wolves v Chelsea (2pm) Newcastle v Manchester City (2.15pm) Tottenham v Liverpool (4.30pm) Allan Saint-Maximum was limping about at Anfield last night before being substituted in the 79th minute and, not surprisingly, he’s a doubt for Newcastle’s home game with Manchester City on Sunday. The Frenchman has a muscle injury and will likely be replaced by Callum Wilson, who was only on the bench at Anfield. Left-back Jamal Lewis will be missing after picking up a hamstring injury. For Manchester City, Joao Cancelo has served a one-match ban so is likely to come back in. Kyle Walker, who missed Tuesday’s 7-0 thrashing of Leeds, could return, and in-form Bernardo Silva is expected to be fit despite being substituted with a muscular problem. This game finished Newcastle 3-4 Man City last season. The Magpies last beat City (2-1) in January, 2019. Another match preview. Check out the details for Leeds v Arsenal on Sunday. He’s good that Mo Salah. How far can he extend it? Liverpool’s next four PL games: Dec 19: Tottenham v Liverpool Dec 26: Liverpool v Leeds Dec 28: Leicester v Liverpool Jan 02: Chelsea v Liverpool Egypt play their opening game in the African Cup of Nations on January 11. Liverpool’s next Premier League game after the trip to Stamford Bridge is home to Brentford on January 15. Antonio Conte must surely have his eye on some potential new recruits so can he bring Spurs fans some exciting transfer news? No. He can’t. “In this moment we’re not thinking about the transfer window. We’ve had many, many problems to face and try to solve. “It was very difficult to speak about other topics. For sure, in the next days we’ll try to have a meeting to speak about the situation and see if there’s a way to improve the squad and in which way. “In this moment, I’m making an evaluation about the whole squad. “Covid will be a good opportunity for someone to show me they deserve to continue to play for Tottenham.” As noted earlier, Premier League managers will meet on Monday to discuss the Covid-19 crisis which has (so far) caused five of this weekend’s 10 fixtures to be called off. Here’s some more detail from the PA: The Premier League, EFL and the Professional Footballers’ Association have arranged players’ meetings with England’s deputy chief medical officer Jonathan Van-Tam to discuss concerns regarding the vaccine. It is understood in at least one meeting he was asked about an increased risk of heart inflammation as a result of getting vaccinated. Van-Tam is believed to have told the players there was a small increased risk from the vaccines, but a far greater risk of heart inflammation from catching Covid. Sources at the Premier League and the PFA also point out that vaccination rates for footballers are above the average for their age group in wider society. The EFL announced earlier that one in four of its players currently had no intention of getting even one jab. By 3pm on Friday, 19 matches across its three divisions had been postponed due to coronavirus infections. It’s been a tough time for the WSL’s elite in recent weeks and Chelsea’s 4-0 defeat at Wolfsburg on Thursday highlighted some of the underlying problems. Suzanne Wrack takes a look. Jürgen Klopp said earlier he didn’t have much clue about which Tottenham players would be in opposition when Liverpool head there this Sunday. To be honest, it’s still something of riddle. Sergio Reguilon and Giovani Lo Celso should be available again after injury. That’s the easy bit. But of the nine players who tested positive for coronavirus, at least two remain in isolation but it’s believed that several of the rest could be involved. Liverpool are awaiting confirmation of positive PCR tests from trio Virgil Van Dijk, Fabinho and Curtis Jones but it is highly unlikely they will play any part having been left out against Newcastle. Time for some Bruno Lage. Wolves are eighth in the table and yet have managed just five home goals in eight matches. Anyone else having difficulty grasping whether they’re quite good or bang average? We may know a bit more when they host Chelsea on Sunday afternoon although perhaps the head-scratching will continue after another 0-0 draw. First up, Lage has revealed that Fabio Silva and Yerson Mosquera have tested positive for coronavirus. In addition, Hwang Hee-chan is an injury doubt. Second up, he’s not buying into the idea that this is a good time to take on the wobbling Blues. “These types of teams don’t have a bad moment,” Lage said. “They have big players and are one of the best teams in the world – they won the last Champions League, have a lot of experience and so does the manager. “He can replace several players because they have a good squad and they do very well in this system, they dominate this system. They can play 3-4-3 or 3-5-2, they know how to play both ways. “For us, this is a challenge, this is why when I had this invitation from Wolves (to become boss in the summer) I didn’t think twice. “These are the kind of things we want to compete, these are the kind of things we want for me and my players to play against. Every week is a massive challenge. It’s an opportunity for us every time.” The Premier League has come in for criticism over late decisions to call off games and communication has, shall we say, been somewhat chaotic. Here’s a personal story. Yesterday I called in at Jon Moss’s record shop in Headingley and had a brief chat with him before he said he was setting off to Leicester to ref the Spurs game. I was due at the dentist at midday (loose crown for those interested) and when I emerged at 12.20pm I received a text from a mate saying the Leicester game was off. The dentist is only five minutes’ walk from Jon’s shop, Vinyl Whistle, so I popped back in just to make sure he’d heard but was told he was loading up his car to set off. “You know it’s off, yeah?” I said when he (thankfully) came back into the shop. Nope. No-one had informed him. Cue some joint scrolling on Twitter to seek confirmation. The media had the story at midday but Leicester and Spurs didn’t tweet the news until 1.30pm. No wonder fans are frustrated. Not much hope if even the refs don’t know their games are being called off. Time to walk the dog? On this week’s Football Weekly Extra - Trent’s rocket, Chelsea’s latest slip and the panel ask: should we pause football? Plus, the three-year prison sentence of Abdullah Ibhais, a tribute to Sergio Agüero and your questions. The smash and grab in graph form. Looks like Everton could have nicked it at the death. Christian Eriksen, who suffered a cardiac arrest at Euro 2020, has left Internazionale by mutual consent. Full story here from PA Media: The 29-year-old enjoyed six-and-a-half seasons at Tottenham before moving to San Siro in January 2020 for a fee in the region of £17million. Eriksen helped Inter win last season’s Serie A title but the following month his life was turned upside down after suffering a cardiac arrest during Denmark’s Euro 2020 opener against Finland in June. The attacking midfielder received life-saving treatment on the pitch before being taken to hospital and was fitted with an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) device. Serie A rules would not allow Eriksen to play with an ICD and the Nerazzurri confirmed an agreement has been struck for the Dane to leave. “FC Internazionale Milano can confirm that an agreement has been reached to terminate Christian Eriksen’s contract by mutual consent,” a club statement read. “The club and the entire Nerazzurri family wish Christian all the very best for his future. “Although Inter and Christian are now parting ways, the bond shall never be broken. “The good times, the goals, the victories, those Scudetto celebrations with fans outside San Siro – all this will remain forever in Nerazzurri history.” Eriksen has not played since the cardiac arrest and it remains unclear whether he will return to professional football. The 29-year-old has been training on his own at Odense – where he was a youth team player for OB between 2005 and 2008 – in his homeland as he steps up his recovery. A spokesperson for the Danish Superliga club told the PA news agency earlier this month: “He is living next to the training area, and he played here as a youth player, and because of that he was more than welcome to use our pitch to train. Christian is not training with our squad, he is just using our pitch.” With Chelsea stretched in midfield, boss Thomas Tuchel says he may have to rush back Mateo Kovacic and N’Golo Kante for Sunday’s match against Wolves at Molineux. Ruben Loftus-Cheek picked up an injury in the 1-1 draw with Everton on Thursday night while Jorginho has ongoing back problems. Kovacic hasn’t played since the end of October due to a hamstring strain while Kante has been absent since 23 November due to knee trouble. Kovacic returned to training on Friday after isolating due to Covid-19, while Kante was on the bench against Everton although didn’t play a part. “Mateo had his first day in training, today,” said Tuchel. “If you want to have my very honest opinion, we have again Jorginho a doubt for Sunday, because he’s in pain. “We have Ruben Loftus Cheek a doubt, because he’s in pain. So do we know that they can travel with us tomorrow? No we don’t. “I don’t know if it’s possible for them to play on Sunday. “So maybe we will start with N’Golo And Mateo. Would that be fair? No. Would that be possible? I don’t know, but maybe we have to. “We need to find a balance now, because we put everything on Jorginho’s shoulders and on his responsibility. “Maybe we are forced to do the crazy stuff that we wouldn’t normally do. But what’s normal? We miss key players and we find solutions.” Further forward, Kai Havertz has returned to training after a negative Covid test but Romelu Lukaku and Timo Werner are still in coronavirus isolation (as is Callum Hudson-Odoi). We need some good football news so how about Trent Alexander-Arnold’s “foot like a traction engine” strike against Newcastle from a range of angles. Sorry Magpies fans but, shit, did you see that? It’s now six games called off in League One after Portsmouth v AFC Wimbledon became the latest to go due to Covid-19 cases in the Pompey squad. “Portsmouth’s League One fixture versus AFC Wimbledon on Saturday, December 18 has been postponed,” a club statement read. “Portsmouth informed the EFL that it would be unable to fulfil the fixture at the Cherry Red Records Stadium due to a number of positive Covid-19 cases in their squad.” Despite the uncertainty, Antonio Conte admits his side are ready to play Liverpool on Sunday. He said: “My thoughts are we are ready to follow the rules and I think it’s the most important thing. If there are the rules, then for sure the rules have to be the same for all the teams. “For this reason, we are ready to follow the rules and we are ready to play, and we’re ready to do what the others tell us to do.” Tottenham boss Antonio Conte is the latest manager to address the issue of vaccinations. He wants his players to get vaccinated but admits he cannot force it on anyone at the club. “Honestly, this is a personal matter the vaccination. I’ve been vaccinated and my family, my daughter and wife, did the same,” he said. “But for sure, this matter is personal. I’d like that other people do the same but every single person needs to take the best decision for himself. “I think every single person, every single player or member of staff at Tottenham or other clubs, has to take the decision for himself. “I took my decision, my family took their decision but I can’t force anyone to take a personal decision.” Premier League managers are set to meet on Monday to discuss Covid protocols, Aston Villa manager Steven Gerrard has revealed. “On the back of what a lot of managers have said, we want the same thing which is for the the game to continue. There are obviously a lot of concerns and a lot of unanswered questions,” he said. “That’s the reason why the Premier League, on Monday, have put in place an opportunity for the managers to get together and I’m hoping there will be a lot of clarity which comes off the back of that meeting. “There’s also an opportunity for the captains to get together and speak and have a debate on what is the best thing to do in the current situation.” Thanks Luke. Hopefully we don’t lose any more games between now and close of play today. And that’s my lot for today. I’ll leave you in the capable hands of David Tindall for the rest of this Omicron-tainted weekend football countdown. Steven Gerrard, the Aston Villa manager, with a fitness update for tomorrow’s match against Burnley at Villa Park: “Ashley Young is 50/50, Keinan Davis, Morgan Sanson and Anwar El Ghazi are out, Leon Bailey, Bertrand Traoré and Marvelous Nakamba are still out.” Gerrard goes on to point out that Covid-related absences are putting a strain on players, which is becoming a welfare issue for the overworked individuals who have to plug the gaps: “If there’s a headline from this conference, I want it to be that player safety and welfare has to be taken into consideration here because this is not just a Covid situation, this is what comes on the back of it.” “We’re having to use more players for more games and more minutes because we’ve got some players missing with Covid. “That puts more strain and stress on the players individually and you pick up more injuries on the back of that.” Quotes courtesy of Aston Villa’s Twitter. Robin Koch may return to action sooner than expected on Saturday against Arsenal as Leeds’s injury crisis deepens. Marcelo Bielsa will be without eight first-team players as his side bid to bounce back from Tuesday night’s 7-0 defeat at Manchester City. The Leeds boss said Germany defender Koch, sidelined since the opening-day defeat at Manchester United due to a pelvic issue and then illness, was among his dwindling options. When asked if Koch was ready for Premier League football, Bielsa said: “It’s not an evaluation that we’ve made just yet. “[Luke] Ayling came back (from injury) to play as a starter after playing 45 minutes with the under-23s. Koch has accumulated training sessions here that are sufficient.” These are the Championship fixtures going ahead over the weekend, as it stands: Friday Barnsley vs West Bromwich Albion (7.45pm) Saturday Middlesbrough vs Bournemouth (12.45pm) Blackburn Rovers vs Birmingham City (3pm) Blackpool vs Peterborough United (3pm) Bristol City vs Huddersfield Town (3pm) Nottingham Forest vs Hull City (3pm) Monday Fulham vs Sheffield United (7.45pm) The Celtic manager Ange Postecoglou insists it is too early to make a call on injured players for Sunday’s Premier Sports Cup final against Hibernian at Hampden Park. Kyogo Furuhashi, Albian Ajeti, Jota (all hamstring), Giorgos Giakoumakis (knee), James Forrest and Mikey Johnston (both knocks) missed the midweek win at Ross County. Postecoglou said: “From the other night, everyone got through OK, which is good. In terms of guys in rehab, all progressing. Obviously we still have another day tomorrow but can’t really make a call on any of them being available or unavailable at this stage. “As I said earlier in the week, it is a day-to-day proposition as to who potentially might be available for Sunday.” More from Klopp on a lack of information on Sunday’s opponents Tottenham, via Reuters: “I have no idea what to expect from them ... we will have an analyst meeting with old footage. We have no information. For them it is difficult as well. Who does not want to play for two weeks and then have to play again,” Klopp said. “More transparency would be really helpful ... at Manchester United, I heard a number of players. Is it necessary to know who or how many? Not knowing is quite strange.” The Liverpool manager Jurgen Klopp is not against calling a brief halt to the Premier League as Covid-19 cases increase but admits he does not “100%” see the benefit because of the knock-on effect it will have. Half of this weekend’s programme has been postponed because of outbreaks at clubs but Klopp wants to play Sunday’s game at Tottenham - if they are able to. Liverpool are currently awaiting confirmation of PCR test results for Virgil Van Dijk, Fabinho and Curtis Jones after they missed the win over Newcastle after positive lateral flow tests. “I’m not against stopping the league. I just don’t see 100 per cent the benefit of it,” he said. “Stopping the league means we stop now for one to two weeks, it means (missing) five to six games. So when do you want to play them? We don’t think we shouldn’t play on Sunday and we would like to play. “I say that now, if in two hours when the players arrive and we have six, seven, eight more cases then, of course, we cannot play. But in the situation we are in now we can play and we want to play. We have no information about Tottenham. I have no idea if they have trained today.” A small tweak to the kick-off time for Newcastle v Manchester City on Sunday: 2pm instead of 2.15pm: The Liverpool manager Jürgen Klopp says the club is awaiting confirmation of the suspected positive Covid-19 tests for Fabinho, Curtis Jones and Virgil van Dijk. “No, it’s not confirmed yet. Its an ongoing process, let me say it like this, but they are not there. They are fine apart from that,” Klopp said. “In this moment, nobody else [is] positive but it’s pretty early still and the players come a bit later, so we will see.” Via the Liverpool website. A little more light relief here with The Fiver’s Christmas Awards – by Scott Murray, Barry Glendenning and John Brewin: All is not well at Leeds, but Marcelo Bielsa has vowed to keep fighting. “Do you think I’m so vain I don’t think I can be sacked?” Louise Taylor reports: “It seemed obvious and a little simplistic to suggest that the position in which Gerrard played would enjoy the greatest improvement under his stewardship, but here we are.” Martin Laurence assesses Steven Gerrard’s impact since he took over at Aston Villa: Bradford City have confirmed they have received a bid for the club from an American consortium which plans to fund a takeover using cryptocurrency but deny a sale is imminent. Let’s keep the spirits up with some non-Covid news from Italy: Juventus must rediscover their identity for the final two Serie A games of the year, the coach Massimiliano Allegri said on Friday, as the Turin club prepare to conclude a disappointing first half of the season. Allegri’s side had hopes of reclaiming the league crown they surrendered last season, but are seventh after 17 games, 12 points behind the leaders and defending champions Internazionale. Juve suffered another setback by drawing 1-1 at relegation battlers Venezia last weekend and have often struggled against the teams below them, such as Saturday’s opponents, mid-table Bologna. “We need to find ourselves again in these next two games. In January we have four or five big games,” Allegri said. “We need to get all our players back and do the best we can in the second half of the season. We need to work with confidence.” Allegri revealed that the top-scorer Paulo Dybala will not be risked after some fatigue, while Federico Chiesa and Danilo are also out and Giorgio Chiellini is doubtful. “We are struggling to finish the chances we create and we are looking to improve that. But you need to do it calmly, these problems must be faced without being alarmed,” he said. “We are aware we are behind in the league table, but we have 21 matches to sort that out.” Juve host Cagliari next Tuesday before a two-week winter break, but start 2022 with a bang by taking on Napoli, AS Roma and AC Milan in the league in January, when the transfer window re-opens for a month. “The transfer market won’t resolve what we need to resolve, our finishing. The squad is excellent, but we need to improve in some aspects and be more clinical,” Allegri said. “We keep our matches open too much and it is normal that there are games, like against Venezia, where you can concede a goal with their first shot on target. This is why you need to be good at taking your chances.” (Reuters) Matt Lowton believes Burnley are well equipped to handle any fixture congestion later in the season following a second postponement in less than three weeks. After the clash with Tottenham last month fell victim to snow, Wednesday’s meeting with Watford at Turf Moor was called off less than three hours before kick-off because of Covid-19 cases in the Hornets’ camp. The defender Lowton said: “I prefer the games thick and fast really. That’s what we play football for. The training’s good and it’s obviously needed but the games are what we want to do. You feel the atmosphere and the buzz. We’re a fit side. We have been over the years. We work hard so we’re well equipped if there’s a lot of games.” Burnley’s players found out about the Watford postponement during their pre-match meal, and Lowton said: “It is very frustrating. We’d done all the work leading up to it, get to the game, you’re ready to play. It was a big game and we knew that. We took a point against a good West Ham. When you’re sat there having your pre-match meal and having little conversations with the boys about what we need to be doing in the game and then you get told it’s off, it’s like a balloon being popped. “You’re ready to go, you’re buzzing and then there’s nothing to do really. You go home and you watch the games that are on telly thinking, ‘We should be playing now’. The good thing is there’s a game (tomorrow) and we’re ready to go.” (PA) “It was a massive topic that the club was really unhappy that a lot of very good young players left the club for [clubs such as] Aston Villa and Leeds and never got the chance to play for West Brom. It was one of the main topics and it takes time. It’s clear the expectations are high.” Ben Fisher speaks to the West Brom manager Valérien Ismaël: Pep Guardiola has returned an inconclusive Covid test so Manchester City’s manager is to have a second test, with his ability to take charge of Sunday’s trip to Newcastle United in the balance. The 50-year-old cancelled his usual pre-game media conference on Friday, due to take place at 12.30pm, while he awaits the follow-up test, thought to be a PCR. Guardiola has continually stressed the need for safety to be a priority over football. If he does test positive then the assistant manager, Juan Manuel Lillo, could take charge at Newcastle for the 2.15pm kick-off. The latest is that 17 matches across the Championship, League One and League Two this weekend had been postponed, along with the five Premier League fixtures. The top-flight matches that are set to go ahead, as it stands, are as follows: Saturday Aston Villa v Burnley (3pm) Leeds v Arsenal (5.30pm) Sunday Wolves v Chelsea (2pm) Newcastle v Manchester City (2.15pm) Tottenham v Liverpool (4.30pm) Here’s the Villa v Burnley match preview, courtesy of Graham Searles: Manchester City’s WSL match against Reading on Sunday has been postponed due to Covid-19 cases in the squad. Alan Shearer says everyone should get vaccinated. “If you are eligible, get your booster booked as soon as possible, for the best possible defence against Covid for you and your family.” Ipswich have appointed Kieran McKenna, the Manchester United first-team coach, as their manager on a three-and-a-half-year contract. Compare and contrast ... Italy’s top league, Serie A, says 98% of its players have had two vaccinations for Covid-19, helping the division stay relatively unaffected by the virus, with the number of positive cases among players remaining relatively low. The situation stands in stark contrast to England, where three midweek games were postponed and half of this weekend’s 10 Premier League fixtures have been called off due to outbreaks as the Omicron variant spreads rapidly across the country. Serie A said on Friday it had no data about the percentage of players that have received a third dose. The most recent Premier League data on vaccinations, from mid-October, found that 81% of players had received one dose and 68% were double jabbed. On Thursday the EFL said that 25% of the players from its 72 clubs did not intend to get vaccinated. The Juventus and Italy defender Giorgio Chiellini urged his social media followers to get their booster jab at the start of December. “Let’s all play our part and get vaccinated for ourselves and to protect the most fragile people,* the 37-year-old wrote on Twitter. Some positive cases have been recorded in Serie A in recent weeks, including the Roma midfielders Bryan Cristante and Gonzalo Villar and Napoli’s Diego Demme and Matteo Politano. Italy’s National Health Institute (ISS) said on Wednesday that the Delta variant was still predominant in the country, with official figures showing the total number of Omicron variant cases standing at 28 as of 15 December. (Reuters) Everton are close to signing the Ukraine left-back Vitaliy Mykolenko from Dynamo Kyiv in a €21m (£17.9m) deal that could rise to €23m with add-ons. Some football took place at Anfield last night, and Eddie Howe wasn’t happy with Mike Dean’s failure to stop the game for a head injury to Isaac Hayden, in the lead-up to Liverpool’s equaliser: Hartlepool have confirmed their visit to Colchester in Sky Bet League Two has been postponed due to positive Coronavirus cases. A statement on their club website said: “Our EFL League two fixture against Colchester United tomorrow has been postponed. “The game has been postponed due to a breakout of positive Covid cases within our first team squad. Full information on rescheduling the game will be released in due course.” (PA) Jonathan Liew reports on Wolfsburg’s dominant Women’s Champions League win against Chelsea last night: Football, of course, isn’t the only sport being affected by Omicron. According to the former Ireland international Bernard Jackman on Twitter, the three French clubs who were due to go to the UK for Champions Cup fixtures this weekend have taken the decision not to travel. That’s Clermont, La Rochelle and Bordeaux. Now back to our regular programming ... Amid the Covid-19 gloom, here are some lovely old black-and-white football photos along with a nostalgic piece by Steve Finan: England’s reunion with Italy in the Nations League will be played behind closed doors as punishment for the disorder that marred the Euro 2020 final. Gareth Southgate’s men suffered a penalty shootout defeat by the Azzurri in July, when Wembley witnessed chaotic and ugly scenes before, during and after the match. A number of ticketless supporters forced their way in and UEFA announced in October that the Three Lions would play their next home competition match behind closed doors as punishment. European football’s governing body has now confirmed that the ban will be served when Italy return to England on June 11 after the Euro 2020 finalists were drawn in the same Nations League group. (PA) “Hi Luke, Do you think the leagues will make vaccines mandatory?” emails Ruth Purdue. “I am not advocating that ... just looking over to the US and how they are dealing with sports players and vaccinations.” Thanks for the email Ruth. I reckon it would be impossible from a legal perspective to make vaccines mandatory. But it is certainly concerning to see the numbers, EG 25% of players in the EFL currently being unvaccinated. You can only imagine many of them have fallen for the misinformation and downright nonsense which is circulated about the vaccines. The Scottish Premiership side St Mirren have been hit by an outbreak of Covid-19. The club have reported several positive results from lateral flow testing and have cancelled training, with those concerned self-isolating while they await the outcome of PCR tests. St Mirren have no match this weekend but are due to visit Celtic in the league on Wednesday. A statement on the club’s website said: “St Mirren Football Club can confirm that following recent lateral flow testing we have unfortunately received a number of positive COVID-19 cases. “In line with Government guidelines, those affected have now taken PCR tests and will self-isolate for 10 days. Training has been suspended, but as it stands our upcoming matches will still go ahead. However, we will continue to monitor the situation over the coming days. The health and wellbeing of our players and staff remains our utmost priority. St Mirren Football Club will make no further comment at this time.” (PA) Have Chelsea lost it? They’ve certainly lost something, including two points against Everton last night after taking the lead through Mason Mount. Jacob Steinberg reports: If you missed it – here’s Andy Hunter’s report Anfield last night, when Liverpool came from behind to beat Newcastle 3-1: Here’s our story on those quotes from the Newcastle manager Eddie Howe. “I don’t think we want half the games played and half not played,” Howe said. “The league really loses something if it becomes disjointed in terms of games played. It was a strange process writing ‘10 things to look out for this weekend’ this week, given the fluid situation regarding which Premier League matches were on and which weren’t. But here it is – by Nick Ames, Daniel Harris, Niall McVeigh and myself: The Newcastle manager, Eddie Howe, agrees with Arteta on the need to maintain fairness: “I don’t think we want half the games played and half not played,” he said. “The league really loses something if it becomes disjointed in terms of games played. When you start losing players to Covid then the worry is the competition becomes slightly unfair and I don’t think anyone wants to see that. “A decision needs to be made to ensure integrity is maintained in the competition. I think it is on a knife edge. People want to see a fair league and not disparity in games and players missing. I’m desperate to continue the programme myself but the welfare of the players and supporters has to come first.” The Arsenal manager Mikel Arteta has called for more clarity from the Premier League over the growing number of games being postponed because of coronavirus outbreaks at clubs. The English Football League has also been badly hit by the latest wave of infections across the country, with 14 games affected across its three divisions so far. Arsenal saw their opening game of the new season go ahead at Brentford despite having a number of positive cases in the squad. Arteta said: “We need more clarity on why those games are not being played and what you need to not have a game played, so you can maintain the fairness of the competition. We have been here on the other side of the table [at the start of the season] where we had all the arguments in the world to not play a football match and we ended up playing it.” (PA) The worsening Omicron Covid-19 situation in football, and across society, conjures up memories of early 2020 when the pandemic began. As Fredi Bobic, then Eintracht Frankfurt’s sporting director, wrote of the Bundesliga’s attempts to deal with the initial crisis: “A decision made out of clear conviction in the morning is already useless by the afternoon.” The world was in a collective state of shock back then, and perhaps the current situation is not as severe, but the number of players and staff at football clubs affected makes the scale of the problem clear. We’ll bring you previews, news and press conferences before the weekend’s action, as usual, as the Premier League resists calls for a full ‘firebreak’ suspension.Chris Wilkinson, who has died aged 76, was the co-founder of the architecture practice that most defined the technocratic optimism of the millennium projects era. WilkinsonEyre were the first architects to win the RIBA Stirling prize two years running, for their Magna science centre in Rotherham in 2001 and the Gateshead Millennium Bridge in 2002, both of which exemplified the firm’s poetic reinterpretation of British high-tech traditions. Their success would lead to a string of international commissions that saw Wilkinson preside over a 200-strong firm, with projects ranging from streamlined skyscrapers in China to futuristic botanical gardens in Singapore. The Magna centre began the new millennium with a post-industrial bang. It was a thrilling reinvigoration of a huge redundant steelworks, which was to science what the Tate Modern was to art, both setting the mould for a generation of visitor attractions housed inside dramatic industrial buildings. It took visitors on a theatrical journey along elevated gantries between a series of glowing pods, culminating inside a silvery sci-fi zeppelin hovering in the red-tinged gloom. WilkinsonEyre’s “blinking bridge” across the Tyne brought similar theatrics to the timeless challenge of how to span a body of water while accommodating the need for ships to pass through. Composed from two graceful parabolic arcs, one forming the pedestrian deck and the other supporting it, it was designed to rotate on an axis, like an opening eyelid, and became an elegant icon of Gateshead’s riverside regeneration that has stood the test of time. The success of these two projects, and the accompanying glare of the media spotlight, prompted the practice to look for work overseas, where it built the sleek Guangzhou International Finance Centre tower, followed by the Gardens By the Bay in Singapore, setting it on the way to becoming a globally recognised firm. Wilkinson was born in Amersham, Buckinghamshire. His father, Tony, was a surveyor at Unilever, and his mother, Norma (nee Treleaven Beer), had been part of the war effort in her youth. He attended St Alban’s school, where he learned a love of drawing that led him to pursue an art foundation course, before studying architecture at the Polytechnic of Central London (now University of Westminster). Graduating in 1970, he worked for Denys Lasdun on the National Theatre, before taking three months off to travel in Greece where, he said, it became clear that Norman Foster and Richard Rogers were “the future which I wanted to be part of”. He rushed home and applied to work at both firms, and was accepted at Foster’s in 1971. He described it as “an incredible time”, when the practice was still very small and creative, a place where he “learned everything”. He worked mostly with Michael Hopkins, Foster’s partner at the time, and joined Hopkins when he started his own office in 1976, where Wilkinson worked on the Greene King brewery and Willis Faber’s headquarters at 10 Trinity Square. After five years he left to join the Richard Rogers Partnership, where he played a key early role in the design of Lloyd’s of London – which in 2011 became the youngest ever building to be Grade I-listed. Wilkinson’s experience with these three titans of the British high-tech movement was profoundly formative, instilling a love of exposing the structure of buildings and celebrating the latest technologies used to build them. A keen painter, he fused that interest in technology with his own more artistic sensibility, indulging in sensuous curves and more streamlined forms, developing a style that has since become ubiquitous for airports, conference centres and corporate headquarters around the world. He launched his own practice in 1983, and was joined four years later by Jim Eyre, with whom he had worked at Hopkins (the firm was rebranded WilkinsonEyre in 1999). They began with small projects, passed on by Rogers and Hopkins, but their breakthrough came in 1991 when they won the competition for the Stratford Market train depot on the Jubilee line extension. Housing train maintenance and stabling facilities alongside office and ancillary spaces, the building exudes the duo’s interest in heroic steel structures, featuring a diagrid space-frame roof that leaps across the 190-metre-long space in a gentle arc, supported on treelike columns. It embodied many of the principles espoused in Wilkinson’s book Supersheds, published the same year. Described by Building magazine as “the book that put the glamour back into the large-volume, clearspan space”, it was a paean to warehouses, train sheds and other long-span industrial structures, drawing on Wilkinson’s travels in the US. It revived an interest in the potential for “universal space” covered by suspended canopies, space frames and tensile fabric membranes that would continue throughout the 1990s, influencing the design of everything from stations to supermarkets. Wilkinson’s lean, techno-centric approach attracted the eye of the inventor James Dyson, who commissioned the practice to design his company’s headquarters in Malmesbury, Wiltshire, in 1992, beginning a relationship that continued for three decades. The campus neatly charts the evolution of the firm, from the first undulating roofed factory, to mirrored glass office pavilions, to a recent cluster of modular student accommodation pods for the Dyson Institute of Engineering and Technology. In a 2019 interview, Wilkinson recalled that Dyson was particularly fond of the flagship store they designed for him in Paris in 2000. “We put all the vacuums on pedestals,” he said. “They were like artworks. He liked that.” It began a trend for technology stores designed like contemporary art galleries, which brands such as Apple and Samsung have since taken to extremes. The dawn of the millennium marked a shift in scale. Wilkinson was appointed OBE in the millennium honours list and the lottery-funded Millennium Commission provided a pipeline of substantial opportunities for architects of this generation. WilkinsonEyre profited handsomely, starting with the National Waterfront Museum in Swansea, followed by the Explore@Bristol science centre, which began an interest in working with listed buildings. Then came the celebrated Magna centre and the Gateshead bridge, allowing the practice to grow and projecting the architects to a level of public exposure that, while gratifying, also felt uncomfortable. “It was great in many ways but it caused us a few problems,” Wilkinson said in an interview last year. “Some articles were written about us that were a bit personal so we decided to lie low for a while rather than making the most of every opportunity that came our way.” They focused on China instead, where they secured the commission for the 440-metre-high Guangzhou Tower. It was a key project for Wilkinson, who increasingly saw the sculptural qualities as more important to their work, keen to introduce a freer artistic approach – while Eyre, the bridge specialist, obsessed over the precise geometry and its rationalisation. Wilkinson’s election to the Royal Academy in 2006 had been a significant moment, encouraging him to enjoy more freedom and take inspiration in his painting and drawing, which became a lifelong passion. He spent the Covid lockdowns painting big abstract acrylic canvases while listening to Pink Floyd and Mozart in his garden-facing dining room, a space he designed in 1996 with full-height frameless glazing and a rooflight inspired by the artist James Turrell. The Guangzhou Tower helped WilkinsonEyre secure further work in Asia, including the Singapore gardens project, conceived as an Avatar-like world of organic glasshouses and strange glowing steel trees. The two projects won the RIBA’s international Lubetkin prize, back-to-back once again, in 2012 and 2013, catapulting the practice into further major global commissions. But the larger the office grew, the more varied became the quality of the work. One of Wilkinson’s most controversial legacies now looms over Sydney’s waterfront, in the form of the 271-metre-high One Barangaroo casino hotel complex, the tallest building in the city, locally nicknamed “Packer’s Pecker” after its billionaire backer James Packer. Built on a site originally earmarked for parkland, for a developer alleged to facilitate money laundering for criminal gangs, to many eyes the project represents everything that’s wrong with Australia’s anything-goes approach to city planning. Back in the UK, other contentious later works include the Siemens Crystal at the Royal Docks, a contorted glass corporate showcase, soon to be home to the relocated City Hall, and the nearby Emirates Air Line cable car, whose fault lies less in the quality of its design than its questionable usefulness. Over his 40-year career, the project Wilkinson said he was most proud of was the Maggie’s Centre at the Churchill hospital in Oxford, built in 2014. Conceived as an angular treehouse, it explored the possibilities of cross-laminated timber and his passion for freer geometries, which Eyre suggests reflected his love of jazz music. His last realised building will be the Dodington Art Gallery for James and Deirdre Dyson on the couple’s estate, due to open in 2023 – fittingly bringing his passions full circle, with a slender diagrid roof covering a clear-span space below. Wilkinson is survived by his wife, Diana (nee Edmunds), whom he married in 1976, and their children, Zoe and Dominic. • Christopher John Wilkinson, architect, born 1 July 1945; died 14 December 2021Patrick Assoumou Eyi, the long-serving coach in Gabon who is facing claims he raped, groomed and exploited young players, has been provisionally suspended by the country’s football association pending an investigation. Gabon’s president, Ali Bongo, described the claims made by several alleged victims to the Guardian on Thursday as “a very serious matter”, with the government also announcing that it will hold a judicial investigation into possible sexual abuse against children and young people in all sports in the country. Eyi – known as “Capello” – is accused of abusing boys in his previous role as the head coach of Gabon’s under-17 team and in his current role as the technical director for La Ligue de l’Estuaire. He has yet to respond directly to questions from the Guardian. A statement from Franck Nguema, Gabon’s sports and youth minister, on Friday confirmed that the Gabonese Football Federation (Fegafoot) had provisionally banned Eyi “from all football activities”, with the case set to be investigated by its ethics committee. Eyi has also been suspended from his post as technical director. Nguema’s statement made reference to the Guardian’s story, in which several unnamed alleged victims said they had not reported Eyi to police in Gabon because they did not have confidence in the justice system. “For the president of the republic, head of state, Mr Ali Bongo Ondimba, ‘this is a very serious matter and an unacceptable one,’” he said. “We will also open a judicial investigation in the national football community, for possible sexual abuse, having been committed against children and young people, of all kinds (boys and girls), in order to identify the possible perpetrators and actors of these heinous crimes. “In addition, I asked my colleague from justice to extend the investigation to all national sports federations, because now it is a question of eradicating all potential sexual predators from the world of national sport.” Several more alleged victims have come forward to claim they were abused by Eyi since the Guardian’s article was published. The players’ union Fifpro has registered a complaint with Fifa over the accusations. A Fegafoot statement said that the decision to suspend Eyi had been taken after a meeting of its executive committee on Thursday “to coldly analyse the situation”. “In view of the seriousness of the facts, the executive committee has decided to suspend Mr Assoumou Eyi Patrick as a precautionary measure from all football-related activities,” it said. “In the process, the general secretary contacted the ethics commission for the opening of an investigation.” Nguema said any sexual abuse of children in Gabonsese sport would “not go unpunished, and will be severely punished by law”.Joe Biden has acknowledged that his $1.75tn economic and climate legislative package will miss the Christmas deadline for Senate passage and will not pass Congress in the waning weeks of this year. Negotiations for the president’s Build Back Better bill, for which the Senate Democratic leader, Chuck Schumer, set a Christmas deadline, have stalled as the centrist Democratic senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia has withheld his support for the bill in its current form, making him a key vote in the evenly split Senate. “My team and I are having ongoing discussions with Senator Manchin; that work will continue next week,” Biden said in a statement on Thursday evening. “It takes time to finalize these agreements, prepare the legislative changes, and finish all the parliamentary and procedural steps needed to enable a Senate vote. We will advance this work together over the days and weeks ahead,” he added. Despite the slowed negotiations, Biden reiterated his confidence in the bill’s passing and said that Manchin has signaled in recent discussions his support for the proposal’s general outlines. “Senator Manchin has reiterated his support for Build Back Better funding at the level of the framework plan I announced in December,” Biden said. Manchin has expressed criticism of the proposal to continue the expanded child tax credit program through the Build Back Better Act. While Democrats want to continue the expanded program for one year through the $1.75tn spending package, Manchin has reportedly expressed concern over the cost of doing so. He believes the bill’s programs should be viewed on a 10-year basis when doing costing analysis, even though some of them expire after just a year or a few years. Should the expanded child tax credit program be extended through the next 10 years, it would require much more funding than the bill allocates. When asked about Biden and Manchin’s current relationship in a press conference on Friday, the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, replied: “The president considers Senator Manchin a friend. He’s somebody who he has had many candid and direct conversations with. It doesn’t mean they always agree on everything but that is not the bad that the president sets for his friendships or relationships with members of Congress.” “He is committed to pressing forward through ups and downs and that’s where we are right now,” Psaki said. She also added that Biden later on Friday would make a “passionate case” for voting rights legislation that remains stalled in Congress as a result of Republican opposition. Psaki said of voter suppression attempts going on in several states that: “It’s a sinister combination of voter suppression and election subversion, which is un-American, un-Democratic but not unprecedented.” And later Friday morning, Biden did speak on the topic when he gave the commencement address at South Carolina State University, a historically Black institution. He was introduced by Congressman Jim Clyburn, who was instrumental to Biden clinching the Democratic nomination for president last year after he endorsed him when he was trailing in the primaries and swung support in the south and among Black voters. Biden told the graduating students: “We have to protect that sacred right to vote, for God’s sake,” Biden said. “I’ve never seen anything like the unrelenting assault on the right to vote.” The president’s comments come as Senate Democrats are discussing potential changes to the filibuster to push voting rights legislation through the evenly divided chamber. Senate Republicans have used the filibuster to block voting rights legislation, as Democrats do not have the 60 votes necessary to overcome a filibuster. “This battle is not over. We must pass the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Act. We must,” Biden told the graduates of the historically Black university. “We’re going to keep up the fight until we get it done, and you’re going to keep up the fight, and we need your help badly.”Your article (If you believe in a public NHS, the new health and care bill should set off alarm bells, 7 December) addresses an important piece of legislation about which there are very real concerns. Several key arguments made in it, however, are incorrect. The authors write that “new integrated care boards … won’t serve all people living in a local area, but a ‘group of people’ who can be drawn from anywhere in England”. This is wholly wrong. These new NHS administrative units will serve 42 areas of England already set out by NHS England. The second clause of the chapter dealing with integrated care boards states that each one is to be established “for an area within England”, which may not overlap with other areas. Readers in Cornwall are not about to discover next April that they are under the care of NHS Lincolnshire. The article also suggests that the bill “removes the requirement for emergency services to be provided for everybody present in an area”. In reality, it expressly directs the new boards to arrange to meet people’s needs for medical services, ambulances, nursing services and “such other services or facilities as are required for the diagnosis and treatment of illness”. Any board which tried to stop providing all emergency care would swiftly find itself in court. This bill requires serious and urgent scrutiny: it pares back the generosity of the planned social care cap, and introduces dramatic new powers for politicians to intervene in the NHS. There is not long left for meaningful changes to be made, as it has already passed the Commons. The right questions will not be asked if basic points of the legislation are misunderstood. Helen Buckingham Director of strategy, Nuffield Trust Mark Dayan Head of public affairs, Nuffield TrustVisits to high streets and shopping centres have fallen ahead of what is traditionally the biggest shopping weekend of the calendar, with a 20% fall in central London footfall on Thursday prompting forecasts of a “muted” end to a turbulent year. Retailers including Harrods and Halfords have brought forward Christmas sales in a bid to entice shoppers, but outlets hoping for a last-minute spending frenzy look set to be out of luck, as fears over the Omicron coronavirus variant keep many at home in the final run-up to Christmas. Figures from Springboard show that visits to high streets around the UK on Thursday morning were down 2.7% on the previous week’s figure, while visits to shopping centres had fallen by 2.6%. Retail parks had, in contrast, recorded a 3.8% lift. In London, where Omicron cases have surged, Springboard recorded a 21.3% drop in footfall to central districts. The New West End Company, which represents retailers and business around Bond Street, Oxford Street and Regent Street, said footfall there was down by 7% year-on-year on Thursday, and 32% below the same day in 2019. Its CEO, Jace Tyrrell, said: “With rising Covid cases dampening consumer confidence and a planned Tube strike looming on Saturday, we’re anticipating a muted final weekend of Christmas trading at a time when West End businesses should be enjoying a much-needed boost.” Retail analysts said the shift could in part be down to shoppers having bought presents early this year. With warnings over potential shortages of toys and other Christmas gifts caused by supply chain issues, and heavy promotion of Black Friday sales, the figures suggest consumers pulled forward festive spending to ensure they got the items they wanted. Data released by the Office for National Statistics on Friday showed higher spending in November, with retail up 1.4%. Clothing sales were up by 2.9%, and there was a 2.8% increase in other non-food store spending, which includes computer, toy and jewellery retail. Joanna Parman, a strategic insights director at consultancy Kantar, said: “Toys had a massive November as people went out and bought the big presents. People are still going to toy shops, and other places to buy gifts, but it seems that most people have bought all of their main shopping.” Shoppers may also be staying away due to concerns about protecting family gatherings. Dr Steven McCabe, a retail expert at Birmingham City University, said November’s retail sales figures “may be regarded as a calm before the latest Covid storm”. “Omicron has changed everything with potential consequences for hard-pressed retailers,” he said. “Professor Chris Whitty’s advice that people think carefully about the need to engage in contact with others means many may be wary of visiting the high street and potentially exposing themselves to risk of infection.” On Thursday, Harrods announced it had brought forward its traditional Boxing Day sale “in response to ongoing trading realities”. On Friday, Halfords – which has held early sales in previous years – followed suit, cutting the cost of some children’s scooters by 40%. Both are running the sales online and in shops. The drop in footfall follows what had started to look like a recovery for physical stores. The ONS said the proportion of retail sales taking place online had fallen to 26.9% in November 2021, its lowest level since March 2020 when the pandemic first began to take hold. Emma-Lou Montgomery, associate director of personal investing at Fidelity International, said the lead-up to 25 December “looks to be far from the Christmas bonanza high-street retailers had their hopes pinned on”. She added: “This year’s ‘last-minute’ Christmas shopping is more likely to be dependent on the army of delivery drivers that have kept retailers in business since the start of the pandemic, as opposed to the more ‘traditional’ Christmas Eve dash to grab whatever’s left on the shop shelves. “Harrods opening up their Boxing Day sale to the public 10 days early shows just how reactive retailers will have to be to combat against any self-imposed lockdowns households may be implementing between now and the big day.” Parman said she expected shoppers to still make trips to supermarkets to buy food, but that these visits would be more staggered than pre-pandemic as people looked for quiet times. A report by website VoucherCodes showed that £2.81bn was spent on the final weekend before Christmas in 2019, and £2.4bn over the same period last year. It has forecast sales will hit £2.75bn in what it has dubbed “panic weekend”.My aunt Margaret Waddy, who has died aged 77 of a pulmonary embolism, was a horticulturist and a teacher, a quiz fan and a committed volunteer with Samaritans in Cambridge. Margaret was born in London but her early life was spent in the Gold Coast, now Ghana, where her parents, Bernard (known as BB) Waddy, a doctor in tropical medicine, and Mary (nee Lawrence), worked for the Colonial Service. At the age of five she was sent to Britain to be educated at the Convent of the Sacred Heart in Tunbridge Wells, Kent, a Roman Catholic boarding school. Margaret had a talent for languages. She gained a degree in classics and Italian from the University of London in 1966, and was fluent in French. After graduating she worked as an au pair and then taught at various places, including the Arts Educational School in London between 1967 and 1970. Inspired by her father, Margaret decided to change her career path, took science A-levels, worked in laboratories and tried several times to get into medical school between 1970 and 1976. She was unsuccessful, but then combined her newfound knowledge of biology with her passion for gardening (inherited from her mother) and took a degree in horticulture at the University of Bath in 1977, graduating in 1981. At Bath she became a keen quizzer and captained the University Challenge team. She moved to Cambridge in 1981 when she took a job propagating plants by tissue culture at the National Seed Development Organisation (which later became the Plant Breeding Institute). She also taught evening classes in horticulture at Bottisham College from 2008. When the PBI was taken over by Monsanto in 2014, she retired from her job, but continued at Bottisham College until 2018. She was devoted to her students, many of whom kept in touch afterwards with news of their careers. Margaret was a member of Samaritans, and for the rest of her life devoted much time and energy to volunteering – not only as a listener, but also helping with recruitment and training. She was briefly director of the Cambridge branch. In recent years she also trained as a Cambridge guide, and had just started taking tours in English and in French when the Covid pandemic arrived. She was a longtime reader of the Guardian and frequent contributor of witty brief letters. She often entered and won competitions, including the prize for imagining the worst opening sentence to a book. Her house in Cambridge had a narrow but elongated garden, which Margaret filled with shrubs, flowers and fruit trees. She had a capacity to communicate with real warmth, based on genuine interest in people. She is survived by four siblings and 10 nephews and nieces; another niece, Jen Lander, died in 2017.UK Government Investments is still the majority shareholder (54.7%) in NatWest, so will it be basically taxpayers who’ll pay most of the £264m fine recently given to NatWest at Southwark crown court because the bank failed to spot that huge amounts of cash deposited in black bin liners might be a bit dodgy (Natwest fined £264m after taking deposits of laundered cash in bin bags, 13 December)? Paul Tattam Chinley, Derbyshire • Susanne MacGregor (Letters, 13 December) tells only part of the Sir Omicron story. Anthony Trollope’s high-society physician is surnamed Pie – a play on the two neighbouring letters of the Greek alphabet: omicron and pi. Was Trollope presciently signalling the next Covid variant? Michael Dunne Brighton, East Sussex • We puzzlers notice details, and I couldn’t help but notice that in your Wordsearch of 15 December, of all the 15 bands and artists from the 1980s, only one, the Pixies, included a member who was a woman. Rachael Lukowska Beckenham, London • I fear for Pedanticus’s blood pressure when he reads the headline “Son calls the shots as king lays low” in your print edition (16 December). Sue Jenkins Thame, Oxfordshire • As a friend once said to me: “Even an eider duck cannot lay down.” Roger Bardell Welwyn, Hertfordshire • The penultimate letter above was amended on 19 December to correct the date of a print edition referred to in the cross-reference.An uneasy Christmas truce has been called over the post-Brexit arrangements for Northern Ireland, even as the EU said it would not negotiate over a key British demand in the rancorous talks. Maroš Šefčovič, the EU Brexit commissioner, said there was “momentum” behind discussions after a major British U-turn, but refused to offer quid pro quo concessions. Downing Street has conceded in recent weeks that it will prioritise removing barriers to trade between Great Britain and Northern Ireland over other constitutional issues that have bedevilled the talks. Talks will be suspended until after Christmas. But in a blow to the British government, the commissioner on Friday refused even to engage with its demand for any renegotiation over the role of the European court of justice (ECJ) in the enforcement of EU law in Northern Ireland, despite a UK concession that the court could retain a role in the protocol. “It was not disputed at all until the summer of this year and therefore the topic we are not ready to include in our discussions,” said Šefčovič, the EU commissioner in charge of UK relations. Under a protocol of the withdrawal agreement, Northern Ireland in effect remains within the EU’s single market and the bloc’s customs border is drawn down the Irish sea. The EU court is the final arbiter of disputes. The British government, however, wants an independent arbitration system rather than giving the ECJ the last say, although in recent days it has accepted the court in Luxembourg will resolve questions about EU law if issues come to arbitration. A potential solution exists in the post-Brexit trade agreement and the EU’s deal with Switzerland. But the European Commission said on Friday that this model was not feasible – yet. A senior EU official said the protocol was “completely different” to the EU trade agreement with Switzerland, because the Northern Ireland agreement was based on “the direct application of reams of EU legislation”, rather than “elements of EU law, which are referred to or paraphrased” as in the deal with Berne. “It was judged that this arbitral solution was not sufficient, and that you needed the full powers of the court of justice,” the official said. Another barrier is that the commission refuses to reopen an agreement that was signed by Boris Johnson little more than two years ago. There is agreement to extend a standstill arrangement beyond 1 January to avoid the full implementation of customs on meat and agricultural imports. But Brussels remains mistrustful of the British government. “The fundamental stumbling block is that we need the UK to move back into a logic of the implementation of an agreement that it negotiated, signed and ratified,” said a senior official. The two sides are also at odds over the process of the talks. While British officials have spoken of “a staged approach”, where issues are agreed one by one, the EU would like a single agreement. Customs and health checks remain a major stumbling block in the talks. While the EU considers it has made a generous offer to cut red tape, the UK argues that its claims to remove 50% of customs checks and 80% of health checks do not stand up. The EU announced on Friday it would rewrite its rules on medicines to ensure life-saving treatments and everyday drugs remained available in Northern Ireland, after threats to supply emerged. Without a change to the rules or grace period, medicine manufacturers based in Great Britain had warned they could cease supplying products to Northern Ireland, because of the extra costs imposed by red tape. Hundreds of medicines used by the NHS in Northern Ireland were at risk. The commission has now proposed that new medicines for Northern Ireland can be authorised by the UK, even if they have yet to be approved by the EU regulator. Under the proposals, quality control checks, so called “batch testing”, would not need to be repeated in Northern Ireland, if they had already been carried out in Great Britain or the EU. The proposals have to be agreed by EU lawmakers and ministers before coming into force. Meanwhile, the French EU minister Clément Beaune said Paris would “in the coming days” begin proceedings against the UK over fishing licences it said Britain still owed a small number of French boats to allow them to operate in British waters. “The next step will be to ask the commission in the coming days to convene the partnership council, as provided for under the Brexit trade deal to settle a problem,” Beaune said, adding that the procedure would target “the most urgent” cases.Is Brexit done? The UK left the European Union on 31 January 2020 and all EU rules fell away at the start of 2021. Soon after, a row broke out over the Northern Ireland protocol, the tortuously negotiated agreement to avoid a hard border on the island of Ireland, by keeping Northern Ireland in the EU single market and customs union. The UK demanded a rewrite of the protocol in July. At first the EU said it wasn’t prepared to do more than tinker around the edges, but by October the European Commission had offered some substantial changes including scrapping customs red tape. After weeks of non-stop talks, each side has now taken a step towards agreement. What is the EU proposing? The commission revealed on Friday it was prepared to rewrite EU law on medicines to ensure stable supplies of generic and life-saving drugs in Northern Ireland. Without changes, Northern Irish patients risk losing access to hundreds of generic medicines available on the NHS. The problem arose because Northern Ireland should follow EU rules on medicines that require quality-control tests to be done in the single market, heaping costs on British manufacturers of generic medicines that could cause many to abandon the Northern Irish market. What is the UK move? The British government has climbed down in its demands on the European court of justice (ECJ), a bete noire for Brexiters. The UK has signalled the ECJ is no longer its first priority in negotiations on the Northern Ireland protocol, as it seeks to focus on customs and health checks in the Irish Sea border that are having the biggest impact on UK business and Northern Irish citizens. The government has also been clearer that it is ready to accept an arbitration system, with a continuing role for the ECJ in settling disputes over EU law. So, an agreement is close? Far from it. The UK sounds positive about the EU proposals on medicines, but says it needs to check the details. But the role of the European court in policing the protocol is a big sticking point. While the British are ready to concede a role for the ECJ, thecommission has flatly refused to discuss a new governance model, partly because it opposes reopening an international treaty agreed barely two years ago. And the two sides remain far apart on customs, plant, food and animal health checks. Does that mean a return to ‘sausage wars’? While the ban on importing meat from Great Britain into Northern Ireland captured headlines, the disagreement is bigger than a few bangers. The sausage issue looks relatively straightforward to solve now the EU has proposed an exemption for “iconic” British products, allowing such items to be imported into Northern Ireland with the right certification. More broadly, the UK has complained there has been little progress on “burdensome” customs and SPS checks on goods moving between Great Britain and Northern Ireland. The EU thinks it has made a generous offer that would mean, for example, a lorry transporting meat, fish, dairy, fruit and sweets from Great Britain to Northern Ireland would need just one certificate rather than one per product type. The UK says the EU’s numbers are less than meets the eye and that a claimed 80% reduction in health checks does not stand up. What next? Unlike the Brexit trade deal, there is no looming end-of-year deadline. The UK would like an agreement before elections to the Northern Ireland assembly, due by May 2022. The commission hopes its medicines proposal will be a “catalyst” for a broader agreement early next year but has declined to match the UK timetable, saying it is “not in the business of artificial deadlines”. Talks will resume in 2022. • This article was amended on 19 December 2021 to change a reference to Britain, when Great Britain was intended.Olivia and Amy are sitting outside in the shade, trying to escape from New Zealand’s early-summer humidity. Amy, 10 months old, burbles happily in the background as her mother talks. She is healthy, happy, and oblivious to her status as a world first: one of a handful of babies born from the first sperm bank for HIV-positive donors. The bank, Sperm Positive, launched in New Zealand in 2019, in an effort to reduce the stigma faced by HIV-positive people – and raise awareness that with treatment, the virus was undetectable and untransmissible. It grabbed international headlines when it was launched, but has been more than a publicity gimmick. Two years on, the bank is bearing fruit. “For me, it wasn’t about that,” Olivia says, referring to the more controversial implications of the sperm bank’s launch. “For me, I just wanted to have a baby …. [and] she is just the cheekiest, happiest, funniest little girl.” Victor, one of the bank’s donors, had thought having a child would be impossible for him. “When I was diagnosed back in 2013, I felt that something like this could never happen – that I was ever going to be able to have children,” he says. On hearing about the bank, “I saw this opportunity – one, to give the opportunity to the couple … to have a child and to make their dreams come true. And second, to prove to myself by evidence that actually it is possible, regardless of your status.” After facilitating two successful pregnancies as a donor, he and his partner are now seeking a surrogate, to try to have a child of their own. The online sperm bank matches prospective parents with donors, and was set up as a collaboration between New Zealand Aids Foundation, Positive Woman Inc and Body Positive. Jane Bruning of Positive Women Inc says since launching two years ago the organisation had “been overwhelmed by the number of inquiries we have received from people keen to receive more information”. Developed partly as an awareness project, it aims to try to drive home the “undetectable = untransmissible” message: that as HIV treatments reduce viral levels in the blood to undetectable, positive people are no longer at risk of transmitting it to healthy partners. The finding “has been shown again and again for over 10 years now,” says Dr Mark Thomas, an associate professor at University of Auckland and HIV-specialised infectious disease doctor at Auckland district health board. Three large, long-term multinational studies have followed about 3,000 sexually active mixed HIV-status couples over years while they did not use condoms, and did not find a single case of transmission when the man was using suppression medication. Despite this, some countries are still cautious about reproductive advice for HIV-positive men – the CDC’s advice as of 2017 was to consider use of PrEP and ‘sperm washing’ in addition to suppressive medications. Thomas says that reflects an abundance of caution, rather than a real risk that a father could infect the child. There has never been a confirmed case of an HIV-positive child being infected via the father’s sperm and born to an HIV-negative mother, he says. Thomas says while the sperm bank has grabbed headlines, the deeper and more ongoing story is that those who test positive still often experience stigma and discrimination – in housing, employment, medical treatment, and from their families or communities. In the early days of the epidemic, when it principally effected gay men, “It was one stigma on top of another,” says Thomas, who first began treating HIV and Aids patients at Auckland hospital in the 1980s. “Back in the 80s and the first half of the 90s, it was a close to universally-fatal diagnosis. So sex and death and homosexuality mixed in together [to create] a really terrible stigma.” While it’s improved since then, social attitudes still don’t reflect the enormous leaps forward in HIV treatment: today, “with maybe one pill at night or a couple of pills a day … HIV never impacts on their life again, medically.” Fear of that stigma is still strong for some of the bank’s donors, including Victor. “In regards to my status, I am still very much in the closet – it’s not something you’re shouting to the four winds,” he says. He has disclosed only to his partner and a handful of close friends. “Sometimes I get my days where I’m just thinking, I have really, really just messed up. It’s not something that I have that I [can] be proud of – but I have learned to live with it and just to keep it to myself.” New Zealand’s University of Otago-run People Living with HIV Stigma Index conducted interviews with 188 HIV-positive New Zealanders last year. Despite all participants being on antiretroviral treatments, a third reported experiencing social stigma related to their status – including gossip, cruel remarks, and verbal harassment. More than half reported stigma in healthcare settings. Some reported losing employment, and more than half had experienced depression, anxiety and insomnia in the last year. “When my parents discovered I had HIV they were actively wanting me to use separate dishes, to use ‘tongs’ when I handle food in the kitchen. It made me feel really dirty, and very low,” one 27-year-old told the study. After disclosing to a landlord that she and her partner were HIV positive, “We were given notice to leave the flat,” one woman said. “When I have disclosed my positive HIV status to guys I have dated, I would either never hear from them again or they would block me from social media apps,” another man reported. “I’m afraid of being rejected,” Victor says – but the children he has helped create have been a bright spot. On the news that another couple’s baby had been safely born, he says, he felt a wave of joy. “It was so much happiness – to be able to see something that you never thought was going to be possible. And just to see, hear how much joy this new little being has brought to the family to the couple that I help with. Beautiful, really.” The names of sperm donors, children and mothers have been changed to protect the identity of donors that have not publicly disclosed their HIV status.For eight months of this year, New Zealanders were so rude – or lucky, depending on whether you live inside or outside New Zealand – as to ignore everything that was happening across the world. Delta was washing over Europe in waves, confining much of the continent to their homes and neighbourhoods. Joe Biden was struggling to implement his progressive agenda, crashing against a Republican wall of legislative and judicial obstruction. It was a reminder for Americans and the world that the Trump era wasn’t a brief, violent blip – a temporary interruption to the second American century - but perhaps a permanent feature of their democracy. In Australia, a continent sitting pretty for much of the year, the virus let rip in New South Wales and Victoria, sending Melbourne into one of the world’s longest lockdowns. For New Zealanders, this was a very distant, and “foreign”, problem. In April 50,000 New Zealanders packed out Six60’s gig at Eden Park. That moment, a reminder to the rest of the world that at least one country was living as if Covid never happened, went viral. Tributes were made to the genius of prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, whose tough measures against the virus in March 2020 meant that New Zealanders enjoyed a year more or less like any other. We worked from our offices. We ate out. Our children went to school. We went to birthday parties and funerals and all manner of mass gatherings without the virus threatening to spread at any given moment. We were on top of the world. Until, of course, we weren’t. Delta breached the border. First in Auckland, and then Northland and the Waikato, and now most other parts of the country. Ardern and her cabinet re-imposed the tough measures that worked so well in 2020. But Delta was different, and this time around the country never quite returned to zero cases. And yet life is returning to a version close to what we were enjoying in April. The virus is only circulating at a low level with more than 90% of the country double-jabbed, one of the highest vaccine rates in the world. Daily cases are even beginning to dip below 100, tantalisingly close to returning the country to “elimination”. The government’s traffic-light system promises to restore most of our pre-viral freedoms. But among these upheavals – ratcheting from one of the country’s with the least restrictions to, albeit briefly, one of the country’s with the most restrictions – it was easy to miss other seismic changes happening in New Zealand society. Women maintained their grip on the three highest offices in the land – the governor-general, prime minister, and chief justice are women. That’s a return to the status quo from the 2000s when Dame Sylvia Cartwright, Helen Clark, and Dame Sian Elias occupied the three offices of state. This isn’t meant to overstate New Zealand as a feminist paradise – Māori and Pacific women still earn far less than white men when doing the same job – but it does highlight a legacy the country, as the first in the world in which to grant women the vote, is conscious of. Other progressive (or perhaps “overdue”) changes were also happening with te reo Māori taking its rightful place as a language of public life. Lorde released an EP entirely in Māori adding to a growing body of work that includes former Australian Idol Stan Walker and Ngāti Awa vocal queen Maisey Rika. Interestingly, public opinion was shifting with these musical milestones too. In one poll 41% of New Zealanders supported a national name change to either the dual Māori-English “Aotearoa New Zealand” or simply the Māori “Aotearoa”. Even 10 years ago that level of support was unthinkable, and it reinforced a lesson that former National party leader Judith Collins learned the hard way: casting Māori as a national bogeyman no longer works. In the 2000s National’s attacks against Māori and Māori interests saw its poll numbers almost double overnight. But in 2021 Collins’s poll numbers crashed. Few New Zealanders were convinced that the government’s “He Puapua” report was a blueprint for a Māori takeover. In fact, more New Zealanders were inclined to celebrate Māori success, from film-maker Taika Waititi to Olympian Lisa Carrington. But in this strange year even those successes – like Carrington becoming New Zealand’s most decorated Olympian – feel like milestones from another, different year. In 2021 there is before-Delta life. All the normal things that happened before August. And then there’s post-Delta life. All the abnormal things that happened after New Zealand caught up with the rest of the world. In 2022, as life possibly returns to what we might consider normal, hopefully our sense of time is restored too.The fully vaccinated NHS worker who wrote to you may well believe mandatory vaccination is “abusive” (Letters, 16 December). I do wonder if they have also accepted the mandatory hepatitis B vaccination that applies to all patient-facing NHS workers. In south London in 2002, many parents opted out of the MMR vaccine, and a measles outbreak ensued. As a GP, I used to tell such parents that they were exercising their right to use my vaccinated children as human shields for their unvaccinated children. Years ago, I responded to a Guardian letter by David Hockney when he railed against smoking bans, pointing out that service industry workers can contract lung cancer from secondhand smoke. NHS workers have a duty to our patients, and the wider community. Denis Jackson Glasgow • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I still have my domestic science exercise book from 1964 (Letters, 14 December). First item: diagram of a tea tray (we had to take the headmaster his tea and biscuits each afternoon). This was followed by damping, folding, mangling and ironing a tea towel. The cookery syllabus came next, which consisted of the different methods of baking, from coconut pyramids to chocolate sponge. Perhaps it was because I went to a grammar school, and would presumably have been expected to have the means, in due course, to have someone else to cook for me, that I didn’t learn how to make meals. Luckily, my mum taught me that. Hilary Fraser Swallowfield, Berkshire • My recollections of home economics lessons are similar to Roz Treadway’s (Letters, 15 December) in that their use as a life tool is negligible. I was in a grammar school in the 1960s. Our domestic science teacher managed to fill a whole double period with teaching us girls how to wash a hairbrush and comb. Ann Craven Newcastle upon Tyne • George Redman (Letters, 14 December) says cookery would have been more useful than Latin in his 1950s education. I was fortunate in my 60s education to learn basic cookery in our mandatory school combined cadet force. I was also taught how to kill Germans, which, fortunately – like my Latin education – I have not needed very much. John Beer Farnham, Surrey • I have to disagree with George Redman. Burnt rock cakes and soggy sponges are no competition for a lifelong savouring of the richness of our beautiful language, its foundations partially rooted in Latin. Jeanette Hamilton Buxton, Derbyshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.My friend Charles Taylor, who has died aged 69 of a pulmonary embolism, was a barrister with a unique and combative personality, drive and an appetite for learning and helping others. He was the driving force behind the establishment in the 1970s of Chichester Chambers (now Pallant Chambers, a set enjoying many judicial appointments), which he developed with single-mindedness and exceptional professional skill. As a barrister he far preferred a contest where he could bring his powers of oratory and cross-examination to bear, rather than less rewarding pleas in mitigation. He appeared in all courts, from magistrates’ to the House of Lords, and was known for his courageous tenacity, not least in pressing on with a line of argument against clear opposition from the bench, often resulting in surprising success, and creation of case law. Born to Leonard, a technical draughtsman, and Phyllis (nee Emerson), a housewife, he was educated in Gerrards Cross, and then at a secondary modern school in Bognor following his father’s relocation. He learned Latin to a very high standard and proved that such an education was no barrier to a very successful career. Charles arrived at Hull University sporting bow ties, which, although he soon set them aside, reappeared as something of a trademark as he went on to train as a barrister and to do his pupillage in Brighton. After being called to the bar in 1975 he worked out of chambers in London until settling in Chichester. His remarkable intellect, exceptional breadth and depth of knowledge, and ability to assimilate information were always apparent in his work, although his delight in flexing his intellectual muscle was not always seen by others as an endearing quality, and he never did manage to master the art of tact as fully as might have benefited his career. He stood, twice, as a Labour parliamentary candidate, in the strongly Conservative seat of Arundel and South Downs. His abiding sporting passion was tennis, which, despite a debilitating accident in 1994, he played to the end with a particularly devastating and powerful serve. In retirement from 2013 he continued to use his skills in assisting others, doing pro bono legal work and fighting determinedly (with great personal effort but no reward) for people who were otherwise unrepresented or oppressed. He had great success and changed many lives for the better. Additionally he wrote a deeply considered book, The God Conclusion (2018), encouraging the reader to reawaken their personal sense of spiritual awareness and purpose. The work is an impressive, readable piece, with extensive footnotes drawing on his own vast breadth of reading. He is survived by his sons, Leo and Jack, their mother, Liz (from whom he divorced in 2009), and his sister, Penny.Emma Beddington’s assessment of Christmas carols (Schmaltzy, saccharine or sinister? A brief guide to the worst Christmas carols, 15 December) will be on my mind when leading services in the coming days. Away in a Manger always jarred with me because a silent baby Jesus (“no crying he makes”), while inspiring familiarity and nostalgia, renders the story unrelatable. A carol about sleep deprivation and parental angst might not provide escapism, but it would be believable. Rev Ryan Service Banbury, Oxfordshire • I enjoyed Emma Beddington’s witty romp through Christmas carols, which managed to be both thoughtful and amusing, as well as knowledgable. There was one historical inaccuracy: she imagines the author of Once in Royal David’s City penning the objectionable lines “Christian children all must be / Mild, obedient, good as he” while an urchin “cleaned his chimney”. In fact, the author in question was female: the redoubtable Mrs CF Alexander. She was also responsible for the equally schmaltzy There is a Green Hill Far Away, which led my aunt as a little girl to empathise sorrowfully with the unfortunate Painsy in the second verse, whose mysterious sufferings “we may not know, we cannot tell”. Prof Andrew Burn UCL Institute of Education • A lifelong Catholic, I share Emma Beddington’s likes and dislikes of Christmas carols, including the need for Strepsils, if you sing properly, and the terrible line in Once in Royal David’s City. For several years now, I have been singing “Christian children all must be / Happy, trusted, loved and free”, and grab this opportunity to spread my version. John Duffy Huddersfield, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.