The “race for space” between homebuyers has pushed up prices in some UK towns by about a fifth this year, with Taunton topping a list of areas with the biggest increases. The average price paid for a property in the Somerset town increased by £56,546 (21.8%) to £315,759 in the 12 months to October, according to figures from the mortgage lender Halifax. It said that while across the UK prices had risen by an average of 6.2%, in a handful of towns growth had been treble that, fuelled in part by buyers reassessing their priorities as a result of the pandemic. The lender includes London boroughs in its analysis of towns, and said none appeared in its table of the top 20 increases. In three – Westminster, Hammersmith and Fulham, and Islington – prices had fallen. There were also drops in Airdrie and Coatbridge in Scotland. The UK housing market has boomed since the first lockdown was eased, and this year it is expected to be the busiest since 2007. For many months, estate agents reported high demand for large homes outside cities, as buyers who were working from home sought more space and placed less importance on living close to the office. Stamp duty holidays across the UK also fuelled sales at the higher end of the market, where buyers could make the maximum tax saving. In England, the tax break on the first £500,000 of a property’s cost allowed buyers to save up to £15,000. Russell Galley, the managing director of Halifax, said: “As the county town of Somerset, this year’s house price winner, Taunton, has a lot to offer homebuyers with its high quality of life and great transport links to major towns and cities across the south-west. “Like Taunton, many of the areas that saw the biggest house price growth over the last year enjoy a combination of greater affordability and space compared to nearby cities.” Second to Taunton was Newark in the east Midlands, where average prices rose by 20% to £280,934, followed by Rochdale in Greater Manchester, where they increased by 18.5% to £206,098. Many of the towns that recorded big price increases were in the north of England, where prices were typically lower than the national average. Separate research by Yorkshire building society, which analysed Land Registry figures, showed a similar picture, with eight of the top 10 highest price rises recorded in local authority areas in the north of England or Scotland. Its strategic economist, Nitesh Patel, said the “extraordinary price growth” in many parts of the country had been driven by low borrowing costs, the return of low-deposit mortgages and falling unemployment, as well as stamp duty savings. However, he added, two impacts of the pandemic may be even stronger drivers. “Due to the restrictions and less travelling, many households saved more than they normally would have, estimated at around £170bn of ‘excess’ savings,” he said. “The second factor is the pandemic has encouraged a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to revaluate housing needs. Buyers are seeking out more space to work from home as well as more outdoor space.” Halifax’s figures showed that for Greater London as a whole, the average price of a home fell by 0.6% to £554,684. However, this disguised a mixed picture across the boroughs. The London borough with the biggest increase in prices was Enfield, where the average cost of a home went up by 6.8% to £512,135. Westminster in central London recorded the biggest fall in the UK, with the average price dropping by 6.9% to £738,088. “It is rare that no London boroughs appear amongst the areas of highest house price growth, but that is the case in 2021,” said Galley. “This shift echoes what we have seen from homebuyers over the last year – less focus on major cities and more demand in the suburbs and further afield.”Six new dinosaurs, an Indian beetle named after Larry the cat, and dozens of crustaceans critical to the planet’s carbon cycle were among 552 new species identified by scientists at the Natural History Museum this year. In 2021, researchers described previously unknown species across the tree of life, from a pair of giant carnivorous dinosaurs known as spinosaurs – nicknamed the “riverbank hunter” and “hell heron” – to five new snakes that include the Joseph’s racer, which was identified with the help of a 185-year-old painting. With international travel to field sites restricted, scientists at the London-based museum concentrated on describing existing collections and species that roamed the Earth millions of years ago. “It has been a fantastic year for the description of new dinosaurs, especially from the UK,” said Dr Susannah Maidment, a senior researcher in paleobiology at the museum, who helped describe some of the new finds. “Although we’ve known about the UK’s dinosaur heritage for over 150 years, the application of new techniques and new data from around the world is helping us to uncover a hidden diversity of British dinosaurs.” Spinosaurs were among four UK dinosaur species described by researchers alongside a new iguanodontian with an unusual snout from the Isle of Wight, and Pendraig milnerae, the earliest known carnivorous dinosaur from the UK. More than half of the new species identified at the museum this year were copepods, small shrimp-like creatures found in salt and fresh water. They form a large part of zooplankton on which krill, fish and other invertebrates feed, playing a vital role in the planet’s ecology and carbon cycle. Because of their abundance, copepods are among some of the biggest carbon sinks in the oceans. Scientists described 291 species this year, many from a collection created over six decades by French researchers Claude and Françoise Monniot. “Copepods are not only free-living but many are parasites, and they can be found living in virtually every other major animal group,” said Prof Geoff Boxshall, a researcher in the museum’s department of life sciences who identified the crustaceans with a South Korean colleague, Il-Hoi Kim. “The huge Monniot collection was made available to Il-Hoi Kim and myself, and as we are both recently retired, we theoretically had time to finally go through it. However, the collection was so enormous it was somewhat daunting – but then Covid-19 happened and completing the series of papers became my lockdown project.” Other newly identified species included 52 wasps, 13 moths, seven crabs, six flies and five amphipods. Beetles featured heavily, as they did in 2020, with 90 new species described. They included a pair of purple and green metallic beetles from India, a monochromatic beetle with a large pair of jaws from the Philippines, and a marsh-loving beetle named in honour of Larry the cat, the Downing Street mouser. A new bush-cricket from south-east Asia, known for its song before the animal had ever been seen, was finally determined to be a species found in Singapore – now known as Mecopoda simonodoi – a specimen of which has actually been sitting in the museum since 1984. Five new species of plants from eastern Africa were identified: known as jewelweeds or touch-me-nots, they usually produce delicate pink or white flowers, except for a few species which have switched to red flowers to attract birds rather than butterflies for pollination. As well as the plants, eight new species of algae, six parasitic worms and three diatoms – single-celled algae – were identified. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresNo 10 hired US lawyers to advise on the legal position of the US president, Bill Clinton, at the time of the Monica Lewinsky scandal before Tony Blair’s official 1998 visit to Washington, previously secret documents reveal. The British prime minister’s visit was overshadowed by Clinton’s relationship with the White House intern, with the UK’s US ambassador, Sir Christopher Meyer, describing Lewinsky in one cable as “the phantom at the feast”. As Downing Street put finishing touches to Blair’s programme, Clinton had famously denied “sexual relations with that woman, Miss Lewinsky” while the Drudge Report published allegations she had kept a stained dress. The developments led No 10 to quietly drop plans for Cherie Blair to attend a Washington meeting on the White House intern scheme during the visit. Philip Barton, Blair’s private secretary, wrote to Cherie’s adviser, Fiona Millar: “I have been reflecting on the impact of the latest allegations about a White House intern. Do you think it would be prudent to drop this part of the programme for now, in case the press gets wind of it?” A later memo, from Barton to the Washington embassy, noted: “For obvious reasons, we do not want a meeting on interns to appear in the programme.” Blair flew to Washington in February 1998 at the height of special prosecutor Kenneth Starr’s wide-ranging investigation into the conduct of Clinton and his wife, Hillary. Starr had originally been appointed to look into the Clintons’ financial dealings but his inquiry had been expanded to cover allegations of sexual harassment made by Paula Jones, an Arkansas state government employee, and claims the president had an affair with Lewinsky. A background briefing fax from John McInespie, a lawyer at the Washington law firm Sutherland, Asbill &amp; Brennan LLP, on Clinton’s legal position. It said: “So far our people say that there is no ‘smoking gun’ to charge Clinton with anything, but that might not be the case by the time of the forthcoming visit of the prime minister.” It added if Lewinsky stuck to her original affidavit, denying she and Clinton had sexual relations, then “all she has to do is face the embarrassment of being branded a “bullshitter – (a term of art)”, but if her lawyer got her full immunity, “this strategy is highly dangerous to President Clinton”. The White House was grateful when Blair, at a joint White House press conference, publicly praised Clinton as “someone I am proud to call not just a colleague, but a friend”. Meyer noted in a feedback cable: “The tension shown by Clinton and his staff before the press conference was matched only by their relief afterwards. Clinton was at his Houdini best.” Meyer added that Jim Steinberg, the deputy national security adviser, told him: “Your prime minister didn’t have to say what he did at the press conference. We owe you big time.” Meyer added: “The task will be to call in the debt at the right time.” In another memo from Meyer to the Foreign Office, he said he had visited George W Bush in Texas, then considering running for president. “Bush admitted that, apart from Mexico, he did not know much about international affairs and that he would do well to broaden his experience,” Meyer wrote. Bush would go on to serve two terms as president between 2001 and 2009. Bush remarked Blair “seemed like a good fellow”, Meyer added. “As the only other Labour politician he appeared to have heard of was Michael Foot, I offered a rapid potted history of how Labour had moved on since then.”André Onana had a headache. He had landed in the small hours on a flight back from Bergamo where Ajax had drawn 2-2 with Atalanta and didn’t sleep much. When he woke, his head still hurt. Training wasn’t for a few hours, so rather than wait until he arrived at De Toekomst, Ajax’s training base, he took a paracetamol from the medicine box in the kitchen and got on with it. After the session he was called to another routine drugs test, his third in a week. He didn’t think anything of it. Not then, anyway. He could be forgiven for thinking of nothing else since. “Football is not a game of humanity,” Onana says. He has been talking for over an hour and it is the only thing he says in English. He speaks without melodrama or rancour and with a dignity – an acceptance, even – that is disconcerting. It is also partly practised; an exercise in exigency, in self-control and survival. It was October 2020 and it could have been the end. Two days later the analysis arrived, the goalkeeper informed when he was with Cameroon: he had tested positive, one of very few footballers found guilty of doping. An international at 20, a Europa League finalist at 21, a Champions League semi-finalist at 23, leader of a brilliant young Ajax team on course for the title, now a hugely promising career seemed on the edge of collapse. He was 24. It didn’t make sense. Ajax’s chief executive, Edwin van der Sar, said the penny dropped when they went to Onana’s house and looked through the box: “Then we understood.” Instead of Litacold, he had accidentally taken Lasimac, a Furosemide-based diuretic. Prescribed to his wife after giving birth, Furosemide is a banned substance. The blister packs looked the same, the pills did too – little white circles, barely 6mm in diameter. The tiniest thing, the biggest impact. “It’s incredible: 40mg can destroy a career,” he says. That’s Onana’s version, and it is one Uefa accepted. They concluded there had been no attempt to cheat but banned him anyway, beginning in February this year. “I’m just a number,” he says. “They can’t deal case by case. I think they should but there are rules and the rules are the rules. The doctors said [Furosemide] is for water-retention and doesn’t benefit you. They recognised it was a genuine mistake but you’re responsible for everything in your body. If I buy a bottle of water that turns out to be contaminated, it’s my responsibility. If you accidentally kill someone driving, the law says …” But you didn’t kill anyone, I point out. “Yeah, but you have to be careful,” Onana replies. “There’s a ‘minster’, and he punishes you. It’s a human error.” “Look, a few days ago something happened,” Onana adds, referencing the botched Champions League draw. “Even the biggest make mistakes.” There’s a smile but if there’s a temptation to tear into Uefa he never succumbs, even though 12 months meant missing “league, Champions League, cup, Super Cup, an Africa Nations at home”. A career derailed. In June, the court of arbitration for sport found “no significant fault” and reduced Onana’s sentence to nine months, but the impact is felt longer. It is not just the games, or even just the football: there is something cruel, almost vindictive about it, the player as non-person, isolated and alone, the game carrying on without him. They don’t call, tell you they’ll wait, that there is a place when you get back? “No,” Onana says. “Football’s not like that. When you’re banned you can’t set foot on the [club’s training] pitch, can’t go into the dressing room. We [Ajax] were league champions. I had played 60% of the games and I wasn’t allowed to celebrate it. Some things in life don’t depend on you and you just have to be pragmatic. “As soon as we found out, we put together a team. Seven people. It’s not easy to find a coach who’s not working. You find your psychologist, a fitness coach, a physio, a nutritionist, a place to work, live. I went to Salou. You have to focus on what’s important – the people you love and that love you – and prepare as best you can.” He goes on: “You can’t even use the African Nations as motivation, a target, because logic says you won’t get there. Football turns its back. I was just trying to survive, come back better. Try to always see the positive side. But sometimes you can’t. As a goalkeeper it’s difficult: you go, someone else plays. There are moments you think about giving in. I was lucky: I have good people. If that happens and you’re alone you’re going to give up. You won’t have the will to go through it. “It’s the way you’re perceived, too. It’s ‘doping’: you’re a ‘drug addict’. How are you going to explain to your parents that you’ve tested positive when you’ve never smoked or drunk?” Onana draws a label on his forehead. “How do you get rid of this here? There will still be people who think [I’m guilty]. People don’t always have time to be informed. The police stopped me in Belgium. The normal thing: ‘Documents?’ When I show my identity card, one of them recognises me. ‘Mr Onana, get out of the car.’ They check the whole car. The whole thing. I hear one say: ‘This guy takes loads of drugs.’” Onana bursts out laughing. “That did hurt. I’m laughing now but the only reason I didn’t end up in a fight is they were policemen. If not, I’m getting out and …” Onana puts his fists up. “Where are you going with that written here?” he continues, signalling his head again. “I’ve come back but if it happens to someone less strong mentally it would be very difficult.” Onana is strong, all right. He has had to be. Born in the tiny village of Nkol Ngok, population barely 400, he was discovered at a competition run by the Samuel Eto’o foundation in Yaoundé, joined Barcelona at 14, slept in a bedroom inside Camp Nou, went to Ajax at 18. Football, he admits, can be a solitary game, players scared. “But it’s our job. We’re here to ‘entertain’ the people. It seems [people think] we don’t have feelings sometimes.” *** He tells of his fear upon reaching the Europa League final still a “kid” and the support from Van der Sar. “I couldn’t have had a better godfather,” he says. “Goalkeeper is a deceptive position. From the outside, you can’t understand how much pressure there is. An example: Stockholm, the Europa League final. Six months earlier I’d been second-team keeper, in grounds of 3,000. It’s one game. Against [Manchester] United. The repercussion. The whole world watching. I get there and tell the coach I can’t play, I don’t feel right. Van der Sar gives an interview: ‘Tell André I haven’t brought gloves, so he plays.’ I wake up and see that. That really helped me. “We lost because we were very young. This guy is ill, that one doesn’t feel well, we’re all looking at the floor, scared. But we only lost on small details and after I said to myself: never again will I feel fear in football. That helped me handle the pressure in the years that followed.” Which didn’t make them easy. When Ajax were denied a place in the 2019 Champions League final in the most heartbreaking of circumstances against Tottenham, he says Amsterdam felt like it was in “the second world war: no one talked, everyone cried” and he still couldn’t tell you who scored in the final. He was on a flight determined not to know. It hurt too much. “But you learn, you grow stronger.” Onana says. In November, ban served, he played for Cameroon against Malawi and the Ivory Coast and for Ajax against Besiktas, reward for his resistance, a new start. Now he has joined Common Goal, collaborating with a project for blind orphans in his native country. “I can’t change their lives entirely but maybe I can help them be a little happier. After the year I’ve had I wanted to end with a good feeling.” There is a sense of beginning again, cruelty overcome if never gone, opportunity ahead, that solitary work worthwhile. In the summer, he will join Internazionale and he is available for the hosts of next month’s Africa Cup of Nations. The Cas ruling gave him a chance, although inactivity means nothing is guaranteed. In his absence Remko Pasveer became Ajax’s first choice and three games is not much preparation. “The coach can always say: ‘Listen, the other guy is playing regularly, and you ...’” Onana says. “If I play it’s an honour. It was strange playing again; I was nervous. But it depends what you’ve been doing for nine months. I was ready from the first day. “Football is a ‘game’, but when there is so much at stake there’s not much humanity. Being banned is not a good thing but you learn so much, find out who really matters in your life. It helped me work on other aspects: more time to train, watch it back, make corrections. When I returned, I got on the scales, shirt off, and they said: ‘Bloody hell, you didn’t look like that when you went away.’ They’re happy for me. A lot said: ‘André, if that happened to me, I would have let myself go’. But when it gets tough you have to get even tougher.”Hospitals have been asked to identify sites for up to 4,000 emergency beds to deal with a potential wave of Omicron admissions in England, as cases hit a record 183,000. On Wednesday, more than 10,000 patients were in hospital with Covid, a figure not reached since March. NHS England confirmed that it was creating new small-scale “Nightingale” facilities with up to 100 beds each at eight hospitals across the country. The health service said it had asked trusts to identify empty spaces to accommodate beds in places such as gyms or teaching areas. NHS managers are aiming to create up to 4,000 beds as surge capacity if needed, with work on the first tranche, in temporary structures, starting this week. A number of huge temporary hospitals, called the “Nightingales”, were built in exhibition halls in the first wave of the pandemic but were dismantled without being used to capacity. The new approach will ask for surge capacity to be built in the grounds of hospitals to make it easier for staff to move between new and old sites and keep patients closer to diagnostics and emergency care. The first sites will be at Preston, Leeds, Birmingham, Leicester, Stevenage, St George’s in London, Ashford and Bristol. There are currently almost 90,000 adult acute and general beds available in England, with occupancy at about 90% on 19 December. The announcement came as new data showed there were 10,462 people in hospital in England with Covid as of Wednesday, although it is still unclear how many were admitted with the disease and how many are there for another reason while also testing positive. The number of patients on mechanical ventilation has remained fairly stable in recent weeks and even reduced since November. On Wednesday the number of deaths reported was 57. Boris Johnson returned from his Christmas break at Chequers on Wednesday with a visit to a vaccine centre to urge people to get their booster jabs, saying up to 90% of people in intensive care had not received their third dose. He said people should celebrate New Year’s Eve but called on them to exercise caution and take tests. The prime minister also warned that Omicron continued to “cause real problems” even though it was “obviously milder than the Delta variant”. The NHS has called on people to have a “jabby new year”, highlighting research from the Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre (ICNARC) that found that at the start of last month about three out of five patients in London’s intensive care units had not received a jab, a figure that it said was rising. Prof Stephen Powis, the NHS national medical director, said the health service hoped never to have to use the surge beds but added: “Given the high level of Covid-19 infections and increasing hospital admissions, the NHS is now on a war footing.” Sajid Javid, the health secretary, also said it was “absolutely right that we prepare for all scenarios and increase capacity”. With the government still concerned about the possibility that the high case numbers of Omicron could overwhelm the NHS, Johnson is holding off from cutting the Covid isolation period to five days for those without symptoms. The prime minister has come under pressure to reduce the UK’s isolation period again, after the US decided to halve it for those without symptoms from five to 10 days as long as they wear a mask in public. England reduced its quarantine period from 10 to seven days last week if people test negative by lateral flow, but some other countries around the world are now looking at going further. Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at Oxford University and the government’s life sciences adviser, has indicated support for a shorter isolation period “if it was supported by lateral flow data”. A No 10 source said everything was “kept under review” but insisted that there were “no immediate plans” to revise the quarantine period again so soon. Several Tory backbenchers called on the government to consider a move similar to the US. Andrew Bridgen urged Johnson to reduce the isolation period, saying the biggest threat to the NHS was “forced absentees due to self-isolation”. David Davis, the former Brexit secretary, said a five-day isolation period followed by a lateral flow test “sounded sensible” for Omicron cases. “If the Americans are doing it, the question is why are we not doing it, not why we should,” he said. Davis also called on the government to make sure it has enough doses of therapies such as Paxlovid that can reduce the risk of hospitalisation in severe Covid cases and to improve data on how many people are in hospital because of the coronavirus, rather than for another condition while also testing positive for the virus. Lee Anderson, a 2019 intake Tory backbencher, said “all options to get people back to work quicker should be looked at”. Another MP added said “isolation could be a bigger issue than actual illness” and they would “support a review at the very least”. Chloe Smith, the minister for disabled people, health and work, said on Wednesday there were “no current plans in England to change the period” for isolation. She told BBC Breakfast on Wednesday: “Of course, we have actually only recently taken it down from 10 to seven, and we want to look at that – we want to make sure that that is working as we believe it ought to. We think the current period, therefore, is the right one, so we haven’t any plans to change that further.” NHS managers have said they are as worried about the impact on patient care of staff shortages from people having to isolate as they are about surging admissions from Covid. The chief executive of NHS Providers, Chris Hopson,said the effect of greater social mixing over Christmas was still to come. He told BBC Breakfast: “We’re now seeing a significant increase in the level of staff absences, and quite a few of our chief executives are saying that they think that that’s probably going to be a bigger problem and a bigger challenge for them than necessarily the number of people coming in who need treatment because of Covid.” In response to the new Nightingale sites, Hopson said it “must be the right ‘no regrets later’ move to make these preparations now” but highlighted the difficulty of staffing them. “Given the other pressures on the NHS and the current level of staff absences, staffing this capacity would be a major challenge,” he said. “But co-location on existing hospital sites maximises the NHS’s ability to meet that challenge.” • This article was amended on 30 December 2021. England reduced its quarantine period from 10 to seven days under some circumstances last week, not “the UK” as an earlier version said.Downing Street initially opposed allowing the landmark Stephen Lawrence inquiry to examine police relations with minority ethnic communities, arguing that to do so would only raise unrealistic hopes for real change. The Macpherson inquiry eventually concluded that the Metropolitan police was institutionally racist, providing a watershed moment in race relations in the UK. But newly released Cabinet papers show Tony Blair wanted to treat the racist murder as an individual incident and to search for lessons to be learned for future investigations of racist killings. The papers show No 10 believed the then home secretary, Jack Straw, should focus on what they saw as “achievable and appropriate” goals in order to ensure the support of the police. “I had originally contemplated a review to consider whether the events subsequent to the murder held any general lessons for the investigation and prosecution of serious racially motivated crimes,” Straw wrote to Blair on 8 June 1997. “Since then, however, the solicitors for the Lawrence family have made a formal complaint to the commissioner of the Metropolitan police about the way in which the case was handled. An investigation supervised by the Police Complaints Authority has begun, and this makes it inadvisable for another inquiry into the case to run simultaneously. “That said, however, there is clear disquiet, not least within the black community, about the issues raised by this case. I believe that the best way to address these, and draw something positive from this tragic case, would be to launch a broader inquiry into police relationships with ethnic minority communities generally.” In the note, Straw appeared to try to head off claims the inquiry would constitute an attack on the police, telling Blair: “I am concerned that this should not be perceived as undermining the police but as an opportunity to identify and promote good practice.” A handwritten note in the margin, apparently for the attention of Blair’s policy adviser Liz Lloyd read: “Is this sensible?” The response, signed “Liz” and dated 11 June, read: “No.” In a typed-up note to Blair’s chief of staff, Jonathan Powell, sent the same day, Lloyd wrote: “I do not think that another wide-ranging review is the best way forward. It will raise expectations that we will not be able to achieve on one hand, and even with good presentation look like an attack on the police on the other. “I much prefer JS’s original proposal, which was to consider ‘whether the events subsequent to the [Lawrence] murder held any general lessons for the investigation and prosecution of serious racially motivated crime’. “I would therefore suggest that JS focuses his review on changes which are achievable and appropriate. It is vital that the police are signed up to the principle of the review, even if they are not in the lead.” The Macpherson report, launched by Straw about a month later, found institutional racism within Scotland Yard and called for widespread changes in the way public bodies across many different fields interact with communities of colour. Its authors said the debate about policing and racism had been transformed by the inquiry, “and that the debate thus ignited must be carried forward”. Downing Street’s pessimistic view of the inquiry’s prospects was detailed in Cabinet Office papers released to the National Archives under the 20-year rule. The files also show that Blair blocked proposals for an ambitious race equality strategy proposed by Straw as Macpherson prepared to publish his report. Straw wanted to publish a government white paper with a 10-year strategy for tackling racial inequality. He set out his proposals in a letter to the prime minister in December 1998 – before the inquiry’s expected report early the following year. He said he wanted to announce a white paper setting a commitment by all government departments to put race equality at the heart of policymaking. “At the extreme, black and Asian youngsters have observed their grandparents and parents suffer discrimination, harassment and racial violence and are developing very hardened attitudes against the white community. We have to win back their confidence in the institutions of British society,” he warned. But Blair was sceptical from the outset, expressing concern that it could result in a “regulation nightmare”. And Angus Lapsley, an official in the prime minister’s private office, said they were “cool” towards a suggestion that racist police officers should usually be dismissed, fearing the reaction of rightwing newspapers. “This could easily become a ‘Telegraph’ cause celebre if taken too far,” he noted. Blair indicated that he agreed and wrote: “We do not want to go OTT on this.” The proposal was finally killed off at a meeting between Blair and Straw on 18 March 1999. A spokesman for the Tony Blair Institute for Global Change said: “The government took a whole raft of actions, including on recruitment, and in fact implemented the Macpherson report.”British workers facing soaring costs of living in 2022 need a bigger pay rise after a “lost decade” of wage growth under Conservative-led governments, the head of the Trades Union Congress has said. In her new year’s message, Frances O’Grady urged ministers to take immediate steps to encourage faster pay growth across the British economy amid soaring energy bills and other costs. Issuing a challenge to Boris Johnson, she said his government could not “sit this wages crisis out” after cutting benefits and announcing plans for a tax raid on workers next year. “After decades of real wage cuts and falling living standards, no one can seriously say working people don’t deserve a pay rise,” she said. “That’s my priority, and the priority of the whole union movement, in 2022. The prime minister should shape up and make it his priority too.” O’Grady’s message comes as pressure mounts on the government over living costs and the highest inflation rate in a decade, amid warnings that the Tories’ tax and spending plans will further damage living standards. The Resolution Foundation said on Wednesday that 2022 was set to be “the year of the squeeze” as households faced a £1,200 hit to their incomes from stalling wages, higher tax, and rising energy bills. Highlighting the financial stress on working families, O’Grady said successive Tory-led governments had failed to get wages rising for the past 11 years. “We are still in the longest period of pay stagnation since the Napoleonic wars. Real wages for millions are less than they were before the bankers’ crisis in 2008,” she said. Analysis by the TUC showed that workers would be £500 a year better off if real wages grew at pre-financial crisis rates between now and 2026. However, it warned inflation-adjusted pay was on track to rise by just £150 a year instead. It found that if real pay growth seen before the 2008 crash had been maintained, workers would have been about £8,000 better off today in real terms. O’Grady said ministers needed to work with unions to develop a “long-term economic plan”, including the use of fair pay agreements, whereby the government brings together worker and employer representatives to set minimum pay, terms and conditions for particular sectors. “Fair pay agreements work all over the world. And they could work here too. They are a sensible, modern solution to the problems of staff shortages, low skills, and low pay. And they will stop a race to the bottom on pay and conditions,” she said. O’Grady said other measures were also required, including an immediate increase in the national living wage to £10 an hour, a ban on zero-hours contracts, outlawing fire and rehire tactics, and ending outsourcing. The current national living wage of £8.91 an hour will increase to £9.50 from April. She added: “If I have one message for this government at the start of 2022, it is this: Britain needs a pay rise.”Pep Guardiola refused to write off the title credentials of Chelsea and Liverpool, despite his Manchester City team extending their commanding lead at the top of the Premier League. City’s 1-0 win at Brentford, courtesy of an early Phil Foden winner, took full advantage of Liverpool’s loss at Leicester on Tuesday and Brighton snatching a late point at Chelsea in Wednesday’slast night’s earlier match. “There are many games to go,” said Guardiola, whose City team appear on course for a fourth title in five seasons. “We are eight points in front but there are 54 still to play for and many tough games still to play. “I’m not going to believe anyone who says it’s already done. The teams we have with Chelsea and Liverpool are more than exceptional. One is a European champion and Liverpool have been our big rival in the last three or four years.” Foden’s winner in a tight match at the Community Stadium made it 10 successive Premier League wins, a pace City’s chasers have struggled to cope with. “We have the distance not because they dropped points but because we won 10 in a row. But there are 54 points still to play for,” Guardiola said. The restoration of Foden and Jack Grealish to the starting lineup after some pre-Christmas hijinks were punished had the desired effect, at least for Foden. Playing as a false nine he had the ball in the net again in the second half, only to fall foul of VAR. “Phil has always been outstanding,” said Guardiola. “He’s a guy who can play in different positions at an exceptional level. We had no doubts about that. Did he have anything to prove? Absolutely not.” This season at Brentford, Arsenal have lost, Liverpool could only draw 3-3 and Chelsea been given a scare by Thomas Frank’s battling team, and Guardiola was relieved to escape with three points ahead of Saturday’s visit to fourth-placed Arsenal. “Just look at the results Brentford have done this season. It has been so tight. They are exceptional at what they do and that’s why the game we played was perfect today,” added Guardiola. City, who play Arsenal next, have another quick turnaround after two games in three days over the Christmas period. “We come back to Manchester tonight, arrive late, recover as much as possible because at 12.30 on 1 January we have another game,” Guardiola said.Virtual assistants can set timers for people, play music, control smart home devices, respond to voice commands and set up reminders. As of Sunday, they have also proven their ability to challenge children to lethal dares. Alexa, Amazon’s virtual assistant, recently advised a 10-year-old girl to touch a penny to a live plug socket after she asked the Echo smart speaker for a challenge. “My 10-year-old just asked Alexa on our Echo for a challenge and this is what she said,” said user Kristin Livdahl in a tweet on Sunday. She accompanied the caption with a screenshot of Alexa’s response. “Here’s something I found on the web. According to ourcommunitynow.com, the challenge is simple: plug in a phone charger about halfway into a wall outlet, then touch a penny to the exposed prongs,” read Alexa’s response. The challenge began circulating on TikTok around a year ago and often results in the person getting an electric shock, along with potential fires and serious lifelong injuries. Users were quick to express their shock and dismay at the tweet, which has since garnered 17,000 likes and more than 3,000 retweets. One user tweeted: “Omg that’s horrible.” Others poked fun at the incident. One said: “Clearly AMZN’s algorithm realize that by suggesting this challenge customers will later have to buy a lot of stuff to replace everything after the house burned down.” Another user said: “What did you expect when you outsourced parenting to an AI?” Amazon said they have since resolved the issue. A spokesperson told CNN: “Customer trust is at the center of everything we do and Alexa is designed to provide accurate, relevant, and helpful information to customers. “As soon as we became aware of this error, we quickly fixed it, and will continue to advance our systems to help prevent similar responses in the future.”Eurotunnel is warning British citizens who live in the EU that they cannot travel through France by car from the UK due to new coronavirus restrictions imposed by the French government. Getlink, the operator of the Channel rail link, issued an urgent warning on its website and Twitter page on Wednesday evening that appeared to confirm that the French government had changed its travel rules. The statement read: “Following a French Government decision, on 28/12/2021, unless they hold French residency, British citizens are now considered 3rd country citizens and can no longer transit France by road to reach their country of residence in the EU.” The French government tightened restrictions on travel from the UK on 18 December following a surge of Omicron cases in Britain. France now only allows travel from the UK for “compelling reasons”. According to the French travel guidance, “nationals of the European Union or equivalent”, as well as their partners and children, “who have their main residence in France or who join, in transit through France, their main residence in a country of the European Union” are considered to have a compelling reason for travelling from the UK through France. According to French officials, British citizens who have a residence in another EU country, such as Belgium, Germany, Spain or Italy, will be required to show proof of their residence, such as a residency permit, tax forms or utility bills. The French government is yet to make an official announcement about the latest change to the rules. But the Eurotunnel statement said the ban did not apply to British people living in France, or people from the UK that also hold an EU passport through dual nationality.Fanging it down an outback road when he is rammed by a truck driver from hell, Jamie Dornan experiences a terrible accident that gives him amnesia – making him forget about all that bondage paraphernalia from Fifty Shades of Grey. In the explosively entertaining six-part series The Tourist, created and written by Harry and Jack Williams, the Irish actor and former Hugo Boss and Calvin Klein studmuffin plays a louche loner who can’t remember who is he, what he is doing in Australia or why he appears to have “kill me” stamped figuratively speaking across his forehead. Dornan joins a coterie of famous foreign actors who have been plonked in the thick of arid, unforgiving Australian land and left to fry in the sun for our dramatic amusement. See also: Gary Bond in Wake in Fright, who drank a lot of beer and went mad; Dennis Hopper in Mad Dog Morgan, who drank a lot of moonshine and went mad; Johnathon Schaech in Welcome to Woop Woop, who spent a lot of time with the locals and went mad; and soon to be Zac Efron in Gold, who, the trailer suggests, finds gold in them thar desert and then goes mad. Come to think of it, Dornan’s character in The Tourist – billed as “The Man” – is pretty sane compared with these rather rabid fellows. He’s like Guy Pearce in Memento in that he’s determined but displaced (in this instance geographically as well as mentally) and constantly banging against the walls of his own mind. If the whole being rammed into near-oblivion wasn’t enough, “The Man” is also a mite concerned when, after meeting the friendly and charming Luci (Shalom Brune-Franklin) at a diner, there appears to be another (rather spectacular) attempt on his life. The show’s central mystery has something to do with a man who has been buried alive and calls “The Man” from inside a barrel, begging to be found post-haste. Director Chris Sweeney (who helmed episodes one to three, with Daniel Nettheim steering the others) shoves a camera inside a tight coffin-esque space, evoking memories of Ryan Reynolds in Buried. A big, beefy, cowboy shirt-wearing villain emerges in Billy (Ólafur Darri Ólafsson), who whistles cheerfully but with absolute menace, his merry tune a harbinger of impending doom. In the series’ second half, Alex Dimitriades emerges as another prominent bad guy, hamming it up in super-villain style. Certain characters aren’t who they say they are, though that does not apply to Helen Chambers – a fair dinkum what-you-see-is-what-you-get probationary constable battling with low self-esteem. She is superbly portrayed by Danielle Macdonald (who played the gossip columnist Lillian Roxon in I am Woman), bringing loads of colour and detail to what could have been the simple sweet hick. Macdonald’s performance vividly contrasts with the rough and tough Dornan – also perfect in a high-intensity role as a man who is something of a blank slate, frightened by who he is or who he may be. There are philosophical questions about identity to ponder – if viewers pause for a breather and stop chewing their nails – including to what extent each of us are defined by our past actions. There’s also an oddly good performance from the ever-reliable Damon Herriman, offsetting his recent menacing work by playing a detective inspector in a way that’s both funny weird and funny ha-ha, suiting the show’s quite dry approach to comedy. Many scenes are humorous in a cagey way, sans explicit signposting: at one point for instance we discover a traffic pile-up has been created by two turtles rooting in the middle of the road. Elsewhere, in the aftermath of an intense confrontation, in a shot one could imagine belonging to a Coen brothers movie, the show cuts to a framed picture on a wall bearing the following message: “LIFE IS MADE OF CHOICES. WIPE YOUR FEET OR SCRUB THE FLOOR.” The Tourist is very well shot by Ben Wheeler and Geoffrey Hall (who was also the cinematographer for Chopper, Red Dog: True Blue and Eden), with colour grading that’s a little off, a little sickly, as if the blues and greens (hard to find in arid outback) in particular have been poisoned from the inside. This is a clever way of visualising the feeling that something isn’t quite right. Sweeney and Nettheim (whose directorial work includes episodes of Halifax: Retribution, Tidelands and Line of Duty) establish a cracker pace that creeps, creeps, creeps up on you, then explodes with a great big thunderclap of action then creeps, creeps, creeps up again. The “bugger me dead, it’s hot!” action-thriller, as it shall henceforth be known, is by now very familiar, but The Tourist is different: a pulse-pounder that feels fresh despite many genre elements, particularly of the neo-noir variety. The show has a great forwards and backwards momentum, contrasting cliffhanger moments with questions about the past and the ambiguities therein. It’s a vision of Australiana that’s less “where the bloody hell are you?” than who the bloody hell are you, and what the bloody hell will happen next? And – summarising my personal response – bloody hell, this is good. • The Tourist streams in Australia on Stan from 2 January 2022. It airs in the UK on BBC One at 9pm on 1 January and is available to stream on BBC iPlayerDon’t Look Up, the latest celluloid offering from the writer-director Adam McKay, has become Netflix’s top film globally despite dividing critics and viewers. The film, a satire in which two scientists played by Leonardo DiCaprio and Jennifer Lawrence attempt to warn an indifferent world about a comet that threatens to destroy the planet, is an intentional allegory of the climate crisis. Despite a stellar cast also featuring Meryl Streep, Cate Blanchett, Mark Rylance, Jonah Hill and Timothée Chalamet, the movie has received a frosty reception from many film critics, including from this masthead. But the lukewarm critical reception contrasts sharply with the response from the film’s allegorical heroes: climate scientists and activists. David Ritter, chief executive of Greenpeace Asia Pacific, says he was struck by the sense of desperation portrayed by the film’s scientists, finding the parallel with the climate crisis “very, very powerful”. “There are tens or hundreds of thousands of people across the world who are scientists, activists, campaigners … giving their lives to this work,” Ritter said. “The sheer number of people who have asked me … what is wrong with our political leaders that they do not understand?” Prof Matthew England, co-founder of the Climate Change Research Centre at the University of New South Wales, said Don’t Look Up was a “brilliant film”. “It parodies our inaction to tackle climate change beautifully well, especially in relation to conservative government and the mainstream media,” England says. “I loved it and I understand a lot of climate scientists have the same reaction, whereas the mainstream media perhaps is feeling defensive because it is part of what is attacked in the film.” Daniel Bleakley, a Melbourne-based climate activist, agreed, saying he hoped the “fantastic film” would draw attention to media reporting of the climate crisis. “If we really want the broad public to start understanding the seriousness and urgency of the climate crisis, we need our media to be communicating it effectively.” Climate activists feel ‘heard’ after film’s release Bleakley said the film articulated a sense among climate activists of having their messages fall on deaf ears over many years. “I have heard from a number of activists that after watching the film … they’ve felt heard, they’ve felt recognised. “As activists and as climate scientists who truly understand the gravity and the seriousness and the urgency of the climate crisis – and the fact that every day counts – it’s almost surreal when you walk around in the world and see people going about their daily lives like everything’s completely normal.” Ritter disagrees with criticism that the film lacks nuance. “When someone says it was really heavy-handed, what were they talking about?,” he asks. “Were they talking about the subtle depiction of the way in which vested interests can institutionally corrupt the public good? Were they talking about the threat of unconstrained techno-optimistic capitalism?” “The use of the scenes of chaos and drama interspersed with the interaction of characters in a more quiet, reflective mode … I thought it was particularly striking and evocative of how one experiences a world that is grappling with the climate crisis.” “Don’t listen to the reviews,” Ritter added. “Watch the film – make your own mind up.” The Guardian’s critics have described the film as a “laboured, self-conscious and unrelaxed satire”, and a “toothless comedy” that comes from a “position of lofty superiority that would drive away any partisans who still need to be won over”. Don’t Look Up currently has a rating of 55% on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes with an audience score of 77%.Australians may have to receive two or even three Covid jabs each year to maintain defences against the virus if early results on the efficacy of booster shots turn out to be a useful guide. Weekly data published just before Christmas by the UK’s Health Security Agency shows the effectiveness of both the Pfizer and Moderna boosters against symptomatic diseases is lower for the Omicron than the Delta variant across all periods after the injection. The analysis included 147,597 Delta and 68,489 Omicron cases in the UK. The agency stressed the “results should be interpreted with caution due to the low counts and the possible biases related to the populations with highest exposure to Omicron (including travellers and their close contacts) which cannot fully be accounted for”. The UK data showed both Pfizer and Moderna boosters had 90% effectiveness against symptomatic diseases from the Delta variant up to at least nine weeks. By contrast, efficacy against the Omicron strain was about 30% lower, and appeared to drop away further after nine weeks. Israel has already begun administering a second booster dose to follow the original three-dose treatment, and at least one US medical centre is considering recommending staff have a second booster. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Medical experts in Australia said results beyond the 12-week dataset would be needed to get a longer term picture. Jaya Dantas, a professor of international health at Curtin University, said it was still early days for the understanding of the efficacy of the vaccinations but “it appears that there might be a need for regular boosters”. “You might need boosters, say maybe two a year or three a year,” Dantas said, with elderly people more likely to be in line for a triple annual dose. The virus has so far spawned 11 variants, with Delta and now Omicron the most contagious. Ten of those strains had emerged in developing parts of the world. “We have vaccine inequity,” Dantas said, with the gap likely to widen as booster demand grows in wealthier nations. “So many parts of Africa have not even had one single dose, or they’ve had very low levels of a single dose.” Michael Lydeamore, an infectious disease modeller at Monash University, said it was reassuring from the UK study that “no matter what your initial first two vaccine doses were – so either AstraZeneca, Pfizer or Moderna – you get basically the same protection” from the Pfizer or Moderna booster. “That’s really important, because we know the AstraZeneca protection is a bit lower to start with than Pfizer,” Lydeamore said “But both go up to about the same level after a booster, so that’s really good.” As of Thursday just over 2 million Australians had received a single booster – 8.3% of the total population. Last week the federal government agreed to cut the minimum interval between second dose and booster from five to four months on 4 January, and then to three months on 31 January, making millions more people eligible in coming weeks.Armed police in Jingxi, in southern China, have paraded four alleged violators of Covid rules through the streets, state media reported, a practice that was banned but which has resurfaced in the struggle to enforce a zero-Covid policy. The four men were accused of smuggling people across China’s closed borders, and on Tuesday they were led through the streets wearing hazmat suits and bearing placards showing their name and photos. The state-run Guangxi daily reported the action was designed to deter “border-related crimes”. A common practice during the Cultural Revolution, public shaming has long since been banned in China, and the Communist party-affiliated Beijing News said the Jingxi incident “seriously violates the spirit of the rule of law and cannot be allowed to happen again”. The Global Times newspaper said that the courts and the Ministry of Public Security had issued various orders since the 1980s to ban the parading of criminal suspects, noting that officials themselves could now be punished. The most recent notice was issued by the ministry in February last year after a man in Hebei Province was tied to a tree for going out to buy cigarettes during lockdown. Social media posts on the topic had received more than 350m views and more than 30,000 comments by Wednesday night, it reported. China is taking strict measures, including sweeping lockdowns affecting millions of citizens, to deal with a rise in cases. The nation reported 203 new daily cases on Wednesday, and one of the world’s largest memory chip makers, Micron Technology, said that ongoing restrictions in the city of Xi’an could lead to delays in the global supply of its DRAM memory chips. The World Health Organization (WHO), meanwhile, has cautioned against reducing Covid isolation times as a “tsunami” of cases driven by the Omicron variant threatens to overwhelm health systems around the world. The highly transmissible variant propelled the US, France and Denmark to fresh records on Wednesday, with AFP’s tally of 6.55 million infections reported globally in the space of seven days through to Tuesday, demonstrating the unprecedented spread. The figures were the highest since the WHO declared a pandemic in March 2020, underscoring the blistering pace of Omicron transmission, with tens of millions of people facing a second consecutive year of restrictions dampening New Year’s Eve celebrations. “I am highly concerned that Omicron, being more transmissible, circulating at the same time as Delta, is leading to a tsunami of cases,” said WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. “This is and will continue to put immense pressure on exhausted health workers, and health systems on the brink of collapse.” The surge, currently worst in Europe, is forcing governments to walk a tightrope between imposing restrictions designed to stop hospitals from becoming overwhelmed and the need to keep economies and societies open two years after the virus first emerged in late 2019. Spain said it would shorten the quarantine for positive cases from 10 to seven days, after US health authorities on Monday halved the recommended isolation time for people with asymptomatic infections from 10 to five days. The WHO’s guidelines on quarantine are, for symptomatic patients, 10 days after symptom onset, plus at least three additional days without symptoms; and for asymptomatic cases, 10 days after a positive test. “There is some data to suggest that the incubation period for Omicron may be shorter, but there will still be a very wide range,” WHO emergencies director Michael Ryan told a news conference. “It would be advisable at this point if we don’t see huge shifts, huge moves in reducing control measures for Covid-19 purely on the basis of initial or preliminary studies. Ryan described “a trade-off between the science and being absolutely perfect in what you try to do, but then having the minimal disruption that you can possibly have to your economy and society – and governments are struggling to find that balance”. The US, where Omicron is already overwhelming hospitals, recorded its highest-ever seven-day average of new cases at 265,427, according Johns Hopkins University. Harvard epidemiologist and immunologist Michael Mina tweeted that the count was probably just the “tip of the iceberg” with the true number of cases likely far higher, because of a shortage of tests. But the country also appears to be experiencing a decoupling between infections and severe outcomes compared to previous waves, officials noted, as evidence accumulates of milder cases under the new variant. France registered a new daily record of more than 200,000 cases – more than double the number recorded on Christmas Day – and extended into January the closure of nightclubs. French police said that wearing face masks outdoors will become compulsory again in Paris from Friday for everyone over age 11 except those inside vehicles, cyclists, users of two-wheeled transport such as scooters, and those participating in sports. Denmark, which has the world’s highest rate of infection per person, recorded a fresh record of 23,228 new infections, which authorities attributed in part to the large number of tests carried out after Christmas celebrations. Portugal also saw a record with nearly 27,000 cases reported in 24 hours, while Lebanon had 3,150 new infections – its highest daily tally since vaccines rolled out earlier this year. The number of people in hospital with Covid in England topped 10,000, the highest total since March, as Britain hit a new record of 183,037 daily cases in the last 24 hours. Studies suggest Omicron, now the dominant strain in some countries, carries a reduced risk of sending those infected to hospital, but the WHO still urged caution. More than 5.4 million people around the world have died from Covid-19, but over the last week the number of deaths averaged 6,450 a day, an AFP tally found, the lowest since October 2020. In Europe, where more than 3.5 million cases have been recorded in the last seven days, Greece banned music in bars and restaurants until 16 January, including on New Year’s Eve while Cyprus banned dancing in public venues. Germany has put restrictions on sports competitions and shut nightclubs, limiting private gatherings to 10 vaccinated people. Mexico City’s mayor cancelled the capital’s massive New Year’s Eve celebrations after a rise in cases. In Ukraine, three people died after a candle lit by a hospital employee in memory of a patient who died of the virus started a fire in an intensive care unit in the western town of Kosiv.Australia’s independent expert group OzSage has savaged the “let it rip” Covid-19 strategy in New South Wales and elsewhere, saying it will condemn some people to death, particularly the more vulnerable. In a report released on Thursday, OzSage said the trajectory of Covid data suggested hospital admission and intensive care unit occupancy numbers were “on a steeply rising trend and anticipated to exceed earlier peaks quite soon. In other words, optimistic assumptions about the impact of the Omicron variant on hospital admissions are unrealistic.” The report said “a fatalistic approach will be fatal for some people”, with NSW in the frontline. “The ‘let it rip’ strategy and defeatist narrative that ‘we are all going to get it’ ignores the stark lived reality of the vulnerable of our society,” the report said. “Despite three doses of vaccine, some patients with cancer and other immunosuppressed people, have substantially reduced protection against Omicron,” it said, noting that about half of the adult population had co-existing health conditions. On Wednesday the NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, repeated his statement initially made on Boxing Day that “we’re all going to get” Covid as a result of the Omicron variant. The OzSage authors, who include the University of NSW’s Prof Raina MacIntyre, criticised the rhetoric from leaders such as the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, who have argued that the media and others should no longer focus on the raw daily case numbers, because hospitalisation rates are so much lower than during the Delta wave when many fewer people were vaccinated. “Daily case numbers are now 10 times higher than during the Delta wave and may be 100 times higher in January” the OzSage report notes. “Even if hospitalisation rates are lower with Omicron compared to Delta, a halving of hospitalisation rates with a 10-fold or 100-fold increase in cases will still translate to a high burden on the health system,” it said. “This is likely to overwhelm the health system, with regional services at particular risk.” The report also blasted “quick-fix adjustments” such as discouraging people from seeking Covid tests if they don’t feel symptoms, to reduce pressure on what remains of the test and trace system. The result would be an increased burden on the health system, the report said, “because it will result in chains of transmission that could otherwise have been stopped”. “We are disturbed by the repeated messaging that only symptomatic people should get tested, when 40-45% of transmissions are asymptomatic, and even in people who develop symptoms, the peak of infectiousness is in the two days before symptoms begin,” OzSage said. “The false reassurance of the messaging will result in more cases of viral transmission that otherwise would have been prevented.” On Thursday NSW reported a fresh record number of daily cases of 12,226, or about one in eight of the 97,201 tested. Hospitalisation numbers also jumped by about one-fifth to 746 in the state, although those in ICU edged up only marginally. Victoria also reported a sizeable jump in new cases, rising about one-third in a day to 5,137. The state also registered 13 deaths. Australia could reach 100,000 daily cases within weeks, Michael Lydeamore, a Monash University modeller, said on Wednesday. While Omicron infections appear to be 40-45% less likely to result in hospitalisations of those inflected, the sheer scale of the cases along with a health system already fatigued from almost two years of battling Covid meant the impact of the current wave “could be enormous”, the OzSage report said. “The rapid rise in Omicron cases may mean we are only days away from seeing higher hospitalisation and ICU admissions than during the peak of Delta,” the group said. As wards reached capacity and more people contracted Covid without getting access to hospital care, more people might die in their homes, OzSage said. “One week ago, NSW Health advised people under 50 years to care for themselves at home, without access to Hospital in The Home,” it said. “This week, they have revised the age cut off to anyone under 65 years. This is the ultimate in ‘personal responsibility’. “The consequence of this policy is that people may die at home when their lives could have been saved by proper timely healthcare,” it said, noting that during the Delta wave, the mean age of those dying at home from Covid was about 40. “During any other time, this would have been a national scandal, but it passed without comment or scrutiny from policy makers and health authorities,” it said. The report does not directly criticise the federal government, but Scott Morrison has repeatedly stressed management of the pandemic in the latest phase is becoming a matter of “personal responsibility” rather than restrictions imposed by governments.In August, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, wrote: “This is what living with Covid is all about. The case numbers will likely rise when we soon begin to open up. That is inevitable. But our focus needs to be on the rate of people being hospitalised”. Well, he was spot on with respect to case numbers rising. The trouble is, that they have risen much faster than expected. The University of New South Wales recently reported modelling showing that 25,000 cases a day for NSW were possible by the end of January. With 12,226 cases for the state on Thursday, it not only looks very realistic, but is most likely an underestimate. Even if Omicron is milder than Delta, with thousands of cases a day, hospitalisations and ICU admissions will inevitably rise. We are already seeing this in NSW. And when he wrote about living with Covid, Morrison failed to mention that many infected people end up with long-term health problems, a condition we call long Covid (or post-Covid-19 condition). Although most people infected with Covid-19 return to normal health after their infection, more than a third may still have health problems three to six months after recovery. Those most at risk of long Covid include people aged over 50, females, and those with chronic health conditions and obesity. Having a psychiatric or an immunosuppressive condition also increases your risk. There is some evidence that the severity of the initial Covid-19 infection doesn’t seem to affect the chance of you getting long Covid, although there are mixed findings on this. If you are unfortunate to end up with long Covid, common symptoms include abnormal breathing, constant fatigue, malaise, sore chest, sore throat, heart abnormalities, headache, muscle pain, abdominal problems, nerve pain, insomnia, dizziness, brain fog, anxiety and depression. In fact, just about any organ in your body can be damaged by the virus. On a more cheerful note, at least one study has found that children are less likely to get long Covid. We are still learning about long Covid and all of the studies referenced above have been on previous variants. Unfortunately, because Omicron has only been around a few weeks, it is too early to know whether the new variant will be just as bad for long Covid. The Australian Medical Research Future Fund is about to fund one or more major studies of long Covid in Australia, so more information will become available in the next two to three years. Like Australia, many European countries have gone through the same route of reopening and trying to live with Covid-19. But Prof Martin McKee, a European public health expert at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine, is critical of the French and UK governments’ responses and disbanding of public health measures. He wants to return the focus to cases, and on bringing cases down to as low a level as possible, rather than simply trying to live with the virus. This doesn’t necessarily mean lockdowns, although McKee points out that these have been very effective in Austria and the Netherlands, albeit for the Delta variant. He argues that the focus now should be on public health measures like improved air filtration and ventilation. What a sensible idea. Unfortunately, the Australian government rarely learns from other countries. Meanwhile, the elephant in the room called long Covid is still there, but quite invisible to our politicians. • Prof Adrian Esterman is chair of biostatistics and epidemiology at the University of South Australia. He previously worked for the World Health Organization in Geneva and Copenhagen • This article was amended on 31 December 2021 to remove a sentence that incorrectly stated that Scott Morrison said modelling of 25,000 cases a day for NSW by the end of January was not realistic. His quote in fact referred to modelling earlier in 2021 that warned of 25,000 deaths if restrictions were lifted.In his seven decades, Mehrajuddin has been a police commander, a fighter for the mujahideen, a district governor and a prosecutor, and even briefly worked in Europe. Until this year, he has never struggled to feed his family. Now they have just one meal a day, hard discs of stale bread soaked in water until they soften to mush. “All the family are starving,” he says bluntly as he waits at a food distribution centre in Kabul for a handout of lentils, rice, flour and oil. “I even worry about dying, because if it happens tomorrow, how will my family pay for my funeral?” His government pension has stopped, and his son’s position as a public servant has been abolished. His disabled wife and daughter are especially vulnerable. The food he is picking up should last them a couple of weeks but after that, he does not know what they will do. Millions of families share his worries. Hunger is stalking Afghanistan, caused by a devastating confluence of political and environmental crises. The UN estimates that only 2% of the population are getting enough to eat. The Taliban victory brought an overnight end to foreign aid that had propped up the economy of the fallen republic for 20 years. In the countryside, where more than two-thirds of Afghans live, the worst drought in 30 years had already left farmers destitute and desperate. Enough people are now eating so little food, and enough children are malnourished – at least one in three – that Afghanistan is likely meet two of the three criteria the UN uses to declare a famine. “If they’re not meeting the indicators it’s getting pretty close,” said Mary-Ellen McGroarty, the head of the World Food Programme in Afghanistan, which estimates that 3.2 million children face acute malnutrition and 23 million people are in crisis. “It’s on the brink. There is no province in Afghanistan today with less than 30% of their population either in crisis or emergency food insecurity.” Across hospitals and feeding centres the number of children needing help is doubling and even tripling. “You see two or three children to a bed, families coming in not only with one child malnourished, but maybe two or three,” she said. If people start to die in large numbers as a result of food shortages, the situation will escalate into an official famine. Without help, which aid agencies, charities and individuals are racing to get to Afghanistan, that grim scenario is likely to be only a matter of time. “The images that you are seeing in the nutrition centres and the hospitals are probably only the tip of what is coming behind it, unless we can get out a massive response, which we are working on every day,” McGroarty said. She said the scale of the crisis in Afghanistan was unprecedented in the country’s modern history. Recognising that, the US and UN eased restrictions last week that had been placed on the Taliban before they came to power. That will allow food and other humanitarian aid to be delivered to the country, including funds to pay teachers’ salaries. Sanctions imposed for terror attacks the Taliban orchestrated when still insurgents had hamstrung international donors and charities for months. They wanted to support Afghans but worried doing so would break the law at home. Afghan foreign currency reserves, held in the US, have been frozen since the summer, contributing to cash shortages on the ground. This means even the minority still getting paid or with savings in a bank are struggling to access their money. The economy overall is thought to have shrunk by at least a third in 2021. Jobs for ordinary people have vanished and the salaries of those still employed have dried up. The Afghani has lost more than 25% of its value and rapid inflation has meant what little money people have has bought them less food. “Poor people didn’t make the Taliban come or go, but they pay the price,” says Obaidullah Baheer, a university professor before the Taliban took control. As his country spiralled into economic disaster, and with classes cancelled, he has shifted his focus to fundraising for food aid. The cash gathered has reached several hundred families across Afghanistan, but the extent of desperation sometimes feels overwhelming. “Often it feels like we are just using a wet towel to try to put out a wildfire,” he said. “You cannot think about the scale and the numbers, because if you do it becomes impossible. You have to do what you can while you can.” Mehrajuddin, who was collecting food at one of Baheer’s charity drives, is part of an urban middle class that has crumbled in just a couple of months. Social media is filled with photos of journalists reduced to selling their clothes by the side of the road and professors taking up manual work on construction sites. Baheer has also been campaigning for national reserves to be unfrozen, though he understands concerns about Taliban trying to siphon off cash. He has already dealt with one provincial governor who tried to commandeer their aid, and a commander who detained a team member for 40 days, but he insists the international community must deal with the authorities to save lives. “This is not about politics, it’s about stopping obscene levels of suffering,” he said. “The Taliban are a reality and they are not going away.” The crisis is particularly hard on women, because the Taliban have barred them from work in most sectors beyond health and education, and a deeply conservative society already made it hard for them to work outside the home. Nadera* was one of the last widows created by fighting between the Taliban and the collapsed Republic of Afghanistan. Her husband, a police officer, was killed by a rocket in August when he came to get his wife and six young children from their home because fighting in the area had intensified. They fled to her brother’s, but his job as a driver was also swept away by the economic collapse, so he has little to share. “My brother gives us two pieces [of Afghan naan bread] for seven people a day, if he can. Mostly we stay hungry.” Even if the Taliban would let her work, she does not know if she could. “There is no one to look after the baby,” she said. The children beg to return to school despite their hunger, but education now seems an impossible dream. McGroarty says Afghanistan needs about $220m a month to ward off starvation through to next spring, and the money needs to arrive soon. The Himalayas march across Afghanistan, and in the high altitude areas heavy snowfall cuts off villages for months, so they need food supplies to be sent in now. Even for areas that will not be cut off, sourcing and transporting food for millions of people also takes time. “We need urgent funding to get us through to May,” McGroarty said. “Hunger is so widespread it’s hard to keep up.” Even western policymakers with no interest in human suffering should be wary of the global implications if Afghanistan slides into a full-blown famine. Islamic State, a group even more extreme than the Taliban and interested in international jihad, is recruiting there. The country also remains the main source of the world’s heroin, from the opium grown in its poppy fields. The Taliban have officially promised to eradicate the fields, but farmers are preparing for a bumper spring harvest. Little of the wealth from the trade goes to the men growing the poppies, but it can at least feed their families. Abdul Manan, in a field just off the main highway between Helmand and Kandahar, was preparing poppies for the smaller winter harvest, slashing the seed buds so the opium sap oozed out. “We used to eat three meals, but this year we only eat twice a day. Everything has got so expensive,” he said. He got almost nothing for the pomegranates harvested from his orchards, making him even more reliant on opium. Gesturing at his poppies, he said with a shrug: “The price this year is a bit better.” * Not her real nameThanks for following our live coverage of Ghislaine Maxwell’s trial and verdict. If you’ve stayed with us over the past few hours it’s been a heated and fast-moving course of events which ultimately saw the 60-year-old British socialite found guilty of sex trafficking in a Manhattan federal court on Wednesday afternoon. We will be closing this blog but you can follow all the latest developments as they happen here. Ghislaine Maxwell, 60, was found guilty in a federal criminal court in New York of crimes including sex trafficking. The jury deliberated for six days. Maxwell is a British socialite and daughter of the late media baron Robert Maxwell, who moved to New York after her father’s death and became the now-deceased sex offender Jeffrey Epstein’s girlfriend and partner in crime. Bobbi Sternheim, Maxwell’s lead defence lawyer, told reporters the legal team with appeal the verdict. “We are very disappointed with the verdict. We have already started working on the appeal and we are confident she will be vindicated.” Maxwell’s family gave a statement: “We believe firmly in our sister’s innocence – we are very disappointed with the verdict. We have already started the appeal tonight and we believe that she will ultimately be vindicated”. US attorney for the southern district of New York, Damien Williams, said Maxwell had been found guilty of “one of the worst crimes imaginable” in a full statement released following the verdict. Virginia Giuffre, who was not involved in this criminal trial but has accused Maxwell and the late Jeffrey Epstein, in civil court in the US, of abusing her celebrated the verdict on Twitter. “My soul yearned for justice for years and today the jury gave me just that.” Four women testified as witnesses for the prosecution in Maxwell’s trial in New York, accusing her of being an integral part of Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse crimes. Lawyers representing Maxwell and Epstein’s victims reacted to the verdict, describing the outcome as “a great day for justice” and a “towering victory”. Maxwell has returned to Brooklyn’s Metropolitan Detention Centre to await sentencing. Judge Alison Nathan has yet to set a sentencing date. Maxwell, who only recently celebrated her 60th birthday from behind bars, now faces decades in prison. Following the verdict she has returned to Brooklyn’s Metropolitan Detention Centre to await sentencing while Judge Alison Nathan has yet to set a sentencing date. Lead defence lawyer, Bobbi Sternheim, has already indicated Maxwell’s legal team will appeal. “We are very disappointed with the verdict. We have already started working on the appeal and we are confident she will be vindicated,” Sternheim told reporters outside court. However, most legal experts agree that the legal bars she would have to clear to overturn the verdict are very high. Maxwell was convicted of five of the six charges she faced and also faces two counts of perjury in another trial in a later date. The most significant trafficking charge carries a sentence of 40 years and coupled with the other charges against her it is likely Maxwell will spend decades, or the rest of her life, behind bars. Judge Alison Nathan will ultimately decide whether Maxwell’s sentences for each count are to be served consecutively or concurrently. Sarah Krissoff, a former prosecutor with the Southern District of New York, told the BBC she expects “a very significant prison sentence” for Maxwell. “Given the involvement of minors, the judge has really great discretion to impose a significant sentence, and based on the evidence that was presented at trial, frankly, I expect the judge to impose a very severe sentence upon her.” Attorney David Boies, who represented several of Jeffrey Epstein’s accusers including Virginia Roberts Giuffre, called the outcome “a great day for justice and for Maxwell’s survivors.” Sigrid McCawley, attorney for Annie Farmer, one of the victims who testified as a prosecution witness against Maxwell described the verdict as a “towering victory”. For too long their voices were ignored and discounted and their characters impugned and disgraced, but no more ... Today’s verdict makes clear that those who prey upon and traffic minors are committing serious crimes punishable under the law. Ghislaine Maxwell has been held accountable and justice has been done.” Spencer Kuvin, the lawyer representing nine of Jeffrey Epstein’s victims, called the verdict “an absolute and unmitigated victory”. Robert Glassman, the lawyer who represented “Jane,” one of Maxwell’s accusers who testified during the trial, also released a statement applauding the verdict. The verdict screams loud and clear-if you make it easier for another to sexually abuse children, you, too, will be held accountable for your role in that abuse.... the strong women survivors of Ghislaine Maxwell and Jeffrey Epstein’s abuse can all sleep better tonight knowing that the justice system got it right.... the jury stayed focused on what really mattered: Ms Maxwell played a critical role in helping Jeffrey Epstein sexually abuse girls.” RAINN, the largest anti-sexual violence organization in the US, has released a statement following the verdict. Press secretary Erinn Robinson, said: We are relieved that Maxwell will be held accountable for her predatory behavior and her role in grooming young women for abuse by Jeffrey Epstein. We are grateful for the brave survivors who came forward to hold Maxwell responsible for her part in his criminal enterprise. We hope that this verdict helps even more survivors see that perpetrators can be held accountable, no matter how powerful or well connected.” Maxwell’s trial featured the testimony of four women who described their abuse as teenagers in the 1990s and the early 2000s. Moira Penza described their role as “the most significant in the trial by far”. That was really the crux of the government’s case here, was the testimony of those four victims, while being corroborated by other witness testimony and other evidence. And what we saw is witness after witness, victim after victim explaining how Maxwell recruited them when they were underage and how she participated in the normalising of this sexual misconduct, of this abuse, and ultimately participated in the commercial sex aspect of this, so actually facilitating the payment for — in exchange for the sexual abuse. And so we saw that throughout. And we really saw a focus on what Maxwell’s specific role was in the recruitment and then even in the actual sex acts, massaging one of the underage minors, massaging her breasts, actually participating in the sex acts. Moira Penza, a former assistant US attorney who led the prosecution in the 2019 sex trafficking conviction of cult leader Keith Raniere, has called the outcome a “complete reckoning” and believes Maxwell will face decades in prison. Penza spoke to PBS News Hour immediately following the verdict, saying: I think this is really a complete reckoning. And what we really saw is that jurors understood the government’s argument that, really, Maxwell was the enabler in chief for Epstein, that these crimes were facilitated by him, and the jury was persuaded by these victims who came forward and testified. Penza described the sex trafficking counts, counts five and six, as the two “most serious” charges in the case, carrying the most significant penalties. “Those were the ones where we really heard about the direct involvement of Maxwell in actual sexualised massages with the victim,” she explained. “For all those other counts, those are also very serious, but what we saw is that the jury was just taking its job very seriously.” Media interest in the case has been unwavering since Maxwell was arrested on multiple criminal charges related to the trafficking and sexual abuse of young women and girls in July of 2020. Almost 18 months later, hundreds of journalists, camera crew and members of the media were seen outside the US Federal District Court House on Wednesday evening to see the unfold verdict live. Legal experts have also weighed in on the verdict. Carl Tobias, a professor of law at the University of Richmond school of law in Richmond, Virginia has said he believes Maxwell will appeal. I am not surprised that the jury took so much time. This was a very high-profile case in which both sides were extremely well prepared and made strong cases. Another explanation may be that the jury was being conscientious. I think Maxwell will appeal, as she said she was not testifying because the US had not proven its case. She would have to show some error in the way the case was tried or some jury misconduct, both of which will be difficult to show. From a distance, it seemed like the victims were brave, sympathetic witnesses, who were providing credible testimony about awful behaviour.” Jesse Gessin, a lawyer practising in San Clemente, California said he expects any appeal to focus on instructions given to the jury in an interview with Reuters news agency. The verdict is quite shocking, given the government’s performance at trial. Witnesses were unprepared, and some of the more iconic names associated with Maxwell were not presented at trial. In the end, it could have been that the nature of the allegations was just too much for the jury. I would expect any appeal to focus on jury instructions as opposed to specific evidentiary rulings.” The attorneys for Virginia Roberts Giuffre, one of Jeffery Epstein’s alleged accusers, issued a statement following Maxwell’s guilty verdict on Wednesday. Attorney David Boies called it, “a great day for justice and for Maxwell’s survivors. The jury’s verdict vindicates the courage and commitment of our clients who stood up against all odds for many years to bring Jeffrey Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell to justice.” Attorney Sigrid McCawley called today’s verdict a “towering victory.” Giuffre did not testify during the trial but was mentioned several times throughout government witness testimony. Maxwell’s siblings Isabel Maxwell, Kevin Maxwell, and Christine Maxwell were seen walking out of the courthouse following the verdict earlier this evening. Maxwell is not the first in her family to face criminal charges. Her older brothers, Ian and Kevin, found themselves on trial after their father’s death in 1991 when a £460m hole was discovered in the Mirror Group pension fund. The two men, as chairman and publisher of the newspaper group, were acquitted of alleged conspiracy to defraud charges in 1996 following a four-year legal ordeal. Robert Glassman, the lawyer who represented “Jane,” one of Maxwell’s accusers who testified during the trial, has also released a statement. The verdict screams loud and clear-if you make it easier for another to sexually abuse children, you, too, will be held accountable for your role in that abuse.... the strong women survivors of Ghislaine Maxwell and Jeffrey Epstein’s abuse can all sleep better tonight knowing that the justice system got it right.... the jury stayed focused on what really mattered: Ms Maxwell played a critical role in helping Jeffrey Epstein sexually abuse girls.” Jane testified that she met Maxwell at Interlochen Center for the Arts youth camp in Michigan during the summer of 1994. Jane, then 14, was eating ice cream with her friends when a woman “walking a cute little Yorkie” dog – Maxwell – approached. They started chatting and eventually a man, Epstein, joined them. Annie Farmer, who testified as a prosecution witness against Maxwell at her criminal trial, said she met the socialite as a teenager before being lured into Jeffrey Epstein’s orbit. Following the verdict, Farmer said: “I am so relieved and grateful that the jury recognised the pattern of predatory behaviour that Maxwell engaged in for years and found her guilty of these crimes ... I hope that this verdict brings solace to all who need it and demonstrates that no one is above the law. Even those with great power and privilege will be held accountable when they sexually abuse and exploit the young.” Farmer was the fourth and final accuser to testify, telling the court that Maxwell gave her a nude massage when she was only 16. Farmer said that she met Epstein at his Manhattan manse in late 1995. Annie’s sister, Maria Farmer, also worked for him as a fine arts painter. Some more photos from the scene have been released. Defense attorney Laura Menninger was pictured leaving the federal courthouse in the Southern District of New York. Menninger avoided the throng of media and did not make any comment when approached by journalists. Here is the full statement from US attorney Damian Williams on the verdict today: “A unanimous jury has found Ghislaine Maxwell guilty of one of the worst crimes imaginable – facilitating and participating in the sexual abuse of children. Crimes that she committed with her long-time partner and co-conspirator, Jeffrey Epstein. The road to justice has been far too long. But, today, justice has been done. I want to commend the bravery of the girls – now grown women – who stepped out of the shadows and into the courtroom. Their courage and willingness to face their abuser made this case, and today’s result, possible. I also want to thank the career prosecutors of the Southern District of New York, who embraced the victims’ quest for justice and have worked tirelessly, day in and day out, to ensure that Maxwell was held accountable for her crimes. This Office will always stand with victims, will always follow the facts wherever they lead, and will always fight to ensure that no one, no matter how powerful and well connected, is above the law.” Thanks for tuning in to our live blog following Ghislaine Maxwell’s conviction at her federal criminal trial in New York for sex trafficking. We’re bringing you all the developments and reactions as soon as they happen. The team in New York will now hand over to our colleagues in Australia and you can continue to keep up with all the news here. Where things stand: Virginia Giuffre, who was not involved in this criminal trial but has accused Maxwell and the late Jeffrey Epstein, in civil court in the US, of abusing her. She tweeted at the news of Maxwell’s conviction: “My soul yearned for justice for years and today the jury gave me just that.” Giuffre lives in western Australia. US attorney for the southern district of New York, Damien Williams, hailed the unanimous verdict against Maxwell: guilty on five charges, not guilty on one, calling sex trafficking of minors “one of the worst crimes imaginable”. Ghislaine Maxwell, 60, was found guilty in a federal criminal court in New York of crimes including sex trafficking. The jury deliberated for six days. Maxwell is a British socialite and daughter of the late media baron Robert Maxwell, who moved to New York after her father’s death and became the now-deceased sex offender Jeffrey Epstein’s girlfriend and partner in crime. You can read the full story of Maxwell’s conviction here. Bobbi Sternheim, Maxwell’s lead defence lawyer, just said outside the court: “We firmly believe in Ghislaine’s innocence, obviously.” It had been expected that Maxwell will appeal the verdict. She was convicted a few hours ago on five of the six charges she faced relating to sex trafficking and conspiracy, for which she could face 40 years in prison. Sternheim continued: “We are very disappointed with the verdict. We have already started working on the appeal and we are confident she will be vindicated.” Maxwell’s family has given a statement following the verdict: We believe firmly in our sister’s innocence – we are very disappointed with the verdict. We have already started the appeal tonight and we believe that she will ultimately be vindicated”. Ghislaine Maxwell’s lawyers Laura Menninger and Jeffrey Pagliuca have left court without making any comment. Maxwell’s lead attorney Bobbi Sternheim did however give a very short statement wishing the crowd a Happy New Year. “Everyone be healthy, have a happy new year,” she said. The Telegraph’s US correspondent Josie Ensor was at the scene and took a quick snap of the lawyers leaving court. Ghislaine Maxwell turned 60 in jail on Christmas Day, where she was back in custody after it became clear at the end of deliberations last Wednesday that the jury was not going to reach a verdict before their festive break. It was her second consecutive Christmas behind bars after being arrested in July, 2020, while hiding away on a secluded luxury estate in New Hampshire. She had been held in custody in what her lawyers said were “horrific” conditions in the Metropolitan detention center in the New York City borough of Brooklyn. Maxwell will surely appeal against her conviction in Manhattan today, but assuming she is unsuccessful in that venture, she can expect to spend many years behind bars after being found guilty of federal sex trafficking and related crimes, possibly even spending the rest of her life in prison. Former federal prosecutor Mitchell Epner has done some scribbling on the back of an envelope and forecasts that Maxwell could get upwards of 12 to 15 years in a best case scenario. His tweet on this was retweeted by former federal prosecutor Moira Penza, who led the NXIVM cult’s investigation and trial. Four women testified as witnesses for the prosecution in Maxwell’s trial in New York, accusing her of being an integral part of Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse crimes. For example, one woman testifying simply under the name of Jane testified that she was 14 in 1994 when Epstein started to sexually abuse her – and that sometimes Maxwell was present during this abuse. Also, at times, Maxwell participated in the abuse, Jane said. “There were hands everywhere,” Jane recalled of an encounter with Epstein and Maxwell. The abuse continued when she was 15 and 16. Ghislaine Maxwell was convicted on five of the six charges she faced. In addition to sex-trafficking, Maxwell was found guilty of conspiracy to entice individuals under the age of 17 to travel in interstate commerce with intent to engage in illegal sexual activity and conspiracy to transport individuals under the age of 17 to travel in interstate commerce with intent to engage in illegal sexual activity. She was also convicted of transportation of an individual under the age of 17 with intent to engage in illegal sexual activity; and conspiracy to commit sex trafficking of individuals under the age of 18. Maxwell was found not guilty of one count: enticement of an individual under the age of 17 to travel with intent to engage in illegal sexual activity. Jurors reached their verdict after 40 hours of deliberations over the course of six days. Virginia Giuffre was not a witness at Ghislaine Maxwell’s criminal trial but has long accused her of being involved in Jeffrey Epstein’s abuse of her, via a long-running civil case. Giuffre lives in Australia, where it is early Thursday, and she has just reacted on Twitter to Maxwell’s guilty verdict. Giuffre calls for others to be held accountable, too. Giuffre has said she was coerced by Epstein and Maxwell into having sex with Britain’s Prince Andrew when she was 17, an allegation Andrew, Duke of York, has repeatedly denied. Giuffre has sued, accusing Andrew of sexually abusing her at Epstein’s mansion in Manhattan and at other locations in 2001. She has sued Andrew and her legal claim alleges she “was compelled by express or implied threats by Epstein, [Ghislaine] Maxwell, and/or Prince Andrew to engage in sexual acts with Prince Andrew, and feared death or physical injury to herself or another and other repercussions for disobeying Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew due to their powerful connections, wealth and authority.” So while she was not involved in this criminal trial of Ghislaine Maxwell, Giuffre was on many people’s minds as the case unfolded. Andrew is seeking to have Giuffre’s civil case against him thrown out. The Guardian points out that Andrew was a mere footnote in the Maxwell trial. Dave Aronberg, state attorney in Palm Beach county, Florida, where Jeffrey Epstein had a luxury mansion that Ghislaine Maxwell effectively ran for him, just told CNN that Maxwell “just got what was coming to her” with today’s guilty verdict in her New York trial. Aronberg pointed out how crucial Maxwell was in luring underage girls into Epstein’s life of sexualized massages and abuse, saying that if it had been just him, trolling around the streets as “a creepy middle-aged guy” who drove up to them in his car and asked them to come with him “they would have told him where to go”, but he had Maxwell to operate for him. Shan Wu, defense attorney told the cable network Maxwell “played an integral role”. He said it was crucial that victims of sexual abuse are taken seriously, as they were in this case, and that abusers and those around them are held accountable. “This kind of crime doesn’t happen in the dark, with only the victims’ word, other people know about it,” he said. Wu said he hoped that the verdicts against Maxwell and, recently, R Kelly, were signs of progress for sexual assault victims. Edward Helmore is outside court in New York. He writes: As the verdict was reached, a crowd of around 200 gathered at the grand steps of the federal court house in lower Manhattan, waiting for statements from prosecutors, defence lawyers and members of Maxwell’s family who attended the trial. Some members of the public told the Guardian they were surprised by the verdict, which had been slow in coming, indicating to some that Maxwell might have been heading for a less sweeping verdict of guilt. Many seasoned journalists who covered the trial, however, were not surprised, judging by chit-chat in the business and some on Twitter, either by the verdict or the length of time the jury deliberated. In fact, it was not that long given that there were six charges to carefully consider, with the knowledge that a guilty verdict could put Maxwell behind bars for decades. And crimes such as trafficking and conspiracy are complex. The jury deliberated for about 40 hours over six days. Outside the court house, which adjoins by bridge the detention center where Jeffrey Epstein took his life, the street had been quiet for days as deliberations dragged on with jurors sending sometimes cryptic notes to Judge Nathan for witness transcripts and clarification on jury instructions. But in the hours before the jury returned, stray protesters and activists were replaced by a sense of anticipation as TV crews began setting up lights and awnings to break into scheduled broadcasts with news of a verdict. Miami Herald journalist Julie K Brown was tireless in her work to expose much about the crimes of Jeffrey Epstein that prosecutors had effectively let slide and she was on to the criminal behind the posh demeanor of Ghislaine Maxwell, too. As Brown just pointed out on Twitter, Maxwell faces up to 40 years in prison. She was found guilty on the most serious charge, sex trafficking of minors, and that crime alone carries a sentence of up to 40 years . Although Maxwell said nothing after the verdicts on each charge were read out, she struggled to stand. New York journalist Victoria Bekiempis is in court for Guardian US and here’s just one of her takes on the case this evening. US attorney for the southern district of New York, Damien Williams, has put out a statement hailing the unanimous verdict against Maxwell, guilty on five charges, not guilty on one. He said: “A unanimous jury has found Ghislaine Maxwell guilty of one of the worst crimes imaginable, facilitating and participating in the sexual abuse of children. Crimes that she committed with her long-time partner and co-conspirator Jeffrey Epstein. “The road to justice has been far too long, but today justice has been done. I want to commend the bravery of the girls, now grown women, who stepped out of the shadows and into the courtroom. “Their courage and willingness to face their abuser made today’s result in this case possible. I also want to thank the career prosecutors of the SDNY who embraced the victims’ quest for justice and have worked tirelessly day and day out to ensure Maxwell was held accountable for her crimes. This office will always stand with victims, will always follow the facts wherever they lead, and will always fight to ensure that no-one, no matter how powerful or well-connected is above the law.” The jury rejected Ghislaine Maxwell’s claims that her accusers were making allegations against her as a form of exploitation of her position and wealth, for money, and were lying about her being involved in any their abuse. The judge had also rejected Maxwell’s claims that she was being prosecuted as a scapegoat for the late Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse and told her team not to focus on that in closing arguments. Epstein was a convicted sex offender who was awaiting trial in New York on further sex trafficking and sexual abuse crimes in 2019 when he killed himself in prison. The jury has returned its verdict and it is guilty. Read our full story below, and we’ll have more coming up on how the specific charges broke down. The jury is returning to the courtroom in New York after deliberating over the fate of Ghislaine Maxwell, the British socialite accused of abusing young girls alongside her late boyfriend and business associate, the disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein. We’ll bring you all the developments from court in our breaking news live blog, as they happen, as well as reactions online and both inside and outside the federal courthouse in Manhattan. Here’s what’s at stake: Maxwell, 60, had denied allegations that she, according to the prosecution, criminally preyed on vulnerable young girls as young as 14, “manipulated them and served them up to be sexually abused by Epstein”, also taking part in some of the abuse herself, between 1994 and 2004. Testimony began on November 29. The trial was originally expected to take six weeks, but after the federal prosecution case lasted for two weeks, with four alleged victims giving evidence, the defense was over in two days. Maxwell chose not to testify. Her lawyers portrayed her as a charismatic and generous boss whom younger women working for her and Epstein looked up to, and that women claiming to be victims have false memories or are just not telling the truth. Ghislaine Maxwell is the daughter of the late British press baron Robert Maxwell, who owned the UK’s Mirror newspapers and the New York Daily News. She met Epstein after moving to New York following her father’s sudden death in 1991. She was arrested at a secluded luxury estate in New Hampshire last year and had been in custody in New York ever since, with the charges against her brought by federal prosecutors in New York. She has previously been sued in civil court but this was the first time she was charged with crimes. Epstein, a sex offender previously convicted in Florida, whose rich and famous friends have included former US presidents Donald Trump and Bill Clinton, as well as Prince Andrew, killed himself in a New York City jail in 2019, while waiting on his own sex-trafficking trial on federal charges. Maxwell had pleaded not guilty to six charges relating to: conspiracy to entice minors to travel to engage in illegal sex acts; enticement of a minor for same; conspiracy to transport minors with intent to engage in criminal sexual activity; transportation of a minor for same; sex trafficking conspiracy; sex trafficking of a minor. Regardless of the outcome of this trial, Maxwell still faces two charges of perjury, accused of lying under oath in 2016 during a civil lawsuit brought by Virginia Giuffre, who says Epstein abused her. Giuffre alleged Maxwell had defamed her by saying she lied about Epstein. Giuffre was not a witness in this trial.At the culmination of Ghislaine Maxwell’s trial, the defendant herself was virtually expressionless as five guilty counts were returned. Outside the court in New York, people voiced surprise at the verdict, along with a sense of relief, and no small amount of exhaustion after waiting through days of jury deliberations. After the verdict, Maxwell poured water from a Fiji water bottle into a paper cup, spoke to her lawyers, looked down at her feet. But she said nothing, and did not turn to her family on front bench of the visitors gallery, offering a reserve than many have interpreted as cold-heartedness. But the French-born, British socialite, whom others saw as a party girl who took a dramatically wrong turn and who now faces the likelihood of decades in prison when she is sentenced next year, has betrayed little of herself throughout her trial in a Manhattan’s federal court. Even as jurors deliberated for five full days before finding Maxwell, 60, guilty of five of six counts – with their questions indicating at times a more favorable outcome for the defendant – she seemed attentive but also distant, ultimately telling presiding judge Alison Nathan that “the government has not proven its case beyond a reasonable doubt so there is no reason for me to testify”. But in striking contrast to expressions of confidence and bonhomie during the early days of the trial, she did not hug her lawyers on the way out. Nor did Maxwell’s family stop outside the court to express their disappointment. Instead, brother Kevin Maxwell issued a statement saying the family believes she will be vindicated on appeal. “We firmly believe in our sister’s innocence,” he said. While the rest of the defense team left hurriedly without comment, Bobbi Sternheim, Maxwell’s lead defense attorney, told reporters: “We firmly believe in Ghislaine’s innocence, obviously. We are very disappointed with the verdict. We have already started working on the appeal and we are confident she will be vindicated.” Some in the crowd that had gathered said they were surprised by the verdict. Amid New York’s Omicron variant surge, a trial that had been anticipated to be a blockbuster, breathlessly-reported judicial event, had already become a side-show that was likely to end in a covid-induced mistrial or a less sweeping verdict of guilt. Outside the court house, which is linked by a bridge to the detention center where Jeffrey Epstein took his life, it has been quiet for days as deliberations dragged on with jurors sending sometimes cryptic notes to Judge Nathan for witness transcripts and clarification on jury instructions. But in the hours before the jury returned, stray protesters and activists were replaced by a sense of anticipation as TV crews began setting up lights and awnings and news anchors prepared to break into scheduled broadcasts. But there were no court-step statements from women victimized by Epstein and Maxwell, or grandiloquent pronouncements from victims’ rights attorneys. Gone, too, were protesters and activists, some expressing an affiliation to the Q-anon conspiracy cult, intent on harnessing the trial to their agenda. Still, the crowd of media outside the court drew bystanders who offered a nuanced interpretation: “Americans are very moral people, they think about right and wrong all the time,” offered Marc Stone. “It’s a major part of American culture, and that’s sometimes a problem.” Stone was hinting, as many have said during Maxwell’s trial, and her defense claimed in court, that she was being tried merely as a cipher for Jeffrey Epstein, who had evaded justice by taking his own life. “The charges against Ghislaine Maxwell are for things that Jeffrey Epstein did,” Sternheim had told the jury. “But she is not Jeffrey Epstein and she is not like Jeffrey Epstein.” Others expressed similar thoughts. Jarva Lund, who had been sketching witnesses at the trial, said it was possible to see Maxwell as a perpetrator and a victim. “If this was Epstein it would probably be more celebratory, but she’s a woman who was probably abused who has been convicted for abuse and perversion.” If there were double standards in play, they were certainly perceived by Elizabeth Stein, one of Epstein’s and Maxwell’s accusers, who had been denied access to the courtroom earlier in the day. She told the Miami Herald that no accommodations had been made for her or other victims attending the trial, while Maxwell’s family received priority. Wendy Murphy, a former sex crimes prosecutor and who has taught sexual violence law at New England Law for 20 years, told the Guardian Wednesday that the government had put on a tight, focused case against Maxwell. “She was equally guilty, equally culpable and equally evil. She was not a subordinate peon – she made $30m dollars – and became an extremely wealthy woman because she chose to be involved in his conspiratorial industry to traffic children,” Murphy said. “It matters what she did, and she allowed her sex to be used as tool to manipulate these girls. When you exploit your own sex to facilitate, support and commit acts of sexual abuse you might not be able to get away with as a man [it] does not entitle you to compassion. It entitled you to extra punishment and extra shame.”I wake to a grey haze that my brain insists is daylight – but when I check my phone it’s only 3am. I lie on, listening to a robin singing – another diurnal creature whose circadian cycle is upset by the new white LED (light emitting diode) streetlight outside my house. At 4am, I give up on sleep. Outside, other than my own footsteps, the only sound is more robin song as I go walking. In winter, robins are one of the few avian species still singing, their ranks swollen by territorial females as well as males. Their winter song is languid and tremulous. However, approaching the glare of an LED lantern, I notice an uptick in my pace that seems to chime with a greater stridency coming from the singing robin in an adjacent sycamore. The impact of light pollution on songbirds has long been recognised, tricking the bird’s brain into thinking night is day. This is easier to hear when the dawn chorus has been winnowed to a single species – and it is no coincidence that the robin is that species. With their large eyes adapted for crepuscular activity, robins are especially sensitive to light and already one of the earliest avian risers. But it’s not just any light that awakens them. Diurnal birds have circadian photosensitive cells in their retina (as do we mammals), which respond to the blue wavelengths in sunlight. The traditional sodium-vapour streetlight emits light at the more red end of the visible light spectrum, and is of little disturbance to the dozing robin. Those streetlights are being gradually replaced by more energy-efficient LED ones. But in solving one problem, another has been created: these white LED lights are rich in those blue wavelengths that disturb not just songbirds but moths and bats too. It’s no wonder these robins can’t sleep. I leave the streetlights behind. I’ve reached the nocturnal cloak of Lagan Valley regional park. Stars prick into view. I tread cautiously through the mulchy dark. As shades grow into a gauze of scrub and trees, there’s not a robin to be heard. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe extent of New Labour infighting and of Tony Blair’s struggle with allegations of sleaze has been underscored by Cabinet Office papers that show No 10 aides privately thought Gordon Brown could have breached the ministerial code. Files released to the National Archives show that in 1998 Blair’s chief spin doctor, Alastair Campbell, urged him to privately rebuke Clare Short, then international development secretary, after she publicly denounced cabinet colleagues as “vultures”. And Blair’s chief of staff, Jonathan Powell, warned him in the same year that he needed to get to grips with what he saw as a lack of discipline among government ministers, expressing concern about ministerial probity. So grave was the problem thought to be that No 10 considered creating a “commissioner for ministerial ethics” to shore up public trust. Powell even went so far as to suggest in writing to Blair that there was reason to suspect that his closest political friend and, ultimately, greatest political rival, Gordon Brown, was breaching strict rules on ministerial standards, an offence for which a cabinet member would usually be expected to resign. “At some stage we will have to deal with the ways in which some ministers are dealing with their political work. How, for example, is Gordon paying for his newsletter to all party members and his receptions (almost certainly in breach of the ministerial code). He is not the only one,” Powell wrote to Blair on 20 February 1998. In another note, written to the prime minister about a month earlier addressing possible ways to deal with parliamentary questions on ministerial propriety, Powell suggested sending an “edict to tell ministers to be more careful”. The note read: “I think Gordon is probably right when he says people are being too lax. Did [then foreign minister] Derek Fatchett really need to take his wife to Australia etc. Do you want to pursue this (with the implied admission that all has not been handled well)?” A handwritten note from Blair in the margin reads: “Let me speak to cabinet and get them to do it by word of mouth.” It gives an indication of the time and effort that was going into trying to hold together cabinet discipline in the early years of his premiership. Three days prior, for example, one of Blair’s closest advisers, Anji Hunter, felt moved to email Powell passing on concerns expressed by an unknown colleague that the prime minister was looking only at the big picture and that No 10 should not “take our eyes off the sleaze factor”, which was thought to be eroding the Blair government’s moral authority. In another handwritten note, Blair’s policy adviser Liz Lloyd replied: “I, too, am worried about this.” She suggested pushing a story that Blair was privately admonishing ministers over standards. Blair was also urged to privately deal with specific ministers, including Short, who Campbell warned was likely to embarrass the government. A documentary showed her accusing a ministerial colleague of telling a journalist she had likened Ulster Unionists to the Ku Klux Klan during a cabinet meeting. Denying the claim, Short told the film-makers: “It’s just utterly malicious, it’s someone from within the cabinet because it’s a lie about a discussion that did take place. It’s very sad. It’s extraordinary that people on your own side would do such things.” Briefing the prime minister on the affair shortly afterwards, Campbell wrote: “As you may have seen, I sought to kill the latest Clare story by being supportive. The trouble is that she will believe it. Her office have already been on saying how grateful they are. In other words, she’ll do something again before long. “Can I suggest you write to her on these lines: for public consumption, we have been supportive over the remarks made on the documentary by you. However, I have to tell you that I regard such comments as unhelpful and self-indulgent. I understand that your department was advised not to cooperate with such a project, given the way that these film-makers generate publicity. And as there is no evidence whatever that a member of the cabinet briefed against you, other than surmise, it was ill-advised to say so.” The confidential papers were released to the National Archives as part of the plan to release government records when they are 20 years old. Commons ‘hemisphere’ The Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown wanted to redesign the House of Commons in a “hemisphere” shape as a symbol of his party and New Labour’s joint reform agenda, according to newly released official papers. Ashdown was keen to expand cooperation between the two parties – nicknamed “the project” – after Tony Blair’s 1997 election victory. In a letter to Blair, he proposed that the Commons chamber could be reshaped as a hemisphere in recognition of the new culture of “consultation, pluralism [and] debate” that they hoped to inaugurate. He wrote: “As a symbol of this we might even say we shall alter the shape of parliament itself, turning it into a hemisphere and setting up a design competition to do this before the millennium.” The proposal met with little enthusiasm in No 10. In a memo to the prime minister, Jonathan Powell, Blair’s chief of staff, wrote: “I can’t believe that he has proposed a hemispherical House of Commons. Are you sure you want to go ahead with this project?” Dome wow factor Tony Blair was worried about the lack of “wow” factor in early plans for the Millennium Dome, a project he inherited from John Major’s Conservative government and decided to go ahead with despite the opposition of many of his cabinet colleagues. Newly released National Archive documents show that Charlie Falconer, who inherited responsibility for the Dome after Peter Mandelson’s resignation over a personal loan controversy, frequently lamented the lack of “wows”. “We need at least 10 wows” but the zones were “too samey and too worthy”, Falconer wrote in one memo to Blair. Blair annotated the note: “This is v worrying.” The Dome was a controversial scheme, but Falconer wrote to Blair: “We have a dome and we must all work to make it a success.” Mandelson, after his resignation, wanted to retain some kind of continuing role in the Millennium Experience, and Blair had in mind a sort of “PPS [parliamentary private secretary] role for Peter on the Dome”, the documents show. Claire Pillman, of the Millennium Unit at the culture department, said Mandelson could not be appointed as a special adviser on the Dome as it would be seen as a return to “shady figure behind the throne”, and Lord Falconer risked being portrayed as a “convenient puppet”.When Covid first hit, Jack Battersby, residential sales manager at Taunton’s Wilkie May &amp; Tuckwood estate agents, set up in his spare room and fretted that lean times were ahead. “It didn’t turn out like that. Business has been great,” said Batttersby as his desk phone rang constantly and messages pinged on his mobile. “We’re getting customers from all over – people from London and the south-east who since Covid are working from home so they might as well be here, but also people moving from places like Bristol and Exeter because they get more for their money.” Battersby was not surprised to see Somerset’s county town topping the Halifax’s UK house price growth table, with a 21.8% increase to £315,759. “There’s brilliant countryside all around but we’re also well connected.” Taunton is surrounded by high ground – Exmoor, the Quantock Hills, the Blackdown Hills – and the surfing beaches of north Devon and Cornwall are easy to reach. But the town is also just an hour’s drive from Bristol and by rail London Paddington is less than two hours away. Hannah Thomas, a negotiator at another estate agency, Greenslade Taylor Hunt, said properties were snapped up within days. “It’s been a mad year in a good way,” she said. Thomas said families were keen to move into neighbourhoods on the edge of town in good catchment areas such as Trull, where an end-of-terrace Victorian cottage is on the market for £350,000. “We’re also getting larger families moving in, for example three generations living together in a larger house. People seem to be looking for different ways of living.” Another reason for the property boom, according to Thomas, is the new nuclear power station Hinkley Point C, which is being built on the Somerset coast 17 miles north of Taunton. Some employees who will be there for a while are buying homes, while investors are hunting houses to rent out rooms to temporary workers. Taunton is also attracting retirees. Quantock House, for example, has apartments for the over-55s who can enjoy an in-house bistro, treatment rooms and balconies with views to the hills. Hundreds more homes are being built as developers try to meet the demand. But this is causing disruption, puncturing the quiet that incomers crave. “The constant building and shutting down roads for the construction traffic is a pain,” said Nicky Heal, who owns Nicky’s Flower Studio. Chris Birch, who runs the upmarket ready meals shop, Cook, said he had moved from Surrey for the quiet life but warned Taunton was not perfect, reeling off the shops that have shut recently, including a large Debenhams department store. There has not yet been a boom in businesses such as trendy coffee bars that incoming Londoners might like. “Who would invest at the moment?” said Birch. And anyone hoping for a cutting edge arts scene might find Taunton wanting. The town has a theatre and arts complex, Taunton Brewhouse, but few would claim hipness for the town. The tourist information centre flags up its flower show (est 1831) before its nightlife. Taunton has no top flight football or rugby club, though the town’s skyline is dominated by the floodlights of the country cricket ground. There are also losers from the booming property market. Charities who work with the homeless have reported a very busy Christmas getting emergency supplies out to the most vulnerable and the rising property prices are making it harder for younger people and those in poorer-paid employment to get on the property ladder. Concerns are growing that local people could be pushed out by the rising prices – as they have been in places like Bristol and further west like St Mawes in Cornwall. Gross weekly pay in Somerset is £567 compared with £577 in the south-west as a whole and £613 in Great Britain. Figures released by the government in the summer revealed that more than 20,000 families in the south-west were made homeless or threatened with losing their homes during the first phase of the pandemic. Somerset West and Taunton council acknowledges that lack of affordable housing is an issue in the area and is aiming to build 1,000 new council homes in the next 30 years . It has also drawn up a plan to end rough sleeping by 2027 and has taken steps to try to tackle the problem such as leasing out affordable accommodation to medical students at a new development called Coal Orchard in the town. Property hunting in Taunton on Wednesday were the Procter family from Berkshire. Dad Peter said he, his wife and two young children were looking for a change of scene. “It feels too busy where we live,” said Procter. “I could work from home and could get into the office in London once or twice a week if we lived here. It will be a bit of extra effort for me but it will mean we all have much fresher air, a slower way of life, which I think most people need just now.”British Steel sank to a loss of £140m last year, according to accounts that showed financial difficulties even after it was taken over by a new Chinese owner. The UK company was saved from liquidation in 2019 when Jingye stepped in to buy it – for only £24m – after months of subsidised operations as the government pushed to find a buyer for an important industrial employer. Its previous owner, the private equity firm Greybull Capital, exited after only three years in charge. British Steel employs about 3,000 people at a steelworks in Scunthorpe, north Lincolnshire, in one of the “red wall” constituencies that were a critical part of the Conservative party’s 2019 general election victory, with Holly Mumby-Croft deposing the Labour MP Nic Dakin. The company lost £69 a tonne on 2.6m tonnes of steel produced during 2020, Jingye’s first year in charge, according to accounts filed at Companies House, underlining the dire state of the UK steel industry. It made revenues of £844m during the year. The accounts showed a profit overall for the year of £295m, although that was only achieved through a £410m paper profit resulting from the £24m knockdown price for assets that were valued at £434m. Jingye, whose sprawling operations are otherwise mainly based in China, also lent its new British subsidiary £220m to use as cash to run day-to-day operations. The drop in demand from automotive customers was a key factor in the £140m operating loss for 2020, as car factories were shut temporarily at the start of the coronavirus pandemic. In the past year steel prices have soared as demand for infrastructure investments rose during the rapid economic recovery and supply failed to keep up after a few difficult years. Yet British Steel has warned of difficulties in taking advantage of the boom. In September it said that surging energy prices meant it was impossible to make steel profitably at busy points in the day when energy demand was highest. It quoted a 50-fold increase in energy prices at some points in the day in September compared with April. Energy costs account for as much as a fifth of the total manufacturing cost, according to UK Steel, a lobby group that argued earlier this month that high energy prices made the UK industry uncompetitive against rivals in the EU and beyond. Jingye has promised to invest heavily in British Steel to improve its energy efficiency in a bid to cut costs as well as carbon emissions. On buying the company Jingye pledged to invest £1.2bn overall in upgrading British Steel’s assets. The accounts revealed only £38m of capital expenditure in 2020 as the pandemic delayed major projects, but they also highlighted plans for £123m of investment planned during this year. British Steel is owned by a holding company, Jingye Steel (UK) Holding Limited, although the parent company is months late in filing its first accounts at Companies House, a legal requirement. British Steel was approached for comment.Westminster Abbey originally anticipated that Elton John would sing Your Song at the funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales, rather than Goodbye England’s Rose, his reworking of Candle in the Wind, newly released records show. An early order-of-service draft included the lyrics of Your Song, although it was mistitled Our Song. A second draft, sent for approval to Buckingham Palace by the dean of Westminster Abbey, Dr Wesley Carr, substituted Candle in the Wind. In the draft, Carr said “boldness”, the “unexpected” and “something of the modern world” should be included, and suggested “anything classical or choral (even if a popular classic such as something by [Andrew] Lloyd Webber) is inappropriate”. Better would be something by John, a favourite of Diana’s and “popular culture at its best”, the dean wrote, adding: “If it were thought the words too sentimental (although that is by no means a bad thing given the national mood) they need not be printed – only sung.” John has previously said he and his songwriting partner, Bernie Taupin, reworked Candle in the Wind at the suggestion of Richard Branson. It became the second biggest-selling physical single of all time, after Bing Crosby’s White Christmas, selling 33m copies. The circumstances of the death of Diana led to concerns within No 10 that Tony Blair might be bounced into publicly addressing the “sensitive” area of privacy and media intrusion by Jacques Chirac, the National Archive documents show. In a telephone call with Blair, Chirac, the then French president, proposed “tightening existing privacy law”, leading Downing Street officials to instruct the Foreign Office to warn them if it got wind that the French intended to make an announcement on the issue. Chirac told Blair that the deaths of Diana and Dodi Fayed, in a car crash after being chased by paparazzi “called into question the whole issue of media intrusion and he proposed to [Blair] that they look at toughening existing privacy laws”, according to a No 10 letter to the Foreign Office. The prime minister “agreed that public feeling would be running high, but (deliberately) made no commitment to look at the UK privacy laws” wrote Blair’s private secretary, Angus Lapsley. But if the French government made an announcement on those lines, “this would present us with a sensitive handling issue in relation to the UK government’s stance on media intrusion”, the letter continued. “The prime minister would therefore be grateful if you could endeavour to give us as much prior warning as possible of any sign that the French do indeed intend to make an announcement.” Downing Street’s view was that tighter legislation was not the answer and the biggest impact would come from a change of heart by the media itself, briefing documents released by the National Archive show. Downing Street was also relieved when Hillary Clinton, the then first lady, changed her mind about attacking the media at a press conference in London before the funeral. “Her personal inclination is to attack the press, but her staff are stopping her from doing it,” Jonathan Powell, Blair’s chief of staff, wrote to the press secretary Alastair Campbell, who scrawled “good” on the memo. As conspiracy theories over UK security and intelligence involvement in the deaths continued, the Labour MP Lindsay Hoyle, who had tried unsuccessfully to raise questions in the Commons on the subject, wrote to Blair asking him to make a public statement about the rumours. Hoyle, then the newly elected MP for Chorley, and now the Commons Speaker, was described as a “publicity-mad loony” in a Post-it note by a No 10 official, who said the Foreign Office’s strong advice was for Blair not to reply in writing. The Foreign Office feared Hoyle would relay any reply to the media and that a public statement “out of the blue” by Blair would give fresh wind to the conspiracy theories, another memo showed. Blair, who was advised by his private office to “put this in writing clearly and definitively”, wrote back to Hoyle in a personal letter stating: “Any suggestion that any British official organisation or department had anything to do with this tragic event is both ridiculous and deeply distressing for the bereaved families.” Before Diana’s funeral, the Conservative leader William Hague unsuccessfully urged Blair to delay the referendum on Scottish devolution as national mourning suspended campaigning. “This inevitably means that the referendum campaigns will effectively close down, and only three days will then remain for the Scottish campaign. This cannot, in any respects, be regarded as satisfactory,” Hague wrote.Resident Alien (Sky Max/Now) “The sci-fi murder mystery doctor dramedy Earth needs now!” That was the US marketing blurb for Resident Alien, a plucky attempt to turn the show’s audacious genre-mashing into a marketing angle. While it certainly has a lot going on – an alien crash-lands in small-town Colorado and attempts to evade detection by hijacking the identity of a big-city doctor – it only took a few episodes for me to realise why I was enjoying it so much. This story of a fusspot out-of-towner clashing with the rhythms of a town full of curious eccentrics is a spiritual descendant of 1990s fish-out-of-water touchstone Northern Exposure, complete with snowy setting and covetable local bar. But what makes it truly special is Alan Tudyk’s performance as the literal-minded, self-regarding ET who finds himself beginning to empathise with humans while still plotting to annihilate us all. It’s a winning combination of black humour and doofus slapstick. Graeme Virtue Breeders (Sky One) By rights, Breeders should not be a hidden gem: it stars Daisy Haggard and Martin Freeman, two of our finest comic actors, and was co-created by the latter alongside Chris Addison and Simon Blackwell, best known for The Thick Of It. In terms of viewing figures, however, it qualifies. That’s partly because it airs on Sky One, a channel that provides its programme-makers creative freedom, but very few viewers to actually witness it. Yet it’s also due to the highly discomfiting nature of the show itself: this is a comedy about parenting whose chaos is in no way cosy. Following the domestic travails of Ally and Paul, Breeders unflinchingly catalogues how well-meaning mothers and fathers can fail their children: series one involves many trips to A&amp;E, a social services visit and Ally mistakenly believing Paul has murdered their insomniac children. In series two, which aired this year, the action revolves around Paul’s anger issues and the breakdown of his relationship with his son. None of these things are laughing matters. Except, in this cathartic, troubling and gratifyingly complex show, they somehow are. Rachel Aroesti The Dog House (Channel 4) Possibly the most under-appreciated mainstay of Channel 4’s primetime scheduling, The Dog House’s second season inexplicably flew below the radar in 2021. And yet, it was an unalloyed televisual joy whose matching process between wannabe dog adopters and adorable pooches was like First Dates for pet owners. Think surprisingly emotional interviews from people longing for the companionship of a dog – tempered with waggy tails and often tearfully grateful humans. It was an uplifting joyful romp of a show, with redemption at its heart. Alexi Duggins The Hermit of Treig (BBC Scotland) When Ken Smith was 26, he was brutally beaten up during a night out and spent 23 days unconscious. Doctors told him he would never speak or walk again. But he did. In fact, he walked and walked until he finally arrived somewhere he felt comfortable. Now, Smith is 74 and has been living alone in a self-constructed cabin in the Scottish Highlands for almost 40 years. Lizzie McKenzie’s beautiful, redemptive documentary finds Smith contemplating the possible end of both his lifestyle and his life itself – intimations of his mortality are becoming more frequent and the wisdom of him remaining in his cabin is debatable. And yet somehow, this film never feels sad or regretful – it’s simply the story of a man who made a very unusual choice and seems entirely at peace with it. And seeing him, still lost in wonder, still awed by the dazzling nature that surrounds him, you understand why. Phil Harrison Cooking With Paris (Netflix) The Friends reunion, The OC’s arrival on All 4 and a Sex and the City reboot: the pandemic has proved that nostalgic noughties television is hugely popular. And any millennial who grew up watching work-phobic heiress Paris Hilton trying her perfectly manicured hand at grafting on The Simple Life knows no one embodies those simpler times more than her. So when she returned with a “cooking” series in the summer, it served as a sort of therapy for those of us looking for a bit of familiar comfort while trapped indoors. It is inexplicably pleasing to see this bizarre being – with her endless resources, state-of-the-art kitchen and team of staff – struggle to serve up unapologetically on-brand and disgusting looking creations such as Frosted Flakes french toast and Unicorn-oli Cannoli to guests including Kim West and Demi Lovato. We also see a different, sweet side to Hilton – one which actually reminds us she is a human, not a caricature – as she talks about wanting to start a family. For the most part, though, Hilton really is on another planet, and it was a pleasure to escape this plagued one to join her there for a few glittery hours. Hollie Richardson History of Swear Words (Netflix) You have to remember that 5 January 2021 was an unbelievably dark day. We were one day off our third national lockdown. Everything felt heavy and apocalyptic. But then what should Netflix throw up? Why, a series entitled History of Swear Words, where a range of comedians and historians explored the usage of the words fuck, shit, bitch, dick, pussy and damn. Better still, it was presented by none other than Nicolas Cage, his hairline tugged all the way down his forehead like a hood, apparently for the sole reason that there is nothing as entertaining on Earth as Nicolas Cage screaming swear words at the top of his lungs. Had History of Swear Words been shown at any other time in human history, it would have been automatic filler. On 5 January 2021, though? My god, it was just what we needed. Stuart Heritage Hip Hop: The Songs That Shook America (BBC Four) Hip Hop: The Songs That Shook America took one song an episode, avoiding tracks already widely acknowledged as classics, and did a deep dive into its provenance, cultural history and the aftershocks it left in its wake. It looked at Kanye West’s Jesus Walks and Kendrick Lamar’s Alright, but the two best episodes came later in the run: one that studied Outkast’s Elevators, which took us back in time to see high school-era Big Boi and Andre 3000; and one on The Bridge by Marley Marl and MC Shan, which played out like an in-depth alternative history of American rap. It occasionally massaged the story into the shape it wished to present, but for the most part, you came away feeling as if it was very good value indeed. It was chatty, informative, each story was ushered along briskly, and it made a refreshing change from the usual folk/prog BBC Four music docs. Rebecca Nicholson Only Murders in the Building (Disney+) What’s scarier than a friend announcing they’re starting a podcast? Only Murders in the Building took this very 2021 concept and spun it into murder mystery gold. Steve Martin, Martin Short and Selena Gomez starred as true crime podcast obsessives who start their own show after a neighbour’s death. The case was intriguing enough but it was the trio’s chemistry that captivated, making good use of their generation gap (see Steve Martin’s inability to write a casual text) with Gomez, famous from her smiley Disney Channel days, playing their straight-faced foil. Throw in some star cameos – like Tina Fey’s imperious true crime podcaster and Sting, playing to insufferable pop star type – and there wasn’t a more delightful show about homicide this year. Not least due to its frequent, playful ridiculing of true crime tropes, plus a cleverly scripted episode whose minimal dialogue movingly delved into the perspective of a deaf character. Things ended with a cliffhanger – what else? – for a second season. Henry WongBlack Country New Road – Ants from Up There Knotty, arty, indebted to the post-rock of Slint, bedecked with sprechgesang vocals and unruly sax, Black Country New Road’s debut album, For the First Time, was acclaimed as one of 2021’s best: Chaos Space Marine, the first track to be released from its follow-up, suggests things continuing in a suitably abstruse vein. • Released on 4 February Dave One of many artists belatedly touring a highlight album of 2021 – We’re All in This Alone Together was as well-received as Dave’s Mercury prize-winning 2019 debut, Psychodrama. There’s a convincing argument that he’s currently the best rapper in Britain: it’s hard to think of anyone else addressing serious issues so eloquently. • Tour begins 15 February, Motorpoint Arena Nottingham Guns N’ Roses – Hard Skool Not an album, but an EP, containing two new songs – Hard Skool and Absurd, both leftovers from 2008’s preposterous Chinese Democracy – but the fact that it’s the first new GNR release to feature guitarist Slash and bassist Duff McKagan for more than 25 years gives it cachet. • 25 February Stormzy A belated victory lap, biggest-ever tour for UK rap’s biggest star – including three nights at London’s O2 Arena – that was meant to be in support of his 2019 album Heavy Is the Head but ended up being delayed twice as a result of Covid. • Tour begins 13 March, Motorpoint Arena Cardiff Midlake – For the Sake of Bethel Woods The first album in eight years from the revered US folk-rock band – who apparently reconvened after keyboard player Jesse Chandler’s late father appeared to him in a dream and told him to “get the band back together”. Single Meanwhile… is an enticing taster: a lovely, softly psychedelic glide. • 18 March Let’s Eat Grandma – Two Ribbons Three years on from their award-winning second studio album I’m All Ears, the off-beam duo of Rosa Walton and Jenny Hollingworth return. The two tracks released thus far see them staying on the path that’s led from weird teenage curiosity status to a cheeringly idiosyncratic take on pop. • 8 April Wet Leg – Wet Leg Wet Leg were one of 2021’s big alt-rock breakthroughs: the deadpan Chaise Longue was one of the year’s best singles. But it also had a certain kind of novelty about it – the funny track at No 6 in John Peel’s Festive 50, for those old enough to remember such things. Their eponymous debut album should establish whether they’re in it for the long haul. • 8 April Dua Lipa The weird time-lag caused by Covid in full effect: here’s Dua Lipa finally touring the biggest pop album of 2020, Future Nostalgia, at the point where, ordinarily, you would be thinking about a follow-up. Still, the songs are fabulous pop-disco confections and given the strong visual identity she has developed, you’d imagine the staging will be something else. • Tour begins 15 April, AO Arena Manchester Michael Kiwanuka The 2020 Mercury prize winner is one of Britain’s finest singer-songwriters: his loose, emotive, powerful hybrid of soul, psychedelia and funk is hugely impressive; his live performances, where the songs are allowed space to stretch out, are consistently fantastic. • Tour begins 6 May, O2 Academy Glasgow Lorde Her third album, Solar Power, won a decidedly mixed response: for every critic enthralled by its homespun, understated quality, another found it underbaked and solipsistic. But she’s a reliably compelling and inventive live performer: it should be intriguing to see what she cooks up for this tour. • Tour begins 25 May, O2 Academy Leeds Abba Quite what form Abba’s virtual return to the stage will take remains a closely guarded secret. “Abbatars” are involved, as is a full live band, but not, as most people seemed to assume, holograms. It has to be something special to warrant the hype that has built up around the shows in recent months. • Tour begins 27 May, Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park, London Billie Eilish Another female artist whose eagerly awaited 2021 album saw her deliberately stepping back from the overheated climate of pop mania – the sonically muted Happier Than Ever largely depicted being a teenage superstar as a life of misery. Whether that mutes the chorus of teenage screams at these arena gigs remains to be seen. • Tour begins 3 June, SSE Arena Belfast Diana Ross Ross’s most recent album, Thank You, was pretty awful, but – with all due respect – who goes to see Diana Ross in 2022 in the hope of hearing new material? Better to focus on the setlist from her 2020 US dates, which was as packed with Supremes and disco-era hits as anyone could wish. • Tour begins 10 June, Cardiff Castle Download An impressive number of big-hitters at the summer’s biggest metal event, fully covering the hard rock waterfront: Kiss, Iron Maiden and Biffy Clyro headline; Deftones, Korn, Megadeth and Sepultura lurk a little further down the bill; should Dying Fetus, Venom Prison or Malevolence be more your thing they’re appearing, too. • 10-12 June, Donnington Park, Derby Sam Fender Fender’s UK arena tour in spring is already sold out, evidence of a soaring popularity founded in the fact that there isn’t really anyone else like him at the moment: a young artist making stadium-ready guitar rock with a furious political bent. There is strong support at this 40,000-capacity gig from Fontaines DC and Beabadoobee, among others. • 15 July, Finsbury Park, London All Points East/Field Day Six events over two weekends, with a spectacular lineup: Gorillaz, Idles, Kraftwerk, the Chemical Brothers, Tame Impala, Nick Cave, the National, Dry Cleaning, Self Esteem, Greentea Peng, Floating Points, Perfume Genius and a host more, making it the ideal event for anyone who fancies an eclectic array of artists. • 19, 20, 25-28 August, Victoria Park, London End of the Road Only one artist is thus far confirmed for the 2022 End of the Road – Pixies – but the lineup is invariably well-curated and eclectic, lurking somewhere between leftfield alt-rock, folk dance music and, increasingly, jazz. The beautiful surroundings, complete with peacocks, make End of the Road one of the most loved of the larger boutique festivals. • 1-4 Sepember, Larmer Tree Gardens, near Blandford, Dorset The Cure In 2022, the Cure will be 44 years old. With a mammoth back catalogue to wrangle, their gigs have become epics: when they last played live, in 2019, their average set featured 27 songs. They last put out a new album in 2008, but two – possibly their last – are apparently planned for release at some point. • Tour begins 1 December, 3Arena Dublin Rosalía – Motomani Rosalía’s 2018 album El Mal Querer – a brilliant fusion of flamenco and experimental electronic music – catapulted the Spanish singer-songwriter to global stardom. Its follow-up is, in her own words, “brave”, “very different” and apparently influenced by the sound of reggaeton. • Release date TBC Arctic Monkeys That the band are headlining the Reading and Leeds festivals indicates a new album is incoming (they were spotted recording it in Suffolk over the summer). However, details are scarce about the follow-up to 2018’s Tranquility Base Hotel and Casino – a relative commercial disappointment compared with its immediate predecessor, the multi-platinum global smash AM. • Release date TBC Classical and opera The Ordering of Moses Seventy years after it was composed, Canadian American Robert Nathaniel Dett’s oratorio “from scripture and folklore” finally receives its first performance in Britain. Joshua Wielerstein conducts the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra and Chorus; Chrystal E Williams and Rodrick Dixon are the soloists. • Symphony Hall, Birmingham, 23 February Toward the Unknown Region – RVW 150 To mark the 150th anniversary of the birth of Ralph Vaughan Williams, the Hallé Orchestra and the BBC Philharmonic share a cycle of his nine symphonies. Ryan Wigglesworth, Mark Elder and Andrew Davis and John Wilson are the conductors, and the programmes include other VW works, including Job and Toward the Unknown Region. • Bridgewater Hall, Manchester, 26 February – 12 May Tamara Stefanovich: 20 Sonatas A history of the piano sonata in three recitals: the ever-imaginative Tamara Stefanovich presents a marathon guide to the evolution of the most significant of musical forms. Domenico Scarlatti and Soler provide the baroque starting points for her survey, which extends into the 20th century with works by Hindemith, Eisler and Ustvolskaya. • Queen Elizabeth Hall, London, 27 February America, the Beautiful The centrepiece of violinist Pekka Kuusisto’s residency with the Scottish Chamber Orchestra is the UK premiere of Shrink, the concerto written for him in 2019 by Nico Muhly. It’s embedded in an all-American programme that also includes Missy Mazzoli’s Dissolve, O My Heart, Barber’s Adagio for Strings and Copland’s Appalachian Spring. • Holy Trinity, St Andrews, 16 March; Queen’s Hall, Edinburgh, 17 March; City Halls, Glasgow, 18 March Peter Grimes Deborah Warner follows her much admired 2019 Royal Opera production of Billy Budd with another Britten staging, which was first seen in Madrid last May. Allan Clayton takes the title role, with Maria Bengtsson as Ellen Orford and Bryn Terfel as Balstrode; Mark Elder conducts. • Royal Opera House, London, 17-31 March SoundState Five days of new music with the London Philharmonic and Philharmonia orchestras, London Sinfonietta, Arditti Quartet and Bang On a Can All-Stars. Soloists include Nicolas Hodges, Meredith Monk, Mark Knoop and Clare Chase, while among the dozen premieres are works by Rebecca Saunders, George Lewis, Mason Bates, Tansy Davies, Betsy Jolas, Liza Lim and Alex Paxton. • Southbank Centre, London, 30 March-3 April The Strauss Project Andris Nelsons conducts both his orchestras in four concerts devoted to Richard Strauss. His Barbican appearances with the Leipzig Gewandhaus focus on the symphonic poems, while at the Royal Festival Hall the Boston Symphony programmes feature An Alpine Symphony and the Symphonia Domestica, prefaced by the Four Last Songs and extracts from the opera Salome respectively. • Barbican, London EC2, 9 and 10 May, Royal Festival Hall, London, 12 and 13 May The Wreckers Glyndebourne’s summer season opens with the first professional production in Britain in more than half a century of Ethel Smyth’s best known opera. Directed by Melly Still and conducted by Robin Ticciati, it will be sung for the first time in French, the original language of the libretto, with a cast headed by Markus Brück and Clémentine Margaine.• Glyndebourne Opera House, Lewes, 21 May-24 June Violet Originally scheduled for last summer’s Aldeburgh festival, Tom Coult’s first opera finally reaches the stage, in Music Theatre Wales’s production, directed by Jude Christian. With a libretto by Alice Birch, it’s the story of a woman who seizes the chance to escape her humdrum life as time accelerates around her. • Snape Maltings, Aldeburgh, 3 and 5 June, then touring Parsifal Opera North follows its hugely successful concert staging of The Ring cycle with a similar treatment of Wagner’s final music drama. Richard Farnes conducts once again, with PJ Harris the director this time; Toby Spence is Parsifal, Brindley Sherratt Gurnemanz and Katarina Karnéus Kundry. • Grand theatre, Leeds, 4-10 June, then touring to 26 JuneI’ve stopped arguing with my mum this year. I’ve been trying to get her to see my side for more than two decades. Almost every conversation we used to have would end with my insides twisted up like a pretzel. We would argue about everything, from religion to patriarchy and family. No conversation was safe. I’ve never had cause to doubt my mother’s love. Maybe that’s why it got so bad, and why Mum bore the brunt of my frustrations; I knew she wasn’t going to leave me. But now in her 70s, weak from having battled cancer, and left with hearing loss, I’m acutely aware that we’re running out of time. We’ve been standing at the opposite sides of a bridge, our arms outstretched, not knowing how to get to each other for too long. Growing up, I trusted my parents. But the way I saw the world changed after my second arranged marriage ended in divorce. I felt betrayed by the choices they had made for me, especially my mum. I began to see injustices around me that I’d never noticed before. Small things, such as the men eating first at dinner parties, boys in the living room, girls in the kitchen. The men never offering to help. The advantages taken by extended family, and how these were only ever one-way. I began calling things out. While Dad seemed to understand, this wasn’t received well by Mum. She and I are both Muslim, but I found myself having different interpretations of what that meant. We look at texts, scripture, and theological stories through the lens of the culture we are raised in. My mum grew up in Pakistan and in Iran. I was born and raised in England. Urdu is her first language, English is mine. As we navigated the knotty problems of life, a lot of our adult relationship became lost in translation. We would argue about women’s rights, about how men should be treated – and I felt she wanted me to accept the status quo too often. Mum believed the demise of my marriage was due to bad luck, I saw it as the symptom of something far bigger. One day, halfway through a family visit, my eight-year-old son, exhausted with our arguments, said to me: “Mama, don’t argue with Nani.” I looked into his eyes. He was pleading with me. I had to find a way to stop. So I did. At the age of 47, I finally scratched the CD that Mum and I had been playing on a loop for years. I began ending conversations early to prevent rows, I stopped filling silences, and I didn’t ask questions that I knew I wouldn’t like the answer to. As the dynamic between us shifted, so did my understanding of the woman who is my mother. I did the painful work of looking at myself, and I began to see my mother as a person separate to me. Mum came to England from Karachi in 1973 when she was 23 years old. At the time, homes in Bradford still had outside toilets; in Karachi, my mum had lived in a sprawling house with several washrooms, and staff to clean them. She had arrived in a country where racism was rife, with a first-class degree that was not accepted here. I see now how frightening that must have been for her – and how much time must have been spent simply trying to survive here. She did not have energy to be angry like me. This year, I have come to understand that my rage was not for her, but grief for the people and experiences that I feel I have lost, for having had to fight alone, for having had to fight at all. But my mum had also had her battles, and she’d done her best. We love each other, and love requires acceptance. We’re not fully there yet. I’m still raw, and I get the sense my mum is still nervous, but we are edging towards each other, and hopefully our hands will meet in the centre of that bridge. Saima Mir is a journalist, writer and author of the novel The KhanBack in 2008, I lived in New York. I wasn’t a total stranger to North American winters – my stepmother is from Michigan, and the one and only time she persuaded me to go on a family sledging outing I was so cold I bailed and went back to sit in the car, like the moody teenager I most definitely was. But I’d never been on the continent for an entire winter. I bought a gigantic army surplus parka and resigned myself to months of wading through freezing slush, alternated with sitting in my studio apartment at night with the windows open because the ancient radiators had one setting: on. That was until I read an article in the New York Times travel section about upstate getaways. The mere mention of a charming B&amp;B overlooking the Delaware River, where you could watch nesting eagles on a nearby bluff while sipping cognac, was all it took. Manhattan’s dreary ice-bound streets slipped away momentarily, and I imagined myself on that very deck. I was in a long-distance relationship at the time, and what, I reasoned, could be more romantic than such a weekend? It was February, the very worst part of winter, and any twinkle of New York City’s seasonal cheer had well and truly died. My boyfriend was due a visit, and I was ecstatic at the prospect of a trip out of the city. We would go somewhere a hundred times more romantic than my apartment (which housed the world’s smallest and most uncomfortable bed), a thousand times more interesting than the corner diner, and a million times more nurturing than the intersection of Broadway and Amsterdam Avenue. I could see it all: the icy river threading its way below the B&amp;B’s deck, the eagles soaring majestically above us, me and my boyfriend holding hands and laughing in the snow, pink-cheeked and very much in love. The B&amp;B was remote. It was technically in a hamlet. Even better, I thought. The trip there involved taking a train from Penn station to the nearest town, then hiring a car to drive the rest of the way. No problem. I should have been alerted to potential trouble ahead when reports of snow and ice storms in the region started coming in. When I phoned the B&amp;B to confirm we would still be coming, they seemed surprised and told us everyone else had cancelled. Being English, this didn’t occur to me. But as I now know, American weather is different. As the train headed north, it got quieter and quieter. Soon, we were the only passengers. It was absolutely freezing, and we were ill-equipped. We made it to the end of the line, picked up the cheapest hire car on offer, and proceeded to drive to our destination. Or rather tried to drive. With no snow tires on our crappy tin box, we slid all over the icy roads, some of which featured terrifying drops on either side. I genuinely thought we were going to die. I had a panic attack, crouched in the footwell of the passenger seat, which I tried to alleviate by chanting. I have no idea what, but probably something like: “Oh God, please don’t let us die out here.” My boyfriend was stoically silent as he attempted to navigate the unfamiliar terrain and not kill us both. At least that’s how I remember it. He may have told me to shut up and let him concentrate on driving, and he would have been perfectly in his rights to do so. Somehow, we made it the 18 terrifying miles to said charming, and yes, very remote, B&amp;B, and we were indeed the only guests there. A captive audience, it turned out. The place was run by a gay couple, one of whom was sensibly still back in the city. The remaining proprietor took a keen interest in us, plying us with cocktails and nibbles. Relieved not to be in the death car any more, and emboldened by alcohol, I naively enquired how we could obtain dinner – thinking that given the magnitude of the weather disaster we were experiencing, we would generously be offered some sort of sustenance. “There’s a pizza place a few miles away. They don’t deliver,” he said. Upon realising we would have to get back on the road, I am unashamed to say I cried. And I can’t even drive. So we took a deep breath and went up to our room to freshen up, for we were starving and after a near-death experience pizza sounded just the ticket. Either the walls of the B&amp;B were thin or the physics of sound travelling were affected by the absence of any other guests, but right there in our room, we could clearly hear the proprietor on the phone to his partner – and he was telling him everything about us. What I was doing in New York, what my boyfriend’s job was, how we had travelled to the B&amp;B, how we had asked for dinner … If things weren’t uncomfortable enough before, they certainly were now. But we duly went to the pizza place, which was charming and wood-panelled, and we lost ourselves in food and wine. The next morning, we started afresh. It was romantic, even if we felt like hostages. There was crisp, blinding white snow all around, beautiful valleys and the Catskill mountains. We went to an outdoor store, got properly equipped with snow-boots and warm hats, and went for walks: crunching through snow, marvelling at the views and the fresh air. We made a short, Blair Witch-style film; we had a lot of sex. And we saw baby eagles through the telescope on the deck set up to view the nest – an amazing sight that I will always cherish. The kicker to all this romance came at cocktail hour on the second and last night, however. I had relaxed somewhat into our hostage situation, and my guard was down. If our host didn’t know literally everything about me from the first cocktail hour, he certainly did now. He sidled up to me as I was helping myself to some more spiced nuts. “Honey,” he said, “he is never going to marry you. Never.” I was too taken aback and too polite, young and English to say anything much at all. I tried to casually shake it off, but his words burned into me. I didn’t tell my boyfriend. Long-distance relationships are hard. We had been fighting a lot. But I loved my boyfriend with a fiery intensity, and was planning to go back to the UK and move in with him. He was seven years older than me, with a grownup job, a grownup house, and generally a life I hoped I could be part of. He represented stability, success – and yes, I did want to get married, although I don’t remember telling our host that, and certainly not in front of my boyfriend. I felt ashamed somehow – caught out, as if my desire for solidity, for togetherness, for marriage was emblazoned on my forehead. But of course he was right. Our relationship ended up an utter fireball of disaster. There were breakups, there were reunions, and eventually I left him. But still, we’ll always have the Catskills.Attenborough and the Mammoth Graveyard 8pm, BBC One True, this title might not instantly evoke seasonal images of sparkles and candy canes. But it’s a calming dose of Attenborough nonetheless. In this one-off, he meets a couple who accidentally found a mammoth fossil in Swindon. Joined by archaeologists and palaeontologists, they excavate what turns out to be a mammoth graveyard in the prehistoric riverbed of the Thames. Cue a very exciting lesson on the relationship between early humans and mammoths during the ice ages. Hollie Richardson Christmas University Challenge 8.30pm, BBC Two As this year’s festive run of the quizshow continues with graduate contestants, tonight’s second semi-final sees host Jeremy Paxman firing questions at the remaining two highest-scoring winners from the heats. Which team will secure a spot in the final? HR The Great British Sewing Bee: Celebrity New Year Special 9pm, BBC One After the Christmas special, here’s another sewing extravaganza to take us into the new year. Tonight, Drag Race winner Lawrence Chaney, Starstruck creator Rose Matafeo, journalist Kirsty Wark and Steps singer Claire Richards rustle up a festive waistcoat and transform some old clothes into children’s party outfits. Sara Pascoe hosts, while Patrick Grant and Esme Young are on judging duties. HR One Night in London Zoo 9pm, Channel 4 Alex Brooker and Josh Widdicombe spend the night in the zoo, American Werewolf in London-style – which makes the show’s rule of “If you break it, you pay for it” sound even more worrying, frankly. Comedians Desiree Burch and Guz Khan join them as they befriend the penguins and sidestep prodigious quantities of camel dung. Ali Catterall Celebrity I Literally Just Told You 10pm, Channel 4 Produced by Richard Bacon, here’s the first celebrity special version of the new “gameshow with a unique twist” fronted by Jimmy Carr (yes, him again). As questions are written throughout the show based on things that are said, Aisling Bea, Asim Chaudhry, Alex Horne and Lorraine Kelly need to pay attention and answer them correctly to win big for charity. HR And Just Like That 9pm, Sky Comedy The Other Three (Sarah Jessica Parker, Cynthia Nixon and Kristin Davis) continue their quest to navigate the brave new world with its Pelotons, podcasts and people of different races you can actually be friends with. This week sees the “gals” trot off on yet more adventures for fans to add to their collections of reruns. Hannah Verdier Film choices The Remains of the Day (James Ivory, 1993), 4.50pm, BBC Two Merchant Ivory’s finest film, a devastatingly sad drama superbly adapted by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala from Kazuo Ishiguro’s 1930s-set country house novel. Anthony Hopkins is repression personified as Stevens, the loyal-to-a-fault butler to James Fox’s Nazi sympathiser Lord Darlington. But when new housekeeper Kenton (Emma Thompson) arrives at the estate and shows an interest in him, there are hints of a thaw in his character. Hopkins and Thompson are on the top of their game, nuanced but on point emotionally, in a world hidebound by class and tradition. Simon Wardell Judy (Rupert Goold, 2019), 9pm, BBC Two “Unreliable and uninsurable” – that’s Judy Garland in late 1968, just before she flies to London for a five-week run of concerts at the Talk of the Town nightclub, in this drama. The actor and singer is a figure in sad decline: underweight, hooked on prescription drugs, often drunk and missing her children back in LA, whom she can’t afford to take care of. But still, in Renée Zellweger’s outstanding portrayal, she can knock your socks off with a song and inspire adoration from her many fans. A tragedy about the uses and abuses of talent. SW Live sport Premier League football: Everton v Newcastle United 7.30pm, Amazon Prime Video. And Manchester United v Burnley at 8.15pm.Covid is sweeping through the casts of musical theatre shows in Sydney and Melbourne, with major live productions forced to cancel performances. At least 90 performers have tested positive to the highly infectious virus and whole companies have been forced into isolation. The Sydney festival production of Qween Lear, a musical adaptation of King Lear that was meant to open at the Hordern Pavilion on 7 January, has been cancelled due to a Covid outbreak among the cast. Frozen the Musical at Her Majesty’s Theatre in Melbourne announced Covid-positive cases on Wednesday and cancelled some performances. Opera Australia, which this week cancelled performances of Great Opera Hits and its much-loved New Year’s Eve performance of La Bohème at the Sydney Opera House, confirmed “more than 20 [Covid] cases across the performing company”. In a statement on Thursday, Opera Australia’s CEO Fiona Allan said: “I don’t think any of us could have foreseen just how fast Omicron would spread and the effects it would have on the industry”. She committed the company to “opening the summer season on Tuesday 4 January”. The Sydney productions of Come From Away and Hamilton have already cancelled several performances leading up to New Year. Many more casts who were in rehearsals in Sydney this week – including the Sydney festival production of A Chorus Line – are now experiencing Covid outbreaks or being forced into isolation as close contacts. “It’s grim,” a Sydney-based musical theatre performer told Guardian Australia on Tuesday. The performer, who wanted to remain anonymous, painted a sobering picture of the scale of the issue, saying more than a dozen members of the Hamilton cast had been stricken with Covid as well as significant proportions of the cast of Come From Away and the Alanis Morissette musical Jagged Little Pill. On Wednesday three other prominent musical theatre insiders confirmed to Guardian Australia specific numbers of infected cast members in each production. One producer, who asked not to be named, said there had also been multiple cases among the casts of A Chorus Line and Qween Lear. A Chorus Line on Thursday rescheduled its dates at Sydney’s Riverside Theatre from 6-16 January to 13-22 January. A performer who tested positive in Sydney this week, and also preferred not to be named, told Guardian Australia: “Nearly all the performers I know who are positive only have mild symptoms and we are feeling optimistic about getting back on stage. We will have antibodies so hopefully this won’t happen again. It’s frustrating because we were so strict. We were wearing masks right up until the moment we go on stage but it’s so contagious.” Hamilton ticket holders are being contacted with offers of a full refund or to rebook their seats. Performances of Hamilton, which were suspended on 22 December, are scheduled to recommence on 5 January. “We certainly intend to reopen the show as soon as we can,” said a spokesperson for the show’s producer, Michael Cassel. Guardian Australia contacted producers for Jagged Little Pill, Hamilton, Come From Away, A Chorus Line and Sydney festival for comment and all of them declined to give specific details about the number of positive Covid cases, citing privacy concerns. ‘We need to minimise risk’ Meanwhile, Harry Potter and the Cursed Child, another Michael Cassel production – which is currently playing in Melbourne – is “business as usual”. The producers of Jagged Little Pill, which finished its Sydney run on 19 December, were meeting on Wednesday ahead of the show’s scheduled Melbourne opening on 4 January. “We’ll see where things are at and how performances will proceed,” said a company spokesperson. Frozen the Musical at Melbourne’s Her Majesty’s Theatre confirmed in an Instagram post on Wednesday that performances on 29 and 30 December were cancelled due to Covid cases in the company. Also in Melbourne, Moulin Rouge! The Musical is proceeding as advertised. Covid is also hitting the independent theatre sector. In Sydney, an outdoor production of Shakespeare’s As You Like It has its Orlando in isolation as a close contact of a positive case. The show is proceeding with a new actor in the role. The 2022 Sydney festival, which opens on 6 January, said it planned to proceed despite the cancellation of Qween Lear as well as the “unforeseen disruption” to the musical theatre show 宿 (stay), the latter which has had two performances cancelled but is now expected to go ahead from 12 January. “Given the evolving nature of the current Covid-19 outbreak, changes to some performance schedules are expected,” festival organisers said in a statement. “Covid remains an ongoing challenge. However, it’s one that the festival is prepared for, and the safety of audiences, staff and performers is, and always will be, our number one priority. “Any changes to the program will be actioned and announced as required. We’ll be monitoring the situation, working closely with government, and will follow any advice or orders should these change.” Festival producers are taking extra measures to ensure their shows will go on. Actors are living in bubbles – in single rooms in the same facility where possible. Casts are being bolstered with extra understudies to cover sudden absences. The State Theatre Company of South Australia is presenting its Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? at Sydney Opera House from 13 January and is co-presenting the musical Girl from the North Country at the Theatre Royal from 5 January. “We have understudies for every role in Girl From the North Country and we are bringing in understudies for Virginia Woolf. This is an extra cost of around $60,000 to $100,000 for theatre companies,” said the company’s artistic director, Mitchell Butel. “We have all cast members in a bubble in company accommodation in Adelaide and Sydney so they are not staying with family or friends. No one is mingling and they are doing rapid antigen tests.” Butel said theatre audiences were still relatively safe compared with many other venues, adding that most theatres still require audiences to check in, prove their double vaccination status and wear masks throughout the show. “A theatre audience isn’t there to converse or mingle with as many people as possible, they are there to witness a show,” he said. “As far as we know, there hasn’t been a single instance of transmission inside a theatre in Australia. But we do need to minimise risk. People are taking their masks off to drink in the foyer. The industry may need to bring back rules that prevent drinking or eating in foyers to keep everyone safe.” Covid outbreaks are affecting musical theatre productions around the world. On Wednesday Australian performer Hugh Jackman, currently starring in the Broadway revival of The Music Man, announced he had tested positive for Covid in New York. In a video posted to social media the 53-year-old Hollywood star announced he had mild symptoms “like a cold … a scratchy throat and a bit of a runny nose, but I’m fine … As soon as I’m clear, I’ll be back on stage.”A Filipino-inspired doughnut shop in New York that started as a short-term project after its founders were made jobless by the pandemic has become so in demand that it attracted a waiting list of 10,000 customers. The Kora doughnuts – which are getting media attention – join a long list of hit baked goods in New York whose fame suddenly sees demand rocket. They include the cupcakes of the West Village’s Magnolia Bakery and the “cronut craze” of 2013, where the makers of a croissant-doughnut hybrid saw customers queuing up at dawn until they were forced to limit purchases to two each. Chef Kimberly Camara started making doughnuts in her apartment in Woodside, Queens, in the summer of 2020 with her partner Kevin Borja, after they both lost their jobs at Union Square Hospitality Group when coronavirus hit the city. At first, Camara and Borja, both 28, relied on the help of friends and family to deliver them to customers. But now they have a five-person strong staff, an industrial kitchen and are looking to open a shop. Their online business, which has over 38,000 followers on Instagram, attracted so many orders that when their waiting list hit 10,000 they had to close it while they worked through all the orders. It is currently at around 5,000. “When we started Kora we had no intention of turning it into a full-blown business,” said Camara. “It was something that we thought would just be a seasonal project, something that maybe we would start and end in a couple of months during the summer of 2020. We kind of just went with the flow.” As demand for doughnuts grew, they continued to expand. “It’s really about the connection that we’ve been able to make with people through the doughnuts. Whether it’s through nostalgia, storytelling – people can relate to a lot of the stories that I would tell regarding how I came up with certain flavors and brought them to life through a doughnut,” said Camara. One of their signature creations is a leche flan doughnut, made from a brioche dough with a round piece of flan in the centre made using Camara’s late grandmother Corazon’s leche flan recipe from a book she found after she died. Camara, who trained at the Culinary Institute of America, came up with her doughnut recipe by chance when she decided to fry some brioche dough rather than bake it.Americans are again facing a stay-at-home New Year’s Eve as US political leaders and health advisers urge people to scrap party plans and avoid larger public events as daily Covid cases break previous records. In New York, attendance at the Times Square celebration known as the Ball Drop – in essence, tens of thousands of people watching a 12ft geodesic sphere inlaid with Waterford crystal descend a long pole – has been capped at 15,000, down from pre-pandemic 60,000, with organizers encouraging revelers to watch it on TV or online. The scaling back comes as the incoming New York mayor, Eric Adams, cancelled his inauguration party, and the outgoing mayor. Bill de Blasio, sees his last New Year’s Eve party severely diminished. As recently as last month, before Omicron made headlines, de Blasio was in an end of two-terms party mood. “Everyone come on down,” he said on 16 November. “We can finally get back together again. It’s going to be amazing.” But recently – on the same day New York reported its highest number of new virus cases ever – De Blasio said the city would scale back its New Year’s Eve event. Attendees must be fully vaccinated and wear masks. The changes are meant to “keep the fully vaccinated crowd safe and healthy as we ring in the new year”, the mayor said in a statement. In Chicago, the Illinois governor, Jay Pritzker, has not yet imposed restrictions or shut down the city’s traditional fireworks show. But he warned Chicagoans this week that “Omicron and Delta are coming to your party”. “You need to think twice about how many people will be gathered together, keeping social distancing if you’re at a party. And if you can’t, leave,” he added. San Francisco has canceled its fireworks show over the Bay for the second year in a row. Mayor London Breed told residents that “we must remain vigilant in doing all we can to stop the spread of the Covid-19 Omicron variant”. Atlanta, too, has canceled its Peach Drop, where, for 30 years, revelers have gathered to watch a glittering fake peach descend to the ground. The Atlanta mayor later issued a press release, announcing the decision. “In consultation with public health officials, we have made the very difficult decision to cancel the Peach Drop,” the Atlanta mayor, Keisha Lance Bottoms, said in a press release. “As positive Covid-19 cases rise, I encourage everyone to be safe, get vaccinated and follow CDC guidelines.” But Seattle has decided to go ahead with fireworks from the Space Needle and Las Vegas plans an eight-minute fireworks display along the Strip. Health experts and officials have explained that Las Vegas’s celebrations take place across the city – not in a tightly-packed area. “It’s the entire city having this party,” Dr Brian Labus, an infectious disease epidemiologist at UNLV, told KTNV. “We’ve been dealing with crowds coming to Las Vegas for the past two years. So, New Year’s Eve isn’t really anything new. It’s just kind of a bigger event.” Las Vegas may turn out to be the devil-may-care exception. Events in Paris, London, Berlin have been canceled, while domestic US and international health officials urge caution. The WHO director-general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, urged earlier this month for people to approach the holidays cautiously, even if that meant canceling or delaying a shindig. “An event canceled is better than a life canceled,” Tedros told reporters. “It’s better to cancel now and celebrate later, than to celebrate now and grieve later.” The Biden administration’s top health adviser, Dr Anthony Fauci, recently advised that a small limited gathering with vaccinated family members would be the safest way to celebrate. “If your plans are to go to a 40-to-50 person New Year’s Eve party with all the bells and whistles and everybody hugging and kissing and wishing each other a happy new year – I would strongly recommend that, this year, we do not do that,” Fauci said during a White House update on the pandemic on Wednesday.A tiny miner’s cottage with an ancient-sounding name loomed large during my suburban childhood. My father was born in Bojewyan Stennack (pronounced Bow-jeew-yurn Sten-arrrr-k), a granite one-up, one-down in Cornwall, at the close of the second world war. His mother, Virginia, grew up here, steps from the foaming Atlantic coast, with her seven brothers and sisters and a mother who spent her life in widows’ blacks. I knew, from family folklore, that Bojewyan’s sash windows wheezed in a sou’westerly and that the chimney of the blackened hearth sang a haunting, almost human note. I knew about the ocean fogs, which obscured feet and montbretia-dotted hedges and made the lighthouse’s lamp, visible from the upstairs back window, glow a spectral white. It was with these inherited memories that I stepped across the threshold of Bojewyan, my family’s home for a century until 1946, and now a holiday let. Several of the cottages on this original terrace of 20 dwellings in Pendeen, just west of Penzance, are now holiday rentals, with woodburners in the old granite fireplaces and gardens, where pit boots once swung, turned into sun-trap terraces. I discovered the cottages’ fate in 2020 when, like the estimated 250,000 Britons gripped by a lockdown genealogy craze, I set about researching my family history. It was a discovery that conjured mixed feelings: was it distasteful that Cornwall’s mining heritage had been turned into a tourist experience? Or was it, rather, a rare opportunity? What might it add to a blustery coastal walk if my partner and I and our young son could return home to warm our toes by the fireplace where my grandmother was fifth in line for a soak in the tin bath; or if we could drink our morning cuppas in the bright white coastal light she rose to as a young girl? Brian Donovan, an expert with online genealogy platform Find My Past, says that I’m not the first to have had this idea. Living history getaways have witnessed a growth in popularity in recent years, inspired by genealogy programmes that focus on social history through the lives of a home’s residents, such as BBC Two hit A House Through Time, Phil Spencer’s History of Britain in 100 Homes and If Walls Could Talk: the History of the Home with Lucy Worsley. Donovan, who specialises in British and Irish records, often receives inquiries from Brits interested in the family homes of their Irish ancestors, and some are fortunate enough to find a B&amp;B now occupying their family’s thatched 18th-century teachín. “People with rural-dwelling ancestors can be disappointed, as simple, mud cottages often don’t survive,” he says, adding that Brits with relatives who migrated to the cities of the Industrial Revolution, such as Manchester, with its ranks of sturdy, stone-built workers’ terraces, have better luck. “The former homes of our ancestors may not be the ideal we envisage,” warns Melanie Backe-Hansen, co-author of A House Through Time (with David Olusoga). “They could have been labourers’ cottages with no amenities, or slum housing that no longer exists. This is interesting for understanding the past, though it may not make for a dream getaway.” But even if there’s not a holiday cottage or B&amp;B that once belonged to your greats, people are likely to find a pub they could well have frequented, schools they attended, or churches where they were baptised or married, Donovan notes. “It’s also worth pointing out that the excellent 19th-century directories (especially the Bassett’s) also list the pubs, schools, churches, etc in a locality, most of which shall still be there to visit and might inspire a holiday.” So while those with cash to splash could commission a genealogical tour provider to arrange a stay in former family members’ homes that have been reborn as holiday properties (ancestralfootsteps.com’s packages start at £5,000), with a little detective work many of us can seek out properties with links to our ancestors via consumer genealogy sites at a fraction of the cost. As well as FindMyPast, sites such as ancestry.co.uk are a good place to start, along with historical maps, the National Archives and undersung local archives in the regions our families hail from. FindMyPast has a new feature that allows users to search census records by address, while Ancestry’s app even shows people their proximity to properties with family links using a GPS map function. Happily, my Cornish forebears’ cottage still has its original proportions: a two-room dwelling with a wooden central staircase, four windows and a front door opening into the main living space, apart from a modest back yard bathroom and kitchen extension. Its granite stonework is painted white and it’s cosily fitted out (with the central heating and soft furnishings my grandmother wouldn’t have known), yet strikingly minuscule for a family of nine. Where, I wondered, would the bodies have arranged themselves? Would they have been able to sit down at the same time, even with the men of the family spending daylight hours down Geevor, the vast village tin mine? The realisation that the lives I’d romanticised as a child must have been gruelling and chilly made me a little guilty as I enjoyed a morning power shower with a handmade Cornish lavender body scrub. “Do you want me to set up a bucket loo in the garden for a genuine 1880s experience?” my partner Tim offered, when I raised this (only half-jokingly). On our last day at Pendeen we walked down to Portheras, a cove known for its craggy coastal beauty and the rip currents churning beneath its bay. It was here that my grandmother and her siblings would come after school, picking down the rock face in the hope of finding bounties from ships wrecked off the Pendeen headland. In 1938, I was told, Virginia and her brother Leonard found a haul of claret, and buried several bottles in the seagrasses above the cove for later Trembaths to find, a crop of Alexanders (horse parsley) marking the spot. On our way back from Portheras we pass the Radjel – the old miners’ pub where heads still swivel at the sight of an “up-country” visitor – an incongruous Portuguese cafe and the village store, where a local tells me that the old Bojewyan cottages were condemned in the late 20th century, their gardens overgrown and their windows smashed, giving them the impression of gouged-out eye sockets. They were saved by a 1973 Historic England listing, and now sell for the price of a London flat. “It’s good they did something with them,” the bobble-hatted local concludes. We didn’t find those buried bottles of claret. My brother suspects that my late father found them when he was a student in the 1960s and that he sat on the headland, downing them by the scruff of the bottleneck. I did, however, find something precious: an insight into the lived reality of my Cornish family – its meanness, but also its magic. “There’s something about the seagull’s cry in the salt breeze,” my gran wrote in her 1942 diary, when she was stationed for war work in a nursery for London evacuees in East Sussex, and homesick for the Cornish coast. You know what, Virginia, there really is. • A week at Bojewyan Stennack costs from £385, stennackcottage.co.uk. Membership of findmypast from £8.99 a month, ancestry.co.uk from £10.99 a month. House historian Karen Averby offers simple census searches from £450In May Chloe Roberson of Chattanooga, Tennessee, injured her knee while working her shift at Amazon and she has been out of work since, while fighting with the company for workers’ compensation and paid medical leave. Roberson, 21, chose to go to the emergency room rather than Amazon’s on-site medical clinic, Amcare, and was referred to a sports medicine doctor who diagnosed her with a dislocated patella (kneecap). Her initial recovery was 10 weeks of physical therapy followed by a steroid shot, but she was later scheduled for surgery on 28 October to repair her knee. “While all of this is going on, I’ve been having to fight Amazon for time off and money,” said Roberson. “They refused workers’ compensation, as I had a dislocated patella when I was 14 years old. I’m 21 now so I don’t see how it’s related.” Roberson and her wife have struggled to cover bills while recovering from her injury and battling Amazon. “I have not had a single day that I haven’t been an absolute sobbing mess because of the stress Amazon continues to put me through,” added Roberson. Reports of high injury rates and high turnover rates at Amazon warehouses around the US as a result of immense productivity pressures and quota rates on workers have been documented by numerous media outlets and organizations over the past several years and confirmed by OSHA logs. Amazon shareholders have recently called for an independent safety audit of the company. A May 2021 report published by the Strategic Organizing Center found Amazon’s injury rates were double the injury rate in the warehousing industry and 80% higher than the industry average for serious injuries in 2020. Jerald Crowley worked at an Amazon distribution center in Greenville, South Carolina, for six months before he resigned on 3 November due to a wrist injury he sustained on the job, as he is deaf and couldn’t afford to lose use of his hand to communicate in sign language with his children. His rate for stacking boxes on pallets was 40 boxes an hour, and he cited the rate as the reason for his injury. “I suffered a high sprain on my right wrist when I was attempting to bring a box in the back of the pallet,” Crowley said. “Their safety rules are that I’m supposed to report it and they will bring it down, but their rate is 40 boxes an hour. I was trying to get credit for the box – if I did not, they could let me go simply because I did not meet the rates, so safety was basically out the window when they chose rates over safety.” On 1 January 2021, the state of Washington increased workers compensation premiums for Amazon due to higher injury rates at Amazon warehouses compared with other warehouses in the state. In December 2021, the National Employment Law Project released a report on injury rates at Amazon’s six warehouses in Minnesota, revealing those facilities have injury rates twice as high as rates for other warehouses in the state, and more than four times the average for all industries in the state. An Amazon spokesperson said in response to the report: “While we know we’re not perfect, this report ignores the perspectives of the vast majority of our employees in Minnesota, who tell us that they’re proud to work at Amazon and feel supported in their roles.” Mustafa Omar started working at Amazon in 2016, but left in 2017 and returned in 2018, and has worked there for the past three years. He picks and loads items that weigh up to 80lbs, typically working on six or seven different stations. He has experienced back pain due to the repetitive motions and lifting heavy items involved in his job. In early November 2021, Omar fell back onto a pallet, injuring his back. He flagged down a senior manager to get his station covered so he could go to Amcare. Omar said he felt like he was in trouble when he asked the manager to take him to the clinic, where he was given ice and ibuprofen. “At this time, I’m thinking ‘oh my God, if I say that I have an injury, that I’ve hurt myself, I might lose my job.’ Because they already instilled fear in me about me being the one that was getting in trouble. I’m thinking about my family, my pregnant wife, my kids, about all the bills that I have and worrying about not being able to work because I’m the breadwinner in my house,” said Omar. Once at Amcare, he downplayed the pain he was feeling so he would be sent back to work, and continued working for a few weeks while visiting Amcare about twice a day for ice and ibuprofen. Eventually he couldn’t tolerate the pain any longer and visited his own doctor, who recommended physical therapy, pain medication and light duty accommodations. When he brought his doctor’s forms to Amazon, Omar says he was told he couldn’t attend the recommended physical therapy because it wasn’t approved. He is still waiting to hear back about getting medical treatment approved by Amazon and his workers’ compensation claim approved and paid out. “I’m still in pain today,” Omar added. “All of us want to come home safely, and when people get injured they should be treated like human beings and taken care of.” Irene Tung, senior researcher and policy analyst at NELP, and Debbie Berkowitz, worker health and safety director at NELP, coauthors of the report, explained Amazon’s high injury rates are a result of rapid work paces, surveillance and disciplinary systems. They added that workers have to operate under constantly changing rules and metrics, regulatory agencies are underfunded, and worker protections are inadequate. “None of these measures that Amazon have taken have really got to the core of the problem, which is the excessively rapid work pace and how it’s enforced through their very distinctive disciplinary system that combines intensive electronic surveillance with very frequent discipline and termination. They have not addressed that and that is the fundamental driver of these injuries,” said Tung. Berkowitz added Amazon’s time-off task disciplinary technology cultivates a climate of fear among workers and drives them to push their bodies in a way that creates high rates of injuries. “Workers are measured by the second and they’re punished by the second,” said Berkowitz. “It basically creates an environment where if they’re not constantly moving, then they might be fired.” Several workers who spoke with the Guardian described delays and other obstacles in applying for workers compensation or receiving medical treatment after sustaining an injury on the job at Amazon. Natalie Monarrez, age 52, has worked as a ship dock worker at Amazon in Staten Island, New York, for about four years. During the pandemic, she lived in her car outside the Amazon warehouse while working a lot of overtime – 12-hour shifts, five to six days a week – as many workers took unpaid leaves in the first few months of the pandemic. Monarrez said several months into the pandemic, the grueling nature of her job and long hours began taking their toll on her body. “Swelling in my left ankle had just reached a point where I couldn’t even fit it in a shoe. I had trouble walking. I had trouble standing,” said Monarrez. “As my job is sorting, I have to stand in the same spot for my entire shift. We’re not allowed to sit down and I was lifting heavy packages the entire time and rotating the upper half of my body. But I couldn’t take it anymore and I knew that it was because of work.” She filed a workers’ compensation claim in August 2020, though she said she received pushback from managers while trying to file the claim until she took off her shoe, showed them her ankle, and insisted on filing the claim and being sent to an Amazon-approved doctor. Once she filed the claim, Monarrez said she has experienced several problems in contacting Amazon’s workers’ compensation insurer, Sedgwick, to correct her pay above the weekly minimum and getting medical treatments and a medical boot for her ankle approved. She took a couple months off work, but returned to work because the compensation she was receiving, about $400 a week, was much lower than her usual weekly paychecks. “At this point, I went to Walmart and Target and I literally bought my own braces for my ankle and my foot, and I elevate my foot every night after work,” said Monarrez. “I never had health issues before working for Amazon.” Amazon did not comment on complaints about workers’ compensation and deferred to a blog post by CEO Dave Clark on time-off task surveillance and disciplinary systems. In regards to injury rates, a spokesperson for Amazon said in an email: “The safety and well-being of our employees is always a top priority. We recognize that helping employees stay safe in physical roles takes a lot of focus and investment, which is why we’re investing hundreds of millions in safety in many different ways, from people – we now have a team of nearly 8,000 dedicated safety professionals – to training, to tools and technology.”Surviving members of the Kindertransport have urged the government to reopen safe routes for refugees in Europe, especially children, trying to reach the UK or risk more tragedies occurring in the Channel. Alf Dubs, Stephanie Shirley and Erich Reich, who all arrived in the UK between 1938 and 1939 as child refugees on the Kindertransport, an initiative set up to rescue nearly 10,000 Jewish child refugees before the second world war, said the UK was losing its moral authority in the world and urged the government to change tack. Their warning comes amid deepening calls for a public inquiry into the deaths of 27 refugees who drowned in the Channel last month, after lawyers representing bereaved family members said “serious failings” in the rescue operation may have contributed to their deaths. “We warned this would happen and that the policies the government has been following was going to lead to this happening,” Lord Dubs said. “We shouldn’t allow this to happen. We should do the right thing. And the right thing is to have safe and legal routes for people to find safety. Not every refugee in the world, but certainly those that have some connection with Britain. “That’s what was the position before we left the EU and it’s really a tragedy that we’ve gone backwards in this regard.” In 2016, the government accepted an amendment by Dubs to resettle 3,000 child refugees. Once the scheme ended in 2020, only 480 unaccompanied asylum-seeking children from Europe were resettled. After the UK left the EU, Dubs put in another amendment, which would require the government to negotiate an agreement with the EU to ensure that unaccompanied children in Europe could continue to come to the UK to join a family member after Brexit, but it was rejected, he said. “They’re closing down legal routes to safety and I find that shocking,” he said. “We’re pushing asylum seekers into the sea … We’re just doing the same as what is happening tragically in parts of the Mediterranean.” Dame Stephanie pointed to a recent survey by Safe Passage, which campaigns for safe legal routes for refugees seeking protection, that showed more than half the children the charity was supporting had lost faith in the legal process. “I’m so proud of this country. I love it passionately, but we’ve lost our moral leadership in the world,” she said. “We’ve got something like 11,000 children stuck somewhere on the streets of Calais, or in refugee camps [in Europe]. It’s not a safe place for children. Every day 17 go missing, and that means that they’ve been killed or exploited or have been trafficked. These are figures that are very difficult to accept in any civilised society.” Sir Erich, who is the chair of Kindertransport group at the Association of Jewish Refugees and knighted for his charitable work, said he was upset when he saw the news of the record number of refugees dying crossing the Channel. He believes, as a minimum, the government must announce an ambitious directive that resettles child refugees in Europe with a connection to the UK. “I think it was our 70th anniversary of the Kindertransport that Prince Charles came and gave a short speech. But what he said was very interesting. He said: ‘I’m so glad that the government of the time allowed you in, because you have given back so much to this country.’ And that’s what it’s all about,” he said. He added that the government’s anti-immigrant policies were “a great source of anguish for me”. A Home Office spokesperson said: “The UK has always provided sanctuary for those fleeing persecution, oppression or tyranny and in 2020, we received the second highest number of asylum applications from UASC out of all European countries.” Under current immigration rules, unaccompanied asylum-seeking children in Europe with family members in the UK can apply to join eligible sponsors. The spokesperson added: “However, opportunities to claim UK asylum from within Europe only incentivise people into making treacherous journeys. That is why the New Plan for Immigration will enable the world’s most vulnerable to come to the UK through safe and legal routes, while making it more difficult for people to enter the UK illegally and stay.”It is hard to pinpoint the worst moment of your life. But when I think about my lowest ebb, a certain image begins to solidify: me, lying in the gangway of a plane, the cabin crew administering oxygen via a canister and a mask as we descend to Budapest airport and other passengers look on (bemused or horrified, I couldn’t say). A couple of minutes previously, a fog had descended on me as I sat in the seat next to my boyfriend; peculiar black clouds coalesced at the margins of my vision. I was passing out. “I need to lie down,” I said, with some urgency. “I need to lie down, now.” Why does this image stand out? I suppose it is because, ultimately, it is about denial – and the point at which that stops being possible. The thing I didn’t want to know was that I was ill. Again. I had no business being on a plane. I had only been able to get on the plane at all as a result of the large white wine and two co-codamol tablets I had necked at the airport. It was no doubt the chemical effects of these that led to me almost blacking out. That and the fact I had been hyperventilating for the duration of the flight. Those who have had panic attacks know that appealing to rationality rarely works. As far as I was concerned, being on that plane meant that I was about to die. There was no arguing with this. This didn’t manifest only psychologically; physiologically, extreme anxiety has all kinds of dramatic effects. My body knew the score. Since the Paris terror attacks two months prior, I had refused to accept that the post-traumatic stress disorder with which I had been diagnosed as a student – and which I had recovered from – had come back. The first time I had it was because I was strangled by a stranger on a dark street as I made my way home. But, with treatment, I had recovered well. For the most part, I put it behind me and got on with my life. Then, in my late 20s, I was in close proximity to the Paris attacks. Once more, I was forced to face the notion that I might be about to die. It sent my system into meltdown. The belief that I was safe, which had taken many hours of therapy – not to mention medication – to build back up, had been demolished. It was as though my mind and my body were not going to be fooled this time. In a way, post-traumatic stress is like time travel. You are walking around, living your life in the present, but a part of you is back there in the traumatic event, reliving that night again and again, your body responding accordingly. I had convinced myself after Paris that I was simply in shock and that the symptoms would fade, but a part of me must have known in the run-up to the Budapest press trip that it wasn’t a good sign that I was hearing French sirens in my sleep, that every time I got on a bus or went to a bar I expected to be shot dead. I must also have known that I should see a doctor, get back on the meds, join the waiting list for therapy, but I was resisting. To do so would mean admitting that I was ill. More than anything, I did not want to be ill again. So, instead, I decided to carry on as though everything were normal. I continued to arrange the trip to Budapest despite feeling paralysing horror at the thought of it. Once I got there, after recovering enough to walk off the plane, I spent the entire time convinced there were gunmen around every corner. The only respite was the discovery that I could order very cheap, very strong martinis to our hotel room. This meant that, at least in the evenings, I was sufficiently tipsy not to feel afraid when I went out. I returned to the UK exhausted. My experience on the plane was humiliating, but it was also the beginning of my acceptance of the fact that I was not OK. I had become interested in the psychology of trauma after I was attacked, but I didn’t seem to be applying any of that knowledge to myself. My trip to Hungary, and its effects, changed that. It made me accept that I needed help. It took a year of intensive treatment, including exposure therapy, for me to be able to leave the house without fear. I was very lucky to receive the help I did so quickly, and for the therapy to have continued past the usual 12 free sessions. Gardening and writing also helped; I spent much of the time confined to my home working on a novel about trauma. The following January, I went to Vietnam and Cambodia, a trip that involved six flights, all of which I took without needing to self-medicate through the fear – unthinkable when I was at my most agoraphobic. I didn’t have a panic attack that meant I needed to lie in the gangway; the plane didn’t fall out of the sky. Not only did I live, but I got to see a bit of that world that I had been missing for those long months. That year, my novel found a publisher and I got married. Since then, I have been writing another book and working on a creative nonfiction project that, among other things, looks at what it means to contemplate motherhood when you have experienced mental illness. I am wary of recovery stories, partly because I don’t take it for granted that I will always be well. When I look back on that young woman lying in the aisle of a plane, she isn’t exactly a stranger, but she does belong to a different phase of my life. And she taught me an important lesson: never deny yourself help out of fear and pride. If I get ill again, I will do my best to remember that. The mental health charity Mind can be contacted on 0300 123 3393 or by visiting mind.org.ukMy uncle died 11 months ago, and my mother also died, leaving my brother and myself to settle his estate. Ten months after applying for letters of administration, we are still waiting for probate to be granted. His house has to be sold to pay off an equity loan within 12 months of his death. We are losing £1,000 a month in interest on the loan with no sign of a solution. DK, Bromley You are among many grieving relatives caught in a ruinous legal limbo because of probate delays. Last year, in a bid to streamline the system, the process was moved online and local courts were closed. Coupled with Covid and staff shortages, the result, for many, has been waiting times of several months. At the same time, the government is proposing to raise probate fees by up to 137% next year, a move the Law Society insists must be accompanied by service improvements. “In 2020, people had to wait 12 to 14 weeks on average to receive their grant. This is unacceptable,” says Law Society president, I Stephanie Boyce. “Our members have also told us that since the online probate service was made available to all professional users in October 2019, they have experienced issues with the online system, communication issues with HM Courts and Tribunals Service (HMCTS), errors on issued grants, and property transactions have been impacted due to delays in grant of probate.” It’s frustrating that HMCTS managed to grant probate within two days of my contact. It told me that your mother’s death had complicated the application and led to clerical errors. “We apologise sincerely for delays that must have made a challenging period even more difficult,” it says. It told the Observer that improvements to the online service and staff recruitment had reduced average waiting times to just over two weeks. The Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman can address unresolved complaints about probate services, but applicants have to be referred by their MP once they’ve exhausted HMCTS’s procedure. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsWild Indian Makwa (Phoenix Wilson) may smoke cigarettes and wear a tough-guy leather jacket, but his face betrays the soft, doughy features of a pre-teen boy. Alternately neglected and beaten by his father, he’s an emotionally inarticulate knot of coiled rage. Cruelty is learned behaviour. The idea, that those who experience trauma are destined to repeat the cycle, is at the centre of the sinewy debut feature from Indigenous American writer-director Lyle Mitchell Corbine Jr. In the film, Makwa, a young Ojibwe boy living on a reservation in Wisconsin, commits a violent crime and escapes the consequences. When we revisit him as an adult, this time portrayed with icy detachment by a transfixing Michael Greyeyes, he’s reinvented himself. Living in Los Angeles, with an office job and a blond wife, he’s attempted to scrub himself of the culture he grew up around. But generational trauma leaves a stain. Simran Hans The Disciple Despite significant critical praise during the 2020 festival circuit and executive producer Alfonso Cuarón’s stamp, Chaitanya Tamhane’s The Disciple was just another drop in Netflix’s content tsunami this year, and failed to get the attention it deserved. There’s some art-reflecting-life here, as it depicts the struggle between art and commerce, and how absolute dedication to one’s craft can lead to a life of sacrifice and frustration. Though this may sound like a downer, the journey is absolutely mesmerizing. Much of that is thanks to the specific art our young lead (Aditya Modak) is trying to master: a very demanding form of Hindustani classical music. The best scenes are of Modak’s frequent hazy nighttime motorcycle rides through Mumbai, listening to tapes of an ascetic master under tanpura drones. The Disciple ultimately confronts movie cliches of hard work and triumph versus the victory of self-preservation, with an unpredictable, volcanic ending. Jordan Hoffman Anne at 13,000 Feet Deragh Campbell is a magnetic force playing a character who tends to push people in the other direction. Her Anne is a woman in crisis in Canadian film-maker Kazik Radwanski’s humble but exhilarating portrait, which has already drawn deserved comparisons to Cassavetes and the Dardennes’ for its unadorned, realist and undeniably affectionate approach to the kind of person who is often intentionally ignored. In loose and humble vignettes, Anne tries keeping turbulent emotions in check while holding a job at a daycare, entertaining a new boyfriend and being present for her friend’s wedding. She’s also training for a skydiving excursion that delivers a not-so-subtle but still moving metaphor for the character’s state of mind. She’s flapping through life like a bird spiralling out, propelled in circles by the competing urges to hide in a corner and finally be seen. Meanwhile, Radwanski keeps the camera at a suffocating distance from his brilliant collaborator’s face, as if to make it impossible for us to look away. Radheyan Simonpillai Groomed Few films have captured the shifting tides of sexual abuse’s aftermath as thoroughly, and singed me as deeply, as Groomed. The Discovery+ documentary proceeds in two registers: certainty, in accounting the methodical process of grooming, and eddying ambiguity, in film-maker Gwen van de Pas’s understanding of her memories as a 12-year-old in a sexual relationship with her 20-something swim coach. In one of the most searing scenes I have ever witnessed, Van de Pas returns to her childhood bedroom in Holland in search of his letters to her. The stew of emotions – fear that the contents will confuse her, desperation for evidence – is palpable and devastating. Even more so are the real-time rationalizations of her groomed psyche when she, to her adult horror, finds the graphically sexual letters. Not every part of Groomed works, but the film’s revelatory vulnerability illustrates how self-undermining confusion is the long and deliberate tail of abuse, not a personal failure to see clearly or a repudiation of what happened. Adrian Horton Riders of Justice There was only room for one great, Mads Mikkelsen-led, Danish movie this year: the Oscar-winning Another Round. Which is a shame, because there were two of them. Riders of Justice could easily be mistaken for a Taken-style revenge thriller at first glance; in fact it’s a deconstruction of the whole genre – a dazzlingly smart mix of screwball comedy, therapeutic drama, metaphysical enquiry and, yes, violent action. Mikkelsen plays a grizzled Afghanistan vet whose wife is killed in a train crash, leaving him to raise their teenage daughter (badly, he’s an emotional black hole). Things become interesting when he meets a trio of dysfunctional tech geeks (Nikolaj Lie Kaas, Lars Brygmann and Nicolas Bro), who believe the crash was not an accident. That’s just the set-up. Wayward, unpredictable and often hilarious, it’s one of those stories that seems to be all over the place but somehow comes together beautifully – like a vintage Coen brothers caper. Oh, and it’s a Christmas movie. Steve Rose The World to Come Mona Fastvold came to feature directing via acting and screenwriting (with her partner Brady Corbet), before making her feature debut The Sleepwalker. Her second feature, the gorgeously literary romance The World to Come, displays her confident, compelling style. The film is based on a Jim Shepard short story, and the scene is set in the ravishing landscapes and inhospitable climate of mid-19th-century rural New York. Farmer’s wife, Abigail (Katherine Waterston) and her new neighbour Tallie (Vanessa Kirby) who become instant friends, and then more cautiously lovers. The doomed-love scenario may feel a little familiar, but there’s a freshness about this film, which feels alive to the “astonishment and joy” that the romantic leads discover so suddenly. Waterston and Kirby are excellent at skirting the maudlin to something more meaningful in this clandestine affair. Credit too, should go to Daniel Blumberg’s arresting score and the invigorating imagery created by Andre Chemetoff’s photography. Pamela Hutchinson The Witches of the Orient A table of kindly Japanese grandmothers exchanging pleasantries over lunch in the present turns out to have been preternaturally talented athletes who galvanized a country half a century earlier. In the 1950s and 60s a team of textile factory workers strung together a stunning 258-game winning streak – including a world championship and Olympic gold – while sparking a craze in volleyball manga and anime in Japan and beyond. Julien Faraut’s documentary The Witches of the Orient conjures an intoxicating brew of archival sports footage and that vintage anime, with electronic music underscoring the repetitive, mesmerizing quality of both factory work and relentless drills by a near-fanatical coach. The film culminates with the 1964 Tokyo Olympics, a display of reemergence for Japan after the horrors of war and the first to include volleyball. It’s a marvelous, inspirational tale of resilience, hard work and determination, told by the athletes themselves with an assist from Faraut’s deft editing, anime-inspired touches and fantastic music choices. Lisa Wong Macabasco The Last Duel In a year of hand-wringing “but what does this mean for Hollywood?” flops, not many films crashed, burned and then totally disappeared with as much of a stink as Ridley Scott’s starry $100m epic The Last Duel. Audiences stayed away en masse (it stumbled to just $30m worldwide) and its Oscar chances dramatically crumbled (Disney hasn’t even bothered with a campaign) but there’s something far smarter and more subversive than one would expect here, something that should have had everyone talking on release rather than the stinging silence it instead inspired. There’s been a slowly increasing number of more recent period films that have nobly tried to attach a more contemporary lens to stories traditionally told in binary, male-skewed terms but few, if any, have managed to do this quite as effectively. It’s the grim tale of Marguerite de Carrouges (a standout Jodie Comer), a woman labelled a liar for accusing a French squire (an odious Adam Driver) of rape and through shifting perspectives, we see that not only is she telling the truth but that every man around her, including grotesque husband (a vile Matt Damon), is using her for something. The film acts as a knowing corrective not only to how history has written Marguerite’s story (an accusatory question mark has been attached to her telling of sexual assault for centuries) but also to a genre of films that has unfailingly valorised men and diminished women (no film in 2021 has been as fully committed to such a depressing “men are trash” worldview). It’s fascinatingly dour yet utterly believable. Benjamin Lee Identifying Features The Mexican cinema scene is not entirely dominated by alpha males like Guillermo del Toro, Alfonso Cuarón and Alejandro González Iñárritu. The year’s most criminally underseen film was the haunting Mexican drama Identifying Features from first-time feature director Fernanda Valadez and her co-producer, co-writer and co-editor Astrid Rondero. It’s about a middle-aged woman from central Mexico who sets out on a journey to find out what happened to the teenage son who left home to try getting into the US: it’s developed from their 2013 short 400 Bags, and inspired by the horrific 2011 San Fernando massacre in which hundreds of desperate people were kidnapped by drug cartels from passenger buses in the borderlands. The movie has heartbreak and a vision of real evil: it is something like social-realist folk horror, though it unapologetically invokes the image of Satan with an absolute seriousness which sets it apart from the horror genre. It is a cry for help and a cry of rage: deeply engaged cinema. Peter Bradshaw Acasa My Home There’s clearly a ton of underseen documentaries out there, of all shapes and sizes, but my attention was drawn to this Romanian documentary, which in a strange way is a companion piece to the amazing 2019 film Collective. It’s a beautifully shot and tremendously moving film about a Roma family living wild outside Bucharest, who are then forced into the city to ensure the kids get an education – it encapsulates the pros and cons of the super-emotive topic of off grid living and the limits of state control. The kicker? The apparently heartless government types pushing the family off their land are the same administration as the good guys in Collective. Andrew Pulver The Night House Not content with directing one of the year’s best films in Passing, Rebecca Hall also quietly gave one of the year’s least celebrated great performances in this intelligent, surprising variation on assorted haunted-house formulae – which came and went with little fanfare in cinemas in August, 18 months after its well-received Sundance debut. Admittedly, David Bruckner’s film (a considerable step up from his accomplished but less distinctive woodland nerve-rattler The Ritual) suffered from a certain lack of novelty in one respect, being the latest in a recent run of horror films in which grief is the real bogeyman. But rarely has the idea been explored and performed with the wounded conviction and complexity that Hall brings to it, as a widowed teacher who can’t quite let go of her husband’s presence in the gorgeous lake house he built her – perhaps because he hasn’t let go of it either. Guy Lodge Days Tsai Ming-liang isn’t rushing for anyone. In his first feature since 2013, the Taiwanese master continues to advance the cause of ‘slow cinema,’ in which static takes stretch on for minutes at a time and allow viewers to sink into a state of meditative relaxation. A well-off middle-aged man (Tsai’s careerlong muse Lee Kang-sheng) and a making-do millennial (Anong Houngheuangsy, a miraculous discovery) independently go about their daily lives, their paths intersecting in an encounter of hushed, powerful intimacy before diverging once again. With so much time to process, we see the most minute gestures as too significant to be ignored, and bigger displays of emotion – like the full-body nuru massage briefly uniting these two lonely souls – as stunning spectacles of connection. Like the cinematic equivalent of soothing ambient music, Tsai’s work can bypass the brain’s instinct to busy itself with analysis and tap into a deeper well of sensation and experience. Charles BramescoFederal, state and territory leaders have met to agree on a uniform definition of what makes a close contact at a snap meeting of the national cabinet on Thursday, implementing new rules for how people are to isolate and when they should get tested. Speaking to reporters afterwards, Scott Morrison said Omicron was a “game changer” that has “overtaken the country in just a month” and required a “reset”. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Omicron requires us to undertake a change of how we are managing the pandemic, and we need to reset how we think about the pandemic, and how we manage ourselves and the things we need to do as governments,” the prime minister said. As case numbers skyrocket and queues for testing grow, the changes are designed to take the pressure off PCR testing and limit the amount of time people spend out of the workforce if they are not seriously ill. What is the close contact definition? Previously there was no agreed definition between the various states and territories, but the main thrust of the uniform rule is to reduce the number of people defined as a close contact and do away entirely with the concept of a “casual contact”. “Except in exceptional circumstances, a close contact is a household contact or ‘household-like’ of a confirmed case only. A household contact is someone who lives with a case or has spent more than four hours with them in a house, accommodation or care facility setting,” Morrison said. The change is similar to what had been flagged in recent days and also includes residential care facilities as a “household-like” setting. Morrison was at pains to point out that it only applied to contact with a “confirmed case”, that is, someone who had received a positive PCR test. “So, you are only a close contact if you are effectively living with someone or have been in an accommodation setting for more than four hours with someone who has actually got Covid – not someone who is in contact with someone who has had Covid,” he said. Those who meet this definition will then have to isolate and test – though when to test and how to test has also changed. What happens if I’m a close contact? Anyone with symptoms should get a PCR test. Under the new arrangement, a confirmed case must isolate for seven days from the date their infection was confirmed with a test. On 31 December the goverment changed the rule on testing announced the previous day, removing the requirement for a rapid antigen test on day six of isolation. “If confirmed cases remain symptomatic, they should remain in isolation. Anyone with symptoms will continue to seek a PCR test,” it said in a statement. Someone who discovers they are a close contact but is not showing any symptoms must test with a rapid antigen test. If the test is positive, they must then have a PCR test. If that comes back positive, the person obviously becomes a confirmed case themselves. A close contact who returns a negative test must still isolate for seven days from the date of exposure, as symptoms may still show. On day six, they can take a rapid antigen test, and may leave isolation if it is negative. The exception is in South Australia, which, while adopting the definition, will still require a 10-day isolation period. “What this does is significantly change those who need to be going and getting in a queue,” Morrison said. If I am not a close contact, can I still get tested? No – unless you are a close contact or have symptoms, you will not be able to get a free PCR test in the way that has been normal practice for the past two years. Morrison made clear the intention was to reduce the number of people in queues for PCR tests, although it is unclear how many of those people fall into the category of what he called “the worried well”. “If you don’t fulfil this definition of a close contact then there is no need for you to be in that line,” Morrison said. “You should go home. Go to the beach, go and do what you want to do. Read a book in the park. Follow all the normal, commonsense things that you would do, monitor your symptoms, follow the Covid-safe practices, make sure you have booked for your booster, do all of those sorts of things – but there is no need for you to be in that line.” Those people of course can still take a rapid antigen test bought over the counter from a supermarket or pharmacy, but Morrison made clear RATs would only be provided free under certain specific circumstances at state hubs. When does the change come into effect? From midnight on Thursday, in all states and territories except Tasmania, the Northern Territory and Western Australia. Tasmania will adopt the change from 1 January, while the Northern Territory and Western Australia will make separate announcements in the coming days. Morrison confirmed that the changes will apply to people currently in isolation when it comes into force from midnight and that people currently isolating who do not meet the new definition may leave. “Let them out,” he said. What is the aim of the change? Testing sites on the east coast and in South Australia have been swamped, causing immense queues to be tested and delaying results in some cases for many days. In many parts of the country rapid antigen tests have also been in short supply. Morrison said the change was needed to relieve pressure on testing sites and allow health workers and others to return to their jobs more quickly. “This should significantly, we hope, over the next few weeks, greatly reduce the volume of people who are having these PCR tests, which means we will be able to increase the turnaround time of these tests, getting results back to those who need to take them,” he said. “In addition to that, it will also free up, we hope, a lot more workforce that is currently being focused on these tests to be able to be supporting the other priorities for managing the pandemic.” What has been the reaction? The president of the Australian Medical Association, Dr Omar Khorshid, raised concerns in a series of posts on social media, saying that the change will make the situation worse. “Redefining close contacts will simply accelerate the outbreak,” he said. “I don’t think you could call the NSW experiment a success yet.” In an AMA statement, Khorshid added: “The change will help to preserve testing capacity and should limit the number of furloughed health workers, but it will come at the cost of accelerating the outbreak. “It seems national cabinet is prepared to bet that a massive Omicron outbreak won’t cause large numbers of hospitalisations. Whilst initial data is encouraging, we expect hospitalisations to rise in coming weeks simply due to the very large number of cases, which will be far larger than the positive tests indicate, due to today’s decision.” He also questioned the decision to forgo some PCR testing. “The use of RATs for asymptomatic close contacts rather than PCR tests is questionable and PCRs should continue to be used if possible, given their superior accuracy for asymptomatic cases,” Khorshid said. OzSage, a group of independent experts who have organised to provide advice to government on management of the pandemic, warned before the announcement that the changes as outlined in advance were not “based on sound public health principles”. “Close contact definitions need to be based on risk,” it said in a statement. “Risk is related to the amount of exposure to virus-laden aerosols. Risk is not limited to arbitrary four-hour time frames within households. “Settings like nightclubs and restaurants have been sites of superspreading events, and if people exposed in these settings cannot get a PCR test, spread will accelerate.” OzSage said relying on individuals to self-test with rapid antigen tests and self-manage their symptoms meant governments would not have a true picture of how many cases are in the community.And with that, we are going to end Thursday’s blog. Before we go, let’s recap the big stories from today: NSW recorded 12,226 new Covid cases and one death, Victoria 5,137 cases and 13 deaths, Tasmania 92 cases, Queensland 2,222, the ACT 253, South Australia 1,374, the Northern Territory 37 and Western Australia one. The national total was 21,343 new cases. A child under two who was Covid-positive died in South Australia. Ghislaine Maxwell was found guilty after sex-trafficking trial in New York. The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, told people to “avoid the mosh pit” this New Year’s Eve amid rising cases. The independent expert group OzSage released a set of Covid policy recommendations, saying it was “deeply concerned” by the spike in case numbers. The federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, took aim at the prime minister, Scott Morrison, over the shortage of rapid antigen tests. Old Parliament House was set alight by protests linked to “sovereign citizen” groups. The prime minister said Omicron was a “game changer” after national cabinet met. National cabinet agreed on a new definition of “close contact” and said Covid testing centres would provide rapid antigen tests. The PM also said free rapid antigen tests will only be provided for those who meet “close contact” criteria. More than 50% of eligible people have had their booster shot. Tasmania announced it would drop PCR tests for interstate arrivals. The Western Australian premier, Mark McGowan, said WA agreed “in principle” to national cabinet’s new definition of close contact. Another act pulled out of Sydney festival over Israeli embassy sponsorship. And that is it! We will see you tomorrow for the last blog on the last day of the year. And we have a statement from the prime minister, Scott Morrison, about the national cabinet meeting. Here are some lines from it: Omicron case numbers continue to increase in Australia and globally. Omicron continues to show greater infectivity than the Delta variant, but with less severity. Prof Kelly noted that a recent study from South Africa has confirmed a 73% reduction in severity of disease with Omicron compared with Delta. Total active cases in Australia have reached over 110,000 cases. However, hospitalisation, ICU and ventilation case numbers remain low and within anticipated capacity. There were 1,481 cases in hospital, 122 cases in ICU with 51 of those requiring ventilation. These numbers are remaining relatively constant. National cabinet has agreed to Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC) advice to reset TTIQ in the context of high case numbers and the Omicron variant, so that Australians can continue to live with Covid-19. The revised approach is complementary to the importance of vaccinations including boosters and existing public health and social measures. Specifically, national cabinet agreed to revised definitions for who is a close contact, how they are isolated and testing arrangements. The Australian Medical Association has released a statement following the national cabinet decision to adopt a new definition of who is a close contact. The AMA president, Dr Omar Khorshid, said narrowing the definition to household contacts will lock in very high transmission rates and accelerate the outbreak of Omicron. “We will miss so many more cases with this new, more narrow definition of a close contact,” Khorshid said. “Anyone catching Omicron in a restaurant or pub for example and who are asymptomatic won’t know they’re infected and could pass the virus on to more vulnerable people. “The change will help to preserve testing capacity and should limit the number of furloughed health workers, but it will come at the cost of accelerating the outbreak.” Khorshid said hospitalisations would rise in the coming weeks because of the high case numbers. The AMA called for the release of the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee’s (AHPPC) advice and modelling that supports the national cabinet decision. “Without the release of AHPPC’s advice, it is very difficult for us to share the prime minister’s confidence that this move will assist in keeping Australians safe and healthy.” Cricket referee David Boon will be out of action for the Sydney Test after testing positive for Covid. In a statement, Cricket Australia announced Boon was in hotel quarantine: The ICC match referee for the Vodafone men’s Ashes series, David Boon, has tested positive to Covid-19 following a PCR test,” the statement read. Steve Bernard, a member of the International Panel of ICC Referees and based in NSW, will take over as match referee for the fourth Ashes Test match, starting on January 5 at the SCG. It is anticipated that David Boon will return to the role for the fifth Test in Hobart, starting on January 14. He is asymptomatic and fully vaccinated, including having a booster. Boon will remain in Melbourne and in line with Victorian state government health guidelines will continue quarantining for 10 days. Opera Australia’s much-loved New Year’s Eve performance of La Bohème is cancelled due to a Covid outbreak. In a statement, CEO Fiona Allan said: Enormous thanks to everyone at the company who have worked tirelessly, trying everything possible to get us back on stage but I don’t think any of us could have foreseen just how fast Omicron would spread and the effects it would have on the industry. As disappointing as this news is, both for our performers and for our audiences who we know were very much looking forward to attending NYE, we must now turn our full attention to opening the summer season on Tuesday 4 January. Opera Australia is contacting New Year’s Eve ticket holders, who have paid upwards of $269 a seat, to offer credit vouchers and full refunds. On Wednesday, Guardian Australia learned there were more than 20 positive Covid cases at Opera Australia across the performing company. Opera Australia is scheduled to present full seasons of La Bohème, Turandot, Otello, The Marriage of Figaro and La Juive from 4 January-26 March. Here’s yesterday’s story: More sporting fixtures have fallen victim to the surge in Covid infections, the latest being Thursday’s Big Bash League meeting of the Perth Scorchers and the Melbourne Stars in Melbourne, because of a positive case in the Stars camp. Saturday’s A-League Men’s game between Western Sydney Wanderers and Western United has also been called off, as has the A-League Women’s match between Melbourne City and Newcastle Jets, scheduled for Sunday. The A-Leagues said in a statement an unspecified number of City players had tested positive but were not feeling unwell, while the cases causing the men’s postponement were in the Western United squad. Despite a rash of cancellations the governing body continues to insist the season will continue. When’s a good time to release some bad data... how about the eve of New Year’s Eve? So today, the Queensland government has published the delayed Statewide Landcover and Trees Study (SLATS) that covers land clearing for the 2018-19 year. During those 12 months, landholders cleared 680,688 hectares. It’s a bit tricky to compare with previous years – such as the 392,000 hectares reported cleared in 2017-18 – as the remote technology has been improved. Still, it appears that Queensland is clearing a lot of land. The 2018-19 tally amounts to about 3,800 times the size of Melbourne’s CBD, or more than 2,400 times Sydney’s. “This report is a carbon bomb that threatens to blow up the commitments to net zero emissions by 2050 made by the Queensland and Australian governments,” Dr Stuart Blanch, WWF-Australia conservation scientist, said in a statement. “It shows clearing has likely been significantly under-reported in previous reports. The latest SLATS data was compiled using satellite images that are three times more accurate than the previous imagery and cover much more of the state. The data provides a new national best-practice standard that all governments and industry should adopt,” Blanch said. To give the amount some context, Australia’s national greenhouse gas inventory estimated landclearing in the 2018 calendar year was about 370,000 hectares nationwide. In that year, the commonwealth government also claimed the land sector was a net sink in the order of more than 20m tonnes of carbon dioxide. As Guardian Australia reported a couple of months ago, there is good reason to think Australia’s statistics underestimate the amount of landclearing that is going on. Today’s figures from Queensland are only going to add to those concerns. Another act has withdrawn from the 2022 Sydney festival in protest against Israeli embassy sponsorship. Today the intercultural dance company Marrugeku pulled its performance of Jurrungu Ngan-ga [Straight Talk] out of the festival program. The company put out the following statement: We took this decision in light of Sydney festival’s actions to seek and retain funding from the state of Israel. It is our responsibility to ensure that the strong voices within Jurrungu Ngan-ga: First Nations Australians, people seeking asylum alongside allied settler artists from diverse backgrounds, can perform with clear liyan (spirit and wellbeing). It is critical that the dancers will be heard, particularly in these circumstances as Jurrungu Ngan-ga embodies the essence of solidarity. The company added: With that in mind we respectfully ask that the festival review their decision to return the funding for the sake of community harmony, the cultural safety of artists and the benefit of our audiences. The show will still run at Carriageworks from 26-29 January, just not under the umbrella of the festival. Tickets issued through festival will be cancelled and refunded by the festival, and punters can secure new tickets here. As Guardian Australia has previously reported, a number of acts have pulled out of Sydney festival over the $20,000 sponsorship deal with the Israeli embassy to stage a production of the Israeli choreographer Ohad Naharin’s Decadance by the Sydney Dance Company. The protests have been backed by a coalition of Arab and pro-Palestinian organisations (including the Arab Australian Federation, Greens for Palestine, Independent Australian Jewish Voices, Jews against the Occupation Sydney, the Sydney representative for BDS and United Australian Palestinian Workers) and assorted artists and academics. Yesterday Karla Dickens pulled her work Return To Sender out of the festival. Other artists to have withdrawn include Blake prize-winning artist Khaled Sabsabi, Malyangapa and Barkindji rapper Barkaa, South Asian dance company Bindi Bosses, the Arab Theatre Studio, the Bankstown poetry slam and journalist Amy McQuire. Here is a breakdown of all the new cases today: NSW recorded 12,226 cases Victoria recorded 5,137 cases Queensland recorded 2,222 new cases South Australia recorded 1374 new cases Tasmania recorded 94 new cases The ACT recorded 252 new cases The Northern Territory recorded 37 new cases Western Australia recorded one new case The national total for Thursday: 21,343 new cases. ACT chief minister Andrew Barr has released a statement after nat cab. Here are a few lines about rapid antigen tests from it: NSW will provide around 1 million RATs at cost to the ACT from 17 January 2022. We have more RATs on order to respond to the evolution of testing arrangements in the context of higher case numbers and community transmission. National cabinet has also agreed to work on a concessional RAT supply arrangement to provided highly subsidised tests to low-income households. Further details will be provided in the coming weeks. Victoria has closed some testing sites because of the heat. McGowan is asked if WA will adopt the new close contact definition before 5 February. He says: In this morning’s meeting there is wide acceptance, in particular from the prime minister, that Western Australia is different. And we don’t have large numbers of cases. In fact, we have one case today. NSW had 11,000. So we are in a very, very different position to the other states. Which is why our testing, tracing isolation and quarantines ystems are all still working. Overthere, they have all collapsed. So that’s why we are able to hopefully eliminate this, because our systems are still working. And so we will adopt those rules around close contacts at some point in time in the future when necessary, if we get to high caseloads. So that’s the agreement of the meeting this morning. Obviously it wouldn’t be, in my view, it wouldn’t be before February 5. McGowan says the positive case in now in hotel quarantine. He is a 27-year-old male backpacker. He’s a close contact of an existing case. He shared a bathroom with that person. He is not vaccinated. It’s believed he was infectious in the community. So therefore there is a range of exposure sites we have published already, and probably more will be published shortly. McGowan: Looking forward, if we keep getting vaccinated, getting our third doses, if we learn the lessons from other jurisdictions that have allowed the virus to spread, it means we will be in the best possible position to safely reconnect with the rest of the world. Everyone wants to move forward and move forward safely. If we stick together do the right thing by each other, by checking in, getting vaccinated, following the public health advice, we will all get through this. McGowan: At a point in the future if we need to move to the national settings, that is what we will do. But like I have always said, WA is in the best possible position because we can monitor the situation in other states, learn from it, and ensure WA is best placed to transition and ease border controls at the right time. It’s a concerning time right now around the country. Everyone is ready – sorry, everyone is ready for this pandemic to be over. But it’s showing no signs of slowing down. We have asked a lot from the public over the past two years in order to rise to the challenge in terms of behaviour, vaccination and, frankly, patience. And I can understand why some would be tired, especially after the boiling hot week that we’ve had. But there is light at the end of the tunnel. If we can eliminate this outbreak, we can get back to the way of life we have enjoyed without any public health restrictions for the rest of the school holidays, hopefully – something I think we would all enjoy. McGowan is now talking about national cabinet. Today’s meeting addressed a range of issues, specifically an updated definition of close contacts and the future use of rapid antigen tests. It was widely acknowledged at the meeting that Western Australia is in a very different position compared to other states and territories. That becomes more and more obvious each and every day. While WA has agreed in principle with the changes to testing and close contacts, these new settings will only be implemented in Western Australia at a later stage. To be clear, the settings agreed at national cabinet today are for jurisdictions with a high-caseload environment, with thousands of daily cases. Western Australia is not in that position. McGowan is announcing an assistance package for businesses and artists impacted. Firstly small businesses impacted by the public health measures will soon be able to apply for a grant of up to $12,500. Sole traders will also be eligible for a grant up to $4,400. Those one-off grants are open to eligible businesses, including creative and performing arts, catering, rental and hiring services, and other hospitality businesses. These businesses will need to demonstrate a reduction in turnover of at least 30% compared to the same 11-day period from last year. Nightclubs that have been forced to close are eligible for a one-off $20,000 grant. McGowan says 26,696 vaccines were administered yesterday. This was pushed by a spike in visitors to state-run clinics, particularly for third doses. Which we know is very important in the fight against Omicron. Yesterday’s surge in vaccinations means 92% of our population aged 12 or above have now had their third dose. And 84% have had two doses over 12. These numbers are very encouraging. Remember as soon as you were eligible for your third dose you should immediately get it done. McGowan: Yesterday we did 5,181 Covid tests. As of this morning, 720 close contacts in total have been identified, 40 of whom are yet to be tested. Of the 40 yet to be tested, 31 were patrons from the Perth mess hall event. As I said yesterday, a number of attendees will not be able to be located by WA police, due to false or misleading contact information provided. In addition, 488 casual contacts have now been identified, with 328 yet to be tested. If you have been identified as a close or casual contact or if you have been to an exposure site, especially the Perth mess hall event, we need you to come forward immediately. We need you to do the right thing and get tested now. Premier Mark McGowan: I can advise that overnight WA has recorded one new local case of Covid-19. That case is a 27-year-old male backpacker. So far we know he was a close contact of an existing case. He shared a bathroom with that person. That man is not vaccinated. It is believed he has been infectious in the community, so therefore there are further exposure sites. These are Dominos pizza East Fremantle on December 28. BP on Queen Victoria Street, in Fremantle on December 28. Portside Boulders climbing gym in O’Connor on December 27. And farmer Jack Spearwood on December 26. Specific times and further exposure sites will be released publicly as soon as possible. We are now jumping over to WA. Visitors to Tasmania will no longer need a PCR test to enter the state from January 1 onwards. Travellers will have to return a negative RAT test 24 hours prior to travel to Tasmania. Fyles: There is two more cases associated with a birthday party event in Darwin on December 23. So yesterday I reported on a nine-year-old girl that had tested positive. And so these two other cases attended that same event in Darwin on December 23. There is four more cases where I don’t have the details. The contact tracing is under way. They are today’s cases and I want to reiterate we saw a significant increase in the test number – 3,600 versus 1,600 yesterday. We have 37 cases in the NorthernTerritory reported in the last 24 hours. So it is disappointing to have 37 cases but the good news is that that rate of spread is still low in terms of those positive cases. Fyles: Eight cases are household contacts of a case that we reported from Christmas Day in Katherine. All of those contacts I understand were in isolation. One of the cases is a known household contact from Tennant Creek – a female in her 20s. So those cases are the eight and the one from Tennant Creek are linked to our ‘regional cluster’ that we’re referring to it as, and that takes the total number for that cluster to 163 cases. Additionally, we have a number of cases. I will provide some details on them to Territorians. One of them is a worker in the centre for national resilience. But they are the contact of an interstate traveller. So a household contact has recently returned from interstate and the cause of that transmission is under investigation. One of them is a nurse at Royal Darwin Hospital and we have contact tracing under way for that case. Two of them are US marines that recently arrived at Robertson barracks from Queensland. Additionally we have a worker that is at the Groote Eylandt mine that arrived into the Territory yesterday. I understand and we have been able to identify the close contacts in that case. There is eight other cases which are interstate arrivals into the Northern Territory. And there is a further nine cases which are household contacts of recent interstate arrivals. We are just jumping to the Northern Territory, where health minister Natasha Fyles says there are 37 new cases. Before I go to the details around those cases, I need to notify Territorians we have seen a significant increase in testing in the last 24 hours. We saw 3,625 tests conducted in the territory. Yesterday’s figures were reported against around 1,600 tests. So we have seen more than double the tests and that accounts for this increase in cases. Some big changes ahead. To recap: Leaders at nat cab have agreed to revise the definition of a close contact. So that is now someone who has been more than four hours with a confirmed positive case in a house, accommodation or care-facility setting. The states can determine exceptional circumstances where more people have to isolate - so, suspected super-spreader events. Positive cases have to isolate for seven days, with a test on day six. Close contacts have to isolate for seven days and have a PCR test if they are symptomatic. A close contact who is asymptomatic must have a rapid antigen test. Lastly, the PM was asked if he had a response to the protests this morning and the damage to Old Parliament House. I am disgusted and appalled by behaviour that would see Australians come and set fire to such a symbol of democracy in this country. I just think it is appalling and I think it is disgraceful, and I think that the authorities should act swiftly in accordance to the law and people should face consequences of their actions. This is not justified. This is not how Australia works. We have a rule of law in this country and people should obey it. And as we come into this New Year and as we reflect on many things of the past 12 months, it has been a tough year for so many Australians, and we still think of the six families in Tasmania. It has been really tough, but we live in one of the greatest countries in the world. We enjoy freedoms here. We enjoy a healthcare system. We enjoy freedoms that few countries enjoy to the same extent that we do and have over such a long period of time. So, while Australia has had a tough year, there is still a lot to celebrate by the simple fact that we are Australians and we live in Australia. Frewen reminds people that the booster eligibility has been brought forward. We went from six months to five months and that brought a number of million extra people back in, and as I have said, on the first of January we go from 4.1 million to 7.6 million. That is a large amount of people in a very short space of time, but the numbers are progressing well, and we will ramp up to January. Both New South Wales and Victoria, have committed to getting their clinics back up to 300,000 doses a week, which is where we were at the height of the rollout. So once we get nationally back up to the high levels ... we will get through people. Reporter: 43% of those eligible for boosters have not had their boosters yet? Morrison: The rate of dosage for boosters is running at six times the rate of first doses when we started, and at around twice the rate of second doses, so the booster rate is actually running significantly faster than we have seen in the last two doses of the vaccination program. I also make this point: that when someone becomes eligible, that does not mean that they are overdue, OK? I would encourage people to do it as soon as hey can, but by the end of January, general, we will have close to 16 million people. You can’t vaccinate 16 million people on one day, but there is no shortage of vaccines. There is 20 million vaccines here in Australia. That is enough to boost 80% of the Australian population, and more coming over the course of the first half of this year, so there is no shortage of supply. This is why we, again, stressed today the need to get the state clinics up and running and that is exactly what they are doing, and to get ourselves off at the world record rates we had in October – when we were running at 300,000 a day on some occasions – that is where we want to get back to. But to do that you need all cylinders firing. General John Frewen is asked by Guardian Australia’s Daniel Hurst about the booster rollout in aged care facilities. Frewen says: We have been focused on aged care facilities, and of the slightly over 2,500 aged care facilities at the moment, we have done already a visit to about 1,500 of those. The eligibility has shifted, of course, so more have become due this year. Some of them are scheduled in January. We are now trying to move them to 1 January. The remainder will fall in the second half of January and we are well engaged with the vaccine providers to get them all scheduled in the second half... Hurst: Does that mean 1,000 aged care facilities have not been visited for boosters yet? Frewen: They had not been eligible so they are becoming eligible now and we have plans in place to visit them as soon as possible. Kelly is asked if these changes will accelerate the outbreak. We will have more cases. There is no doubt about that. This is a way of coping with that last caseload. It is about using the resources we have wisely, and I will leave others to their own opinion. Morrison is asked if he can ensure these changes won’t result in more lives lost. He says: I am confident that this is the best way to manage the Omicron pandemic. That is what I am confident about. Reporter: What personal responsibility will you take? Morrison: It is the same that I have taken all through this pandemic as prime minister. Every single day, when I first stood before you here, and Australia was one of the first countries in the world to call it the pandemic – two weeks before the World Health Organisation. Each and every day I have focused on this pandemic to ensure that we have got the best possible settings that we can have, so I do take responsibility for the decisions we have taken I do take responsibility for the fact that Australia has one of the lowest death rates in the world, that we have one of the strongest economies coming through the pandemic, and we, indeed, have one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. These are all of my responsibilities. Morrison is asked about people struggling to get a rapid antigen test. If you are not symptomatic and not a close contact, then go home. That is the first way. That is the first way to be able to ensure that we keep those queues down. In terms of the supplies in the private market, in pharmacies and shops, supermarkets and places like that, what is important is they have the certainty that they know that governments aren’t all of a sudden going to go round and start providing these free to anybody and everybody. We will be providing them only where it is recommended to us that they need to be provided... for our aged care workers or in those high-risk settings, or indeed what we hope to arrange for schooling when we go back to school next year. Otherwise, people can go get those in the private market. Morrison is asked about NYE. The prime minister says: What I would like people to do tomorrow night is enjoy the evening. I would like them to be looking forward into 2022 and looking forward confidently. Because Australia’s feature is bright. What I would like people to do tomorrow night is exercise common sense and follow all the normal precautions that we have been talking about. We have been living with this virus now and the virus has been around us now for two years. And we understand a lot more about it than we previously did and we understand how it is transferred. I would expect people to show appropriate caution, commonsense, treat each other with a sort of respect for their health, as well in terms of how they are engaging with them, and enjoy a beautiful, hopefully, summer evening all around the country as we move from 2021 into 2022. Chief medical officer Prof Paul Kelly says that “the booster program is absolutely crucial” to fighting the virus. The second one is public health and social measures. Wearing masks, as you all are today, that is very important, one of the other things that are in place and are a matter for the states and territories. The third one is tests, trace, isolate and quarantine ... And make sure that those people that are the closest contacts are getting rapidly diagnosed, rapidly isolating and therefore protecting the rest of the community. That is the absolute key piece. Morrison is asked what pressure these changes might put on the hospital system. He says: What we’re dealing with is a different variant that has a high volume with lower severity illness. And we have done endless rounds of modelling over the last many months about the impacts on the hospital system. And so it really does become an issue of the proportion of total number of cases that end up in serious illnes, that put pressure on hospital system. And these are the issues that of course are being worked through the medical expert panel and the chief medical officer. What I want to make very clear today is the definition we have adopted today has actually come forward from the chief medical officer, which I strongly agree with. It is a practical definition to deal with the circumstances of the new period and maximise the resources we have available to deal with a pandemic. We have significant resources to do that, more than most countries around the world. Hence why we have one of the best responses and outcomes from Covid anywhere in the world. Morrison is asked about the Therapeutic Goods Administration approving rapid antigen tests. He says: As I said yesterday, that we have current applicants who have had their products withdrawn by the FDA in the United States. There will be some who will be out there selling their wares. The only way they will have anything approved by the TGA is if they comply with the requirements of the TGA, they provide the data that the TGA insists on providing. There are a number of applicants who haven’t provided that. And of course you wouldn’t expect them to be approved in those circumstances. Morrison is back up: What is in South Australia, I want to stress, while they are adopting the definition of close contact from midnight tonight, they are continuing with a 10-day rule in South Australia. Nothing is further changing on the isolation arrangement in South Australia, but the definition of a close contact is, as I have said today. In relation, something Lieutenant General Frewen just mentioned, just because someone becomes eligible for a booster does not mean that if they have not had a booster by that day they are overdue. That is something that has been pedalled out there which is not accurate, it is not true. You become eligible from a particular date. And from that date, we encourage people to go and have the booster. Frewen says there are 16 million doses of mRNA vaccines sitting in storage. There will of course be areas where demand outstrips the immediate ordering. And we continue to work with all of the providers to get either urgent deliveries to them or work local redistribution. We urge any [one] who is running low on supply, please contact the vaccine operation centre and we will make sure we get additional vaccine to you as quickly as we can. January will be a big month. General John Frewen is up: As of yesterday, 2.3 million of the 3.9 million eligible people have had their boosters, which represents around 57%. There were 149,000 vaccines administered yesterday ... Pleasingly, 60,000 of those vaccines were delivered through pharmacies, which is a record for pharmacies – the first day that pharmacists have delivered more than GPs. Kelly says the good news is that the virus is less severe: The other key element of this is we need to protect our PCR testing for where the best bang for buck is. We have seen over the last week an increase in the positivity rate from around 1%, which is what we have seen throughout the pandemic, to almost 5%, and even higher in some states. That demonstrates to me that we are not getting to the people that we need to get to, in terms of PCR testing, hence that risk-based approach for who we want to come forward for PCR testing. Chief medical officer Prof Paul Kelly: It is a different virus, very different from previous versions of the virus we have seen over the last two years. What is the difference? We know it is very transmissible – it is at least as transmissible as Delta. And is transmitting fast in the community, as we have seen – 110,000 active cases now in Australia, and that is continuing to rise. I expect will continue to rise ... It is less severe. I think that is becoming very clear now. We have had good news overnight, there was a paper that I read from South Africa, which is a different country to us in various ways, but they have had the longest and most extensive experience of this particular form of the Covid-19 virus, the Omicron variant. They are seeing a 73% decrease in severity. And that is becoming very clear now, in terms of their measures of severity with this virus. That is similar to what we’re seeing in Australia. Morrison says nat cab is trying to get the balance right. That is with Omicron, we cannot have hundreds of thousands of Australians or more taken out of circulation based on rules that were set for the Delta variant. We need rules for the Omicron variant, so that we can keep our economy working and get people in jobs, we can keep Australia open, and we can focus the resources that we have on the tasks that are most urgent. At the end of the day, get your booster, monitor your symptoms, check in where you are going and use common sense to manage your health responsibly and that of your family. Morrison says there are some changes to isolation requirements for healthcare workers at next week’s national cabinet meeting. In addition, we will be looking at the issue of concessional access in the private market to rapid antigen tests, working with the states and territories on that issue. They are responsible for the rapid antigen test that are being distributed in their testing centres; the commonwealth looks after aged care and a number of high-risk settings. We will continue to do that. Specific orders are in place and stocks are on the way here to a number of the states, including the federal government. Morrison says some vulnerable groups will still be able to access them. Where possible, particularly for vulnerable groups, we would seek to do those through the pharmacy network and through the private network, and that would bedone through a registration system similar to how we manage things like the PBS and things of that nature which pharmacy is very used to dealing with. But for all other casual uses, you would just like to get a test or something like that, well, that is what the private market is for. Morrison says the RATs will be free only if you meet the criteria. Anyone else who would like to get a rapid antigen test, well, go to your pharmacy or the supermarket or the warehouse, big suppliers, where, we believe – as a result of making this change and being very clear about who is being provided with a public test and who is not, all the private industry who gave us that advice this week – they can go now. They can book their supplies, they can get them on the shelves and not have any concern that, somehow, a new policy will come in and tests will be handed out to anyone who wants one. It was agreed today that will not be the policy in Australia. Rapid antigen tests will be provided publicly at those testing centres for those who require one according to the rules that I have set down, and we have taken out of national cabinet today. Morrison says he knows this is a big change to how we have rolled the last two years. I know this is a bit different to what you have been hearing over the last couple of years. That is the gearchange. That is the reset. That is what we need people to really understand, and I know it is a change from what has been said, but dealing with Delta is very different to dealing with a Omicron, and to ensure that our public health systems work as effectively to keep as many people are safe as possible, that is why we need to make this change. Morrison says this will reduce the pressure on testing centres. Which means we will be able to increase the turnaround time of these tests, getting results back to those who need to take them. In addition to that, it will also free up, we hope, a lot more workforce that is currently being focused on these tests to be able to be supporting the other priorities for managing the pandemic. In particular, the boosting clinics and centres or administering the vaccine. Morrison says RATs will be provided at testing centres. We will transfer over the next few weeks from PCR to these rapid antigen tests with, at the state testing centres, over the next couple of weeks. Some large states will be moving to get those rapid antigen tests to those testing centres as soon as they can and that will happen over the next few days and the next few weeks. If you are eligible for a rapid antigen test and there is one stay at that time, you will be given one. You will go home, take it and follow those rules. If that is not a rapid antigen test there then we will still give you a PCR test in the transition. Morrison says if that’s not you - do not go and get tested. If you don’t fulfil this definition of a close contact then there is no need for you to be in that line. You should go home. Goto the beach, go and do what you want to do. Read a book in the park. Follow all the normal, common sense things that you would do, monitor your symptoms, follow the Covid-safe practices, make sure you have booked for your booster, do all of those sorts of things but there is no need for you to be in that line. Morrison: So, to summarise, if you are a confirmed case, seven days. On the sixth day, you have a rapid antigen test and if that is [negative] after seven days, you can go back into the community. If you are a close contact, you get a rapid antigen test. If that returns a negative, you still remain in isolation for those seven days and you have a rapid antigen test again on day six. If you are a close contact and you are symptomatic, go and get a PCR test. If you are a close contact that returns a positive rights test, go and get a PCR test. Morrison: So, if you are symptomatic, and that goes for anyone who is symptomatic, by the way, if you are symptomatic, then at the right test is a PCR test. A close contact who is asymptomatic does not have symptoms, must have a rapid antigen test, and if positive, they must then have a PCR test. In that case, they become a confirmed case and the rules that apply to confirmed cases apply to them. Now, close contacts that return a negative test, they must remain isolated for those seven days because symptoms and other things can present later. And that is seven days from their date of exposure to the person who is a confirmed case, and they also will have a rapid antigen test on day six. Morrison: Now, a confirmed case would isolate for seven days from the date. So someone who actually has Covid, from the date that they took the test, they would have to isolate for seven days and have a negative rapid test, a rapid antigen test, on day six, prior to being able to leave isolation after seven days. A close contact that is symptomatic must have a PCR test, still. The definition is as follows: Similar to what I said to you yesterday -except in exceptional circumstances, a close contact is a household contact, or household like, of a confirmed case only. A household contact is someone who lives with a case or hasn’t spent more than four hours with them in our house, accommodation or care facility setting. So, you are only a close contact if you are, effectively, living with someone or have been in an accommodation setting with someone for more than four hours with someone who has actually got Covid - is not someone who is in contact with someone who has had Covid. Nat cab has agreed on a new definition for close contact with some states chnaging that now while others will follow. It will come into effect in New Wales, Victoria, Queensland, SouthAustralia and here in the ACT. Tasmania will follow on the 1 January, and the Northern Territory and Western Australia will be making announcements, particularly the Northern Territory, in the next few days to confirm how they will be moving to these new definitions. Morrison says national cabinet has agreed on “very practical way forward” that recognises that states and territories are in different stages. There is increasing evidence of reduced severity of overgrown, which is welcome news. Today there are 122 people in ICU and there are 51 people on ventilators, actually less than the number I mentioned to you yesterday. We are saying that the severity of this illness, the impact, particularly on those in hospital, in the most extreme illness situations, is remaining relatively constant, and that is an experience we are seeing in other countries as well. When’s a good time to release some bad data? How about the eve of New Year’s Eve? So today the Queensland government has published the delayed statewide landcover and trees study (SLATS) that covers land clearing for the 2018-19 year. During those 12 months, landholders cleared 680,688 hectares. It’s a bit tricky to compare with previous years – such as the 392,000 hectares reportedly cleared in 2017-18 – as the remote technology has been improved. Still, it appears that Queensland is clearing a lot of land. The 2018-19 tally amounts to about 3800 times the size of Melbourne’s CBD, or more than 2,400 times Sydney’s. “This report is a carbon bomb that threatens to blow up the commitments to net zero emissions by 2050 made by the Queensland and Australian governments,” Dr Stuart Blanch, a WWF-Australia conservation scientist, said in a statement. It shows clearing has likely been significantly under-reported in previous reports. The latest SLATS data was compiled using satellite images that are three times more accurate than the previous imagery and cover much more of the state. The data provides a new national best-practice standard that all governments and industry should adopt. To give the amount some context, Australia’s national greenhouse gas inventory estimated land clearing in 2018 calendar year was about 370,000 hectares nationwide. In that year, the commonwealth government also claimed the land sector was a net sink in the order of more than 20m tonnes of carbon dioxide. As Guardian Australia reported a couple of months ago, there is good reason to think Australia’s statistics underestimate the amount of land clearing that is going on. Today’s figures from Queensland are only going to add to those concerns. Scott Morrison says: Omicron is a game changer. It has been in the country for just over a month. We have taken the care to ensure that we are understanding it as best we can, examining the impact on our hospital system to ensure we are recalibrating in the right way so Australia can continue to live with this virus. OK we are jumping to the PM now. Finally, Marshall says there was a “large discussion” at national cabinet regarding the use of rapid antigen tests. All states agreed to transition away from PCR tests and towards rapid antigen tests: It is fair to say that there are increasing numbers now coming into Australia. No state will be giving these away free of charge. This is completely against public health advice, except in circumstances with particularly vulnerable communities. Some states spoke about there might be a particularly vulnerable cohort that they want to administer these to in a reasonably rapid period of time. But we all agreed that we will be making a transition to more people using the rapid antigen tests and getting out of the lineups for a PCR test. Marshall says two-thirds of all the people lining up for PCR tests in South Australia are asymptomatic. These people, really, quite frankly, should not be in the line unless they were close contacts of somebody who was a positive case. We really do want to free-up our capacity for testing for those people who have symptoms and over the next 24-48 hours we will look at putting new directions in place to make it very clear to every single person in South Australia that we really want to test people that have symptoms or are close contacts of those people that have symptoms. So just a bit of advance warning that we will be significantly tightening up on that. Marshall says the national cabinet also discussed the time close contacts and positive cases should isolate. As of the next 24-48 hours, South Australia will move to 10 days for people who are Covid-positive and seven days for those people who are close contacts. If they are unvaccinated, it will remain at 14 days. Marshall turns to the national cabinet. He says three critical things were discussed - the first being the standard definition of what a close contact is: Now, you might recall if we go back several months ago, we were very, very keen to get everybody that was a close contact or a casual contact into isolation to stop the spread. We were pursuing, at that point, an elimination strategy so that we did not put our state into lockdown, like we saw in New South Wales, in Victoria and the ACT. We have a completely different strategy [now]. It is completely different variants, and we are in a very, very different stage at the moment, so we are looking to suppress the transmission of this disease, and take the appropriate action for this stage of this particular variant. Today, we agreed that we would, very significantly, narrow the definition of a close contact. This will, essentially, [mean] the people who are a household or intimate contact with a positive case. And also, each state will look at exceptions, or exceptional circumstances, in their state. South Australia has recorded 1,374 new cases overnight. There are still 37 people being treated in hospital. Marshall says numbers are likely to “bob around” for some time. South Australian premier Steven Marshall is speaking now following national cabinet. He says a Covid-positive child aged under two has died: A Covid-positive child under the age of two has, sadly, passed away. This is still being determined as the cause of death. Obviously, we will refer this to the coroner. It is similar to the 95-, 94-year-old woman that we reported the other day,[where] we knew that she passed away with Covid but not necessarily of Covid, so we will need to do that investigation. But very sad news that a child under the age of two, Covid-positive, has passed away. Perrottet is asked what the point of QR codes is now that the system of contact tracing is changing and more and more people are becoming infected. He says: Obviously there was a lot of debate and discussion as we opened up, we planned to remove QR codes in low-risk settings, we kept them and mandated them at high-risk settings to allow ... our health teams to track and trace those cases. There was concern, and hearing from public feedback that was very comfortable with the QR settings we brought them back in a limited way ... As we learn to live alongside the virus, the utility of those QR codes over time will completely dissipate. Mike Bowers, photographer at large for Guardian Australia, has been down at Old Parliament House surveying the damage. He says traditional owners at the tent embassy are frustrated and attempting to keep media from the site. Perrottet says the “substantial investment” the state has placed into its health system gives him confidence NSW will be able to cope with rising case numbers. Which, keep in mind, jumped by more than 100 hospitalisations in the past 24 hours: We always said as we open up case numbers would increase and we’ll expect that continue to occur as we live along the virus. What’s incredibly pleasing is we still have capacity in our health system ... that is the measure of success as the key metric for us, not the case number itself. Please expect as we open up, case numbers will increase. New South Wales premier Dominic Perrottet is speaking now on 2GB. He says restricting the definition of close contacts is a “more balanced approach” that “suits the circumstances” we are currently facing. The government has released a response condemning the fire at Old Parliament House on behalf of the minister assisting the prime minister and cabinet, Ben Morton. Read it in full here: Criminal damage has no place in our democracy. Australia is one of the leading democracies in the world and the Museum of Australian Democracy at Old Parliament House has become a physical symbol of the strength and success of our Australian democratic system. We have led the world in the development of our Australian democratic system. Our democratic success is based on the principles of freedom, respect, fairness and equality of opportunity. Millions across the world can only but dream to live in and have the opportunities afforded to them that come with living in a liberal democracy like Australia. No system of government is perfect. In our democracy the freedom to peaceful protest is one that we can and should celebrate. Today’s actions at Old Parliament House were not peaceful. The resulting damage undermines the message that peaceful protesters seek to deliver. As minister responsible for Old Parliament House I was reassured by the chair of Old Parliament House that at the last board meeting, the board was fully briefed by management on planning and preparations for these protests and the board was satisfied with the planning and preparations. The protection of the building is paramount and given the live operational issues, management have made decisions based on advice from security agencies. Disappointingly, but necessarily, visitor access has been restricted at times. It is the government’s expectation that all illegal activity should be dealt with by the police and the courts to the full extent possible. I thank the first responders. They should not have to put themselves in harm’s way to deal with the fire. The damage to the building will be fully restored back to its original condition. Before we hear from the prime minister, it’s Caitlin Cassidy back with you for the next little while. Caits coming in from all angles today. Scott Morrison is due to address reporters at Parliament House in Canberra at 3.10pm AEDT. This has not been independently verified by Guardian Australia but there are a lot of reports the protesters today are a “sovereign citizen” group. From AAP: The ACT has reported 253 new cases of Covid-19, beating its previous high – set two days earlier – by a single case. There are six people in hospital, with no one in intensive care or requiring ventilation. The new cases bring the territory’s tally of active cases up to 1,134. The infections were picked up alongside almost 4,000 negative tests returned. The Tasmanian premier, Peter Gutwein, is expected to address the media at 3pm after Nat-Cab. We are not sure what time the PM is speaking yet. ACT police have released a statement into the fire at Old Parliament House. Here it is in full: There has been ongoing protest activity at the front of Old Parliament House throughout the past fortnight. Old Parliament House was evacuated earlier today after protestors started a fire at the front doors of the building - this was quickly extinguished by ACT Fire &amp; Rescue. A police investigation into the cause of the fire has commenced. Old Parliament House will remain closed until further notice. Australians may have to receive two or even three Covid jabs each year to maintain defences against the virus if early results on the efficacy of booster shots turn out to be a useful guide. Weekly data published just before Christmas by the UK’s Health Security Agency shows the effectiveness of both the Pfizer and Moderna boosters against symptomatic diseases is lower for the Omicron than the Delta variant across all periods after the injection. The analysis included 147,597 Delta and 68,489 Omicron cases in the UK. The agency stressed the “results should be interpreted with caution due to the low counts and the possible biases related to the populations with highest exposure to Omicron (including travellers and their close contacts) which cannot fully be accounted for”. This is a thread from Twitter user Isabelle AI who says healthcare workers in Sydney are exhausted, and begs the PM and premier to visit the front line. ACT police are expected to hold a press conference about the fire at Old Parliament House soon. I want to point out again – we don’t know what’s happened today or why the fire started. Huge queues for booster shots in Sydney. Protesters on the scene say the police approached the smoking ceremony, spraying pepper spray which then resulted in the fire. I really want to stress that we haven’t yet been able to confirm any of the claims. We are getting more information for you and have put these accusations to ACT police. To be clear - we are not sure exactly what has happened at Old Parliament House this morning, or what the context for the protest is. We are chasing the information and will bring you more detail when we have it. The federal opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, also called for caution regarding the push to narrow the definition of a close contact. When asked about the federal government proposal to narrow the definition, Albanese said it would make sense to have national consistency, and a “commonsense approach” should be taken. But in order to achieve that, as well, we do need to deal with people’s anxieties. When we had a lifting, for example, of the QR codes, and people not being notified, what occurred was that a range of people just chose to then not go about their normal way of life and to withdraw from activity. So we need to be cautious about this. Albanese said the national cabinet should review the matter thoroughly, “and we want to see the states bring their public health advice”. All we’ve heard so far is Scott Morrison’s view about this. We want to hear the approach that state governments think should be taken to this. But what we do urge is there needs to be consistency, there needs to be clarity and certainty and common sense, because businesses and the Australian people in individual states and across the country are really struggling with this hodgepodge of constantly changing rules and definitions. Albanese pivoted to a broader critique of Morrison (with an election due by May), declaring that the Prime Minister “can’t continue to just come up with a new slogan in order to get the headline every week”. This prime minister needs to do something other than go to a focus group this morning and get a definition about ‘shake and bake’ ... This prime minister speaks about personal responsibility. This is the guy who won’t take responsibility for his job, whose most common phrase is ‘it’s not my job’ when asked about things that clearly are the job of the Australian prime minister. OK, we can confirm the fire at Old Parliament House is now out. ACT Fire and Rescue were called at 11.45am, and the crew found the two front doors alight. The building was evacuated and fire crews put the blaze out. ACT Police are now handling the incident. We know that a large number of protesters had been at the site just before the blaze. More to come on this as we have it. From AAP: Tens of thousands of revellers are still expected to flood Melbourne for New Year’s Eve celebrations, despite record Covid-19 infections. Melbourne lord mayor Sally Capp said it was undeniable celebrations have taken a hit from the pandemic - normally hundreds of thousands of people flock to the city and an entertainment drawcard has been cancelled. However, she assured those who have tickets to four event zones in the city, open to the double-vaccinated only, that there was still plenty to enjoy. “Within the celebration zones, there is family-friendly entertainment, more than 115 artists will be dazzling and delighting the crowds, there is a 9.30pm fireworks show, particularly for families and children,” she told reporters. Streets will be closed for outdoor dining, families can bring a picnic and there will be alcohol-free zones. “Post the 9.30pm show, we move more into glitter balls, DJs and dancing as people look forward to heralding the end of 2021 with a midnight firework show across those four celebration zones,” she said. However, the pandemic’s ongoing impact on freight, logistics and workplaces’ ability to train staff also means the city of Melbourne has cancelled its drone swarm at Docklands as part of its New Year’s Eve celebrations. It is hoping the drone event provider, Celestial, can deliver the spectacle in January. We know emergency services are now at Old Parliament House. Videos are being shared online – we will bring you more information as we have it. Several journalists on Twitter are reporting that Old Parliament House in Canberra is on fire. We are trying to find out more for you now and will keep you updated. Hello everyone, this is Cait Kelly. I’ll be taking you through the second half of the day. Here’s some weather for you first up. It’s going to be hot, hot, hot over the next few days. The Queensland press conference has just ended, and with that, I will pass the blog on to Cait Kelly. She will bring you all the latest developments, including what comes out of national cabinet, due to meet at midday. Back to Queensland, and Gerrard says this is “the best time” for the state to be experiencing a pandemic. The weather is warm, Queenslanders have had the opportunity to get vaccinated, and school is off for summer: This is the first time Queenslanders will experience the true pandemic ... if we are going to experience the pandemic, then January is probably the best time to be experiencing it, because it’s warm ... and schools are on holidays. This is the time to be having a pandemic. Over in South Australia, Steven Marshall will have more to say later in the day after national cabinet meets. Gerrard says the “vast majority” of people who acquire Covid while fully vaccinated will experience a relatively mild illness. But “even if only a tiny proportion of a large number of people needs to go to hospital ... that’s still a large number”. Gerrard says “certainly” tens of thousands of cases will be detected in the state, and the definition of close contacts needs to change or “the country won’t function”. If we continue to use our current settings, then all of us will be in quarantine, and the state won’t function. Turning to the Torres Strait, Gerrard says there are 11 cases in Thursday Island and one case in the rural town of Cherbourg overnight. Lockdowns are not being considered at this point but the community will be consulted. He says “we are not going to stop the Omicron virus” but there are some things that can slow its spread – like mask-wearing and working from home if you can. Gerrard says there are five things to do if you test positive to Covid-19: Self isolate and tell those you live with to self isolate and get tested. Answer health care questions you are asked when called by a health worker. Tell the people you’ve been in contact with to get tested and quarantine. Ensure you have supplies of food and medications for a fortnight. Look after yourself and keep a symptom diary. To hospitalisations in Queensland, and there are 1,809 cases receiving care in their homes, and 103 cases in hospital. But it’s difficult to work out what proportion are there for treatment and symptoms and what proportion are there for other reasons. There are at least 29 people receiving treatment for Covid in hospitals. Gerrard says: Even if you’re vaccinated there is a significant chance you will acquire this illness in the coming weeks. Queensland’s chief health minister Dr John Gerrard is up, breaking down today’s figures. He says case numbers will continue to rise, but vaccines work, and will hopefully keep intensive care admissions low: Trying to relay this message in a balanced manner is quite difficult ... if I can just take you back and compare what’s happening now with 2020. To the end of June 2020 in Australia there were 8,566 Covid cases diagnosed, so about the same number as we’ve seen in Queensland since the borders opened just over two weeks ago. Associated with that 8,566 cases last year were 204 intensive care admissions and 30 deaths. In Queensland so far since this latest wave, we have seen no intensive care admissions and there have been no deaths reported. It is likely in the coming days there will be intensive care admissions ... the really big issue though in trying to balance this message is we’re not going to be talking about 8,000 cases in a few weeks, we’re going to be talking about tens of thousands of cases ... but the good thing is the vaccines are working and they’ve been clearly demonstrated to work. Grace has announced Queensland’s numbers. There were a record 2,222 Covid cases detected in some 30 local government areas, a slight jump on yesterday’s record figure. There are now 8,586 active cases in the state. The good news is there is nobody being treated in intensive care. Further north, Queensland education minister Grace Grace is speaking in Brisbane now to provide a Covid update while also announcing funding for kindergarten services in the state. Tasmania has reported 92 new Covid cases overnight – almost a doubling of cases in one day – as well as new hospitalisations for the first time since the borders reopened to hotspots. Three people are now in hospital, with one admitted for an unrelated medical reason. There are now 386 active cases in the state. Back to politics, and Daniel Hurst has brought us some more of federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese’s comments this morning. Albanese says people are “crying out for clarity and certainty” and says the prime minister, Scott Morrison, should stop passing the buck. Albanese used a media conference in Adelaide this morning to demand outcomes from today’s national cabinet meeting (which is due to begin at midday AEDT). Albanese said: The truth is that there’s so much uncertainty out there. What we need out of today’s meeting is some clarity. Because people are anxious. People are worried, people are voting with their feet by not going out, by not going to restaurants, by not undertaking activity that they normally would in the lead-up, particularly, to New Year’s Eve. What we need from today is some national leadership that has been sorely lacking. We need national leadership when it comes to the rollout of the booster. Too many people still can’t get an appointment for their booster. The prime minister needs to explain why it is that it’s four months in between the second shot and the booster shot in a week’s time, but that is reduced to three months down the track at the end of January. Is that just because of capacity constraints? Albanese called for certainty regarding the rollout of boosters to people in aged and disability care. He also took aim at Morrison over shortages of rapid antigen tests: What we’ve seen is state government step up into the void, like the Andrews government, because of the failure of leadership from the Morrison government. Once again, Scott Morrison yesterday, when he appeared at a media conference, spoke about it not being his job. Well, it is his job, and he should do it. As prime minister of the country, we need certainty when it comes to the testing regimes as well and certainty when it comes to the need for isolation. That is what business is crying out for, clarity and certainty. And that is what the population is crying out for as well. But from a prime minister, who’s always playing catch up, always waits until an issue becomes a crisis before there’s any movement whatsoever, and then always is looking for someone else to blame. There is a wait time of between eight and nine hours at Victoria Park to get a Covid test: In lighter news, eBay has revealed some shocking statistics on unwanted Christmas gifts this year. Some 108 pre-loved items were listed every minute on Boxing Day, apparently (do not trust this information). I’m not sure how they knew specifically what was being listed was an unwanted gift, but either way, this year, eBay data shows that people in NSW and VIC were the most likely to flip their unwanted gifts to make some cash. (As our lifestyle editor Alyx Gorman wisely pointed out, if they were unwanted gifts they would also be listed as “new”, not “pre-loved”.) Three of the top five postcodes for selling pre-loved items on Boxing Day on eBay belong to Victoria, namely to Werribee, Melbourne CBD and Dandenong, while Sydneysiders in Baulkham Hills/Bella Vista and Ryde/Putney/Denistone East round off the top five. The top five unwanted gifts were women’s clothing (never buy clothes for your partner), books, trading cards, DVDs and Blu-Rays and coins (coins?). Two coins were listed every minute on Boxing Day, which seems insane. OzSage says our health system was stretched before Covid, and has now had its capacity eroded by staff resignations and a blowout in waiting lists. The impact of the “sheer number” of Omicron cases at this time of year could be “enormous”: The rapid rise in Omicron cases may mean we are only days away from seeing higher hospitalisation and ICU admissions than during the peak of Delta ... NSW recognises the overload of the hospital system and is already warning the community not to expect access to hospital care. One week ago, NSW Health advised people under 50 years to care for themselves at home, without access to Hospital in The Home. This week, they have revised the age cut off to anyone under 65 years. This is the ultimate in “personal responsibility” – where citizens are left without access to healthcare and to sort out their own Covid care, as well as do their own contact tracing whilst sick with Covid-19. Consideration should be given to support for people found Covid-19 positive who are in caring roles. The consequence of this policy is that people may die at home when their lives could have been saved by proper timely healthcare. Without the safety net of regular contact from medical services the unintended consequences are likely to be more ambulance callouts and emergency department presentations. OzSAGE ... found that there were a disturbingly high number of deaths of relatively young people with COVID-19 at home between July and October 2021. ... We remain deeply concerned that people with preventable and treatable complications of Covid-19 may die at home in NSW, without access to even the support of Hospital in The Home. OzSage says the messaging that we are “all going to get Omicron” that has been coming out of NSW also ignores the vulnerable in our society, who remain at increased risk of severe illness: The “let it rip” strategy and defeatist narrative that “we are all going to get it” ignores the stark lived reality of the vulnerable of our society. Despite three doses of vaccine, some patients with cancer and other immunosuppressed people have substantially reduced protection against Omicron. Similarly, people with co-existing health conditions (estimated to be 50% of the adult population) are at increased risk of illness. The impacts of a fragmented testing system and disrupted health system will be felt most by our elderly, lower socio-economic groups, First Nations people, people with disability and regional populations ... A fatalistic approach will be fatal for some people. On the limiting of close contacts, OzSage says they have previously outlined the ongoing importance of contact tracing and QR codes, particularly as nightclubs and restaurants can be the sites of super-spreading events, which we have seen with Omicron: The proposed change to the definition of a close contact is to reduce testing and resources and is not based on sound public health principles. Close contact definitions need to be based on risk. Risk is related to the amount of exposure to virus-laden aerosols. Risk is not limited to arbitrary four-hour time frames within households. ... The rhetoric that case numbers ‘do not matter’ is incorrect - particularly in the face of the Omicron variant. Daily case numbers are now 10 times higher than during the Delta wave and may be 100 times higher in January. Even if hospitalisation rates are lower with Omicron compared to Delta, a halving of hospitalisation rates with a 10-fold or 100-fold increase in cases will still translate to a high burden on the health system. So even though hospitalisation rates are lower with Omicron than the previous Delta wave, hospitalisations and ICU occupancy are still on a “steeply rising trend”, which we saw today in NSW when hospitalisations jumped by more than 100 overnight. The trajectory of observed data suggest that hospitalisation and ICU occupancy are on a steeply rising trend and anticipated to exceed earlier peaks quite soon. In other words, optimistic assumptions about the impact of the Omicron variant on hospital admissions are unrealistic. Introducing a narrower close contact definition when the test positivity rate is currently 13% in NSW is unlikely to improve the burden on the health care system and will instead fuel the outbreak. Limiting the amount of testing reduces pressure on the test and trace system in the short term but will worsen the health system burden, because it will result in chains of transmission that could otherwise have been stopped. Back to the document released by OzSage today, and they’ve detailed some lengthy criticisms about testing in NSW, the risk of Omicron spreading and redefining close contacts. OzSage says testing in NSW is “failing”, with many people turned away after waiting hours in queues, and testing centres shutting at a time we should be testing more, not less: There are unacceptable delays in testing results being sent. Worse, there have been &gt;1000 infected people who were sent a negative test result by mistake, and this problem has not been addressed in a transparent fashion. Rather than investing in expanded testing capacity, the response of government is to restrict access to testing by changing the definition of close contacts and allowing PCR test to only family contacts, health workers and a few other groups. This will reduce our surveillance capacity for new variants and give falsely low case numbers. In addition, the test positive rate is 13% in NSW compared to &lt; 2% during the Delta wave – telling us we need more, not less testing. OzSAGE says rapid antigen tests are “unaffordable” for low-income people and families, given the need to test multiple times and the severe shortage nationwide: RATs ... cannot serve as the backbone of the public health test and control system. The results are not reported to the government, so people who test themselves and self-manage their Covid-19 will not be counted in official case numbers. There is unknown reliability of individual RAT brands with the Omicron variant, as a nasal swab (the usual method) is less likely to be positive than a throat swab. There has been no messaging to advise people on swabbing both the nose and throat when doing a RAT. There should still be a requirement for a PCR testing after a positive RAT. We are disturbed by the repeated messaging that only symptomatic people should get tested, when 40-45% of transmissions are asymptomatic, and even in people who develop symptoms, the peak of infectiousness is in the two days before symptoms begin. The false reassurance of the messaging will result in more cases of viral transmission that otherwise would have been prevented. China has labelled prime minister Scott Morrison joining social media app TikTok as a double standard, AAP’s Alex Mitchell reports. Morrison has previously warned Australians about the Chinese-owned app and said it “connects right back to China”, but he joined on Christmas Eve. Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian said Morrison’s choice of social media apps was “his own business”, but added Australia should not discriminate against Chinese companies: I need to reiterate that the Australian side should follow the principle of openness and market rules, stop abusing the concept of “national security” or applying double standard to serve its interests, and provide a fair, open and non-discriminatory business environment for Chinese companies. Australia banned Chinese-owned tech giant Huawei in 2018 and has also cancelled a number of infrastructure deals citing security issues in China. The prime minister posted two TikTok videos on Christmas Eve and has amassed more than 33,000 followers. On the criticisms the AMA has raised regarding the proposal to narrow the definition of a close contact, Hunt says he respects “there are many views”. This is what the president Dr Omar Khorshid said yesterday evening: Back to Hunt – he says his motives after the next election are “to be a dad”. He also responds to criticism of the government’s handling of rapid antigen tests, saying the TGA wasn’t too slow to approve the tests. Prior to national cabinet, the advisory group OzSage has released a series of recommendations on Covid policies. It says it remains “deeply concerned” about rising Covid numbers in NSW, arguing the decision to remove restrictions as Omicron surged has “cost us dearly”: We now have over 12,000 cases a day in NSW, a testing system that cannot keep up with demand and a health system so burdened that citizens are being told they may not be able to access healthcare. Staff stand downs will continue to escalate and effect more and more people. That includes supply chains, logistics and every part of civil society. All models to date assumed good testing capacity and adequate contact tracing. Without these, case numbers will blow out further. At this point in time there is no publicly available modelling to support a National Plan that is based on public health principles which will protect our hospital systems from collapse. OzSage, a group of experts in epidemiology, health and economics, recommends: A transparent and open investigation into why a private pathology provider issued falsely negative test results to infected people and provide a solution to prevent this happening again. Procuring commonwealth RAT supplies, making them free or subsidising the cost as well as a national notification system for positive RATs. Disseminate information to labs and community about the need for nose and throat swabs for detection of Omicron, as nasal swabbing alone is less accurate. Avoid misleading messaging that tells asymptomatic people they do not need to test. Anyone who has been in close contact should test, regardless of symptoms or location of the contact. Prepare surge health workforce capacity. A fit-for-purpose hospital in the home model and a palliative care plan, and stronger delivery of booster doses at facilities and greater oxygen supplies. Medical advice and current modelling that forms the basis of a state or national Covid-19 response should be publicly available. Transparent reporting of infected people self-caring at home. Deaths at home should be monitored and reported weekly. Isolation times should be no less than seven to 10 days depending on the risk balance for the workforce. Education to overturn the “we are all going to get it” messaging and enable the public and businesses to use simple prevention measures. Hunt says “immense progress” has been made on isolation requirements for close contacts. “Practical ways to ensure we don’t have large numbers of workforce on furlough”. A reminder, the Australian Medical Association and others have raised concerns at the proposed reduction of who is defined a “close contact”, arguing we should instead be expanding PCR tests and it will allow the virus to spread. Turning to New Year’s, Hunt’s sage advice is to “avoid the mosh pit”. We’re back on Covid, and Hunt says the commonwealth will deliver 5m Covid-19 vaccines and boosters between now and the end of January. He says it may take the workforce “a little more time”, because state-run facilities need to boost capacity. The reduction between vaccine intervals is due to be reduced from 4 January. The health minister Greg Hunt is speaking now, and it isn’t Covid related. Instead, Hunt is announcing a new bowel cancer treatment on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. From the new year, the medication Braftovi (encorafenib) will be available for patients with severe colorectal cancer. Interrupting Covid transmission briefly to bring you quite an extraordinary claim about the 2032 Olympic Games from federal government frontbencher Stuart Robert: In an interview last night on Sky News Australia, Robert suggested people should vote for the Coalition to protect the Summer Olympics in Brisbane and south-east Queensland. The Olympics have bipartisan support and were strongly backed by the Queensland Labor government. Speaking to Gary Hardgrave, Robert invoked the spectre of the Greens: In terms of the Olympics in the south-east corner, the way we protect it, the way we ensure that Queensland is ready for it, is to ensure we’ve got a Coalition government. The organisation committee, if you like, the corporate structures of 50/50 with the state and the commonwealth, that will go very well. As long as that good balance is there between the state and the commonwealth, simple answer, Gary, don’t vote in a Labor-Green government. It will not fare well, like it didn’t fare well last time. Wait times for Covid tests in the ACT have reduced since the Christmas rush. As of this morning, the Garran and Kambah testing clinics had a one hour wait time, Nicholls had a 35 minute wait time while the Mitchell drive-through testing clinic had a wait time of 1.5 hours. The Garran testing centre has been prioritising tests for close and casual contacts, and people with symptoms. Greg Hunt will be up in the next 15 minutes. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese spoke in Adelaide this morning ahead of this afternoon’s national cabinet meeting: The prime minister says he is changing gears, but the truth is he has stalled the recovery. The truth is that there is so much uncertainty out there stop what we need out of today’s meeting is some clarity. Over in New York, the jury in the sex-trafficking trial of Ghislaine Maxwell has reached a verdict and found her guilty on five of six counts. Read more on the verdict here: And you can follow our live blog on the case here: Also concerning is the testing positivity rate. Some 12.58% of tests in NSW came back positive in the latest reporting period. In Victoria, 6.33% of tests returned positive results. Turning to hospitalisations, there have been more than 100 people hospitalised with Covid overnight in New South Wales. There are 395 people in hospital with Covid in Victoria, including 55 in ICU, which is staying relatively stable. But there’s been quite a significant jump in NSW. There are now 746 people being treated in hospital, and 63 in ICU. Yesterday there were 625 hospitalised. Victoria’s case numbers have also come in and 5,137 new Covid-19 infections have been detected. That’s quite a jump from 3,767 yesterday. Sadly, 13 lives have been lost overnight. New South Wales case numbers are in – and it’s another daily record. There have been 12,226 new Covid cases recorded in the state, and one death. AMA president Dr Omar Khorshid has echoed Nancy Baxter’s concerns that redefining a close contact to someone who has spent four hours in a household with a case will accelerate the outbreak. He says resources would be better spent improving PCR availability. We also have confirmation the national cabinet meeting is due to start at midday. Chris Silverwood, head coach of the English cricket team, will miss the fourth Ashes test. It’s shaping up to be a hot New Years Eve across Victoria, with severe heatwave conditions in place across the state. If you’re gathering outdoors be sure to find some shade. Health minister Greg Hunt will be speaking at the Mount Martha Lifesaving Club at 9.45am this morning. Meanwhile, Darwin has been rocked by a large earthquake that hit near Timor-Leste and Indonesia early this morning. The Bureau of Meteorology says there’s there’s no tsunami threat to Australia. Read the full report here: I wish I had more good news for you today, but unfortunately an endangered pygmy hippo calf has died at Sydney’s Taronga Zoo just a month after her entry into the world. She was found unresponsive on Christmas Eve, while preliminary findings indicated a potential heart defect. The hippo was known as a “little watermelon on legs”, and may she rest in peace. Here’s some more comments from Nancy Baxter this morning, who expressed concern at the proposed changes to the definition of a close contact. Good morning, We are limping towards the finish line of the year – just one more day to go. Caitlin Cassidy here to guide you through this morning’s news – and all eyes are on the national cabinet who will be holding a snap emergency meeting today to grapple with rapidly rising Covid cases across the country. New South Wales recorded a dramatic jump in Covid cases yesterday, detecting 11,201 infections and three deaths, while Victoria recorded 3,767 cases and five deaths. It was the first time cases have jumped beyond 10,000 in a single state and a national record for Covid infections. There are predictions daily case numbers could rise beyond 100,000 in the coming weeks. The prime minister Scott Morrison on Wednesday announced the national cabinet meeting, which will focus primarily upon settling a uniform national definition of close contacts. Under the proposed definition, a close contact will be dramatically changed to be someone who has spent four hours or more with a confirmed case in a household or household-like setting. Prof Nancy Baxter, the head of the University of Melbourne’s school of population and global health, told ABC radio this morning the definition wasn’t fair and would overwhelm our healthcare systems. It comes with testing centres overwhelmed amid shortages of rapid antigen tests, which have doubling in price in some stores amid concerns of price gouging. Let’s get stuck in.When Valentin Gendrot applied for a job with the Paris police in 2017, he didn’t expect to get through the vetting process. A thorough background check would have revealed that Gendrot, then aged 29, was an investigative journalist who specialised in exposing dubious working practices: he had previously worked undercover at a call centre, a debt recovery agency and a car plant. His application was, however, successful and he began a two-year stint as an adjoint de sécurité (ADS), a position roughly equivalent to a police community support officer in the UK. Things got off to an underwhelming start when, on completing the obligatory three months’ training, he was assigned to a dreary posting at a mental health facility, charged with transporting patients from one psychiatric unit to another. After 15 months in this role he earned a transfer to Paris’s notoriously restive 19th arrondissement, where he was finally able to experience front-line policing. Gendrot’s account of his time on the force, Flic, made waves in France last year and is now available in English, thanks to Frank Wynne’s tidy translation. It portrays a working culture in which racism and misogyny are rife and police regularly exceed their powers with impunity. “Officers dealing with members of the public, he writes, “are routinely overfamiliar, inappropriate, aggressive in their words and actions, and insulting, and they unlawfully confiscate merchandise … from those [unlicensed street hawkers] issued with fines.” In one particularly disturbing incident, an officer beats up an innocent teenager for talking back. The boy, of African heritage, is bundled into a police van and repeatedly punched; Gendrot watches as his colleague goes “completely berserk, uses his elbow to pin the boy’s chest so he can lay into him … like a man possessed”. When the victim later files a complaint, triggering an internal investigation, several officers give false testimony in support of their co-worker, who is cleared of wrongdoing. Gendrot wonders: “How can he ever trust the police again after this incident?” While the depiction of the police in these pages is unflattering and at times damning, it is not entirely unsympathetic. Gendrot cites a 2018 report by the French senate into the working conditions of officers serving in the Île-de-France region, which identified a number of chronic problems. Some, such as the psychological stress of regularly confronting violence, are intrinsic to the occupation and to a degree inevitable. Others, such as long hours, irregular work patterns and the pressure of having to meet performance targets, are endemic to the 21st-century neoliberal managerialism espoused by President Macron. The toll of these conditions is most clearly visible in the alarming suicide rate among French police officers, which is 36% higher than among the general population. In 2019, the director general of the police force responded to concerns about officers’ mental health by issuing a memorandum advising local constabularies to arrange barbecues to boost morale – an intervention derided by many officers as feeble and condescending. Any credible critique of policing must give due weight to these organisational questions, and the author does not duck this. Some matters, however, are cultural rather than structural, and Gendrot’s anecdotal snapshot of life on the force suggests the prevalence of macho and chauvinistic attitudes is a big problem: people of non-white heritage are referred to by discriminatory epithets; a male officer persistently harasses a female colleague, rigging the work schedule to ensure she is always assigned to accompany him on patrols; while sharing a dorm with a fellow ADS, Gendrot wakes one morning to find his roommate sitting naked on his face, with his balls resting on his forehead, taking a selfie. Gendrot’s encounters with male boorishness prompt him to reflect on his own conflicted relationship with masculinity. His scrawny frame and spectacles make him a somewhat unlikely copper. He is good at football, which helps him to fit in, but is uncomfortable with some other rituals of male bonding, such as sharing stories of sexual escapades (“something I wouldn’t talk about even with close friends”). These personal asides provide a pertinent subplot to the story: one wonders how many capable people are put off joining the police for fear of not fitting in. This English edition appears at a time of renewed scrutiny of policing in the UK, prompted by several egregious incidents of misconduct – including, most recently, the revelation that officers took photographs of the bodies of two murder victims, which they then shared with colleagues on WhatsApp. Many of the problems highlighted by Gendrot exist, in varying degrees, in police forces all over the world. Chief among these is the perverse code of honour that compels otherwise decent officers to cover for the violent thuggery of colleagues. Without proper accountability a police force ceases to serve the community and becomes something else entirely. As Grendot remarks after witnessing an incident of police brutality: “I feel like I’m riding with a gang that has unlimited powers.” • Cop by Valentin Gendrot is published by Scribe (£9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Fewer Australians will be told to get tested for Covid, with most states backing a much narrower definition of a close contact, as a record 21,000 new daily cases were reported nationwide. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, cited “some very practical problems” caused by the more infectious Omicron variant – including the huge strain on the PCR testing scheme that had been at the centre of Australia’s response for two years. Speaking after a snap national cabinet meeting on Thursday, Morrison called for a “reset” because it was unfeasible to “have hundreds of thousands of Australians or more taken out of circulation based on rules that were set for the Delta variant”. The changes come on the same day the OzSage group of scientists and economists warned that a “let it rip” and “defeatist” approach to Covid would disrupt the health system and be felt most by vulnerable groups. Morrison insisted he took “responsibility for the decisions we have taken” and flatly rejected OzSage’s advice that “a fatalistic approach will be fatal for some people”. The prime minister said: “I accept the chief medical officer’s advice.” Under the new definition – expected to be adopted by all states and territories except Western Australia at this stage – a close contact is someone who lives with or has been in a “household-like” situation with a confirmed Covid-19 case for at least four hours. Confirmed Covid-19 cases and close contacts will have to stay at home for seven days, with a rapid antigen test on day six in order to clear the way for them to return to the community. “If you are anything other than a close contact, and you are not symptomatic, you don’t need to go and get a test,” Morrison said. “Now, I know this is a bit different to what you have been hearing over the last couple of years. That is the gear change. That is the reset. That is what we need people to really understand.” Morrison said the change would “ensure that our public health systems work as effectively to keep as many people safe as possible”. But the Australian Medical Association blasted the new definition, saying the move “appears to put politics over health” and would “accelerate the outbreak of Omicron”. The AMA president, Dr Omar Khorshid, said authorities would “miss so many more cases with this new, more narrow definition of a close contact”. “It seems national cabinet is prepared to bet that a massive Omicron outbreak won’t cause large numbers of hospitalisations,” Khorshid said. The new rules are expected to come into effect at midnight on Thursday night in New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, the ACT and South Australia – although SA will still maintain a 10-day isolation rule. Tasmania is set to adopt the new rules on 1 January, and the Northern Territory is due to announce its plans in the coming days. But the Western Australian premier, Mark McGowan, said his state was in a “very different” position from the states “with a high case load”, and still hoped to “eliminate” the current outbreak. WA reported just one new Covid case on Thursday. McGowan said he had “agreed in principle” to the new settings proposed at national cabinet, but they would only be implemented “at a later stage” if needed. Queensland’s chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, bluntly backed the change to the definition of close contact. “If we continue to use our current settings, then all of us will be in quarantine, and the state won’t function,” Gerrard said. As Queensland recorded 2,222 new cases, Gerrard also sought to prepare the recently Covid-free state to expect “tens of thousands of cases”. He said “we are not going to stop the Omicron virus” but there were some things that could slow its spread – like mask-wearing and working from home if people could. The federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, accused Morrison of “always playing catch up” and called for “some national leadership that has been sorely lacking”. “People are worried, people are voting with their feet by not going out, by not going to restaurants, by not undertaking activity that they normally would in the lead-up, particularly, to New Year’s Eve,” Albanese said in Adelaide. Morrison told reporters in Canberra: “Each and every day, I have focused on this pandemic to ensure that we have got the best possible settings that we can have, so I do take responsibility for the decisions we have taken.” Australian health authorities on Thursday reported 21,343 new Covid cases, a new record for the country, including 12,226 infections in NSW, 5,137 in Victoria and 1,374 in South Australia. The chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, said Omicron was “very transmissible”, but data from South Africa – which had “the longest and most extensive experience” of the new variant – indicated a 73% decrease in severity compared with Delta. He said Australia’s figure of 1,400 people with Covid in hospital out of the 110,000 active cases was “much lower than what we have seen before”. Currently 122 people were in intensive care. Prof Robert Booy, an infectious diseases paediatrician at the University of Sydney, said that “for the vast majority, it will probably be fine” to reduce to seven the number of days after a positive diagnosis that a symptomless case could leave isolation. “For people who do test positive who are asymptomatic five days after their test and are well enough to go back into the community, they’re unlikely to transmit any virus,” Booy said. But Prof Nancy Baxter, head of the University of Melbourne’s school of population health, and a member of the OzSage executive, said the changes to the close contact definition would just fuel the outbreak. She said the move “reflects the crisis that we’re in” and was a case of “Newspeak”, a term coined by George Orwell in Nineteen Eighty-Four to describe propagandistic language that twists ordinary meanings. “The lines for testing will get shorter, the cases won’t rise as quickly [but] it’ll just mean we aren’t identifying them,” Baxter said. “They’ll be invisible until the hospitalisation rates start going up.” The president of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners, Dr Karen Price, said the testing, tracing and isolating system had “just collapsed”, so the use of PCR tests had to be rationalised. “It’s to manage the resources better, which I understand, but it has to come with other, clear directions,” she said. Michael Lydeamore, a lecturer in Monash University’s econometrics and business statistics department, said something had to be done because the system wasn’t coping. There would be a shift to “people choosing the right thing to do rather than being forced to do the right thing”.Talia Hibbert was rewatching a Spider-Man film and eating a meal in her living room when she received life-changing news. Her romance novel Act Your Age, Eve Brown, which she wrote at the beginning of the pandemic, had entered the New York Times bestseller list. The lighthearted romantic comedy, published this year, follows the escapades of a young black British woman who crashes into the life of an uptight B&amp;B owner. Hibbert had not expected readers outside her established fanbase to be interested in the book, which she describes as her most ridiculous one to date. But it did reach a much bigger audience, thanks in part to large book-loving communities on Instagram, YouTube and, most importantly, TikTok. These communities, known as Bookstagram, BookTube, and Booktok, are not just spaces for people to share their passion for whatever their reading. They also have huge marketing power, driving books such as Hibbert’s up the bestseller charts and reshaping the publishing world. The phenomenon is being felt acutely in romance novels, particularly those with diverse characters and storylines, which have previously struggled to break through via traditional publishing routes. Hibbert, 25, started reading romance novels when she was 12. At the time, the books available in the genre were not very diverse. “I didn’t even think of trying to be traditionally published because I very much had the mindset that it wasn’t going to happen for someone like me writing characters like mine,” she said. “I knew that if I was going to have a chance of being traditionally published, I had to be better than the best. And I just didn’t think I was. I thought I was good, but I didn’t think I was good enough to overcome not being white, essentially.” She initially self-published and built a loyal fanbase. As well as having leading black characters, Hibbert also explores chronic illness and other forms of disability in many of her novels. “I’m really glad I did that because it enabled me to figure out what kind of writer I wanted to be and develop my own platform on my own terms,” she said. She was able to get an agent and sold the three-part Brown sisters trilogy to the US publisher Avon. The books exploded on social media. Readers of all races and ages were raving about the series, and found their way to her other books. Among them was Tolu Akingbade, a 22-year-old master’s student at Cambridge University, who started posting on TikTok at the beginning of the year. She now has more than 31,000 followers. She said many were people of colour and/or LGBTQ+, who often thanked her for the diverse romance recommendations. “It’s really important to be able to see yourself and understand that you’re not invisible,” Akingbade said. “Authors like Talia Hibbert blowing up has shown people that black British people exist, which I know feels silly but at the same time it’s not their fault because when have we been shown?” She loves books that simply show “black girls in love” and have joyful storylines. “I love romance stories that focus on community as well and talk about found family. I think that is something that we can really see in the black community, especially in the UK.” Soniya Ganvir, who is one half of the Instagram account Brown Girls Read Books, says accounts like hers show publishers that there’s demand for these kinds of books from readers of all races. “In the last year I’ve read more books with black and brown protagonists in the romance sector than I ever have,” the 32-year-old said. “And, increasingly, white authors of romance are including characters that aren’t white.” While she has welcomed this increase, she says some of these books are being rushed out and many romance writers of colour are still being let down by their editors or marketing teams. Sumayyah Malna, 32, the other half of the account, said: “And so part of how our account grew is to specifically showcase and promote writers of colour and those books that don’t get the attention that they deserve. “We do read quite widely, and we don’t just exclusively read writers of colour. We read some amazing books by white authors, but there’s no point in us, as far as we’re concerned, promoting those because they get the promotion.” They are both eager for further change, and call specifically for more books where women of colour are at the centre of a “pure romance” storyline. Ganvir said: “I think it is great for people of colour to feature in stories without their race being an element of it. They can be characters who fall in love, they can be characters who beautiful, joyful things happen to them.”The American west faced an unprecedented year of climate disasters in 2021. A cold wave in February triggered temperatures 50F below average in Texas, killing at least 150 across the state and leaving millions without power and water. Heatwaves over the summer broke temperature records across different western states, killing hundreds in the northwestern US and Canada. Fires seared through large swathes of the west, razing the northern California town of Greenville and searing through groves of giant sequoia trees. This summer, the Guardian interviewed a panel of climate scientists about their experiences living through the crises that climate research had long foretold. As the year ends, they share their reflections on what’s happened – and what gives them hope, even as climate catastrophe looms. The climate scientist: ‘The extraordinary is no longer extraordinary’ Daniel Swain, Colorado Climate scientist, Institute of the Environment and Sustainability, University of California, Los Angeles The last few years featured some really prominent global climate and weather extremes. And this year, in particular, kind of puts an exclamation point on that. The magnitude and frequency of what happened over the past 12 months or so is pretty remarkable. The extraordinary and unprecedented is no longer extraordinary or unprecedented because it’s starting to happen so often. In June, we had that unbelievable heatwave across the Pacific north-west and British Columbia. We had Death Valley-like temperatures in the glacial valleys of British Columbia, that, for me personally, is probably one of the most shocking modern heatwave events I can remember anywhere. But then, we had the fires throughout the west followed by record-breaking, extreme precipitation – sometimes in the same towns and cities that were affected by heatwaves and fires. The fingerprint of human-caused climate change is really clear. And what we’re starting to see is that a lot of these impacts of climate change are outpacing our efforts to deal with them. Emergency management systems, transportation infrastructure and water conveyance infrastructure is failing. We’re seeing implications for things like energy infrastructure, as we saw in Texas, and for water infrastructure, in places like California. Infrastructure, even in wealthy nations, is designed with a finite tolerance to extremes. The good news, and the bad news, is that we are the cause of this. Climate change is happening because of us, and so we are the ones to fix it. Of course, we can also choose not to fix it – and that’s the tension I constantly feel. The meteorologist: ‘Maybe this will be a wake up call’ Simon Wang, Utah Professor of climate dynamics at Utah State University The natural disasters, the drought, the heat – it’s hardly surprising any more. Everything that happened has followed the trend that has been predicted 10, 20 years ago. I hate to say “I told you so.” But I just want to make clear that when scientists predict something, there are usually good reasons for that. People should trust the science. Now more and more people are suffering. But maybe it will make more and more people realize that these extreme weather events and fires will keep happening – maybe this will be a wake-up call. With each year of extreme weather events, maybe we’ll start to see policy change. But even politically conservative states are starting to feel the pain, and are starting to consider action. Take Utah. Here the Great Salt Lake, because of the drought, is at a record low level. The lake is shrinking, and the decline is a sign of bigger things - of declining snowfall and snow melt, of declining water for household and industry. As the lake shrinks, more of the dry lake bed is being exposed, and winds could cause it to send toxic dust into the air. And all that has triggered a lot of panic. I’ve been studying the effects of climate change on the Great Salt Lake for over a decade. But this is the first year I have seen so many calls for actions coming from all sides. People are realizing just how fragile the natural balance is, and there is a chance right now to salvage it. So now scientists will have federal funding, and will be working with different agencies and different task forces to study the problem and inform policy changes and conservation measures to save the lake. That’s where I am. I try to be both alarming and optimistic. The paleoclimatologist: ‘There’s a lot we can all do’ Kathleen Johnson, California Associate professor of earth system science at the University of California, Irvine Central and northern California saw an unprecedented fire season yet again, one that was incredibly destructive and had huge social, economic and ecological impacts. And then, it was followed by this huge, extreme rainfall event. In the paleoclimate record, we can see that these big swings between extreme drought and extreme wet conditions has been a normal feature of California’s climate. But we also know that climate change is likely to increase the amplitude of these extremes. We know that with rising temperatures, droughts will become more droughts and fires will become more intense and more frequent. And we know that we can expect greater rainfall during these extreme events. One of the things that has really hit home to me about this year is the fires’ impact on giant sequoia trees in the Sierra Nevada. I’ve done research in the Sequoia national park and it’s one of my favorite places in the world – these trees are just amazing. And they’re actually fire-adapted trees – they require fire to live and propagate. But the fires have been so extreme this year and last year that they’ve permanently killed thousands of sequoia trees. A recent report indicated that up to 20% of the sequoias have been killed in the last two years alone – and that just makes me really sad. It makes me worried that future generations are not going to be able to enjoy the beauty of these trees. As a paleoclimatologist, it also motivates me to look back at the idea of trying to develop better records of fire in the Sierras, and so better inform and understand what is happening and what’s to come. There’s a lot we can all do. My students are also so incredibly motivated – they care deeply about sustainability and environmental justice. So as an educator, I see that as my role: to help send these well-trained scientists out there who can advise on policy issues, and help make these changes happen. The atmospheric scientist: ‘It’s like being knocked over by a wave’ Katharine Hayhoe, Texas Climate scientist and chief scientist at the Nature Conservancy These supersized disasters just keep coming and coming. According to a recent analysis, there was about an average of three months in between each billion-dollar weather or climate event back in the early 1980s. And nowadays, the average is about 18 days between them. So it’s not only that individual events themselves are getting more dangerous and more damaging. It’s that there’s no respite. It’s like being knocked over by a wave. You’re struggling to your feet, when another one comes. There’s no time to take a breath in between, there’s no time to recover. To those living in the west, and experiencing the fires, heatwaves, and flooding – I would say you have good reason to be anxious, your fears are valid, your concerns are real. Now, how can we use our voices to encourage action at every level? It’s not about saving the planet. The planet will be orbiting the sun long after we’re gone. It is about saving us – our civilization, and many of the other living things that share this planet with us. I see that the majority of people are worried that we don’t know what to do. And if we don’t know what to do, that fear will paralyze us. And if it paralyzes us, we are doomed. And so providing people with a sense of efficacy of how they as an individual can make a difference. And it’s not just you know, changing your lightbulb or cutting out your meat consumption. It’s engaging and using your voice and advocating for change in your community in your place of work. In the school that you would have your child attends or the organization that you’re part of.Alynda Segarra is practising radical joy. The musician – better known as Hurray for the Riff Raff – has decided to embrace happiness in spite of this era’s particular horrors. “This is a violent time to be a human – it’s kind of always a violent time to be a human,” they explain over Zoom from their airy New Orleans home. “How do we stay present, how do we intensely feel joy, and not just the crushing weight of it all?” The answer is trees. “We’re hit with hurricanes every year yet plant life is thriving. It was very comforting to look at these living beings and be like: ‘I don’t know how to survive this. How the fuck do you survive this?’” they say, recounting pandemic-induced walks around their lush local landscape. Growing up in a cramped apartment in the Bronx, New York City, they felt the natural world was reserved for “very wealthy people who go on elaborate vacations. It felt like a class divide.” Now, plants aren’t just offering Segarra strength and solace – they’re also helping them craft a whole new genre. “Nature punk” is how Segarra refers to their forthcoming eighth album, Life on Earth, the follow-up to 2017’s rave-reviewed The Navigator. It includes a scrappy, swaggering, Lou Reed-reminiscent homage to the rhododendron, while closer Kin sees Segarra collaborate with a wind chime-draped tree which they describe as their “favourite experimental musician”. Yet what’s most impressive about Life on Earth is not the unusual credit list, but the way Segarra metabolises bleak and disturbing subjects into songs that brim with hope, beauty and cheer. Opener Wolves is a soaring, soothing, synth-peppered slice of heartland rock that alludes to climate catastrophe. On Precious Cargo, the refugee crisis is movingly – but somehow not despairingly – evoked in lyrics about journeying through the jungle only to face the inhumane conditions of US detention centres. That song is based on the testimony of two men Segarra met a few years ago while volunteering for an organisation that supports asylum seekers in Ice detention facilities. It was a move prompted by the musician feeling that they were “getting pummelled by the news. I was like I have all this fucking free time and I’m just feeling bad for myself and the world: let me go do something.” Eventually, the men were released, and one of them provides Precious Cargo’s coda, in which he asks people to keep helping refugees: “I asked what his message to the world was and that’s what he decided on. It’s really beautiful.” Also beautiful is Jupiter’s Dance, a sticky, bristling pop song that offers comfort to immigrant children. It features the rhythms of the Puerto Rican music Segarra heard as a child: after years spent overlooking their heritage, they began incorporating such influences into their rootsy, folksy sound on The Navigator. Life on Earth moves their sound on again into something slicker and synthier, partly thanks to producer Brad Cook (Waxahatchee, Snail Mail), whom Segarra describes as a lovingly encouraging figure with a “Ted Lasso vibe”. In the past, their work has usually been labelled Americana, but the musician feels increasingly alienated from that genre. “The Americana world feels so oppressive to me – a world that doesn’t want to hear the truth about how hard it is to be alive. It makes things very pretty.” As a teenager, it was punk and the friendly community around it that captured Segarra’s imagination. “I was part of an acoustic punk band that was very embarrassing, but because in New York we have such small spaces I couldn’t practise the electric guitar. I shared a room with my aunt, she would have been like, ‘this is so annoying!’” Born to Nuyorican (New York Puerto Rican) parents – their father was a music teacher and their mother served as one of New York’s deputy mayors in the 90s – Segarra lived with their aunt and uncle until the age of 17, when they left to travel the US and play music in a street band. “I was in this world of wanting to live outside of society, that was my biggest dream, to not pay rent or pay for anything and have no money. I felt like I would be crushed by trying to join the world and have a job.” The preferred mode of transport was freight-hopping – the illegal and very dangerous practice of sneaking on to freight trains. “I look back and think how the fuck did I do that? Because now I’m so neurotic,” they shudder. The pandemic gave Segarra space to process the trauma of that time. “These very physical memories would wash over me, all this stillness and silence brought up a lot.” They found that EMDR – a form of therapy that uses buzzers and blinking lights to divest certain memories of their distressing effect – helped. “I’d been doing talk therapy for many years, and I can intellectualise something all day, but I was just like: why do I still feel like I’m crawling out of my skin?” This period of healing has also altered their approach to touring. Previously, they had high expectations of themself: “I wanted to perform well, I wanted to give people hope. Now I want to go in being like, I’m a human and all I can do is be present with you.” As they prepare to head back out on the road, Segarra is hoping to take the lessons of the last two locked-down years with them; the realisation that “it’s OK for me to just get through today, it’s OK if all I did today was make a really nice meal”. As their profoundly heartening new album proves, they achieved an awful lot more than that. • Life on Earth is released via Nonesuch on 18 February.UK house prices rose by more than 10% in 2021, the fastest growth rate in 15 years, according to new figures that underline the strength of the pandemic housing boom. The price of an average UK home hit a record high of £254,822 in December, up nearly £24,000 over the year, according to data published on Thursday by Nationwide, the UK’s largest building society. Prices are now 16% higher than before the pandemic struck in early 2020, an outcome few economists anticipated as the UK’s nations were embarking on the first in a series of lockdowns. Yet after the initial freeze in activity, the housing market has remained buoyant throughout the pandemic. People forced to spend more time at home have looked for more space, while the UK government also heavily subsidised the market with a temporary cut in stamp duty and interest rates have remained near historic lows. The 10.4% annual growth rate in December was the strongest since 2006 and represented a slight acceleration from the 10% rate in November, although annual growth has been in double figures since May, barring a slight slowdown in October after the end of the stamp duty holiday. In June, annual price growth reached 13.4%, the fastest since 2004 during the housing bubble before the global financial crisis. In contrast, average earnings rose by 4.9% in the year to October, according to the Office for National Statistics. Robert Gardner, Nationwide’s chief economist, said continuing high demand and a persistently low stock of homes on the market had contributed to the soaring prices, but added that a slowdown may be on its way in 2022 – and particularly if the Bank of England follows December’s interest rate rise with further increases in the coming year. “It appears likely that the housing market will slow next year, since the stamp duty holiday encouraged many to bring forward their house purchase in order to avoid additional tax,” he said. “The Omicron variant could reinforce the slowdown if it leads to a weaker labour market. Even if wider economic conditions remain resilient, higher interest rates are likely to exert a cooling influence.” Wales was the UK region with the fastest house price growth over a calendar year, 16%, for the first time since Nationwide started collecting the data in 1973. The south-west was England’s fastest-increasing region, corroborating separate data from Halifax, part of Lloyds Banking Group, which showed that Taunton was the town with the strongest annual price growth, at above 20%. Halifax’s measure of annual house price growth came in at 6.2%. London, where house prices are already elevated, was the slowest-growing region, with prices rising by 4.2%. The capital was the only region in which price growth did not accelerate during 2021 compared with 2020. Nationwide’s measure of affordability showed that a London buyer with a 20% deposit would have to be in the top 10% of earners to be able to buy at the average price.The Chinese ride-hailing firm Didi Global has reported widening losses and a decline in third-quarter revenue, after its domestic business took a hit from a regulatory crackdown by Beijing. The company said operating losses hit $6.3bn (£4.68bn) in the nine months to the end of September, while revenue fell nearly 2% in its third quarter. Chinese authorities have come down hard on Didi since its New York Stock exchange listing in June, demanding that it take down its software from mobile app stores while the Cyberspace Administration of China (CAC) investigated its handling of customer data. The restriction came as a blow for Didi – co-founded in 2012 by former Alibaba employee Will Wei Cheng and backed by SoftBank Group – which was the dominant ride-hailing company in China. The company now faces stiff competition from ride-hailing services by automakers Geely and SAIC Motor. Under pressure from Chinese regulators concerned about data security, Didi decided in December to delist in New York and pursue a Hong Kong listing. Shares in Didi soared after its initial public offering (IPO), giving the company a valuation of $80bn and marking the biggest US listing by a Chinese firm since 2014, but have since declined by 65%. Didi said on Wednesday its board had authorised it to pursue a listing of its class A ordinary shares on the main board of the Hong Kong stock exchange. “The company is executing above plans and will update investors in due course,” Didi said. The company also announced that Daniel Zhang, the chief executive officer of the Chinese e-commerce company Alibaba who had served as a director on Didi‘s board since 2018, has resigned. He is succeeded by Yi Zhang, a senior legal director of Alibaba Group.Since the beginning of the pandemic, a low-key but persistent source of irritation has been how impossible it is to focus. “I can’t do anything,” is a line I’ve exchanged with friends countless times, by which we mean anything more energetic than scrolling. For the past 12 months, at the end of most days, the scene has been exactly the same; I’m out cold on the sofa, dazed from hours of binge-watching, as a prelude to dragging myself to bed. It’s a dull, depressing and nutrient-free way to pass the time. It’s also a hard habit to break. For many of us, the biggest casualty has been reading. Books – in particular, in my case, fiction – have seemed to require unearthly levels of engagement. For months at a time, no book has appealed, and every title picked up has been put down. Across my apartment, along with the unwashed cups and stray socks, is an archipelago of books started and abandoned. As the pandemic wore on, the New York public library system stopped charging fines for late returns, removing the single incentive I had to finish anything. It’s odd how disturbing this became. I remember looking at my bookshelves, full of books shipped, years ago and at enormous expensive, across the Atlantic from London. Via the order on the shelves, I could trace the years of my most voracious reading, when one volume led to another, and another, and another. I saw, too, how this energy had dwindled over the years to much more occasional enthusiasms. There had always been lulls and lags, long periods in which nothing quite took. But it had never been like this. I wondered if it had as much to do with middle age as the pandemic. Perhaps I had entered that period – like the moment a Radio 1 DJ glides, seamlessly, into Radio 2 and then death – when things simply stopped interesting me. Perhaps, I thought with panic, this was it. I’d aged into some fundamentally incurious state, filled up my hard drive, irreversibly burned myself out. The situation led to some desperate measures. Perhaps the way to jump-start this, I thought, was to be hardcore. All right, I’m not going to write a novel during the pandemic, but maybe I can force myself to actually read one. One night, after the kids were asleep, I resisted another episode of Friday Night Lights and cracked the spine on Swann’s Way, a book that, at a conservative estimate, has moved with me unread across three countries and seven addresses. “For a long time I would go to bed early.” Aaaaand I’m out. Other failures followed. If Proust was a bit much for my degraded system, how about the Collected Short Stories of John Cheever, a book I’ve been meaning to read since picking it up in a secondhand bookshop in Provincetown, Massachusetts, eight years ago? I ploughed through seven short stories, all beautifully written, some a little dated, and none of which could persuade me to keep reading. I tried a comfort read: Valerie Grove’s excellent biography of Dodie Smith, which I love, but couldn’t settle to. Maybe horror was what I needed, to match the inside with the outside world. But Shirley Jackson’s We Have Always Lived in the Castle dragged, and Thomas Ligotti, whom I’d half been looking forward to reading, didn’t quite take off, either. The one success I had, last summer, was with Zadie Smith’s Intimations, six essays on the pandemic that briefly lifted me out of my slump. But it was over very quickly and didn’t lead to anything else. What fixed things, in the end, was shame. Every night, my two six-year-olds have a homework assignment of 25 minutes’ set reading. They are frequently grumpy about it, and I’m frequently cross with them. “How come we have to read and you don’t?” asked one, a few weeks ago, and she had a good point. While they read, I almost always scrolled on my phone in what parents have been taught to refer to as bad modelling. Reluctantly, I sat down with them on the sofa for the 25 minutes, and forced myself to read. I opened Zora Neale Hurston’s Their Eyes Were Watching God, which has sat unread on my shelf for 10 years, and either through its brilliance, or the psychology of the timer, it instantly worked. After finishing, I flipped to Penelope Lively’s Moon Tiger, which was exactly what I needed: the long view taken by an old lady dying in hospital, reminding me that all things will pass. Last week, I started Elizabeth Taylor’s Angel. A long time ago, I had loved books by Taylor, but from the cover this one looked aggressively boring and I was spitefully testing myself. Oh my god, books are amazing. It’s impossibly good. Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnistEven amid the torrent of praise for the revered former archbishop Desmond Tutu in the days since his death, the anti-apartheid champion is not being universally mourned. Alan Dershowitz, the renowned US constitutional lawyer and ardent defender of Israel, took a moment to brand Tutu as “evil” and “the most influential antisemite of our time”. “The world is mourning Bishop Tutu, who just died the other day. Can I remind the world that although he did some good things, a lot of good things on apartheid, the man was a rampant antisemite and bigot?” he told Fox News. Dershowitz accused Tutu of minimising the Holocaust and of comparing Israel to Nazi Germany – an extreme interpretation of the former archbishop’s statements that takes some convolutions to reach. But Tutu’s real crime in the eyes of Israel’s most unrelenting supporters was to liken its rule over the Palestinians to apartheid and then refuse to back off in the face of an onslaught of abuse. On his visits to Israel and Palestine, Tutu would have immediately recognised echoes of his homeland in the forced removals, the house demolitions, the humiliations of checkpoints and systems of control on movement, the confiscation of land for Jewish settlements, and the confining of Palestinians to blobs of territory, reminiscent of the Bantustan black homelands. Above all he saw one people controlling another who, like black South Africans until 1994, had little say in their governance. Tutu was not alone in his view. Former US president Jimmy Carter drew similarly vitriolic accusations from Dershowitz and others when he published his bestselling book, Palestine: Peace Not Apartheid, in 2006. But Tutu was harder to attack. He not only had the authority of a Nobel peace prize awarded for his courageous stand against white rule in South Africa but he knew apartheid when he saw it. Nearly two decades ago Tutu told a conference in Boston: “I’ve been very deeply distressed in my visit to the Holy Land; it reminded me so much of what happened to us black people in South Africa.” A few years later he was even more direct. “I know first-hand that Israel has created an apartheid reality within its borders and through its occupation. The parallels to my own beloved South Africa are painfully stark indeed,” he wrote in 2014 in a call for the Presbyterian general assembly in the US to back sanctions against Israel. A figure of Tutu’s stature drawing parallels between a system constructed on racism and the reality of Israel’s domination of the Palestinians, and calling for boycotts to end it, alarmed the government in Israel. With the two-state solution moribund at best, Israel is faced with a growing movement that sees the conflict through the moral prism of civil rights and injustice – a framing that has historic resonance in the US in particular and has taken on additional significance in the age of Black Lives Matter. While Tutu was critical of Palestinian attacks, his implicit likening of Israelis to white South Africans during apartheid challenged the Jewish state’s longstanding narrative to portray itself principally as a victim of Arab aggression and terrorism, and to exclude the part played by occupation and settlements in the conflict. Others have made the charge, including a string of former Israeli cabinet ministers and officials who say they can no longer deny the reality that their country is practising a form of apartheid. Two former Israeli prime ministers, Ehud Barak and Ehud Olmert, have drawn parallels with the old South Africa. But Tutu carried a moral authority wielded surpassed only by the man who epitomised the anti-apartheid struggle, Nelson Mandela. Tutu justified the calls for a boycott of Israel in the Tel Aviv newspaper Haaretz. South Africa, he said, had extraordinary leaders at the time it mattered. “But what ultimately forced these leaders together around the negotiating table was the cocktail of persuasive, nonviolent tools that had been developed to isolate South Africa, economically, academically, culturally and psychologically,” he said. The former archbishop knew that it would only happen if ordinary people mobilised, having witnessed considerable western collusion with apartheid. The US government listed the African National Congress as a terrorist organisation while backing white South Africa’s war in Angola. Margaret Thatcher was an ardent opponent of sanctions against the apartheid regime. Separately, Tutu warned that it was not possible to be a neutral bystander. “Those who turn a blind eye to injustice actually perpetuate injustice. If you are neutral in situations of injustice, you have chosen the side of the oppressor,” he said. All of this earned Tutu a particular ire from some of Israel’s defenders. The Anti-Defamation League accused him of antisemitism over his boycott call. Others dug into the distant past and latched on to a call Tutu made for forgiveness during a visit to Jerusalem’s Yad Vashem memorial for Europe’s murdered Jews in 1989. “We pray for those who made it happen, help us to forgive them and help us so that we in our turn will not make others suffer,” he said. Dershowitz characteristically gave Tutu’s call the most extreme interpretation by describing it as having “demanded that Jews forgive the Nazis for killing them”. In reality, Tutu consistently sought to reassure Jewish communities around the world that he understood their history and their concerns, but he saw no reason not to continue calling the occupation as he saw it. The former archbishop would have been pleased that others increasingly embraced his perspective. This year, Human Rights Watch in the US and Israel’s most prominent human rights group, B’Tselem, published groundbreaking reports describing Israel’s domination of the Palestinians as apartheid. But ultimately Tutu’s intent was not to condemn. His calls for forgiveness fitted with his belief that it is an essential step toward justice and peace – a view central to his chairing of South Africa’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission. Tutu saw how everyone was liberated, white people included, when apartheid ended in South Africa. He wanted Israelis to liberate themselves from the burden of apartheid too. Chris McGreal is the former Guardian correspondent in Jerusalem and JohannesburgAfter a period of unprecedented, sustained success, the Seahawks have bottomed out. Now, they’re at a crossroads. Defeat to the Bears last Sunday dropped the Seahawks to 5-11 on the season. They have no shot at making the playoffs. The roster features a rotating morass of mediocrity. There are questions about the future of their franchise quarterback, head coach and chief personnel decision-maker. Things could be about to get ugly. There remains an oft-repeated myth around Seattle that the Russell Wilson-Pete Carroll partnership turned sour once the franchise quarterback started to get paid like a franchise quarterback. The theory makes some sense. The Seahawks were the first team to truly take advantage of the modern Collective Bargaining Agreement that turned a quarterback on a rookie contract into the sport’s leading market inefficiency. Seattle had Wilson on the cheap, and it was able to surround him with a bevy of Hall of Famers slap-bang in the middle of their primes. Carroll, Wilson and the vaunted Legion of Boom stomped all over the NFC on their way to two Super Bowls, winning one and dropping the other to the Brady-Belichick Patriots, falling one yard short of back-to-back titles. It would be neat and easy if things took a sudden downshift from there; if paying Wilson was the sole reason for the decline – the expense of a $30m per year quarterback meaning talent leaking out of the roster elsewhere. It’s also inaccurate. This year represents Carroll’s first losing season as a coach since 2011. Since the Seahawks drafted Wilson in 2012, few if any franchises have matched the pair’s success, including the period in which Wilson was signed to an extension. Tampa Bay with Brady, Kansas City with Mahomes, and New Orleans with Drew Brees certainly had (and have) no issues maintaining a championship-caliber roster with a quarterback subsuming more than 20% of the salary cap. Patrick Mahomes, Dak Prescott and Josh Allen all absorb a higher percentage of their team’s cap sheet, on average, than Wilson. It is not a question of Seattle being able to sign, draft or trade for talent that would fit under the cap to support Wilson. It’s about who the Seahawks have opted to sign, draft and trade for. This season is the result of a near-decade of iffy draft and personnel decisions, dating back to the very start of the Wilson era. Since 2013, the Seahawks have made 15 draft picks in the first or second round. Only one, DK Metcalf, has made a Pro Bowl. Three – Metcalf, Frank Clark, Jarran Reed – would be considered above average players. Only one of those, Metcalf again, remains with the team. On top of that, they traded first-rounders for Jimmy Graham, Percy Harvin and two first-rounders for Jamal Adams. All three were misses; the Adams whiff not only hit the team talent-wise but also forced Seattle to completely re-define the stylistic makeup of their defense to try to accommodate his weaknesses. A franchise quarterback and a savvy, defense-first coach can only cover up so many defects. At some point, the other players must make some plays. Seattle simply lacks talent. That’s partly why Wilson looked to bail on the whole enterprise last offseason. As he’s always very keen to point out, Wilson did not demand a trade. He simply pointed out the four specific teams he would like to go to if Seattle wanted to trade him, which, obviously, he did not want. No, sir. It was a masterclass in petty. The carefully coordinated media leaks. The Tune Out The Noise social media onslaught. As reported by the Athletic, Wilson believed things had grown stale. It was reported that Wilson, and others, had started to tune out Carroll’s happy-clappy style. The Seahawks have tried to evolve in all the ways Wilson would ever demand. They shifted philosophies on defense, trying to keep up with all of the game’s latest innovations, rather than sticking doggedly to the style that drove them through their initial period of success. On offense, there has been a willingness to change things, too. From the caveman stylings of Brian Schottenheimer and Darrell Bevell, the Seahawks looked to get younger and slicker by bringing in Shane Waldron from the Rams to run the offense. But any sense of the Seahawks embracing the confuse-and-clobber style that powered the Jared Goff era Rams has not come to fruition. There are two reasons: a) defenses finding counters to that style of offense (the Seahawks missed on when they wanted to jump into that evolutionary cycle); b) Russell Wilson. At this point, it’s clear there’s not a Seahawks style or a Schottenheimer style or a Waldron style or a Carroll style. It’s Wilson’s style. His unwillingness to throw over the middle of the field has taken on meme-level proportions this season. Wilson has attempted just 26 passes of 10 yards or more over the middle of the field this season, an average of two a game. By comparison, Tom Brady is averaging seven such attempts a game, Aaron Rodgers is averaging five, Patrick Mahomes is averaging four. In fact, among 34 eligible quarterbacks this season, Wilson ranks 29th in the league in the average number of attempts per game he targets beyond ten yards in the middle of the field. To play in a Russell Wilson offense means to forfeit the middle of the field, which constricts whatever Seattle might like to do on offense. This has been a long-running theme to Wilson’s game. It’s why he’s able to limit turnovers, but in playing such a compressed style defenses can better cut off his supply line outside. Wilson’s game has always been built around the deep ball. He takes the easy guff underneath and launches delightful darts down the field to move the Seahawks offense along. This year, as defenses vacate the middle and focus on the perimeter, his effectiveness has tumbled. His adjusted completion percentage (which removes throwaways) ranks 23rd among eligible quarterbacks this season on throws of 20 yards or more, per Pro Football Focus. That puts him behind Davis Mills, Tua Tagovailoa, Carson Wentz and a fossilized Ben Roethlisberger, hardly a who’s who of Favre-ian gunslingers. As much as the offense needed to adapt and grow coming into the year, so did its pilot. He did not. Wilson then got hurt. Before the Seahawks could blink, the season had slipped away. As this offseason approaches, Seattle’s ownership now faces a tricky choice: to move on from Carroll; to move on from Wilson; to move on from everyone, including John Schneider, the personnel czar. There’s little to no chance all three will return. Two of them? Maybe. Carroll departing seems the most likely outcome. Whether or not Wilson’s season-long slump is indicative of anything longer-term, the Seahawks want nothing to do with the annual quarterback merry-go-round. Moving on from Carroll is likely the team’s best shot to convince the quarterback to stick around long-term. Carroll deserves credit for his willingness to re-energize the franchise, for trying to evolve rather than getting stuck in his own fuddy-duddy ways. This isn’t the story of a coach who stayed too long, or an organization that went down thinking its way would always be The Way. This is a team that paired a talented quarterback with an excellent coach and an extraordinary roster and ran through the league like few before. Two remain true, yet the final and most important part, the core of the roster, has sunk to depressing levels of incompetence. Now, they need a reboot. “Not for one reason at all am I thinking that we need to restart the whole thing,” Carroll said this week. There is some truth there. The Seahawks will be flush with the cap space needed to re-fashion the roster around Wilson if the quarterback wishes to stick around. But the Seahawks do need a fairly dramatic overhaul. Making a break from coach and quarterback at this stage would be easier than betting on the two to rediscover their old mojo.In the summer of 2020, the London-based psychotherapist Zoë Aston hit the headlines with a scream-therapy campaign she had devised for the Icelandic tourism board. On a website called Looks Like You Need Iceland, visitors were invited to record a scream which would then be blasted out for you in the vast, frozen wilderness. “And when you’re ready,” the blurb ran, “come let it out for real. You’ll feel better, we promise.” All of which assumes a scream-readiness with which I am patently unfamiliar. I am famous in my family for never shouting when I drop a glass or cut myself in the kitchen. The bigger the mess, the quieter I get. The angrier I get, the quieter I get, too. I have never screamed or shouted anyone down. A while back, the thought occurred to me that this might be a problem. What if, one day, I needed to yell? What if I, or someone else, needed the kind of urgent attention a scream is designed to attract? Reading the psychologist Art Janov’s 1970 book The Primal Scream does not help. This is at least partly due to its terrifying cover art, which features a bald figure with a cleft cranium, out of which gapes a screaming red mouth full of teeth – a nightmarish vision matched only by the intense embarrassment I feel just thinking about what therapists call “primaling”. I don’t want to primal. Or vent. Or rage. It’s the actual, audible how-to that’s the problem. As keen as I am to step out of my comfort zone and start yelling, part of me wonders if my fear of doing so isn’t self-generating and redundant. Fight or flight is an involuntary physiological reaction to a threat – so surely I’ll scream if I need to, whether I think I can or not? Aston is not so sure. Depending on how extroverted or introverted you are, she explains, research shows that, when faced with a perceived threat, you might not scream: “It might actually deactivate your voice,” she says. Learned behaviours come into it, too. If, like me, you’ve always been the quiet one, that’s likely where you’ll get your sense of safety. “Taking up more energetic space might, conversely, feel very unsafe.” To unpick that association of “loud” with “bad”, she suggests I try ever louder singing, or positive affirmations. “Something like, ‘I love you’ or ‘I am enough’,” she says. It’s about telling yourself that loud doesn’t necessarily mean anger or danger; that it can be a useful tool. I ask my friend Shahanara if she knows she can scream. “Uh, yeah,” she says. Then she tells me how, during a period of intense work, she’d get on a train to Farthing Downs in Surrey – the closest bit of countryside to where she lives – for exactly this purpose. “You’d take the train to go to scream in a field in Surrey?” I say, bemused. Then I ask if she’ll go to Surrey with me. Walking towards her chosen scream-spot, I listen to the rain falling on my jacket hood and I cannot fathom how or why I’d shatter this quiet. The quiet is what I live for. I have brought along my field recorder and mic, hoping that viewing the expedition as an artwork will somehow take the edge off, but they stay firmly stashed in my rucksack. First, Shahanara demonstrates an extraordinary ability to go from quiet up to a full-body scream and back again. When nothing terrible happens as a result of this bellowing, I find the courage to try it myself. I start by just naming things loudly. That tree. Those clouds. That tree! It’s the loudest I’ve ever heard my voice and, for a soaking wet Monday afternoon, it’s not too shabby, if not quite a full scream. Back home, days later, I finally turn up the volume on the first song that comes to mind, the one that consistently gives me the most energy, the one that feels like fire – Face Tat by Zach Hill – and without thinking too much I smash my face into a cushion and yell. Ha. I’ve got more range than I’d figured. It comes out more “high screech” than scream – I feel like a parrot under a blanket. I still can’t imagine doing it without the cushion, but I have to tell you, since then I’ve approached Zoom meetings, school runs and deadlines with a new sense of possibility.If the American political status quo was working, Congresswoman Cori Bush might not have slept on the steps of the US Capitol to demand an extension of a coronavirus-era eviction moratorium. She might not have testified about her decision to have an abortion, consigning the details of her experience to the official congressional record. Perhaps she might not have run for Congress at all. But as the St Louis congresswoman sees it, she was sent to Washington to disrupt a political order that had long ago stopped working for people like herself – a nurse, pastor and activist who has worked for minimum wage, once lived out of a car and raised two children as a single mother. And she says she is only just getting started. “I ran and I lost and I ran and I lost. I kept running because there was a mission behind it,” Bush said in an interview. “It wasn’t about me wanting to be somebody in Congress – I know some people have those aspirations – but, for me, it was more about the mission. And I have not completed that mission yet.” Halfway through an extraordinary first term, and gearing up for reelection, Bush is one of the most recognizable – and quotable – members of the House. Part of the progressive “Squad”, she believes deeply that her own personal hardships make her a better and more responsive representative. Her personal story is what connects her to her constituents and what sets her apart in Congress. When her colleagues left Washington for their weeks-long summer recess without securing an extension of the federal eviction moratorium, Bush stayed behind. Having experienced the pain of poverty and eviction, she couldn’t fathom leaving hundreds of thousands of Americans vulnerable to homelessness as the coronavirus ravaged the US. In an instant, she decided to stage a sit-in on the steps of the US Capitol. Her protest on the Capitol steps drew widespread national attention and effectively shamed party leaders into finding a solution where they had insisted there was none. Eventually, the White House extended the temporary ban on evictions. The hard-won victory was an important moment for Bush and her team. She said it proved to her constituents in St Louis that she would always put them first, even if it put her at odds with Democrats, party leadership, even the president of the United States. “For us, winning that extension of the eviction moratorium was a huge part of the story of who we said that we would be in Congress, we said we would do the work, do the absolute most, and that was the absolute most we could do.” Now, she continued, “the White House knows that about us, too.” Bush describes herself a “politivist” – part politician, part activist. In her view, the roles are complementary, not oppositional. “Oftentimes people expect you, because you hear it in your communities, that when you go to Congress, you’re going to change. That is the expectation,” she said. “I think that we’ve already been able to show that St Louis is first…. St Louis is the heart of every single thing that we do.” Bush rose to prominence as a Black Lives Matter organizer in Ferguson, Missouri, where the movement was born after the 18-year-old Michael Brown Jr was shot and killed by a white police officer. The daughter of a local alderman, Bush said it wasn’t until the protests that she considered running for public office. In 2020, Bush became the first Black woman to represent the state of Missouri when she was elected to Congress after two unsuccessful campaigns – first for Senate in 2016 and again in 2018 for Congress. To win, she unseated the Democratic incumbent, William Lacy Clay. Clay had held the seat for 20 years, having succeeded his father, William Clay Sr, a founder of the Congressional Black Caucus, who was first elected in 1968. She was sworn in three days before the Capitol was attacked by a pro-Trump mob. “We were still moving into our office when the insurrection happened,” she said. “We didn’t have a panic button yet.” “So that was our introduction to Congress,” she continued. “Since we started off in such an unexpected place, a horrible place, for us, it was just like, ‘OK, dig in.’” While locked in their office, Bush and her staff drafted a resolution to “investigate and expel” any member of Congress who attempted to overturn the election results and “incited a white supremacist attack”. The resolution reflected the increasing hostility between members of Congress. At times, Bush has said she feels targeted by her own colleagues. Shortly after the attack, the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, ordered the relocation of Bush’s office, after she asked to be moved away from congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene out of concern for her staff’s safety. Earlier this month, Bush joined House progressives in pressuring the party’s leaders to strip congresswoman Lauren Boebert of her committee assignments over her Islamophobic comments targeting Congresswoman Ilhan Omar, who is Muslim. At a press conference, she unloaded on Boebert, calling her a “lying, Islamophobic, race-baiting, violence-inciting, white supremacist sentiment-spreading, Christmas tree gun-toting elected official” who is a “danger” to her country and her colleagues. Like her colleagues in the “squad”, Bush has been unafraid to challenge Democratic leaders, even the president. “I am who I am,” she said. “I don’t take off my activist hat to be able to legislate in Congress. And so that has been the guiding force this entire time.” During a tense standoff over Biden’s agenda earlier this year, Bush charged Democratic leaders with breaking their promise to progressives by decoupling two pieces of Biden’s agenda – a bipartisan infrastructure bill and a sweeping social policy package. In a word, she captured progressives’ sense of betrayal: “Bamboozled.” TV network chyrons snapped to reflect the comment and soon Bush was on TV arguing their case. House leaders delayed the vote. A month later, Bush was one of just six House Democrats to vote against the infrastructure bill that Biden signed into law last month. Not because she opposed the legislation, which would spend billions upgrading Missouri’s bridges and highways, but because she feared that passing the bill without the larger social policy that was a priority for progressives would sap them of their leverage. Bush now fears she was correct. After a months-long effort to appease conservative Democratic senators, Joe Manchin announced that he could not support the $2.2tn social safety net bill, dooming its chances in the evenly divided chamber. Bush, who previously denounced Manchin’s opposition to the package as “anti-Black, anti-child, anti-woman, and anti-immigrant”, laid the blame squarely on party leadership. “Honestly, I’m frustrated with every Democrat who agreed to tie the fate of our most vulnerable communities to the corporatist ego of one Senator. No one should have backed out of our initial strategy that would have kept Build Back Better alive,” she tweeted. Tagging the president, she said: “You need to fix this. Still, the activist in Bush is not done fighting for the measure, which passed the House in November. “We cannot spend the next year saying, ‘the House did its part, and now it’s the Senate’s turn,’” she said recently. “We need the Senate to actually get this done.” Bush is also working to elevate issues of racial justice that she said the party does not do enough to prioritize. Efforts to pass police reform collapsed earlier this year, and voting rights legislation remains stalled in the Senate. The supreme court will soon decide the future of abortion access. Bush said her Capitol protest was inspired by the moment, but she does not rule out future action. “If I feel led to move in that way, based upon whatever is happening, it is never off the table for me,” she said. Some lawmakers are critical of her legislative style. They call it divisive at worst and naive at best. The suggestion is that she will eventually have to learn to compromise and play by the rules. But in light of Manchin’s opposition, Bush is even more certain of her approach. “If that were the gold star, we would be a lot further in this country,” she said. “There’s more than one way to get things done.”How should writers respond to the sound and fury of the current political moment? When the times frequently produce dramas more lurid and fantastical than anything even the most gifted novelist could dream up, how can literature compete? The solution offered by the Indian-born US journalist, author and professor Amitava Kumar is not to turn away from the daily outrage of the news and #fakenews but to embrace it. By engaging in an “activism of the word”, this erudite, original and ultimately unsatisfying book intends to pit the “radical surprise of real life” against the “lies of the rulers”. In this way, Kumar hopes to “preserve the uncomfortable or disturbing truth against unrelenting and widespread assault”. We can be sure what this novel is trying to do, because it keeps telling us. It does so via its narrator Satya, an Indian-born US journalist, author and professor who is attending an artists’ retreat on an Italian island that is “said to be where George and Amal Clooney spend their summers”. Satya is working on a novel called Enemies of the People which, he says, is based on an untrue story – in fact, “on the many untrue stories that surround us”. The plot of A Time Outside This Time, such as it is, comprises a collage of news clippings, tweets and anecdotes Satya has collected – as well as abstracts of psychology papers he has read and journalism he has conducted on the subject of truth and lies. Instead of “what used to be called a bourgeois novel” – dismissively glossed as “the human heart in conflict with itself et cetera” – Satya/Kumar serves up a torrent of namechecks and information. A future reader would find in this book a kind of time capsule of the Trump years: through it pass not just Donald (and Ivanka) but Hillary Clinton, Sarah Silverman, Anthony Fauci, George Floyd, Narendra Modi, Marina Abramović and Tina Fey (“Oh, Tina Fey”). Here you can learn about the Dunning‑Kruger effect, the Milgram experiment, the marshmallow test, VS Naipaul’s meeting with Ayatollah Khomeini, Gandhi’s brush with Spanish flu and George Orwell’s father’s involvement in the Raj opium trade. There are more intimate sections, such as flashbacks to Satya’s childhood memories of anti-Muslim riots in India and descriptions of his newspaper commissions about men and women caught up in webs of state oppression. But everything is related in the bloodless prose of a Washington Post editorial: “He was dead five years later,” we read of one character, “from a heart attack, while he was walking with his wife to a restaurant. This was a sad event.” When, early in the book, Satya declares, “to be honest, I thought I had a handle on the truth”, I wondered if his claim to be writing an anti-bourgeois novel before cocktail hour at a lakeside villa with the Clooneys summering nearby was a sly ruse. Perhaps – like one of Kazuo Ishiguro’s myopic, affectless narrators – he would become more and more enmeshed in his misperceptions and self-deceptions until his worldview was overturned. An early detour, in which he discovers more than meets the eye in a Pakistani migrant’s story of entrapment by the US police, seems to promise as much. But as the novel progresses, the “radical surprise of real life” is increasingly – and surprisingly – absent. Satya is a good husband to a good woman, a research psychologist named Vaani whose only real purpose in the story is to tell him about experimental cognitive studies he goes on to summarise at length. Late on we discover she has an ex-husband who hosts a Fox News-like show on Indian TV, conveniently providing Satya with an opportunity to sermonise against rising nationalist bigotry under Modi. “Any good novel,” Satya reminds us, quoting the historian Timothy Snyder, “enlivens our ability to think about ambiguous situations and judge the intentions of others.” But sincerely intending to dramatise ambiguous situations and the intentions of others is not the same thing as doing it. In fiction, all the information in the world – whether true or false – is no substitute for the enlivening portrayal of character, relationship, interiority, et cetera. • Matt Rowland Hill’s memoir Original Sins will be published by Chatto &amp; Windus in July. A Time Outside This Time is published by Picador (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Ikea has increased the price of its flat-pack furniture by up to 50%, blaming supply chain costs caused by Covid-19, in a move that will further stoke growing concern about the rising cost of living. After customers complained that prices appeared to have risen sharply after Christmas, the retailer said it was no longer able to absorb increased costs and was passing them on to consumers. An Ikea spokesperson tweeted: “Unfortunately, there has been a significant increase in costs across the supply chain, including in raw materials, transport and logistics. As this is still ongoing, it is necessary to increase prices across many of our products.” Archived versions of Ikea’s website from as recently as October showed significant price increases, including a Malm desk that has gone up from £99 to £150, a jump of more than 50%. A Jokkmokk table with four chairs is also up 50%, from £99 to £149, compared with earlier this year. A Hemnes daybed has gone up from £215 to £279, a 30% rise, while an Alex nine-drawer unit increased 35% from £85 to £115, according to archived versions of the Ikea website from earlier this year. A Kura children’s bed was up by 14% from £129 to £150, while Ikea’s Klippan sofa, one of the Swedish store’s most popular items, is £20 more expensive – a rise of 11% – at £199. Ikea confirmed that the company had raised prices across multiple countries and ranges. A spokesperson said: “Since the start of the pandemic, Ikea has managed to absorb the significant cost increases experienced across the supply chain while keeping prices as low and stable as we possibly can. Now, like many other retailers, we have had to raise our prices to mitigate the impact on our business. “Price increases vary but remain in line with what we are seeing globally at Ikea, which is approximately a 9% average increase across countries and the product range. Affordability remains at the heart of our business, and our focus will always be on continuing to offer quality, sustainable home furnishings at an affordable price for the many people.” Ikea warned earlier this year that prices would rise, citing factors including bottlenecks in shipping raw materials from Asia to Europe. The wider furniture industry has suffered significant delays, with the online furniture retailer Made.com saying that up to £45m-worth of orders have been delayed. It blamed a profit warning on factory shutdowns in Vietnam, clogged ports and extended shipping times. Rising prices at Ikea come amid broader concern about the cost of living, after UK inflation hit a 10-year high of 5.1% in November. Soaring energy bills and rising taxes prompted 2022 to be dubbed the “year of the squeeze” by a thinktank report published this week.We are interested to hear from people living in the UK who were against getting the Covid vaccine but subsequently decided to get inoculated. We’d like to hear why you did not want to get the vaccine initially, and which factors ultimately changed your mind. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.When Harry Kane scores, he tends to jump up in celebration before performing a low fist pump. It is controlled, fuss free, the modern-day interpretation of the Alan Shearer outstretched palm in the air. Not this time. When the England captain stooped to conquer against Germany in the Euro 2020 last-16 tie at Wembley, he took leave of his senses – as did virtually everyone else inside the stadium – making off towards the corner flag and launching into an Olympic-style long jump. Kane landed in a seated position, sliding on his shorts before leaning back, arms outstretched, as the pile-on began. There were 86 minutes on the clock and it had been utterly draining, the tension rising exponentially to unbearable levels. But now Kane knew. The Germans did, too. It was over. Kane would describe a feeling of “pure elation and pure joy” – a moment that would stick with him forever – and around a ground that looked more packed than it was meant to be were scenes of mayhem; the plot collectively and comprehensively lost. The tarpaulin that was stretched across the rows closest to the pitch became an impromptu trampoline. Arms and legs were everywhere. Fans fell across seats at awkward angles, insulated from any pain by the cocktail of adrenaline, booze and whatever else. A similar scene had played out after Raheem Sterling gave England the lead on 75 minutes. Now the home crowd and millions around the country had the definitive release. A historic victory was incoming – one to ignite the tournament for Gareth Southgate and his players; a run to the final that would end in penalty shootout heartbreak against Italy. In so many ways and on so many levels, it was the essence of sport. Kane had as much reason as anyone to mainline the euphoria and not only because doing well for the national team is his No 1 priority. He had dreamed of doing so as a kid in Chingford, east London, when he would watch England’s tournament matches in the beer garden of a pub called The Sirloin. The 28-year-old has scored 48 times for his country – he is on course to overtake Wayne Rooney’s record of 53 – and, before the Germany game, he had said that his favourites were on his debut against Lithuania in 2015 and the last-gasp winner against Tunisia at the 2018 World Cup. This goal topped the lot – because of the magnitude of the win that it helped to secure and the pre-match narrative surrounding Kane. Since England beat Germany at Wembley in the 1966 World Cup final, they had won the grand total of eight knockout ties at major tournaments. Seven were at World Cups when the beaten opposition were Paraguay, Belgium, Cameroon, Denmark, Ecuador, Colombia and Sweden. The eighth was at Euro 96 – the penalty shootout victory over Spain. In other words, England had claimed one major scalp (that of Spain) in 55 years. There was also the Germany factor, with England having lost on all four occasions that they had faced them in knockout football since 1966 – the World Cups of 1970, 1990 and 2010 and Euro 96, when Southgate missed the decisive penalty. The manager’s personal redemption was a prominent subplot. Kane had been caught beneath an unforgiving spotlight, having laboured during England’s three group matches – his statistics showing no goals and one shot on target. It was difficult to ignore the impression that he lacked sharpness and the questions swirled. Was he fatigued at the end of a long season? Was his club situation affecting him? He had made it plain that he wanted to leave Tottenham who, at that point, were deep into their convoluted search for a manager. Cut to St George’s Park a few days before the game and an interview with newspaper journalists. It was Kane’s assurance, the complete faith that he has in his ability, which took the breath. And in such pressured circumstances. “I could go 10, 15 games without scoring but, give me a chance, and I’d back myself to score it,” he said. The chance would come before half-time, the ball breaking for Kane to the left of goal after a run from Sterling only for him to take a slightly heavy touch back inside that allowed Mats Hummels to slide in and clear. Should Kane have tried to shoot first time? Wembley fretted, although it was nothing compared with the 81st minute when Sterling left a backpass short and Kai Havertz sent Thomas Müller clean through for the equaliser. Müller shot and everyone looked at the bottom corner of the net, waiting for it to bulge because this is how the story goes, right? And then the ball kept on going. It was a let-off of biblical proportions and how the England support would enjoy watching the clip from the beer garden in Germany when the fans there are on their feet, bellowing and cheering. And then there is just disbelief. The thing about Kane is that, unlike many centre-forwards, he is not a confidence player. He does not dwell on the misses. He simply looks ahead to the next opportunity. It came when Luke Shaw led a four-on-four break and the substitute Jack Grealish whipped in a cross from the left. Kane contorted his body to make the angle for the header, harnessing the pace on the ball and, when it bounced down and in, football was coming home. It did not, of course. But after the match of the year – and many before it – the possibilities felt limitless.By this point there is surely no way back for the clowning profession: every minor horror movie knows it can serve up a demonic pierrot as a bogeyman. With this sequel to 2019’s The Jack in the Box, Lawrence Fowler’s would-be franchise doubles down on the eponymous creepy toy by having its hellspawn harlequin manifest once the crank is turned. It’s rather beholden to The Conjuring (and uses the same title font) and, while writer-director Fowler obviously knows his horror, he doesn’t really show enough imagination here to blaze a bloody trail of his own. The knick-knack of the title is delivered to the country mansion of Olga Marsdale (Nicola Wright), a rich collector of vintage toys who is bedridden with bone cancer. Aware of its cursed past, she activates its ability to grant wishes and rearranges the revolving letters on the top from “JACK” to “LIFE”, before winding the crank. The dial on the top of the box indicates that six lives are going to be needed to achieve her wish; the box’s seller duly becomes victim no 1, and Olga browbeats snivelling son-cum-factotum Edgar (Matt McClure) to round up five more sacrifices. Luckily, wide-eyed Amy (Mollie Hindle) has just bulked up the serving staff by signing on as housemaid. Despite the Hollywood precursors, there’s a distinct strain of English gothic here. Not just in the fusty bedrooms and cellars with blinking lights, which Fowler exploits atmospherically, but in the claustrophobic mother-son relationship. Edgar overcomes his squeamishness towards murder in his desperation to save his parent, with one offering having a particularly oedipal edge. Unfortunately, that is the sole truly sordid moment in a grim trudge of rote butchery, with Hindle and her fellow sacrificial lambs given little of interest to do or say. Fowler pens everyone in with some lame restrictions, including 10ft estate walls in a world where ladders apparently don’t exist, and the inevitable phone-signal blackout. The rictus-grinning demon has it too easy here; real clowns know that a slip-up or two en route enhances the enjoyment. • The Jack in the Box: Awakening is released on digital platforms in the UK on 3 January and in the US on 18 January.The outgoing head of the Bar Council has labelled Dominic Raab “thin-skinned” for failing to meet him, claiming he was snubbed by the justice secretary for defending lawyers. Derek Sweeting QC, whose tenure as chair of the professional body representing more than 16,000 barristers in England and Wales concludes at the end of the year, said he has not had a face-to-face meeting with Raab since the latter was appointed lord chancellor in mid-September. In an interview with the Guardian, Sweeting said: “I still haven’t met him and don’t expect to. I understand he took exception to something which I had said and I have a good idea what it was. “All I would say is that if ministers are going to make attacks on lawyers – unfairly, in my view, and the view of many others – then they should expect a robust response. We shouldn’t then end up in a position where we are denied meetings as a result of being critical. It does seem counterproductive and perhaps a bit of a thin-skinned approach.” Raab is understood to have taken exception to comments Sweeting made expressing concern about the lord chancellor’s remarks in parliament when he said there was a “widespread practice” among defence lawyers “of encouraging the accused to wait until the moment in court before they take the decision on whether to plead guilty”. Many criminal lawyers took umbrage at Raab’s words, suggesting they were misleading and added to the government’s anti-lawyer rhetoric. Raab also attracted the ire of many barristers for not attending the Bar Council’s first physical conference in two years at the beginning of the month and sending a recorded message instead. To add insult to injury, on the day of the conference, he posted a picture on Twitter of himself with two people on roller skates dressed as Christmas puddings at a festival in his constituency. “It got a pretty poor reception,” said Sweeting. “I do understand that an MP with a marginal seat would want to be in his constituency on a Saturday, and it wouldn’t have been a problem if he had responded to requests for a meeting in the months since he became lord chancellor.” Raab’s failure to meet Sweeting comes at a time when the backlog in the crown courts, which try the most serious offences, stands at approximately 60,000 cases, with some trials pushed back until 2023. There have also been major bills published on judicial review and crime and sentencing. The Guardian understands that the justice secretary has met Stephanie Boyce, the president of the Law Society, which is the equivalent professional body for solicitors. Sweeting said: “It is important to talk to politicians face to face, not all the time, because they have lots of other priorities, but it’s really interesting what comes out of those sorts of discussions, not just on my part, but on the part of politicians who often say, ‘Oh, I actually would like to talk about this more than that.’ You often find the next conversation is the one in which you really get down to business and talk about the things that you’ve identified as mutual areas of interest, which is why I think it’s disappointing I haven’t had a face-to-face meeting.” Discussing an eventful year as chair, Sweeting also pointedly contrasted his personal response to the crisis in Afghanistan with that of Raab, who was criticised for remaining on a family holiday in Crete while the Afghan government collapsed. “We [the Bar Council] did a lot of work on Afghanistan during the summer,” said Sweeting. “I interrupted my holidays to do some work on it as well because it was urgent.” Sweeting, who will take up an appointment as a high court judge on 11 January, urged Raab to reconsider. “I hope that there’ll be a rethink and engagement as soon as possible with my successor,” he said. “I and the Bar Council have had very constructive relationships this year with officials at the MoJ [Ministry of Justice], as well as politicians – this is something of an exception to my experience of the year.” A MoJ spokesperson said: “The justice secretary has engaged regularly with the legal sector and will continue to do so.”A victim of Ghislaine Maxwell who testified at her sex trafficking trial has said she feels “relieved and grateful” about the guilty verdict, while another woman who has accused Maxwell of involvement in her abuse said the former British socialite was “more evil” than Jeffrey Epstein. Maxwell was found guilty on five of six charges for her involvement in Epstein’s sexual abuse of teenage girls. Prosecutors said that Maxwell “preyed on vulnerable young girls, manipulated them and served them up to be sexually abused”. “I am so relieved and grateful that the jury recognized the pattern of predatory behavior that Maxwell engaged in for years and found her guilty,” said Annie Farmer, one of the victims who testified at the trial. “She has caused hurt to many more women than the few of us who had the chance to testify in the courtroom. I hope that this verdict brings solace to all who need it and demonstrates that no one is above the law.” Farmer, one of four accusers in this case and the only one to testify under her full name, told the court that Maxwell gave her a nude massage at Epstein’s New Mexico ranch when she was just 16. She met Epstein through her sister Maria, who worked for him as a fine arts painter. “ANNIE AND I ARE SOBBING WITH JOY!!!,” Maria Farmer said on Twitter after the verdict was announced. Virginia Giuffre, another Epstein victim who has accused Maxwell of being involved in her abuse, described the Briton as “more evil than Epstein”. “What Ghislaine did to so many of us is unforgivable,” Giuffre told The Cut. “She used that charm, that wit, that smile to come off as somebody you want to trust.” Giuffre described the verdict as “a bittersweet emotion because I have been fighting for so long”. “Justice to me looks like holding all of these people involved in the sex ring, those who greased its wheels, named and shamed,” she said. “I’m sick of carrying around that shame. That shame doesn’t belong to me.” She separately tweeted: “My soul yearned for justice for years and today the jury gave me just that. I hope that today is not the end but rather another step in justice being served. Maxwell did not act alone. Others must be held accountable. I have faith that they will be.” Giuffre is suing Prince Andrew in a civil lawsuit, claiming he had sex with her on three occasions two decades ago when, aged 17, she had been sexually trafficked by Epstein, allegations Andrew vehemently denies. Teresa Helm, another of Maxwell’s accusers, told the BBC Maxwell would “never again have the opportunity to take anything from anyone”. She said: “Justice takes the lead today. I am consumed with gratitude for every brave, courageous and justice-driven person that has fought for this outcome. “Ghislaine Maxwell will never again have the opportunity to take anything from anyone. She will reside on the other side of freedom. Us survivors, we go free.” Damian Williams, the US attorney for the southern district of New York, hailed the verdict against Maxwell for “one of the worst crimes imaginable, facilitating and participating in the sexual abuse of children”. “The road to justice has been far too long, but today justice has been done. I want to commend the bravery of the girls, now grown women, who stepped out of the shadows and into the courtroom,” Williams said. Lisa Bloom, a lawyer for some of Epstein’s accusers, said she expected Maxwell to spend the rest of her life behind bars. She told the BBC: “She is 60 years old, she has been lucky to have 60 years of freedom, it is far too much. We hope that she never walks free again … The trial showed she was no scapegoat - she wasn’t on trial for just hanging around with Jeffrey Epstein, she was on trial for her own actions.” Dave Aronberg, the state attorney in Palm Beach county, Florida, where Epstein had a mansion at which he abused teenage girls, told CNN that Maxwell “just got what was coming to her”. Sigrid McCawley, who represents several victims, said that with the verdict Maxwell has been held accountable and justice served. “Today’s verdict is a towering victory, not just for the brave women who testified in this trial, but for the women around the world whose young and tender lives were diminished and damaged by the abhorrent actions of Ghislaine Maxwell,” McCawley said. Maxwell did not speak or look at the jury as the verdict was read, the journalist Julie Brown, who spent years working to expose Epstein’s crimes, said on Twitter. “As the verdict was read Maxwell struggled to stand, but said nothing,” Brown tweeted. “Maxwell, 60, appeared shaken, she sipped a cup of water then slumped back in her chair. She did not shed a tear.” Maxwell faces up to 65 years in prison. Late Wednesday, Maxwell’s brother, Kevin Maxwell, said the family stood by her and believed she would be vindicated on during the appeals process. “We firmly believe in our sister’s innocence,” he said in a statement. Bobbi Sternheim, Maxwell’s lead defense lawyer, said her team planned to appeal the verdict. Agencies contributed reportingElon Musk has rejected criticisms that his company is taking up too much room in space, saying his tens of thousands of planned satellites would be able to coexist with many others. As well as building up Tesla into the world’s most valuable carmaker by pioneering electric cars, Musk has shaken up the space industry by founding SpaceX, a private rocket company that is also seeking to become a major telecommunications entity through a network of tens of thousands of low-orbiting “Starlink” satellites. SpaceX has already launched more than 1,600 satellites, including a recent launch on 18 December which added a further 52, making it the focus of calls for regulation of space. Musk dismissed criticisms that SpaceX was dominating radio frequencies and orbital slots, in an interview published by the Financial Times. “Space is just extremely enormous, and satellites are very tiny,” Musk said. “This is not some situation where we’re effectively blocking others in any way. We’ve not blocked anyone from doing anything, nor do we expect to.” Josef Aschbacher, head of the European Space Agency, said earlier this month that Musk was “making the rules” in space. Aschbacher called for coordinated action from the EU and other countries to ensure that SpaceX’s constellation did not prevent other countries or companies from launching their own satellites. Musk compared the number of satellites with the 2bn vehicles on the Earth’s surface, suggesting there was room for “tens of billions” of satellites. The FT cited an astrophysicist disputing that claim on the grounds that satellites need large gaps to be able to safely avoid collisions. SpaceX has also drawn criticism from China, which this week publicly accused the US of ignoring international treaty obligations following two near misses between the Chinese space station and Starlink satellites. China said the space station had been forced to manoeuvre to avoid satellites in July and October. Astronomers have also expressed increasing concern that the proliferation of tens of thousands of satellites will cause unalterable changes to the night sky if launches remain unregulated. Manufacturers have already tried to address such criticisms with design changes to make satellites less visible from Earth. SpaceX, which Musk founded in 2002, is racing against competitors including the UK government-backed OneWeb to build a satellite network big enough to cover the whole globe. SpaceX has permission from US authorities to launch 12,000 satellites and eventually plans to have a constellation of 42,000 – many times more than the 8,000 or so in orbit in September. Amazon, founded by Jeff Bezos, the world’s second-richest person after Musk, is also planning to join the low-Earth-orbit (LEO) space race with the first launch of its Project Kuiper satellites in late 2022. Other competitors include Blackrock-backed Astranis, US weapons manufacturer Lockheed Martin, Canada’s Telesat and the Chinese government.The killing of Valentina Orellana-Peralta, a 14-year-old who died in her mother’s arms after police shot her in a department store dressing room, has sparked outrage and renewed scrutiny of the Los Angeles police department. Yet her death was just one of five killings by LAPD in a nine-day period this month, marking a brutal end to a year that has seen repeated scandals inside one of America’s largest police departments. This year, the LAPD killed more than double the number of civilians than in 2020. And while it’s unclear what’s driving the increase, activists argue that LAPD officers have been emboldened to use lethal force in careless and unwarranted ways after seeing their colleagues face little, if any, repercussions. “The tactic is shooting first and asking questions later,” said Jose Barrera, California director for the League of United Latin American Citizens. During the past week and a half, LAPD shot six people, including Orellana-Peralta. Five of the people shot by LAPD around the Christmas holiday have died, and none were armed with guns, according to official accounts. The killings added to an already grim year for the LAPD’s use of lethal force. In 2021, LAPD has shot 38 people, killing 18 of them, according to the LA Times. In 2020, the department shot 27 people, killing seven of them. Those figures were similar to 2019, when LAPD shot 26 people, killing twelve. “There’s just a reckless disregard for human life,” said Christian Contreras, a local civil rights attorney representing the family of one of the civilians killed by the department this month. “We’re dealing with a huge surge in police shootings and killings of Black and brown people. It’s out of control.” A deadly Christmas week The shootings, and particularly the death of the teenage bystander, have brought national attention on the department, which has faced continued accusations of unjustified killings, racial profiling and civil rights violations. In most instances, police have released few details about the people they killed and why police resorted to deadly force. But even with the limited information available, critics say the circumstances do not indicate deadly force was merited. On 18 December, LAPD officers fatally shot two people in separate incidents – both involving men allegedly holding knives. In the first incident, LAPD said officers in the Newton division in South Central were responding to a call for a “domestic violence suspect” at an apartment complex, described as a “man in his 30s”. A spokesperson said that officers upon arrival found Rosendo Olivio Jr, 34, who “fit that description”. Police alleged Olivio was holding a “folding knife” and butane lighter and yelling profanities and threats, and that an officer shot him dead when he “ignored commands”. But Contreras, an attorney representing Olivio’s family, said it was unclear if Olivio was the suspect related to the original call, and that his family has questioned whether he was involved. Holding a pocket knife was not justification for killing him, Contreras added. Olivio’s shocked family struggled to process the news and the LAPD statements presenting their loved one as a violent criminal, the attorney said. Olivio was a father of four, who lived in a neighborhood where police have been embroiled in repeated scandals over the killing of civilians. (Officers in the LAPD’s Newton division have for years used the nickname, “Shootin’ Newton”.) And although the LA police commission ruled that police officers violated policy in two other recent LAPD killings in south LA, the officers have not faced charges. “Police investigate themselves … and justify the conduct of their colleagues,” said Contreras. “The system is designed to cover up misconduct.” In the second 18 December killing, LAPD also alleged that a man with a knife ignored commands, but the department’s statement made no mention of whether he had threatened anyone. On 23 December, LAPD killed two people inside a Burlington Coat Factory store in North Hollywood: a 24-year-old man who had a bike lock and had assaulted several customers, and Orellana-Peralta, the 14-year-old who was in a dressing room. Video of the shooting showed an officer immediately firing at the man from a distance, without appearing to issue any commands. One of the officer’s bullets hit the girl, who was shopping for Christmas dresses. Civil rights advocates questioned why an officer with an assault rifle appeared to fire at 24-year-old Daniel Elena Lopez, who did not have a gun, without attempting to deescalate and without assessing whether bystanders could be endangered. Valentina’s mother, Soledad Peralta, said the shot knocked them both to the ground and that police ignored her cries for help. Once LAPD located them in the dressing room, officers removed her from her daughter, and “just left her laying there alone”, she said. LAPD declined to comment on her claims. Then on Christmas Eve, LAPD shot a man who was allegedly shooting a gun in the air; he survived, but was in critical condition. And on 26 December, an officer fatally shot a man who was at a gas station and allegedly had a knife. LAPD did not respond to the Guardian’s inquiries about the rise in killings. ‘LAPD creates the danger’ Advocates argued that the surge in killings was part of a pattern of misconduct this year that required systemic change. Other controversies involving the LAPD in 2021 included: officers detonating seized fireworks in south LA, destroying part of a neighborhood and 22 residential properties; officers allegedly purchasing stolen guns; officers accused of falsely labeling civilians as gang members; officers not wearing masks in violation of Covid policies, but facing no discipline; the department promoting inaccurate data about its traffic stops; and revelations about the agency’s use of surveillance technology, prompting a rebuke from Facebook. Officials have touted a range of LAPD reforms during the pandemic, including initiatives sending mental health professionals to respond to certain calls, expanded deescalation training and community programs meant to build relationships and restore trust. But the steady stream of scandals, activists said, illustrated how the department fails to prioritize public safety and how reforms have not prevented harmful practices. “LAPD is the one that creates the danger,” said Albert Corado, whose sister Mely was killed by LAPD in 2018 in a shooting with similarities to the Burlington case. She was working as a manager at a Trader Joe’s store when an officer fired at a suspect and killed her in the process. The death of his sister could have been a turning point for LAPD, he said. But instead, the cycle of killings and unanswered calls for justice has continued, even after the reckoning prompted by George Floyd’s death. “We’ve been at this moment many times in LA and across the country. Every few months, we say we’re so sorry for this person, and LAPD needs to be reined in, and it doesn’t happen,” said Corado. “After Mely’s death, they didn’t change a damn thing. All these people are dead, and we’ve yet to do anything really substantial in a way that is going to be meaningful for victims.” Corado is running for city council and advocates for the defunding of LAPD and the abolishing of police. Supporters of defunding argue that the best way to reduce police violence is to cut LAPD’s budget, limit their interactions with the community, and reinvest the funds in services. He said he was tired of conservatives who defend police at all costs, as well as Democrats who continue to increase law enforcement budgets while pushing modest reforms that have failed to stop the killings. LAPD and its supporters have recently been pushing for more resources, citing concerns about rising crime, including high-profile robbery cases and retail thefts. The data, however, paints a more complicated picture; homicides have increased, reflecting national trends during the pandemic, but property crime is generally down. Latora Green, an advocate who attended the press conference of Orellana-Peralta’s parents on Tuesday, said she hoped more people would come together to push for defunding: “It’s the whole system that needs to be dismantled.” No amount of accountability can bring back the 14-year-old victim, she added: “What really is justice when you lose someone?” Corado also came to the news conference to offer support to the grieving parents. He said he wanted them to know they were not alone – that there was a network of families across LA who have suffered similar tragedies.There is a more accurate term than insurrectionists to describe the people who stormed the US Capitol building on 6 January, forever smearing the seat of the American republic with fear and fascism. Although their activities inspired terror and were planned in part by members of white supremacist groups, they object to being labeled as “terrorists” or “white supremacists”. Calling them “rioters” doesn’t quite capture the political motivations of the pro-authoritarian mob of Maga fanatics. Perhaps we should view them as historical re-enactors. After all, they were only recreating the effort to undermine democracy, freedom and the US constitution that has repeated itself for centuries. Yet, if you asked them, they would undoubtedly say they were “patriots”. Throughout the course of American history, whenever this country has found itself standing on the unthinkable precipice of ruin, there has always been a horde pledging their allegiance to the flag while clamoring to push the country into the abyss. To be clear, there is a difference between loving one’s country and the vainglorious virtue-signaling that defines America’s most self-righteously toxic misnomer. But fanaticism does not prove one’s devotion. Nationalism is not the same as patriotism. In his 1861 Cornerstone Speech describing the “revolution” that still stands as the bloodiest war in the history of this continent, Confederate States of America vice-president Alexander H Stephens crowed that he had never met “an abler, wiser, a more conservative, deliberate, determined, resolute and patriotic body of men” than those who would rather rip their nation in half than discontinue their for-profit human trafficking enterprise. Five years later, the conquered confederacy of traitors would unite to form the Ku Klux Klan, an “institution of chivalry, humanity, mercy and patriotism … noble in sentiment, generous in manhood and patriotic in purpose.” Alabama governor George Wallace defended segregation as a matter of patriotism. When South Carolina senator Strom Thurmond filibustered the Civil Rights Act of 1957, he wondered why the people of the north would pick on the “patriotic” people who simply wanted to preserve white supremacy. After he switched parties in protest of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, he was embraced by the new “lilywhite” Republicans as a “patriot”. The Tea Party patriots tossed racial slurs at John Lewis, while at least two people have been killed at rallies organized by the far-right group Patriot Prayer. There is nothing more unpatriotic than someone who calls themself a “patriot”. The flag-waving hypocrites who proudly proclaim their loyalty to their country are determined to kill America. Since the 2020 election, at least 19 states have passed 33 laws that make it harder to vote. These legislative acts of voter suppression are largely introduced and passed by adherents to Donald Trump’s “Stop the Steal” movement that now includes a considerable share of the GOP’s constituency. Although these “America first” acolytes claim to want to make their country great again, their real end game is to destroy any semblance of a government where white people’s voting power is equal to their share of the electorate. In other words, the principal goal of the so-called Patriot Party is the opposite of democracy. These America-mongers perform patriotism while disregarding the actual values of their country. They will proudly recite the pledge of allegiance while demonizing Black Lives Matter protesters, reform-seekers or any movement that promotes liberty and justice for all. In Colorado, armed members of the Montezuma County Patriots were charged with harassing participants in a Walk for Justice and Peace. The trial begins days after the white supremacist group Patriot Front organized a rally in Washington. At least three deaths are associated with Patriot Prayer, another pro-Trump gang that staged violent demonstrations across the country. They have constructed a parody of a pro-life movement that does everything it can to strip rights and life away from their fellow Americans. Archbishop Timothy P Broglio, head of the US Archdiocese for the Military Services, claimed that forcing women to carry out unwanted pregnancies is an “authentic act of patriotism”. A true lover of democracy would accept stricter gun laws favored by most Americans. Instead, these performance artists made the National Rifle Association the official partner of school shootings by casting their uncompromising support for firearm manufacturers as an act of patriotism. They claim critical race theory makes kids feel bad and hate America. Yet, they are somehow willing to trade the lives of social studies students for gun industry profits. Whether it’s back-alley abortions or the spilled blood of second-graders, patriots have never cared about life, liberty or the pursuit of happiness. Besides being unapologetically pro-death, they are unrepentant liars. They spread conspiracy theories and reject the scientific research of climatologists, immunologists and criminologists, ignoring the death and destruction caused by climate change, Covid-19 and the criminal justice system. They push the false notions of illegal immigration, crime and widespread voter fraud, fully knowing the consequences of their fearmongering. Their obstruction of the 6 January House committee proves it. Their text messages prove it. Their own recounts prove it. Math, history, science and the entire English language prove that they have no use for truth, facts or evidence. This historically inaccurate, mathematically incorrect caricature of patriotism is white nationalism wrapped in a star-spangled banner. If the American empire ever falls – and it will – we can thank the patriots for the demise of democracy. Ultimately, these fanatical jingoists are the least patriotic people in America. They detest democracy and loathe any prospect of a more perfect union. They have pledged their allegiance to the flag, but not the republic for which it stands. Patriotism as performance is their only protection because a country that provides liberty and justice for all is too unbearable a thought. They’d rather kill it first. Michael Harriot is a writer and author of the upcoming book Black AF History: The Unwhitewashed Story of America This article was amended on 31 December 2021 to site Montezuma County in Colorado rather than Arizona.And now, the end is near. Not of the Thursday quiz, but of 2021. It will be good to bid farewell to this cursed year, and to look forward to an equally dismal 12 months the way things seem to be going. Never mind. In the meantime, here are 15 questions to tease and entertain you. The quiz master is away and will not be able to join you in the comments today, but you will still have the challenge of a hidden Doctor Who reference, the saintly Kate Bush, the ever-popular anagrams, and the wrath of Ron from Sparks to face. Have fun – and have a happy new year! The Thursday quiz, No 36 If you do think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quiz master’s word is always final, and you wouldn’t want to be sent to bed early on New Year’s Eve.From filters to bags to balls, the number of products aimed at stopping the torrent of microplastic fibres being flushed out of washing machines and into rivers and oceans is increasing rapidly. Grundig recently became the first appliance manufacturer to integrate a microfibre filter into a washing machine, while a British company has developed a system that does away with disposable fibre-trapping filters. Entrepreneurs are also tackling the problem at source, by developing biodegradable fabrics from kelp and orange peel, and tweaking a self-healing protein originally discovered in squid tentacles. Microplastic pollution has pervaded the entire planet, from the summit of Mount Everest to the deepest oceans. People are known to consume the tiny particles via food and water, as well as breathing them in. Microplastics have been shown to harm wildlife but the impact on people is not known, though microplastics do damage human cells in the laboratory. Fibres from synthetic fabrics, such as acrylic and polyester, are shed in huge numbers during washing, about 700,000 per wash cycle, with the “delicates” wash cycle actually being worse than standard cycles. An estimated 68m loads of washing are done every week in the UK. New data from 36 sites collected during The Ocean Race Europe found that 86% of the microplastics in the seawater samples were fibres. “Our data clearly show that microplastics are pervasive in the ocean and that, surprisingly, the major component is microfibres,” said Aaron Beck, at the Geomar Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research in Kiel, Germany. Grundig, which launched its fibre-catching washing machine in November, said the system caught up to 90% of synthetic fibres released during wash cycles. The filter cartridges are made from recycled plastic and last for up to six months, after which they can be returned free of charge. A system that can be retrofitted to existing washing machines and does not need replacement cartridges has been created by the British company Matter, and was recently awarded £150,000 from the British Design Fund. The device, called Gulp, is connected between the outflow pipe and the drain and traps the fibres in a container that is emptied every 20 washes. The company’s founder, Adam Root, a former Dyson engineer and keen scuba diver, said the idea had started with a £250 grant from the Prince’s Trust. “I used it to take apart a washing machine and that’s when I had my ‘eureka’ moment.” In the UK, Alberto Costa and other MPs are campaigning for a new regulation requiring all new washing machines to be fitted with plastic microfibre filters from 2025, backed by the Women’s Institute and others. France has introduced the requirement for filters to be fitted from 2025. The EU, Australia and California are considering similar rules. There are already a range of microfibre-catching devices on the market, but they have produced a mixed performance in independent testing. Research from the University of Plymouth in the UK examined six different products. One stood out, Xfiltra, which prevented 78% of microfibres from going down the drain. The company is focused on providing the technology to manufacturers to integrate into washing machines. The scientists tested two other devices that can be retrofitted to machines – the Lint LUV-R and Planet Care filter systems – but these trapped only 25% and 29% of fibres respectively. The three other products tested were used in the washing machine drum. The Guppyfriend washing bag, into which clothes are placed, collected 54% of microfibres, while a prototype washing bag from Fourth Element trapped only 21% of fibres. The last product tested was a single Cora ball, the stalks of which ensnared 31% of the fibres, though more than one ball could be used. An earlier report from the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency found significantly better performances from the Planet Care and Guppyfriend products, although it was not peer reviewed. Prof Richard Thompson, who works at the University of Plymouth and was part of the testing team, cautioned that filters would not solve the problem of plastic microfibres alone. “We have also shown that around 50% of all fibre emission occurs while people are wearing the clothing,” he told the Guardian. “Also, most of the human population don’t have a washing machine. “As with nearly all the current problems associated with plastic [pollution], the problem is best fixed by more comprehensive consideration at the design stage,” he said. “We need to design these in order to minimise the rate of emission, which should also make the clothing last longer and hence be more sustainable.” A dozen groups working on better fabrics were recently shortlisted as finalists in a $650,000 (£482,000) microfibre innovation challenge being run by Conservation X Labs. AlgiKnit is creating biodegradable yarns from kelp, a type of seaweed, while Orange Fiber in southern Italy is making fabrics from the byproducts of citrus juice production. Another finalist, Squitex, has developed a protein originally found in the tentacles of squid. The company says it is the world’s fastest self-healing material and can be made into fibres for textiles and coatings that reduce microfibre shedding. Other finalists are taking a different approach. Nanoloom is creating non-shedding fabrics using graphene and another group is using high-powered lasers to treat the surface of fabrics to make fibres less likely to be lost. Cotton, as a natural material, is biodegradable, but its production often involves the overuse of water and pesticides. The Better Cotton Initiative, which covers more than 20% of global cotton production, recently announced a target of cutting carbon emissions per tonne of cotton by 50% by 2030, compared with 2017. Further additional targets covering pesticide use, soil health, smallholder livelihoods and women’s empowerment are expected by the end of 2022.As a trickle of tourists slowly returns to Egypt, the floating nightclubs along the Nile are back in business. And belly dancers are once again in high demand. The glitzy late-night shows attract visitors from all over the world, and especially from the Gulf’s Arab states, with dancers in revealing outfits performing with full traditional musical backing. But while many dancers are happy to be getting back to work, there is growing disquiet that the artform is becoming closely associated with drinking and nightclub culture. They feel that the belly dance, which is deeply rooted in Egyptian history, has been increasingly seen as more akin to strip dancing, and that this association is making life difficult for the dancers. “What we’re seeing more and more of is this dance being hidden in these underground cabarets and bars,” says Egyptian dancer Amie Sultan. “A normal Egyptian family who wants to go to the theatre and watch a show will never see this dance.” As part of a campaign to change perceptions of the traditional artform, Sultan has launched a bid to have Egyptian belly dance included on Unesco’s Lists of Intangible Cultural Heritage. Although the dance is hugely popular – it is common to see belly dancers at Muslim and Christian weddings and star performers are celebrities in their own right – Sultan says they are seen more often as sex workers than artists. In Egypt’s conservative society, dancers face intense social stigma, and even risk prosecution for wearing outfits deemed too promiscuous by the authorities. “A mother will hire a dancer for her son’s wedding,” says Sultan, “but she’ll never let her daughter become a dancer.” Born in Singapore, Sultan began her dancing career in ballet. When she moved her focus to belly dance in 2014, she was shocked by a culture where performers compete to wear more revealing costumes and often undergo cosmetic surgery and breast augmentations. “I don’t even like the term ‘belly dance’,” says Sultan, who now teaches what she prefers to call Egyptian dance. Belly dance, she says “is a term that was invented by the French colonialists in Egypt. They took it back to France and called it danse du ventre [dance of the stomach], but we never call it that in Arabic.” Her programme for young dancers is run along similar lines to ballet training. Students are taught to dance in the style of stars from Egypt’s “golden age” of cinema, such as Samia Gamal and Naima Akef, and to distance themselves from the more sexualised styles found in nightclubs, where Sultan says the traditions have been diluted with other dance styles. Associating belly dance with sex work can make life difficult for dancers. Women trying to break into it as a career risk alienation from their families, insecure accommodation at the mercy of suspicious landlords, and sexual harassment. Unscrupulous managers have been known to push dancers into sex work. Dancers can also fall foul of the government’s strict regulations on attire. In 2019, a Russian woman was sentenced to a year in prison for breaching the dress code. Dance teacher Ali Abdelfattah says belly dancers are stigmatised in a way that doesn’t affect other professional dancers. “The ballet is seen as something graceful,” he says, “but when people see belly dancers, it throws up a lot of question marks. It’s not a good image.” Abdelfattah says that most of his students attend his workshops without their families’ knowledge. Because of the difficulties faced by Egyptians, many of those dancing in clubs, cabarets and at weddings come from abroad, especially from Russia and South America. Lurdiana, a Brazilian dancer working in Cairo, says she was recruited to belly dance in Sharm el-Sheikh. “They need dancers here,” she says. Even within the industry, Egyptian dancers face difficulties. Lurdiana’s former manager once explained his preference for foreign dancers. “He said that if an Egyptian girl works as a belly dancer, it means she doesn’t come from a good family or have a good education,” she says. “They think that she just does it because she wants to get money and doesn’t have any other options. They can’t imagine that she would do this just because she loves it.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:The health secretary, Sajid Javid, has warned MPs he may need to “constrain” the Covid testing system over the next fortnight, as demand for lateral flow kits surges. Ministers have repeatedly encouraged members of the public to test themselves using a lateral flow device (LFD) before attending gatherings or meeting vulnerable relatives. However, test kits have repeatedly been unavailable online in recent days, and many pharmacies have complained of being unable to secure them. Labour has accused the government of presiding over a “shambles”, with many members of the public struggling to obtain tests despite ministers putting testing at the centre of efforts to control the spread of Omicron. Demand for the tests has also been boosted by a change in quarantine rules that allows people to emerge from self-isolation after seven days instead of 10, as long as they carry out two negative lateral flow tests. In a letter sent to MPs on Wednesday evening, Javid acknowledged the intense strain being put on the system as cases of the Omicron variant continue to increase, with 183,037 new infections recorded on Wednesday. “In light of the huge demand for LFDs seen over the last three weeks, we expect to need to constrain the system at certain points over the next two weeks to manage supply over the course of each day, with new tranches of supply released regularly throughout each day,” he wrote. Javid reiterated the advice that the public should take a test “when engaging in activities that carry the greatest risk, and before coming into contact with people at risk of serious illness”. He said MPs should suggest that constituents unable to source testing kits online or find any at their local pharmacist, should, “see whether their local authority is distributing tests” or seek them out at local community facilities, such as libraries. “I would like to thank your constituents for their continued understanding and patience during this unprecedented time,” he wrote. Javid underlined the action the government has taken to increase the supply of LFDs, with 300m expected to be available in January, up from the 100m planned before the Omicron variant was discovered. Amid warnings that the PCR tests used to confirm new cases of the virus have also been unavailable in many parts of the country, Javid also stressed that capacity for these has increased significantly, from 530,000 a day in November to up to 700,000 a day. Unlike in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, ministers at Westminster have opted not to place new restrictions on the public before new year. There is mounting concern among NHS leaders about their capacity to deal with surging cases, however. Data published on Wednesday showed there were 10,462 patients in hospital with Covid in England. That was the highest figure since March, although it is unclear how many were admitted with the disease and how many are there for another reason while also testing positive.Pleather trousers, locket necklaces and Natural Born Killers T-shirts: during this holiday season, Megan Fox and Machine Gun Kelly cemented their 2021 fashion status with a familiar look – matching styles. The pandemic has had a regressive effect on fashion: shoppers swapped their office uniforms for tracksuit bottoms and in lieu of any fashion trends that stuck, we clung to the past, reviving looks from the 60s, the 70s and Y2k. One of the most unexpected revivals has been the trend of celebrity couples dressing alike. In the late 90s and early 00s we had Justin Timberlake and Britney Spears in double denim, Victoria and David Beckham in matching Matrix-inspired leather jumpsuits, and even the likes of Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie, and Demi Moore and Ashton Kutcher jumped on the bandwagon. Once again, in 2021, celebrity couples started dressing in complementary outfits. Leading the trend was the reconfigured Bennifer (Ben Affleck and Jennifer Lopez), reunited after nearly two decades apart (they initially broke up in 2002). The duo signalled their togetherness with matching fashion choices. Their last public outing, earlier this month, saw them twinning in PG-13 sky blue. And where they led, others followed. From Justin and Hailey Bieber in pumpkin-coloured coats to the aforementioned Fox and Kelly, and Blink-182’s Travis Barker and Kourtney Kardashian, Bennifer underlined the importance of creating a brand identity through a matching wardrobe. “This behaviour is about performative couplehood,” said Prof Alison Goodrum from Norwich University of the Arts. Goodrum says the pandemic has altered the way couples express their closeness in public. “In a changed world where public displays of affection, touch and physical proximity are discouraged, couples have turned to alternative ways of signalling their partnerships.” Shared wardrobes reveal intimacy but can also signal changes in public personas. When Kardashian and Fox began dressing as goth-punks (like their respective beaux, Barker and Kelly), they got a boost, adding elements of edginess and danger to their images. “Complementary dressing is rarely something that occurs without planning or intent,” says Goodrum. “Dressing alike is a useful tool for any red carpet couple to employ in the development or enhancement of their personal branding. It is a shorthand to signal messages about their lifestyle, preferences, status and even ideologies.” But what does it say when a star with a strong personal identity starts to dress to complement their partner’s attire? In August, the jewellery retailer Tiffany hired Beyoncé and Jay-Z, dressing them in matching evening attire, in a conscious effort to attract a younger customer to the luxury brand. The effect seemed at odds with Beyoncé’s unique brand of independence and self-love. “Fashion is often regarded to be a material means of self-expression and individuality, so there is a curious contradiction that surrounds both the idea and the practice of couple-dressing in this regard,” says Goodrum. “To dress in an intentionally similar manner to someone else may be considered by some to be problematic, a threat to one’s authentic self, a loss of one’s identity or a denial.”Jimmy Anderson wants English cricket to row back on its aggressive push towards the white-ball formats in recent years and has insisted it is now down to the senior players to lift a Test squad that is currently flat after its Ashes humbling. A trip that began with Anderson believing his final tour of Australia might replace the memories of the 4-0 loss in 2017-18 has moved into a zombified state, with England 3-0 down and the two remaining Tests in Sydney and Hobart now a case of playing for pride and World Test Championship points. Chris Silverwood, a head coach few expect to remain in place after an error-strewn tour, will miss the first of these while isolating after a positive Covid case among his family. Three members of his support staff – Jon Lewis (seam bowling), Jeetan Patel (spin) and Darren Veness (fitness) – also have the virus. As well as leading to a lack of slingers in the nets, an outbreak that has also resulted in three family members being infected represents the latest headache for a side that trail 3-0. That has caused an eruption of opinions about English cricket’s priorities. Speaking at training on Thursday, Anderson initially stressed the need for minds inside the camp not to dwell on the broader issues with two Tests remaining, only for the 39-year-old to then decide he wanted to get something off his chest. “What I will say is, I think that there has been a big push with white ball cricket since the 2015 World Cup,” Anderson said. “So I just would like to think that maybe [a better] balance between red- and white-ball cricket is there, going forward. At the minute, it’s tipped slightly towards white-ball. And it has been for the last few years. “If you look at our performances in Test cricket over the last few years, they’ve been pretty inconsistent. So, from that point of view we can hopefully just redress that balance a little bit.” Asked if the standard of County Championship cricket has dropped during his 20-year professional career, Anderson replied: “There’s a bit more cricket now, I guess. There are more competitions to think about. I think that the one thing for me is that potentially the wickets aren’t as good as they used to be. You see a lot more result pitches now in county cricket. So perhaps, with the bigger picture, that’s something we can think about in the future.” One would hope the words of England’s record Test wicket-taker – now up to 639 victims after an immaculate four for 33 at the MCG that proved in vain – might resonate higher up at the England and Wales Cricket Board. So, too, those of captain Joe Root who called for a “reset” in red-ball cricket in the wake of defeat. However, the governing body’s leadership is currently in flux, with headhunters having been dispatched to fill the currently vacant role of chair and a chief executive in Tom Harrison who presided over the past five years and may well leave after the end of the financial year when a £2.1m bonus pot matures and is split by senior executives. Next summer’s domestic schedule is currently being devised and a third round of the County Championship may move into the middle of summer after last season’s shemozzle. But with the Hundred in place, and no competition in men’s cricket having made way, first-class cricket will still largely get second-class treatment. Fresh leadership at the top cannot come quickly enough, although Root is likely to remain as captain of the Test team for the time being due to scant alternatives. “Everyone thinks so highly of him,” Anderson said. “Not just as a bloke but as a cricketer, and as a captain. So yes, hopefully he will continue. “We’re aware we’ve got so much good support around the world, people getting up in the middle of the night to watch and we’re gutted we’re not performing for those people and giving them what they want to see.” Asked about the motivation now, Anderson added: “The lads are pretty flat at the minute if I’m being brutally honest. It can be difficult, especially for guys experiencing the Ashes for the first time. That’s where the more senior players come in. We have to rally round, make sure everyone is in a good place and a good headspace to compete. “I know I said it last time but I would be extremely surprised if I was here in four years’ time. Obviously I didn’t want [the 4-0 defeat in 2017-18] to be my last memory of Australia, so I came back here and this is going to be it. We’ve just not been at the races. We’ve now got two games to do something about that.”Public holidays are notoriously difficult for epidemiologists – people may avoid or delay both testing and hospital visits, making for slightly unreliable numbers. But some things are still clear from the latest Covid data released by the government. Omicron is now responsible for more than 90% of all new infections in England (the other three nations haven’t published a full set of data yet), meaning that its particular effects are now driving the pandemic. And its rate of growth versus earlier this month appears to have slowed considerably. It is barely three weeks ago that Omicron infections were more than doubling every two days. If that rate of increase had continued we would be close to 1 million infections per day by now. Even the Christmas holiday cannot explain the difference between that estimate and the most recent reported infection numbers for England of 117,000. On the other hand, hopes from before Christmas that we may have seen the epidemic peak were almost certainly premature. Overall cases are still increasing, and we haven’t seen the worst daily report yet, but the lower rate of increase means a lower eventual peak than previously thought. Drilling down into the data we can see large changes in how the epidemic has moved through different age groups. In mid-December infections increased most rapidly in the 20-to-40 age group, however in the last few days before Christmas there was a dramatic slowing in the rate of increase in that group. By contrast infection rates in the 50+ age group were relatively flat for the first half of December but in the 10 days before Christmas the rate of increase in infection rates in this age group increased substantially. This older age group is far more likely to be admitted to hospital, and so admissions have risen in recent days, as has the number of beds occupied by people with Covid in England: currently 9,546 compared to 6,434 two weeks previously, a 48% rise. But the number of patients with Covid occupying mechanical ventilation beds remains fairly level and is actually below what it was a few weeks ago. The most recent data for England was 758 on 28 December, compared to 795 two weeks previously. Deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid test are still falling slightly, but we would not expect to see any impact on the death statistics from the recent rapid rise in Covid for another couple of weeks. How the next few weeks – never mind the next few months – play out in the UK is still far from clear. Even though the Omicron variant appears to be less severe than Delta, and for many the infection is just a mild, cold-like illness, that is clearly not the case for all. Ultimately the amount of pressure on the NHS will depend on how many people become ill enough to be admitted to hospital and that will depend on how high infection rates go, especially in the older age groups. If, as was the case in South Africa, cases increase very rapidly, peak and fall rapidly then the pressure on the NHS may be short-lived and manageable. But the epidemic in the UK may not follow what happened in South Africa. So where does this leave us with knowing how to best manage as we move beyond new year? It all depends on how much pressure Omicron will place on the health service at its peak and how long that period of high demand lasts. We probably won’t know until a week or so after the holiday period what is likely to happen in January and beyond. Interventions and measures that reduce the transmissibility of an infection will reduce the peak but are often associated with a longer-lasting epidemic – people who are susceptible simply become infected later, rather than all at once. In other words, social distancing measures may not prevent but only delay infections. In addition to reducing the height of the peak – and thus the immediate pressure on the health service – there can be other important gains from delaying infections, especially if new treatments or new vaccines are expected that will substantially reduce death or severe disability. This time, though, there is nothing likely to make a big difference expected soon. Another complicating factor is that the effectiveness of the vaccines versus infection declines with time. Recent data from the UK Health Security Agency suggests that the protective effect of the booster shot may be waning after about 10 weeks. Its effectiveness against severe disease is more durable than effectiveness against mild infection, but will still decrease with time. As always, interventions are a matter of fine timing. It is still not clear how this new Omicron-dominant wave will play out. Earlier this week the UK government chose not to introduce new measures before the new year, instead adopting a wait-and-monitor approach as long as hospitalisations remained relatively low. The US CDC recently reduced the recommended isolation period for people with a positive Covid test – but no symptoms – from 10 to five days. This may indicate a new preference for less restrictive policies if soaring infection numbers no longer necessarily mean mass hospitalisation and death. Paul Hunter is a professor in medicine at the University of East Anglia The headline of this article was amended on 30 December 2021 to reflect the fact that it was about England, rather than the UKI am sure those who know my backstory of criminality imagine – reasonably – that the toughest times of my life were while I was a guest of Her Majesty, who kindly gave me full board and lodgings for 16 years, on and off, during the first six decades of my existence. And they are half right. My first taste of her hospitality came in 1957 when, at 14, I was ordered to spend three months in a detention centre. Then a relatively new concept, these were designed to give miscreants a “short, sharp shock” that would teach us to stay on the straight and narrow. It didn’t work, of course, which I know because I met up with virtually all of the class of ’57 from Foston Hall, Derbyshire, in different jails and at different times. As for the teaching element, I was sent there for nicking a chewing gum machine. It was a bit of a lark, really, and a long way from the crimes that led to my last jail term: seven years, in 1996, for relieving Barclays Bank of a million pounds and producing counterfeit giro cheques of such high quality that the benefits system was forced to issue a new design; Post Office staff could not differentiate our cheques from theirs. (One for Michael “Prison works” Howard to think about.) I had a few difficult periods during those stays. I did frequent stints in isolation – and I was in prison when a diet of solely dry bread and water, for three days at a time, was a lawful punishment for misbehaving cons. No doubt I would have been birched, too, had that punishment not been abolished in 1962, a couple of years before I arrived in the adult system (for stealing a tray of rings from a jewellers). I have also been on the receiving end of bad – in fact, illegal – behaviour from staff, usually out of sight, in segregation units. When I was a witness to mistreatment, rather than a victim, I chose to call out the behaviour of staff. If my attitude landed me in hot water, I was always determined never to let my keepers see they were getting me down. I forced my feelings to follow my resolve. So, all in all, yes, I have served hard time. Yet somehow it never drove me near despair. You see, I chose to become a criminal; volunteered, if you like. I was steeped in crime, enjoyed my work and willingly signed up to the adage: “If you can’t do the time, don’t do the crime.” Accordingly, when mistakes occurred at work and I ended up in the slammer, I regarded it as an occupational hazard. The toughest time of my life, although occurring in prison, had nothing to do with the difficulties chronicled above. It took place while I was sailing serenely through a seven-year sentence in a civilised jail, HMP Risley. Around the back end of 1998, I received a letter containing disturbing news about a dear friend, who was struggling to cope with life on the outside. It had happened before – particularly badly in 1989 – but then I had been free and could be by his side. I more or less moved in with him, listened to him and sometimes laughed with him, encouraging him to think of good times we had enjoyed and could enjoy again. He eventually recovered and we did, indeed, spend some good times together. This time, however, there was no possibility of me going to him, and he had medical issues that prevented him from visiting me. All I could do was make phone calls and write letters until I was free – in about a year’s time. It was not enough. Perhaps nothing would have been. Ultimately, there were to be no more times, good or bad, spent together again. I had wanted to offer him my attention and constant presence, but I could not – and that was due entirely to my incarceration. When my loss of freedom hurt only me, I was happy to take the consequences, but I felt the full force of it when it affected my ability to help him. For the first time in my chosen career, I felt the powerlessness and impotence of captivity. To my mind, I had failed my friend. This was my nadir, my rock bottom. I coped, because you have to. Life moves on and time heals, but the episode left its mark. That was my last jail term to date. I have asked myself if it had any bearing on me going straight. The truth is, I don’t know. I didn’t commit any crimes between my release, a few days before the end of last century, and the almost accidental securing of my role as a Guardian journalist in 2003. But I had been away the best part of four years, so I was due a sabbatical, if you like, until I had adjusted fully to life outside the walls. Plus, my work in the latter stages of my career involved long-term planning. But crime has a strong pull; I sometimes miss the buzz of it. So I will never know. What I do know is that, 23 years on, I am in a much better place, physically and spiritually. It is a good feeling. I am in the 17th year of my journalistic journey and while, sadly, reporting doesn’t pay nearly as well as crime (and is considerably more stressful), it has one major perk: I know I will not be going back to that place of lowest point again. Instead, I am blessed with children and grandchildren, who bring me absolute joy (most of the time!), and a few dear friends. Some are old mates, who have been in my life for a long time, but now I am free to be in their lives, too, and for the foreseeable future. Finally, I am on hand, to cajole, praise, comfort and, yes, help, if needed. It is a good feeling – one I think about daily. Throw in a couple of rescue dogs and my happiness is complete. It looks as though I will not be accepting Betty Windsor’s hospitality again. That said, along with the aforementioned kids and pals, she is welcome to pop round to my place any time.When I say I’m a fan of canned beans, I mean I’m a stan of canned beans. A friend once joked that I could write a cookbook called Doing New Things With a Tin of Beans, which I very nearly mistook for a challenge. Nutritionally, they’re a powerhouse, but it’s their versatility that truly gives me life. I recently figured out that you can blend an entire tin of cannellini beans to make a silky-smooth double cream replacement, ideal for glossy pasta sauces such as this vegan penne alla vodka. Borlotti, on the other hand, are gorgeous and meaty when mashed with diced mushrooms and used like mince. Borlotti bean Swedish “meatballs” (pictured above) Don’t be tempted to mash the beans to oblivion – you want to have a chunky texture – so I’d advise against using a food processor, if you can help it. A fork or potato masher should do the job. Prep 15 min Cook 45 min Serves 4 For the ‘meatballs’ 1 x 400g tin borlotti beans, drained and rinsed 60g panko breadcrumbs 50ml boiling water 2 tbsp vegan bouillon, or stock powder 2 tsp vegan gravy granules (I use red Bisto, but strict vegans may prefer an alternative) 1 tsp Marmite 25g vegan butter or margarine 1 medium onion, peeled and finely chopped 85g shiitake mushrooms, finely chopped ½ tsp fine sea salt ½ tsp ground black pepper ⅛ tsp ground nutmeg ¼ tsp allspice 1 tbsp vegetable oil Finely chopped parsley, to serve Lingonberry or cranberry sauce, to serve For the gravy 40g vegan butter 3 tbsp plain white flour 380ml vegetable stock 150ml unsweetened and unflavoured soy milk In a medium bowl, mash the beans with a fork until each one is just broken up and the mixture is chunky; don’t mash it to a paste. Add the breadcrumbs and mix to combine. Put the boiling water, stock powder, Bisto and Marmite in a measuring jug and whisk smooth. Set a medium frying pan over a medium-low heat and add the butter. Once melted, add the onion and fry gently, stirring, for two minutes. As the chopped onion turns translucent, add the mushrooms, fry, stirring, for eight to 10 minutes more, then add the salt, pepper and spices, stir to combine and take off the heat. Add the onions to the mashed bean mix, along with the Bisto and Marmite, and stir to combine. With lightly wet hands, form the mixture into tablespoon-sized balls and put on a plate. Put the frying pan back on a medium heat and add the vegetable oil. Fry the balls in two batches for about 10 minutes each, turning them regularly, until lightly browned all over, then transfer to a plate while you make the gravy. Return the frying pan to a medium-low heat and add the butter. Once melted, whisk in the flour until you have a smooth paste. Add the stock bit by bit, whisking as you go, until smooth. Bring to a gentle simmer, whisking constantly, until the mixture thickens into a rich gravy. Still whisking, add the soy milk in a slow, steady stream and, once the gravy is smooth and creamy, turn the heat to low and return the meatballs to the pan. Leave to simmer gently for a few minutes, stirring often to prevent the gravy from sticking, then serve with mashed potato or pappardelle, a sprinkle of fresh parsley and some lingonberry or cranberry sauce. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Penne alla vodka with cannellini cream You’ll need a high-speed blender to get a really smooth cannellini cream. If you don’t have one, get the beans as smooth as you can with a stick blender or a food processor, then pass through a fine sieve to catch any tough skins. Prep 10 min Cook 20 min Serves 4 1 x 400g tin cannellini beans, undrained 100ml unsweetened and unflavoured soy milk 2 tbsp olive oil 1 small onion, peeled and very finely chopped 2 garlic cloves, peeled and minced 4 tbsp tomato puree ½ tsp sugar 350g passata 70ml vodka ½ tsp chilli flakes, plus extra to serve Salt and black pepper 300g dried penne 1 small handful basil leaves, to finish Put the beans and their liquid in a high-speed blender with the soya milk, blend until very smooth and creamy, then set aside. Put a medium saucepan on medium-low heat and add the olive oil. Once hot, add the onion and fry, stirring regularly, for three to five minutes, until softened. Add the garlic and fry for two minutes more, taking care not to let it brown. Add the tomato puree, sugar, passata, vodka and chilli flakes, stir to combine, then bring up to a simmer. Cover the pan and leave the sauce to simmer for eight to 10 minutes, stirring occasionally to make sure it doesn’t catch. Meanwhile, bring a large saucepan of salted water to a boil, add the penne and cook according to the packet instructions, until al dente. Once the sauce has reduced and thickened, stir in the cannellini cream, season to taste and keep warm. Once al dente, drain the pasta, reserving 150ml of its cooking water. Add the pasta to the sauce, turn the heat down low and toss to combine. Cook, tossing and stirring often, for two minutes, adding the reserved pasta water as required to loosen the sauce (you may not need all the water; use just enough to bring the sauce to your desired consistency). Serve with an extra sprinkle of chilli flakes or freshly ground black pepper, and a scattering of torn fresh basil. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado • Richard Makin writes the School Night Vegan blogAs new year approaches, crowds around the world may be expecting whizzes and bangs to light up the sky. But the appeal of fireworks could fizzle out with the growing use of drones for light shows. One notable example was the opening ceremony of this year’s Tokyo Olympics, while the Over the Top NYE event at Reunion Tower in Dallas is among those planning to combine fireworks and drones to welcome 2022. They are also being embraced at a local level: more than 1,000 people watched a drone display at Mercia Marina in Derbyshire to celebrate Bonfire Night this year. Ollie Howitt, the creative coordinator at SkyMagic, which used a fleet of 300 drones to create a display for the mayor of London’s new year celebration last year, said demand had increased substantially, something the pandemic has helped accelerate. She added that drones were increasingly able to fly in greater density and for longer. “We do think it’s going to be something that’s ever evolving, as opposed to it being a short-lived sort of fad that people have suddenly got interested in,” she said. Robert Neff, a partner and general manager at Mercia Marina, also believes drone displays will become more common. “There’s a big movement against fireworks,” he said. Neff said the decision to use a drone display at the marina was down to a number of factors, including the impact of fireworks on animals – from wildlife and waterfowl to the cats and dogs of boat owners. “They’ve often commented on how much distress is caused to their pets by the fireworks,” he said. Howitt said there were benefits to drones: “They’re no emission, they’re reusable, there’s no fallout or any debris or that kind of thing. So in that sense they are a very good, sustainable option.” But not everyone agrees. A spokesperson from the British Fireworks Association said drones could also pose environmental problems. “Suggestions are that drones have less of an impact on the environment, but we have grave concerns about electrical demand and use of lithium batteries which are known not to be all that ‘green’,” they said. “Firework use impact on the environment has been shown to be minor and very short-lived and recent studies have suggested that there is likely to be more pollution from a couple of cars driving to an event than caused by fireworks at an event.” An RSPCA spokesperson said that while drones were a possible idea to try to reduce the impact of displays on animals, there were downsides. “Drones are not without their own negative issues such as spooking horses and livestock or colliding with birds, and can cause disturbance to animals and members of the public. It’s therefore important for their effects to be fully considered and measures taken to minimise the chance of accidents,” they said. And there are logistical issues with drone light displays, known as “drone swarms”, needing to receive specific safety approval from the UK Civil Aviation Authority. Some suggest the use of fireworks and drones are not mutually exclusive. The crackle and bangs of pyrotechnics create a sound sensation that is hard to replace. “We find fireworks work really well in tandem with drones. But we don’t really see it as a one replacing the other at all. We sort of feel as if it’s just another tool in the chest for how you sort of animate the sky and what you want to do with the show that you’re putting on,” said Howitt, noting that while fireworks give a loud, emotive, big performance, drones offer the chance to tell stories in the sky by using a series of images. But, as Neff noted, using drones to avoid the potential problems from fireworks involves people ditching the latter. “What people point out is why do you bother avoiding it if five miles or two miles down the road they’re having a big firework display,” said Neff. “It makes a bit of a mockery of it.” But he is not certain he would opt for drones again. “I don’t know,” he said, adding people were expecting rather more from the display. “They expected more drones, more lights, more performance. People always want more. And I think the noise is part of the big experience of it all,” he said.The biggest shake-up to the insurance industry for decades takes place on Saturday, when insurers will be banned from quoting policyholders a higher price to renew their home or motor insurance than they would offer a new customer. After years of complaints that customers who regularly switched insurer were paying significantly lower premiums than those who renewed, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) has said they must be offered the same price. The move is expected to be bad news for households that chase the lowest new-customer premiums annually. However, the FCA expects it to result in lower renewals for loyal customers who renew automatically, typically saving them £120 a year each. The FCA’s reforms follow a review that found insurers were attracting new customers with artificially low prices and then increasing premiums in subsequent years – a practice known in the trade as “price walking”. It also uncovered evidence that insurers were using sophisticated processes to attract customers who they thought were less likely to switch in future. As well as leading to higher prices for loyal – often older – customers who were less likely to switch suppliers, price walking had distorted the way the whole insurance market had worked, the FCA said. It has been particularly prevalent in the home insurance market where those renewing policies have routinely been charged double or even triple what they would have paid as a new customer of the same firm. Sheldon Mills, executive director of consumers and competition at the FCA, said the rules were expected to save consumers £4.2bn over the next 10 years. “Our interventions will make the insurance market fairer and make it work better. Insurers can no longer penalise consumers who stay with them. You can still shop around and negotiate a better deal, but you won’t have to switch just to avoid being charged a loyalty premium,” he said. “We are keeping a close eye on how insurers respond to our new rules, to ensure that the benefits of a better insurance market are delivered to consumers.” Martin Lewis, the founder of the MoneySavingExpert website, and one of those who helped to turn UK consumers into a nation of switchers, has predicted that price savings currently offered to regular switchers will fall. “My best guess is firms won’t just cut renewal prices to match those for newbies. Rates will meet nearer the middle as happened in 2012, when insurers were barred from gender price discrimination. This will mean savings from switching will likely relatively reduce. We’re still unsure of how this will work exactly, but prices for switchers are very likely to be relatively higher for January,” he said. The move has been welcomed by the Association of British Insurers, which said it will remove “excessive price differences in the premiums paid by some new and existing customers for the same policy”. Ursula Gibbs, director at the comparison website Comparethemarket.com, said it looked as though insurers had been playing “a clever pricing game” and keeping premiums lower in recent months to try to lock in as many customers as possible before new regulations were introduced. She said car insurance premiums had fallen by £80 a year over the past 12 months. “There is uncertainty over what will happen to the cost of car insurance next month. While the rule changes should end the loyalty penalty, this does not mean that auto-renewing your insurance will get you the best deal,” she said. If the FCA’s new rules do result in less switching, it will bad news for the comparison websites, coming at a time that the energy switching market has all but ceased to exist. The sites earn a considerable commission for each new customer they bring to an insurer.A BBC News interview with a lawyer accused of the sexual abuse of a minor after Ghislaine Maxwell’s conviction “did not meet the BBC’s editorial standards”, the corporation has said. The broadcaster has been inundated with complaints about the interview with Alan Dershowitz, which was broadcast on the BBC News channel shortly after Maxwell was found guilty of sex trafficking in a New York court on Wednesday. Dershowitz, who was previously Jeffrey Epstein’s lawyer, has been accused of sexual abuse by Virginia Roberts Giuffre, who has made similar claims against Prince Andrew. Both men deny the allegations. When interviewed on the BBC News channel on Wednesday, Dershowitz was introduced simply as a “constitutional lawyer”. He was then allowed to attack Giuffre’s credibility, without challenge from the presenter. A BBC spokesperson said on Thursday that Dershowitz “was not a suitable person to interview as an impartial analyst, and we did not make the relevant background clear to our audience. We will look into how this happened.” In the interview, Dershowitz congratulated the prosecution in the Maxwell case for not calling Giuffre as a witness, “because they ultimately didn’t believe she was telling the truth and they didn’t believe a jury would believe her and they were right in doing so”. The BBC did not mention that Dershowitz and Giuffre are locked in lawsuits over the veracity of her claims that he was part of a group of powerful men to whom Epstein offered her for sex. She sued him for defamation after he called her a liar, and he countersued claiming she was making false claims about him as part of a plan to extort money from a far wealthier member of Epstein’s circle. The Labour MP Nadia Whittome tweeted: “Alan Dershowitz, who was accused of the same crimes as Prince Andrew, is on the BBC trying to silence victims following Ghislaine Maxwell’s conviction. I can’t believe this needs to be said but the BBC should not give a platform to people accused of child sexual abuse.” She added: “We have a responsibility to believe people when they disclose sexual abuse and to create conditions in which they can in the first place. All details of Epstein’s network should be published and all victims/survivors are owed justice. This is clearly the tip of the iceberg.” Sarah Churchwell, an American literature professor from the University of London, tweeted: “People have taken this thread as an opp to bash the BBC, so let me be clear I’m a fan and a beneficiary of brilliant people at @BBCNews. But this – Dershowitz as ‘constitutional lawyer’ without explaining his screaming conflicts of interest – is not OK.” Adam Wagner, a human rights barrister, said the interview represented a “huge error by the BBC” and that all the corporation had to do was search Dershowitz’s name on Google to see that he was not an appropriate guest. Caoilfhionn Gallagher, a coroner and human rights lawyer, said she was “shocked” and described the decision to interview him as “utterly bizarre”. The BBC statement said: “The interview with Alan Dershowitz after the Ghislaine Maxwell verdict did not meet the BBC’s editorial standards, as Mr Dershowitz was not a suitable person to interview as an impartial analyst, and we did not make the relevant background clear to our audience. We will look into how this happened.”Chelsea have announced losses of £145.6m after tax for the year despite being crowned European champions in May. Thomas Tuchel’s appointment to replace Frank Lampard at the end of January transformed the team’s fortunes on the pitch as they went on to defeat Manchester City in the Champions League final. But the club’s financial results for the year to 30 June 2021 have been severely affected by playing games with no crowds because of the Covid-19 pandemic, while there was also a reduction in profit on player sales. Chelsea’s turnover increased from £387.8m to £416.8m thanks to an increase in broadcasting revenue. But after posting a profit of £39.5m in the previous financial year, this year’s losses are significantly more than the £102m in the 2019-20 season. Chelsea’s accounts state they are “reliant on Fordstam Limited for its continued financial support”. The company is owned by Roman Abramovich, and has indicated it will continue to support the club “for the foreseeable future”. As well as winning the Champions League for the second time, Chelsea finished fourth in the Premier League and reached the FA Cup final. Meanwhile, Tuchel has admitted Chelsea’s preparations to host Liverpool on Sunday will include a “trial and error” selection process as he counts the continued injury and Covid-19 toll in the wake of Wednesday’s 1-1 draw with Brighton. Reece James should miss out against their title rivals with a hamstring strain, and the extent of the England wing-back’s problem could prove pivotal to the Blues’ campaign. Chelsea will sweat on Thiago Silva’s thigh issue and Andreas Christensen’s back problem – but also on a host of players still suffering lasting effects after contracting Covid, including Timo Werner. Tuchel said: “[Werner’s] not good, not in training. And that’s because of Covid. We don’t know any more at the moment, and nobody knows quite how the players [who have had Covid] will react. We play trial and error and see what we get. That’s why I’m protecting my team. We can play much better but we need a full squad over weeks and weeks.” Romelu Lukaku made it two goals in two matches against Brighton - his first start in 10 weeks after ankle trouble and Covid isolation. But Tuchel admitted he must continue to carefully monitor Lukaku’s continued recovery. “I’m surprised with what he’s doing, actually very surprised,” Tuchel said. “But I don’t know how long he can do it. We will see and we will try it but I don’t know.”Francesca Chiejina began her year as a ghost, ended it as an enchantress, and took in a goddess, a princess, a pauper and an acclaimed Proms appearance along the way. Covid might have meant an enforced pause for many musicians, but it certainly doesn’t seem to have derailed this radiant and versatile soprano. “Yeah,” she smiles, “I’ve had a crazy year.” The Nigerian/American singer, 30, has been based in London since 2014, studying at Guildhall and then winning a place on the Royal Opera House’s prestigious Jette Parker Young Artists programme. We talk over Zoom as she’s in Nigeria for her first visit in more than three years. “It’s lovely to be here,” she says. “Being on the same soil where I was born. I’ve been reflecting a lot, re-remembering and rediscovering who I was, who I am and who I want to be.” Who she is and who she wanted to be was never a singer, let alone a soprano. As a girl in Lagos, there were piano and violin lessons and her talent was evident. Her family moved to Michigan in the US when she was 10 (“I remember carrying my violin as my hand luggage!”) and in public schools she enjoyed free music lessons, and was part of orchestras and choirs. “I’d get solos here and there, and my teachers would tell me my voice was good,” she says. Still, she began studying to be a doctor, and a very different career looked set. “I never thought I’d sing for a living, but this tiny seed in me kept growing until when I was about 20 it just exploded.” Her parents were took some convincing. There were tears, she says. “They thought I was ruining my life, that I should at least finish my medical training, but I think it was when I got into the Jette Parker programme that they finally accepted I wasn’t making a huge mistake.” And the soprano bit? As a teenager she sang alto, the lowest female voice, in choirs, and she began her musical training as a mezzo. “I had never really stretched my voice,” she says. “And, sopranos had this reputation for being really hard to please, difficult girls who like to be the centre of attention, and I thought: that’s not me. I’m a mezzo, personality-wise!” But her teacher had a hunch and encouraged her to explore her range, and Chiejina’s voice blossomed. “For a long time, and even a little bit still today, I was a reluctant soprano,” she laughs. “But I’m slowly learning to be a better one – in terms of standing up for myself. It’s a lot of pressure to be the tenor or the soprano, you have to learn how to say no a lot.” Not that “no” has been her watchword this last year. “Obviously I don’t want to tire myself out but I figured if I say yes to lots of opportunities I will be able to discover what I like, and what is challenging in a good – and bad – way, and where my real strengths are. I see it as taking in data. It’s really fun to stretch my voice while I’m young and to have the freedom to experiment.” Her voice suggests she will particularly excel in Verdi and Puccini – and she’s currently learning La bohème’s Mimi for an English Touring Opera production in spring 2022, but in Handel’s Amadigi as enchantress Melissa (also for ETO) she was hailed as “exceptional”; as the soloist in Berg’s Seven Early Songs at the Proms with John Wilson’s Vertigo orchestra her voice “glinted with beauty”, and as Britten’s Miss Jessel in Turn of the Screw – a filmed production from OperaGlass Works – she was hugely impressive: “Her luscious voice heavy with illicit experience and knowledge.” Beyond the bohème, future plans include Strauss’s Four Last Songs at Cadogan Hall, and she reveals she’d love to do more of Verdi and Puccini’s famous heroines – Aida or Madama Butterfly’s Cio-Cio-san. “I really want to sing the hell out of these parts. That’s the thrill of these roles. The music is so exciting!” She points out that her musical training in the US at public schools was provided free by the state, and – had she grown up in the UK where similar opportunities are desperately limited – she is unlikely to have been able to develop into the musician she is today. “Music needs to be accessible to all from a really early age. Everyone needs the opportunity to discover it. You can’t just force people as adults to go to stuff that they don’t know or care about.” Did she ever feel that she didn’t fit the overwhelmingly white world of classical music? “No one ever made me feel that, at least not to my face,” she says, “but in my classes I just got used to the fact that there were only ever one or two people of colour. I got kind of numb to being the token black face, and chose not to focus on it too much as it can be an incredibly lonely existence. Instead I focused on wanting to excel and simply being really really good at what I do.” On those latter points there is no doubt. • This article was amended on 3 January 2022. Due to an editing error an earlier version referred to Aida and Madama Butterfly’s Cio-Cio-san as “Puccini’s famous heroines”; the former is a Verdi heroine.Alex, 29, Bristol Occupation Conference producer Voting record Alex, who was born in Vienna and grew up in Warsaw, votes Labour in Poland by postal vote. She cannot yet vote in the UK, where she has lived since 2013 Amuse bouche Alex used to live in Derby, and appeared in the local paper in her first month in the city, in a piece about street fashion Alison, 74, Bristol Occupation Retired biology teacher, lecturer, women’s rights activist Voting record Generally Labour, but in recent local elections Alison voted Tory for the first time, for the police and crime commissioner Amuse bouche Alison has three children with three different men. “My daughter’s rebellion was to marry and have three children with one man!” For starters Alison If you take the risk versus the benefits for vaccinating children, the risk is way too high. For the first time, we are asking children to subject themselves to a possible danger in order to protect adults. All the other vaccinations are about protecting the children themselves. Alex I don’t have strong opinions about vaccinating children – I don’t have any of my own. My partner’s kids, who are 12 and 14, are getting vaccinated because they want to. The big beef Alison I was talking about immigration, how it must have been very hard for some of these little towns in eastern England, to find within 10 years that a child is in an extremely small minority of native English speakers in their class. She got that. Alex I was surprised by her perspective around eastern European immigration, because in other respects she seemed to be so open-minded. I didn’t feel offended on the part of my brethren. It was more surprise, because she seemed to be such a logical person – she voted to stay in. Alison This is a very small island and I just see the housing creeping in, greenfield sites being covered up – we’ve got a housing crisis. We talked about the way Britain creams off often highly qualified people. I mean, why are Nigerian nurses working here, when they are needed in Nigeria? Alex The way I approach it is that Britain, having been a colonial power, has had Windrush, plus Pakistani and Indian migration. Then there was European migration, but you can’t tell that they’re not from here until they start talking. Is it that there seems to be some deceit there that rubs people up the wrong way? Alison thought that was an interesting perspective. Sharing plate Alison The statue of Edward Colston should have been removed, but it was unfortunate in the way it was done. Alex I responded to a survey and said we should keep it in a museum. I don’t condone renaming everything that has a slave owner’s name attached to it, but it’s not my bone to pick and not my heritage. I would rather argue about the role of the British in the second world war, having come from a country that might not have been invaded if different decisions were made at the time. Alison Bristolians still talk about the Colston Hall, renamed last year. They should have information in the hall to explain who Colston was. For afters Alison We talked a bit about how disgusting men’s toilets are but, for a lot of women, this is one of the issues [of the trans debate]. When you have a child in a buggy, mixed toilets – with single enclosed cubicles – are rubbish. Alex I didn’t disagree. Alison Of course trans people can exist. But I’m not willing to say trans women; I will say trans-identified men. Alex It’s undoubtedly difficult to be trans in this world – you are likely to be attacked for it. For me, the conversation that has built up around it in the media is disproportionate to what people experience in their life – though in no way do I want to minimise the experience of trans people. Takeaways Alex It was a perfect illustration of someone who doesn’t think there should be eastern European immigration connecting with someone nearly three times younger and an eastern European immigrant. Everything is possible if you give each other a chance. Alison She was lovely, but then I never don’t get on with women. I might adopt her, although she does have a mother in Poland. Additional reporting: Naomi Larsson • Alex and Alison ate at Box-E, Bristol Want to meet someone from across the divide? Click here to find out moreA leading scientist has warned it is “very worrying” that a shortage of Covid-19 tests could lead to people mixing for new year celebrations without being able to see whether they are infectious. Prof Peter Openshaw, who sits on the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag), said the conditions at a New Year’s Eve gathering were “perfect” for spreading coronavirus. Asked about the prospect of untested people mixing due to a shortage of lateral flow devices, he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “I think it’s very worrying indeed. “We know the situations in which transmission happens and fortunately I don’t think we are facing the sort of lockdown that was necessary in order to cope in the very earliest part of this year. “But we do know that crowding together in poorly ventilated spaces, particularly if you are shouting over loud music, is absolutely perfect in terms of transmitting this very, very highly transmissible virus.” An error message on the government’s lateral flow test ordering website that appeared for several hours on Thursday said there were “no home delivery slots left”. For a time, there were also no PCR home tests available for either essential workers or the wider public, nor slots at walk-through and drive-in testing sites across England. The issue led Prof Martin Marshall, chair of the Royal College of GPs, to accuse the government of sending “mixed messages” about the reason for the shortage. He said: “The government advice is reasonably clear about what people need to do before they’re allowed to socialise, before they’re allowed to release after self-isolation, but there’s no point in having that advice if as GPs we know we’re no longer able to help patients to actually act on that advice, and that’s a big issue for us.” Prof Azeem Majeed, head of the department of primary care and public health at Imperial College London, also said there were not enough lateral flow tests to support the government’s policy for their “indiscriminate use”. He called for key workers and those identified as close contacts by Test and Trace to receive tests as a priority. Ministers are grappling to avoid panic that there are not enough tests putting further strain on supplies, in a repeat of the fuel crisis seen earlier this year. However, a significant surge in demand for tests was always likely given that the government told people to check they did not have the virus before seeing vulnerable relatives and socialising in big groups over the festive period. Covid cases have also risen to their highest levels due to the Omicron variant, meaning that significantly more close contacts may need to test to check whether they have been infected. Lucy Powell, Labour’s shadow culture secretary, said people “should be cautious about their new year” and that those socialising should “do it in a safe way”. She told Sky News that if everyone could get access to a test before going out, that would be “absolutely critical” to decreasing the risk of Covid transmission at new year gatherings. “I’ll be having a very boring night in this year on my own,” Powell said of her own plans. Those struggling to order a test online were told to “keep trying”. Jenny Harries, chief executive of the UK health security agency, admitted there were “some difficulties across the country both with pharmacies and with home testing requests”. But she added: “We do release – and are continuing to release – test slots for individuals, so they should just keep trying through the day.”Gyms are temples for the terminally vain to worship their own bodies and set fire to their cash. If you want to self-improve, read a book: and why, given the limited time slot granted to each of us to be alive, waste so much time in self-indulgent solitude? More sinister than that, gyms prey on insecurities fostered by a popular culture that worships unrealistic physical types: and as a gay man, I belong to a community in which body dysmorphia struts around the dancefloor with gleeful abandon. That used to be what I thought, anyway, and even when I surrendered to gym membership, I felt like a tone-deaf singer signing up for a choir. Everyone else seemed to know what they were doing, flexing with free weights in all sorts of unlikely poses while I sheepishly faffed around with the treadmill and aimlessly tried the occasional weight machine hoping that grunting a lot was some sort of sign of progress. (It’s reassuring to know this did not make me exceptional: research suggests more than half of us don’t know what to do in the gym.) This year, I changed my mind for a few reasons. First, I’d put on weight during lockdown – like most Britons, who on average added half a stone – in large part because, like one in three British adults, my drinking went up. Lockdown boredom, the stress of writing a book, and politics increasingly resembling a burning skip did not help. Second, I didn’t want to remember this unsettling era as a miserable life-devouring black hole: better to be able to say that at least it spurred a positive change. Third, I was still reeling from turning 37 and the realisation that, “Oh, so you really do just hurtle through life, and without making changes, your health faces a downhill slope.” Beginning more than two months before gyms reopened on 12 April, I drastically cut down on drink, combined running with high-intensity interval training – that’s where you do start/stop bursts of vigorous exercise – and ate a lot of Greek yoghurt. This approach is not for everyone, and, with hindsight, was something of an error: losing weight fast is liable to reduce body fat and muscle at the same time. So, not long after the gyms reopened, I decided to focus on building muscle for a few reasons, none of them to do with becoming the Arnold Schwarzenegger of the left. It’s good for health, and research even suggests it’s good for brain function. It reduces stress and improves emotional wellbeing, powering up endorphins on a search-and-destroy mission to take out bad thoughts. When I’m working out, I have to concentrate – not something that comes easily in my case – so I can forget all the people who’ve loudly decided I’m the socialist Antichrist on Twitter. There’s the satisfaction of learning and mastering new skills – particularly those you always believed you were simply hardwired to never acquire. Everyday physical tasks become easier, turning you into a more helpful resource. You lay a healthy foundation for later years to build on. It’s undeniably rewarding, too, to put significant effort into something and see results, even if that can be construed as vanity. Here is a far healthier alternative to the scams that are diets, too, the vast majority of which eventually end with the dieter putting on more weight than they started with. Indeed, I’ve been forced to learn far more about food and how the body works. Rather than seeing carbohydrates as inherently bad, to be labelled “strong avoid”, I’ve come to understand good carbs – such as oats, wholemeal bread, vegetables and whole fruits – as a source of fuel, so that protein can be used to build muscle rather than broken down inefficiently as energy. I now eat more than ever, just more mindfully about what the body deems more helpful. That matters because a balanced diet is much more important than flexing your guns in the local gym. Above all, it’s been educational. Rather than haphazardly using whichever machine looks least intimidating, I searched the internet to adopt a regimen that works different muscle groups on different days. Thanks to YouTube, a friend, and a brilliant personal trainer called Nathan once a week, I learned the proper form for each exercise – important if you want to avoid injury. And so, aged 37, I’m the healthiest I’ve ever been. So many caveats need to be applied here. This is easy to do if you have no kids, live next to a gym you can afford to join, and have a work life you can flexibly juggle. I haven’t changed my mind about the evils of body dysmorphia, and the importance of embracing the different ways our bodies manifest. And while the market size of the gym and fitness sector in the UK nearly doubled to more than £2bn in the 2010s, for many, membership doesn’t mean much other than feeling better for having done something. In the US, less than one-fifth of gym members use their paid-for facilities consistently. Like anything, the gym needs commitment, being comfortable with the trial and error that forms the basis of education, and building up new skills. But in my case, it’s worked, improved both my physical and mental health, and made life more satisfying: so here’s to changing my mind. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnistSir Cliff Richard has emerged as king of the 2022 music calendar sales chart, proving more popular than younger stars, it has been reported. The 81-year-old Young Ones singer came first in Calendar Club’s top 10 music category, the Sun reports. Since his first calendar was released in 1979, Sir Cliff has sold 1.5m of them to his enthusiastic fanbase. Famous for his hits Summer Holiday and Devil Woman, Sir Cliff had informed potential buyers that he would no longer be able to pose topless for calendars. However, his 2022 offering includes him posing shirtless for August in only swimming trunks while raising a glass to the camera from the comfort of a swimming pool. His calendar was shot mostly in New York, along with one picture taken in Barbados, where Sir Cliff owns a luxury villa. Sir Cliff’s spokesperson said: “The calendar was shot in NYC earlier in 2021, with one additional image taken in Barbados. “Sir Cliff loved the informality of the shoot and was able to direct the creative himself.” Along with Sir Cliff, calendars of another vintage star, Elvis Presley, also remained more sought-after than contemporary artists. The king of rock’n’roll took second spot in music calendar sales, according to Calendar Club. Harry Styles, 27, took third place despite the runaway success of his solo music and acting career in recent years after leaving One Direction in 2016. Kylie Minogue, 53, came fourth ahead of Little Mix in sixth and Taylor Swift in ninth. The stars were the only women in the top 10 for music calendar sales. Despite Sir Cliff’s success in music calendar sales, he no longer featured in the top 10 overall, in which football clubs dominated. Liverpool came ahead of Manchester United to win most overall sales. Natalie Taylor at Calendar Club said: “Cliff is still king of the calendars but he has actually slipped from seventh in the main chart, which includes all categories, to 11.” In the TV sales chart, the US sitcom Friends came top and the BBC comedy Mrs Brown’s Boys came second.A series of major storms have doused the parched landscapes of the American west with rain and record-breaking amounts of snow over the past two weeks, offering a hopeful reprieve after a devastatingly dry year. In California, which has been mired in drought, the snowpack has grown to 159% of what’s considered normal for this time of year, and the state got to more than half of its 1 April average, with some areas receiving more than 122in of snow over the last seven days. It’s not just in the mountains. Rainfall records have been broken across the state, and southern California is bracing for floods, flows, and more frigid temperatures through the end of the week. The strong storms also were able to pull swaths of the state out of the highest categories of drought. The latest report from the US Drought Monitor, released 30 December, shows that roughly 33% is now classified in “extreme” drought, down from nearly 80% categorized last week. Only a tiny fraction – less than 1% – is categorized as in “exceptional” drought. It’s good news – but the drought remains. Despite what officials and experts are calling a promising start to the water year (which is measured starting each October), the whole state remains in some form of drought, and there’s a long way to go before California overcomes deficits left by dry conditions. “This drought has been a very severe drought so the water deficits have been severe,” says Noah Diffenbaugh a climate scientist at Stanford University. He likens the storms to an overdue check received after months without pay. “If you don’t get paid for weeks or months on end and then you get a regular paycheck that doesn’t make up for everything you’ve lost out on.” Ernest Conant, Regional Director for the California-Great Basin at the US Bureau of Reclamation agrees. “The main takeaway is this is a great start but certainly the drought is not over,” he says. “The snowpack is our largest reservoir in the state,” he adds. “Last year, we started out with a pretty good snowpack in January and then nothing further happened. That’s a good illustration of what we don’t like to see – just one big storm and that was it.” Most reservoirs in the state remain lower than average. Shasta, California’s largest – and a cornerstone of the Central Valley Project, which supplies water to the agricultural center of the state – is still at just 29% of its total capacity, about half of where it historically is at this time of year. Three reservoirs, out of 12 total in the state, have surpassed their historical averages, including Folsom near Sacramento, where officials have had to discharge water due to flood risks. “They all have to preserve a certain amount of space for flood control and of course Folsom is critical for flood control protection for the greater Sacramento area,” Conant says. “But most of the state’s reservoirs still have a long way to go.” In order to get the water supply to a safer and more sustainable level, a strong snowpack will be essential. Roughly 90% of California’s rain and snowfall happens between October and April – with most of it falling during the winter months – which makes the season a crucial time for determining how the state will fare through the summer. The snowpack is especially important, providing what amounts to a water savings account that will trickle into streams, rivers and reservoirs through the warmer seasons. With the possibility of warm, dry weather lurking in the coming months, it’s still unclear whether the snowpack will stick around until spring. Higher temperatures and warm rainstorms can eat away at the snow, cutting into California’s most important water supply system. “In the west we have been experiencing decreasing reliability on the snowpack as a result of long term warming,” Diffenbaugh says. “We have experienced in recent years, very rapid spring snowmelt, even in years when there has been substantial snowpack.” Heat, which is attributable to human-caused climate change, not only has a negative impact on the snowpack, it has also played a big role in intensifying the drought conditions across the American west, baking moisture out of the air while it increases water needs among plants, animals, and people. It has also had a hand in expanding the risks from drought-related events, like fast-moving wildfires. “There’s been a lot of research on how global warming is affecting the hydroclimate of California and the west more broadly,” Diffenbaugh says. “Even going back to the 80s we can find research showing that warming is decreasing the reliability of the snowpack, increasing runoff and flood risk during the wet season in California, and increase moisture deficits and droughts in the warm season.”At least three members of a Saudi hit squad convicted by the kingdom of murdering Jamal Khashoggi are living and working “in seven-star accommodation” inside a government-run security compound in Riyadh, according to a source connected to senior members of Saudi intelligence. The assassins are believed to be staying in villas and buildings run by Saudi Arabia’s State Security agency – far from the walls of its infamous prisons. The source has spoken to two witnesses who claim to have seen the men. They said family members frequently visit the men, who are able to use a gym and workspaces on the site. All were sentenced before a Saudi court, in a trial broadly condemned as a sham – though only one of them, Salah al-Tubaigy – was named. Some received death sentences, which were later commuted to life terms. The sightings cast further doubt on Riyadh’s claims to be holding the killers to account and come as Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman’s most trusted adviser, Saud al-Qahtani has re-emerged in the royal court after three years in hiding. Qahtani was acquitted of any involvement, despite a western intelligence assessment that he had masterminded the assassination at Prince Mohammed’s behest. The source confirmed that Tubaigy, the forensic scientist who dismembered Khashoggi inside the Saudi consulate in Istanbul, was one of those seen inside the facility. Mustafa al-Madani, the body double dispatched by the hit squad team to create the ruse that Khashoggi left the consulate alive, has also been seen, as has Mansour Abahussein, who is accused of leading the operation. Both witnesses have visited the compound on several occasions in the past two years. They say the men were relaxed and appeared to be performing normal duties. Visitors, including caterers, gardeners, technicians and family members, frequently attend the compound, according to the intelligence source. The sightings of Tubaigy, Abahussein and Madani took place in late 2019 and towards the middle of 2020. The witnesses would not publicly disclose their names for fear of retribution from Prince Mohammed and by state security, which wields a heavy hand in Saudi Arabia. Abahussein and Madani are known to be intelligence officers employed by state security. Their boss, Abdul Aziz bin Mohammed Al-Howairini, has been seen with some of the accused, and is often spotted using the compound gym. In December 2019, after proceedings shrouded in secrecy, a Saudi court acquitted three defendants; sentenced five more to death; and a further five to prison terms. The five men sentenced to death were not organisers and were eventually legally pardoned in May 2020 by Khashoggi’s children in an arrangement brokered by Prince Mohammed. Little has been revealed, until now, about the whereabouts of the main players in the plot. But their apparent presence in a modern, well-equipped intelligence compound, where they enjoy freedom of movement, is starkly at odds with assurances by the Saudi royal court that the perpetrators faced tough punishment. The revelations come as mystery continues to surround the identity of a man arrested by French police this month, who was initially identified as a member of a secondary team of the Khashoggi assassins. Khaled Aedh al-Otaibi was arrested at Charles de Gaulle airport on 7 December on the basis of a warrant issued by Turkey. Police later said the arrest had been a case of mistaken identity. However, Turkish officials are understood to believe that France may have captured the right man and freed him for political reasons. A well-placed source confirmed to the Guardian that Turkish officials had flagged their concerns, claiming the data they provided to Interpol matched what French police had initially sent to them. Prince Mohammed is known to be anxious to prevent further details of the assassination being made public – a scenario that would have been likely if one of the killers had been extradited to Turkey and tried in open court. President Emmanuel Macron of France was received by Prince Mohammed in Jeddah earlier this month in the first visit by a western leader to Saudi Arabia since the scandal erupted in October 2018. As a quid pro quo, Macron had insisted that the de facto Saudi leader receive a call from the Lebanese prime minister, Najib Mikati, potentially opening a path for Riyadh to send aid to the bankrupt country. In the days that followed France releasing the man they arrested, the language used by Saudi and Gulf officials towards Lebanon has softened considerably.Ghislaine Maxwell’s crimes were even worse than those of the sexual predator for whom she trafficked girls because she used her ability to gain the girls’ confidence to drag them into a world of abuse, an alleged victim has said. Virginia Giuffre, who claims she was trafficked by Maxwell’s boyfriend Jeffrey Epstein, but who did not give testimony in the case that concluded on Wednesday, said Maxwell and Epstein had taken a part of her childhood that she could never get back. “I have been dreaming of this day for the last 10 years, not knowing that it was going to come,” she told New York magazine’s the Cut. “It’s a bittersweet emotion because I have been fighting for so long.” Maxwell was convicted on sex trafficking charges that carry a total prison sentence of as long as 65 years. Epstein, the convicted child sexual abuser on whose behalf she acted, killed himself in prison in 2019 while awaiting trial on allegations of sexual offences against hundreds of girls. Giuffre said part of the pattern of the abuse perpetrated by Epstein and Maxwell was the mix of charm and power they could wield. Epstein had powerful friends – such as Prince Andrew, whom she also accuses of sexual abuse – and could convince girls he “owned” the local police department, she said. But Maxwell was capable of exploiting their weaknesses to draw them in. She said Maxwell gained her confidence by promising to help her achieve her dream of becoming a massage therapist if she came to work for Epstein. Instead, she said, it was the start of her ordeal at his hands. She told the Cut that Maxwell used her “womanly abilities to make me feel comfortable”, adding: “The deceit hurts even more because I fell naively into her trap. I mean, she is poised. She looks sophisticated. She didn’t raise any hairs on the back of my head.” Giuffre said Maxwell had seen her reading a book about massage therapy and, armed with that knowledge, was able to gain her confidence. “The thing about predators is they seek the vulnerable, find out what they want, and promise them a dream. That’s how they work. Cages and chains come in all different shapes and sizes. I wasn’t tied to a radiator or anything, like you’ve seen in movies. My shackles were Epstein and Ghislaine’s wealth and the powerful people they knew.” She called Maxwell the “devil’s righthand man”, adding: “She’s definitely worse than Epstein. She used that charm, that wit, that smile to come off as somebody you want to trust … She’s worse to me, more evil than Epstein. What Ghislaine did to so many of us, it’s unforgivable.” Wednesday’s guilty verdicts showed that “no matter how rich or how connected you are, you can still be held accountable”, she said. A lawyer representing 20 people who have accused Epstein and Maxwell said the verdicts were a warning to sexual predators that their crimes would be punished. “This does send a message to other sex predators and those who would conspire to sex-traffic underage girls to them that this will be taken very seriously, charges may be filed against you, you may be prosecuted and you may end up getting sentenced to prison for the rest of your life, as may be the case with Miss Maxwell,” Gloria Allred told BBC Breakfast on Thursday. “Beware and do not conspire with or become a sexual predator yourself, because underage girls are very vulnerable. They are easy to take advantage of and it is taken very seriously when they are preyed upon by adults who do know better.” The Duke of York, the Queen’s second son, is facing a civil lawsuit brought by Giuffre in the US over claims – which he vehemently denies – that he had sex with her when she had been sexually trafficked by Epstein as a 17-year-old. Allred said it was now a matter of having to “wait and see” whether the case gets to trial. Lisa Bloom, a US lawyer who also represents several of Epstein’s survivors, said Andrew should be “quaking in his boots” after Wednesday’s verdicts. She told Mail Online: “Because this shows that a jury is willing to come back with a guilty verdict even if the accusers are not perfect, as no human being is. Even if there were grounds for cross-examination, which there were, they looked to the essence of the story and they found that Ghislaine Maxwell was guilty of sex trafficking.”The Ashes series continues to grapple with Covid-19 after match referee David Boon tested positive for the virus and Australia and England were placed on separate flights to Sydney due to the growing outbreak among the tourists. The news on Thursday that Chris Silverwood, England’s head coach, is expected to miss the fourth Test at the SCG that starts on 5 January after a family member tested positive – the seventh case among support staff and families since Boxing Day – was followed by news that Boon would also have to stay back in Melbourne for 10 days of isolation. Cricket Australia (CA) confirmed Boon is fully vaccinated, including a booster, and asymptomatic, so will return for the fifth Test in Hobart, with Steve Bernard, on the ICC referees list and based in New South Wales, set to deputise. However, the governing body is clearly scrambling to keep the series going amid England’s outbreak. The tourists awaited results from a fourth round of testing on Thursday before their flight to Sydney on New Year’s Eve – all the tests were negative – and a separate charter for Australia’s touring party had been organised at short notice. Both teams are set to stay at the same hotel in Sydney but their journey has been split to reduce contact time. Graham Thorpe, the assistant coach, is leading the England squad in an interim capacity provided he clears the latest PCR tests. Silverwood intends to serve 10 days of isolation to ensure his family’s wellbeing in Melbourne, but could in theory travel to Sydney after seven and thus in time for day two of the fourth Test. “It’s not ideal but it’s been that sort of tour,” said Jimmy Anderson, responding to Silverwood’s news. “Something has been happening all the time. Lots of stuff away from the cricket which can cause distractions, so it’s something we have to deal with.” England’s players have had meetings about learning to cope with Covid outbreaks on tour, something which helped the third Test continue to its conclusion after the camp’s first four cases came to light on the second morning of the match. By contrast, Thursday night’s fixture between Perth Scorchers and Melbourne Stars in Melbourne became the first Big Bash League match to be postponed since the start of the pandemic after the emergence of one positive case in the Stars’ backroom staff. CA told the Guardian the two situations differed due to the number of players that the Stars’ coach had close contact with before the positive result and the delay for PCR test results. England’s players and coaches mixed over the Christmas period and on day one at the MCG but only lateral flow results were required to take the field.It was supposed to be a “super year for nature”: 2020 was going to be “a major opportunity to bring nature back from the brink”. But then the coronavirus pandemic set in and long-held plans to tackle the environmental crisis, kickstarted at Davos in January, where the financial elite underscored the risks of global heating and biodiversity loss to human civilisation, never happened. The biggest biodiversity summit in a decade, Cop15 in Kunming, China, where world leaders were expected to strike a deal to halt and reverse the destruction of ecosystems by reaching a Paris-style agreement for nature was postponed until 2021. The Cop26 climate summit was also postponed for a year. As we enter 2022, there has still not been a super year for nature. Substantive negotiations for the biodiversity Cop15 meeting in China, the little sister to the climate convention, are likely to be delayed a fourth time as a result of the Omicron variant. Preparatory talks planned for January 2022 in Geneva have been pushed back – again – until March in a process that is feeling increasingly cursed, despite the best efforts of organisers. “We’ll get it done. Come hell, high water … or Covid. When and how, I don’t know,” says Basile van Havre, co-chair of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) working group responsible for crafting the Cop15 agreement. The 21-point draft includes targets on eliminating plastic pollution, reducing pesticide use by two-thirds and halving the rate of invasive species introductions, aimed at cutting the rate of extinctions and protecting life-sustaining ecosystems. Amid the delays, warnings about the health of the planet have not gone away. Scientists say the sixth mass extinction of life on Earth is under way and accelerating, driven by human behaviour. A million plant and animal species could disappear, according to a UN report complied by leading researchers, which also found the biomass of wild mammals has fallen by 82% and natural ecosystems have lost about half their area. During the pandemic, the destruction of the world’s forests increased sharply. Dangerous levels of greenhouse gases continue to accumulate in Earth’s atmosphere as humans consume beyond planetary boundaries. And yet, the world’s governments have missed every single target they have set for themselves on averting the destruction of the natural world. “It’s like a debt that you’re not paying back. You keep accumulating the interest and that’s going to have to be repaid at some point,” van Havre says. “The later you wait, the more expensive it will be.” CBD negotiators last met in person in February 2020 in Rome, as the pandemic took hold. In May 2021, representatives from the 196 parties to the agreement embarked on a gruelling schedule of online talks to get back on track, meeting six days a week for three hours until mid-June. Negotiators for Pacific island states were among those who attended the video calls in the early hours due to timings of the meeting. From there, hope rose that the process could finally be completed. A ceremonial opening of Cop15 in Kunming, split in two because of the delays, took place in October, in which China took the presidency, the first time Beijing has hosted a major UN environmental conference. A group of philanthropists, including Amazon founder Jeff Bezos, donated $5bn to protect 30% of the planet by the end of the decade. There was an emphasis on nature and biodiversity at Cop26 with side deals on deforestation and a mention for nature in the Glasgow pact. Then, yet again, the pandemic had other plans. “Covid is a curse, of course. Can you imagine if Omicron happened a month earlier and what would have happened with Glasgow. But, as always seems to be the case, the CBD was the unlucky one,” says Li Shuo, a policy adviser for Greenpeace East Asia, who says he will be watching Covid protocols closely at the Beijing Winter Olympics to assess the likely restrictions on delegates at Kunming part two. While Cop15 in person may remain in doubt, plans for the first IUCN Africa Protected Areas Congress (APAC), to be held in Kigali, Rwanda, in March 2022 are for now still on track. The summit promises to be “the first ever continent-wide gathering of African leaders, citizens, and interest groups to discuss the role of protected areas in conserving nature”. If 2022 is to finally be a super year for nature, experts say three main things need to happen. First, countries must strike an agreement at Cop15 – whenever it happens – that is reflective of the crisis in the natural world and, most importantly, they must stick to it. Second, nature needs an elegant north star akin to the 1.5C and 2C climate targets that everyone can pursue, from businesses and governments to NGOs and citizens. Finally, 2022 must be the year the world adopts a single strategy to tackle the three environmental conventions agreed nearly 30 years ago at the Earth summit in Rio de Janeiro. Scientists are clear that the climate crisis, destruction of nature, and desertification cannot be tackled in isolation, and countries should follow the example of Uruguay, which is developing a combined approach. Resolving divisions between developed and developing countries from Cop26 will be key if there is to be a Paris-style agreement for nature, says van Havre, who emphasises the role of civil society in the negotiations and the “trust or lack thereof around the $100bn of climate funding from developed countries … There are consequences. “NGOs were important for lifting ambition at Cop26 in Glasgow. That is a clear signal of what we will need in Kunming. We will need them to be able to engage with delegates on site, not in a different place,” he adds. Despite support from dozens of nations to protect 30% of land and sea by 2030, countries including South Africa are arguing for a lower number to be included in the final Kunming agreement. Ambition on targets relating to plastics pollution, pesticide use and harmful subsidies will also be weighed against financial commitments, expert commentators say. In terms of a rhetorical north star for nature, many in the biodiversity community are continuing to search for a coherent term. “Nature positive”, a phrase increasingly used by businesses and governments, lacks a formal definition and will include more complicated metrics than its climate equivalents. Leading fossil fuel companies, such as BP and TotalEnergies, have started to develop strategies for their projects to have a positive impact on biodiversity. “I think we need to recognise that, unlike climate change, where the 1.5C is a target, biodiversity is more complex,” says Elizabeth Maruma Mrema, the UN’s biodiversity head. “A number of factors will make something nature positive or not: land, the sea, climate change, chemicals, pollution, invasive species. All that increases the complexity. It will be difficult to have the equivalent to 1.5C.” But Eva Zabey, director of Business for Nature, says the perfect cannot be the enemy of the good when it comes to developing a system businesses and civil society can follow for nature. “In my view, nature positive is the equivalent of net zero, which is not in the Paris agreement text but is a way of making it more accessible,” says Zabey. “We shouldn’t be waiting for a framework to start the action. There are some ‘no regret’ actions that companies should take now. Make sure your supply chain is deforestation free, for example. There’s no reason not to start innovating new products and to invest in protecting and restoring ecosystems.” Officials have started to hint at the need for another Earth summit to respond to the challenges of the 21st century. Some developing countries are seeking to separate issues of biodiversity and climate at UN negotiations in the hope of dual streams of funding. But the UK and France have started to allocate climate funding to biodiversity, indicating how intertwined the issues are. Maintaining coherence between climate, biodiversity and desertification treaties will be key, says Mrema. “If these three conventions were to be negotiated today, probably there would just be one treaty. At the time, the world was looking at issues in silos. Time and again, scientists have reminded us that that doesn’t work. Taking care of soil will look after biodiversity and help with the climate, for example. Likewise, we cannot dissect when it comes to implementation,” she says. Do we need a new Earth summit? “That could be an important question to ask ourselves,” says Mrema. In terms of whether these issues will be resolved at Kunming part 2 next year, Li Shuo says the Chinese presidency may need to find its own Alok Sharma (Cop26 president) or Archie Young (lead climate negotiator for the UK) to have any hope of making it a super year for nature. He says: “How do they translate a political-level mandate into the technical nitty gritty? It is a big question. Are we transitioning into a time period when they do that? Or are we going to see that during the Cop?” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresThe giant warehouse towers over the Belarus countryside, less than a mile from the Polish border. In this 10,000 sq metre space patrolled by dozens of armed soldiers, 1,000 asylum seekers are crammed among countless industrial shelving units, held up on their way to Europe in the midst of a frigid winter. “We’re trapped in this building,” says Alima Skandar, 40. “We don’t want to go back to Iraq and we can’t cross the border. Please, help us.” What was a customs centre in the village of Bruzgi has been turned into a dormitory for asylum seekers. The EU has accused Belarus’s leader, Alexander Lukashenko, of deliberately provoking a new refugee crisis by organising the movement of people from the Middle East to Minsk and promising them a safe passage to Europe. Lukashenko’s critics say the exploitation of these people is a callous reprisal for sanctions that Brussels has imposed on his regime. Last autumn Skandar, her husband and their four children arrived in Belarus on a flight from Iraqi Kurdistan and then camped for weeks surrounded by barbed wire that Poland had erected along its border. Early in November, Belarusian authorities escorted thousands of asylum seekers to the Polish frontier in an escalation of the crisis. Witnesses told the Guardian how Belarusian troops gathered groups of up to 50 people and cut the barbed wire with shears to allow them to cross. Hundreds managed to evade the Polish police by hiding in the forests. Others were caught and pushed back violently to Belarus by Poland’s border guards. On 6 November, during a harrowing attempt to cross the frontier, Skandar was separated from three of her children, whose ages range from 13 to 20. “When the Belarusian soldiers cut the barbed wire, hundreds of us moved toward the border,” Skandar says. “Three of my children were in front and ran for the forests across the border. My husband, our youngest child and myself were left behind. The Polish police seized us and sent us back to Belarus. “I haven’t seen my children since that day,” she adds, beginning to cry. “I hope they’re OK.” As the days passed, the crisis grew more concerning, with Polish police using teargas and water cannon against people attempting to cross, and the EU adding new sanctions against Belarus. As temperatures plummeted, Belarusian authorities began to move the asylum seekers to the warehouse in Burzgi. Inside, on shelving units once used for merchandise, people have built makeshift cots using wooden planks and cardboard boxes. There are dozens of children and elderly people, many in need of medical help. Outside, other people sit around a wood-fuelled structure used to heat food and water. The water is for the showers, which are located out in the snowy cold. Temperatures in Bruzgi can reach as low as minus 12C. The majority of people in the camp come from Iraq’s autonomous Kurdish region, where on 3 December an attack by Islamic State militants killed three civilians and 10 Kurdish soldiers. Occasionally, groups of people, mainly in their 20s, attempt to cross the border in the cold. Some make it, others don’t. At least 19 people have died since the beginning of the border standoff. Most of them froze to death. Some of their bodies were sent back to their home countries from Minsk alongside dozens of people forcibly repatriated by Belarusian authorities or who decided to return voluntarily. Ebrahim Naman, 20, watches his peers plan their next attempt to cross the frontier. He hopes for a different solution, as for the past two years, since an accident in his home country, Naman has been in a wheelchair. He has undergone several surgeries on his back, and doctors have told him that new rehabilitation techniques in Europe could help him to walk again. For weeks, Naman has camped with his family in front of the barbed wire, hoping to be allowed in. Unable to make his way through the forest in his wheelchair, six people carried him along on a bedsheet. “My son must make it to Germany,” says his father. “He needs medicines every day, and there are none here. I hope that Europe does something to help people like him who need urgent medical attention.” A rumour have been circulating in the warehouse for weeks that Germany will take in these people before year’s end. It has not been corroborated. A 32-year-old woman from Syria says she would rather “die on the spot from a bullet or the cold” than go back. She arrived in Belarus on 28 October on a direct flight from Damascus with her mother and husband. Her mother had a kidney transplant and is in need of medical assistance. “She was a nurse in a state hospital in Idlib where, among other things, she looked after the injured in the army,” her daughter says. “As a result, the opposition started to perceive her as a traitor and supporter of the regime and our properties were confiscated.” The woman says her brother, who lives in Germany, is trying to get them out of here through an asylum organisation, and booked an appointment at the embassy to submit applications, but Belarusian authorities told them that if they left the camp they would not be allowed to return. On 26 November, during a visit to Bruzgi, Lukashenko promised that Belarus would never play politics with refugees’ lives. “Whoever wants to move westward, it is also your right,” Lukashenko said in a speech that was translated in Arabic. “We are not going to keep you behind barbed wire or beat you.” The warehouse occupants say that generally Belarusian soldiers are not mistreating them – except for one man, a tall soldier in a black uniform, who is said to be one of the heads of the troops at the camp. “He is the most evil,” a man from Iraq says. “We often see him beating children.” The border checkpoint of Kuźnica is about 500 metres from the warehouse. There is little evidence now of the people who camped there for months, just a pile of rags and bottles. On the Polish side, an EU symbol is visible but out of reach.Southern has cancelled trains to and from London Victoria for two weeks as a result of pandemic-related staff shortages. Disruption to rail schedules around the country has been worsening over the Christmas period. On the extensive network run by CrossCountry, industrial action is affecting services. Southern has now announced that none of its trains will run to or from London Victoria until 10 January owing to “coronavirus isolation and sickness”. London Victoria is one of the UK’s busiest stations, and is normally connected by Southern to locations such as Brighton, Eastbourne and Portsmouth. Meanwhile, CrossCountry has said a strike by members of the Rail, Maritime and Transport (RMT) union means it will run “a very limited timetable” on New Year’s Eve. It will not operate any trains between Aberdeen and Edinburgh; Glasgow Central and Edinburgh; Derby and Nottingham; Peterborough and Stansted; Cheltenham Spa and Cardiff Central; Newton Abbot and Paignton; and Plymouth and Penzance. A heavily reduced service will be in place between Edinburgh and Plymouth; Manchester Piccadilly and Bournemouth; and Birmingham New Street and Peterborough. The strike involves train managers and senior conductors, in a dispute over the role of guards. Many other operators in addition to Southern have cancelled trains owing to the pandemic. They include Avanti West Coast, CrossCountry, Greater Anglia, London North Eastern Railway, Northern, ScotRail, TransPennine Express and Transport for Wales. The suspension of Southern’s London Victoria services means it will not serve Clapham Junction, Wandsworth Common or Battersea Park. Planned resignalling work at London Victoria had already resulted in most Southern trains due to serve the station between 27 December and 3 January being diverted to run to and from London Bridge. This was timed to coincide with the festive period when demand for travel is lower. RMT members employed by Gate Gourmet are involved in a strike at Edinburgh Waverley on New Year’s Eve as part of a long-running dispute over allegations of bullying. The RMT general secretary, Mick Lynch, said: “The disruption to services from the New Year’s Eve strike action is wholly down to these greedy private companies on our railways seeking to squeeze out every penny they can by hammering down on safety, jobs and workplace dignity. We are ready for a new year of campaigning and action on all fronts.” • This article was amended on 31 December 2021 to make clear that a reference to RMT strike action applies to CrossCountry trains, rather than Southern’s services.What’s in a name? Quite a lot in the case of the musical Kipps, which aired on Sky Arts on Wednesday night. The title comes from the 1905 HG Wells novel, but the show itself is a radical rewrite of an earlier musical version of the story, Half a Sixpence, which starred Tommy Steele on stage and film in the 1960s. Julian Fellowes wrote the fresh book, which he titled Half a Sixpence, in 2016, while George Stiles and Anthony Drewe added seven new numbers to the original David Heneker score. What we saw on screen was a filmed performance at London’s Noël Coward theatre in 2017. So what’s the difference between the original Half a Sixpence and Kipps? I would say that the former – especially in the 1967 film version where Julia Foster co-starred with Steele – was essentially a romantic tale about how Artie Kipps finally finds true love with his childhood sweetheart, Ann. Kipps is closer to Wells’s original in that it is a comic parable about the English class system. I even wonder whether the novel influenced Shaw’s Pygmalion, which dates from 1912, in that it shows how in a rigidly stratified society accent determines status. Given Fellowes’s creation of Downton Abbey, what is most surprising about Kipps is its portrayal of the English upper class as brutally snobbish predators. Artie himself is a Kentish draper who comes into a fortune and finds himself, despite his avowals to Ann, falling for the do-gooding Helen Walsingham. But it is made abundantly clear that Helen is being used as bait by her upper-crust family to hook the wealthy Kipps. Two artfully juxtaposed numbers demonstrate how money can be used for ill or good. In one, Ann’s criminal brother tempts Kipps with capital gains. In another, the raffishly thespian Chitterlow hymns “the joy of the theatre” and asks Artie to invest in his new play. But I’ve long argued that any musical needs a moment of ecstasy where song, dance and story combine to spirit-lifting effect. In Half a Sixpence, it comes in the number Flash, Bang, Wallop, which is a pub knees-up with its roots in English music-hall. In Kipps, it comes in a new song, Pick Out a Simple Tune, where Artie galvanises a starchy musical evening by playing on his banjo: “Just keep plucking with your plectrum / make new friends across the spectrum,” he jovially sings as Folkestone’s finest rattle spoons, whirl, twirl and even swing from the chandeliers. Fun as the musical is, it already shows its age: conspicuously, there is no diversity in the casting. But Kipps confirms Wells’s point that gusto and goodness can overcome the whaleboned snobbery of the class system and the show boasts an invaluable asset in Charlie Stemp, who went on to play the chimney sweep in the stage version of Mary Poppins. Tommy Steele was likable in Half a Sixpence, but there is something a touch calculated about his charm. Stemp radiates kindly innocence and reminds us that Wells subtitled his quietly subversive novel “the story of a simple soul”. Kipps is repeated on Sky Arts at 3pm on 1 January.The world-famous Uffizi gallery in Florence displays an unrivalled collection of works by Renaissance greats including Michelangelo, Leonardo and Raphael. However, its director believes that is not enough, and says it is now crucial for museums to play a role in highlighting the issues of today and confront the “toxic social structures” of the past rather than simply glorifying its artists. Eike Schmidt, the director of Uffizi Galleries since 2015, has a reputation for modernisation and in a dramatic shift from the norm, he hosted an exhibition before Christmas aimed at reflecting the violence women have suffered at the hands of male perpetrators – beginning with one of the greatest sculptors of the 17th century, Gian Lorenzo Bernini. Alongside contemporary portraits by Ilaria Sagaria featuring female victims of acid attacks stood Bernini’s Bust of Costanza Bonarelli, a marble portrait of his lover that the artist sculpted months before he commissioned his servant to slash her face in a fit of jealousy over her relationship with another man. “This is a world-famous bust but hardly anyone beyond the world of specialists knows her story,” said Schmidt. “The bust shows her in a very personal situation, her hair is undone and she’s wearing a semi-transparent robe with buttons open. So clearly Bernini made this when they were lovers. But not even a year later, he became jealous because she was with another man and so had her cheek slashed. This is exactly what happens today to so many women by jealous ex-partners.” Bernini got off with a token fine while Costanza was banished to a monastery. “I really wanted to make this connection between a work of art that is really naively admired and contributes to the fame of Bernini [and] the very problematic side of Bernini that was socially accepted at the time,” he said. “I think it’s absolutely our mission to tackle these social issues where we can, otherwise what is our sense?” Schmidt has been widely credited with making the Uffizi’s art more accessible to all social classes, improving the visitor experience, cracking down on ticket touts and celebrating female artists. It has the largest collection in the world of works by female painters who were active before the 19th century, but before Schmidt arrived the works were not given much exposure. He organised a series of exhibitions dedicated to historical female artists including Lavinia Fontana, the first professional female painter in Italy, and their contemporary counterparts. “Many people don’t even know that there were women painters before the 19th century,” he said. “But their marginalisation was really a phenomenon of the 19th and 20th centuries, they were not marginalised in their own time.” He has been unafraid to use controversial tactics, such as working with one of Italy’s top fashion influencers, Chiara Ferragni, to attract a younger audience. Ferragni was in the museum in 2020 for a shoot with Vogue Hong Kong before an exhibition there, and posed for a photo in front of Sandro Botticelli’s The Birth of Venus before posting it on Instagram and recommending her followers visit the museum. “That was a little bit provocative and we knew it would be,” said Schmidt. “We had about 1,000 complaints but 8,000 additional followers, so in the end it was a big win for us.” Schmidt was the target of controversy when he was appointed as the Uffizi’s first non-Italian director. Along with foreign directors of some other cultural sites, his position became precarious during the short-lived government between the Five Star Movement and far-right League, which had tried to undo museum changes made by the previous government. But after the coalition collapsed in August 2019, Schmidt renounced an offer to take the helm at Vienna’s Kunsthistorisches Museum and his mandate was extended. Six months later, Schmidt was faced with the long closures brought on by the coronavirus pandemic, delivering a significant hit on takings. But he used the period to come up with a strategy for tackling pre-pandemic problems, such as overcrowding, before visitors returned, while at the same time making the museum’s trove of treasures accessible to people living beyond Florence. This year, he started sharing some of the Uffizi’s works with museums in other areas of Tuscany, as part of the “Uffizi diffusi”, or “Diffused Uffizi”, project. “Even if we had the space to build another wing, or three, we still wouldn’t be able to show all the treasures we have,” he said. “So it made sense to have works displayed close to where people live. The idea was to spread tourism with the entire region of Tuscany rather than just having everyone in Florence.” And in a deal worth more than €2m (£1.7m) signed in November, the Uffizi will lend some of its masterpieces to the Bund One Art Museum in Shanghai for a series of exhibitions, beginning with Botticelli in spring 2022. “We have to consider that the Chinese haven’t been able to travel to Europe for almost two years,” Schmidt said. “There is a value in sharing works from our culture with people on the other side of the globe. But before we even think about what we’re sharing we have to see what condition the works are in, and if they’re not fit to travel, they won’t travel.”If Boris Johnson wants to know why the Conservative party struggles to win the support of young voters in London he could start by looking at the annual report on the housing market from the Nationwide. There is no single reason for the government’s unpopularity among people in their 20s and 30s in the capital, but housing is clearly a factor, and the current state of the market shows why. Without a top salary or generous parents, homeownership is all but impossible. Nationwide measures affordability by using regional earnings and house price data to show where in the income distribution a potential purchaser would sit if they were aiming for a typical first-time buyer property, assuming a 20% deposit and borrowing four times their annual earnings. In Scotland and northern England, the typical buyer would be in the 30th income percentile, whereas in the south-east they would be in the 80th percentile. In London they would be above the 90th percentile. That means someone on a modest salary in Glasgow can still aspire to buy their own home, whereas for all but the top 10% of earners in London, renting is the only real option. As house prices have increased faster than incomes for the past decade, affordability has become more of an issue. Ten years ago, the average first-time buyer in the south-east was in the 60th income percentile. This trend goes some way to answering the big question for the property market in the year ahead: when will the pandemic boom that has seen prices rise by 16% since early 2020 come to an end? A number of factors mean last year’s 10% increase in prices is unlikely to be repeated. Mortgage rates are rising and some purchases were brought forward into 2021 to take advantage of the government’s stamp duty holiday. But, as the Nationwide notes, affordability will be a factor. There comes a point where houses are simply too expensive for first-time buyers, even if they can access the bank of Mum and Dad. Not everybody wants to own a home, of course, but the Conservatives have always liked to be seen as the party that sticks up for those who do. That’s a tough case to make when a 20% deposit on a typical first-time-buyer home in London is now £88,000 – almost double the average annual gross income in the capital.The United States set a new record for daily infections of Covid-19 after reporting almost half a million positive cases as the surge of the Omicron variant spreads across the country. On Wednesday there were 488,000 cases of the virus in the US, according to a New York Times database. However, even that figure is likely a serious undercount of the true numbers of positive cases, due to the rising popularity of home tests and people who are infected but asymptomatic. The seven-day rolling average of cases in America is also soaring to a new high of more than 265,000 per day on average, a surge driven largely by the highly contagious Omicron variant. “It’s unlike anything we’ve ever seen, even at the peak of the prior surges of Covid,” Dr James Phillips, chief of disaster medicine at George Washington University Hospital, told CNN. New cases per day have more than doubled over the past two weeks, eclipsing the old mark of 250,000, set in mid-January during the height of the last winter peak of the pandemic, according to data kept by Johns Hopkins University. Record case counts are being logged in states and cities across the US, including New Jersey, New York and Chicago. In Georgia, 200 national guard troops are helping staff testing sites and hospitals and in Arizona and New Mexico, federal medical personnel have deployed to bolster the local health services. US health experts urged Americans to prepare for severe disruptions in coming weeks as the surge threatened hospitals, schools and other sectors impacting their daily lives. “We are going to see the number of cases in this country rise so dramatically, we are going to have a hard time keeping everyday life operating,” said Dr Michael Osterholm, an infectious disease expert at the University of Minnesota, to MSNBC. “The next month is going to be a viral blizzard,” he said. “All of society is going to be pressured by this.” The fast-spreading mutant version of the virus has cast a pall over Christmas and the new year, forcing communities to scale back or call off their festivities just weeks after it seemed as if Americans were about to enjoy an almost normal holiday season. The number of Americans now in the hospital with Covid-19 is running at around 60,000, or about half the figure seen in January, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported. While hospitalizations sometimes lag behind cases, the hospital figures may reflect both the protection conferred by the vaccine and the possibility that Omicron is not making people as sick as previous versions. Covid-19 deaths in the US have climbed over the past two weeks from an average of 1,200 per day to around 1,500. Public health experts will be closely watching the numbers in the coming week for indications of the vaccines’ effectiveness in preventing serious illness, keeping people out of the hospital and relieving strain on exhausted healthcare workers, said Bob Bednarczyk, a professor of global health and epidemiology at Emory University. CDC data already suggests that unvaccinated people are hospitalized at much higher rates than those who have been inoculated, even if the effectiveness of the shots decreases over time, he said. “If we’re able to weather this surge with hopefully minimal disruptions to the overall healthcare system, that is a place where vaccines are really showing their worth,” Bednarczyk said. It’s highly unlikely that hospitalization numbers will ever rise to their previous peak, said Amesh Adalja, senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security at the Bloomberg School Public Health. Vaccines and treatments developed since last year have made it easier to curb the spread of the virus and minimize serious effects among people with breakthrough infections. “Its going to take some time for people to get attuned to the fact that cases don’t matter the same way they did in the past,” Adalja said. “We have a lot of defense against it.“ But even with fewer people hospitalized compared with past surges, the virus can wreak havoc on hospitals and healthcare workers, he added. “In a way, those hospitalizations are worse because they’re all preventable,” he said. The World Health Organisation reported that new Covid-19 cases worldwide increased 11% last week from the week before, with nearly 4.99m recorded December 20-26. But the UN health agency also noted a decline in cases in South Africa, where Omicron was first detected just over a month ago. Agencies contributed to this reportElden Ring (Xbox One/Series S/Series X, PlayStation 4/5, PC) The long-awaited fantasy epic from Dark Souls’ creators FromSoftware, with narrative input from George RR Martin. It combines a huge, detailed open world, inhabited by everything from dragons and wolves to trolls and patrolling soldiers, with the developer’s signature heart-in-mouth, swords-and-sorcery combat. An intriguing world to discover alone, or with other players. Stray (PlayStation 4/5, PC) A game about being a cat in a cyberpunk city, using your feline agility and talent for blending into the background to spy on the robots who live there, and fit into the hidden urban spaces that aren’t ordinarily seen. In development for years, this mysterious game has only become more intriguing with each delay. Ghostwire: Tokyo (PlayStation 5, PC) Imagine that something mysterious has happened in Japan’s capital, leaving it almost entirely devoid of people and populated instead by ghosts. And then you have to fight the ghosts, with your bare hands. That’s Ghostwire: Tokyo, a game whose visual effects alone make it worthy of notice. God of War Ragnarök (PlayStation 4/5) Put-upon former Greek God-botherer Kratos, now a grumpy widower, continues his journey through Norse mythology with his adolescent son in this visually stunning and viscerally violent action game. Having made some troubling discoveries and angered a whole bunch of Norse gods in their previous adventure, they must tread carefully through these fabled realms. Oxenfree 2: Lost Signals (PC, Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4/5) The star feature of 2016’s spooky, character-driven thriller Oxenfree was its conversation. Its characters carry on natural-feeling dialogue throughout, as you investigate the goings-on at a mysterious island where local teens have long gathered to party. Not much is known about this sequel, but the developer’s talent for atmosphere makes it one to watch. Splatoon 3 (Nintendo Switch) This wacky series of paint-splattering kid-friendly shooters is the poster child of the new school of Nintendo game design, where every idea gets a fair shot. Frenetic, colourful and unassailably stylish, play in a team vying to cover funky urban maps in colourful ink. The squid game that everybody should be talking about. Horizon Forbidden West (PlayStation 4/5) Flame-haired robot dinosaur slayer Aloy returns in this PlayStation 5 flagship game, which has us exploring the far reaches of a North American continent that has long since been returned to nature – apart from all the killer machines. Expect to be stunned by how realistic this world looks, and touched by the stories to be found within it. Gran Turismo 7 (PlayStation 4/5) The ultimate in realistic racing games, made by the world’s most obsessive motor sports enthusiasts at Polyphony Digital in Japan. Drive around fastidiously detailed tracks in all kinds of changing weather, in pristine, beautiful cars that would be entirely out of reach in real life. Petrolheads are likely to spend as much time gawping at the vehicles as driving them. Starfield (Xbox Series X/S, PC) A sci-fi role-playing epic from Bethesda, makers of the famously absorbing Elder Scrolls series of fantasy games. Create a space explorer in your own image, and spend hundreds of hours jetting about nearby star systems. We’ve not had much in the way of landmark sci-fi games since the Mass Effect series, so hopes are high for this. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild 2 (Nintendo Switch) It still doesn’t have an official title, but Nintendo’s sequel to its most ambitious Zelda game is looming on the horizon. If it offers anything like the scope and variety of its predecessor, where every shrine, forest or distant encampment of monsters promised something interesting to discover, it will be a game that you could spend the whole year playing.Kylian Mbappé Paris Saint-Germain He may have ruled out a move in January but there remains a slim chance that the France forward could join Real Madrid this month after their failed attempts to sign him in the summer. Mbappé is entering the final six months of his contract with Paris Saint-Germain and can therefore sign a pre-contract agreement with the Spanish giants, although talks are said to be on hold until after the two clubs meet in the second leg of their last-16 Champions League on 9 March. Whether Madrid will attempt to force the issue before then remains to be seen. Anthony Martial Manchester United Ralf Rangnick has made no secret of the forward’s desire to leave Old Trafford six years after he became the most expensive teenager in history but his destination remains unclear. A loan bid from Sevilla that would have involved the Spanish club paying half of Martial’s £150,000 a week wages was rejected, with United not prepared to finance any loan move. Barcelona and Juventus have also been credited with interest in the 26-year-old, who has slipped down the pecking order following the return of Cristiano Ronaldo and has played only 200 minutes in the Premier League this season. Raphinha Leeds United The Leeds forward has been heavily linked with Bayern Munich and the German champions could decide to make their move should they allow Kingsley Coman to join Barcelona. Any offers would be strongly resisted, however, by Leeds, who are wary of losing their key creative player while they are battling against relegation. Liverpool have also been linked with the player signed from the French side Rennes in October 2020, whose contract expires in 2024. The Brazilian could cost around £60m. Denis Zakaria Borussia Mönchengladbach The Switzerland international’s decision not to sign a new contract with Borussia Mönchengladbach has put several clubs on alert, with West Ham and Juventus among those to have been linked in recent days. A defensive midfielder who is also capable of filling in at centre-back, Zakaria – who was born in Switzerland to a South Sudanese mother and Congolese father – moved to Germany in 2017 from Young Boys and has also merited attention from Manchester United and Liverpool. Ainsley Maitland-Niles Arsenal Perhaps unsurprisingly after his outburst on social media in August when he pleaded to be allowed to move to Everton on a season-long loan, Mikel Arteta has rarely turned to Maitland-Niles so far this campaign. Despite praising him after the win over Watford, the 24-year-old has not featured since in the Premier League. The England international has made only two starts in the Premier League and is expected to join Roma, linking up with the former Chelsea striker Tammy Abraham and, of course, José Mourinho in what could be a permanent deal for around £12m. Nathaniel Phillips Liverpool The defender described as “one of the smartest players I ever worked with” by the Liverpool manager, Jürgen Klopp, has yet to feature in the Premier League this season having filled in admirably during the club’s injury-ravaged title defence. Now it could be time for a new chapter after Phillips asked to move on in January should they receive a suitable offer, with the 24-year-old recovering from a fractured cheekbone that kept him out of the festive schedule. West Ham – in the midst of their own defensive crisis – are among those to have been linked. Ben Brereton Díaz Blackburn A striker whose scoring record has been transformed since being surprisingly called up by Chile for the first time earlier this year. Brereton Díaz has been in spectacular form for Blackburn since returning from his exploits at the Copa América in the summer and a host of Premier League clubs have clearly been paying attention. Brighton and Leeds are among them, with the Blackburn manager, Tony Mowbray, suggesting it would take around £30m to tempt the club into selling. “If somebody bids the money that we can’t turn down and it’s life-changing for Ben Brereton Díaz, then who am I to stop him from earning £100k-per-week?” Kieran Trippier Atlético Madrid The England mainstay has thrived under the tutelage of Diego Simeone since joining Atlético from Tottenham in 2019 but looks likely to return to the Premier League as Newcastle’s first major signing since the Saudi takeover. Talks are said to be progressing well and the 31-year-old would bring undoubted experience and quality to a side who are struggling to survive under their new manager, Eddie Howe, with Trippier likely to earn a significant pay rise for swapping the top of La Liga for the bottom of the Premier League. Dusan Vlahovic Fiorentina The 21-year-old has been turning heads around Europe all season having fired 16 goals in Serie A for Fiorentina already and is well on course to beat the 23 he managed last term. Vlahovic’s contract ends in 2023 and he has already rejected an offer to become the highest-paid player in the club’s history, with some of the Premier League’s biggest sides reportedly monitoring the situation. While it could take an offer north of £70m to tempt Fiorentina into doing business in January, they may decide to cash in if the right deal presents itself. Lucas Digne Everton With Rafael Benítez preferring to field players out of position at left-back as his dispute with Digne drags on, it seems likely that Everton will allow the France international to leave Goodison Park in January. Chelsea have been mentioned as a potential destination after the injury to Ben Chilwell ruled him out for the rest of the season, with Thomas Tuchel’s side expected to aim for a loan deal that may suit both parties in the short term. Any deal for Digne could also smooth the waters for Ross Barkley to return to Goodison Park on loan.Of all the predictions on your 2021 bingo card, who had employees being fined for going into the office? Workers in Wales now face that threat since the tightening of Covid regulations amid the spread of the Omicron variant, with a possible £60 penalty for failing to work from home. That is just one of many examples of how the pandemic has transformed the world of work this year – and perhaps for ever – for city centre employers, their staff and the service industry that depends on them for trade. Out of office Most white-collar workers are ending 2021 back where they began – hunched over laptops on kitchen tables, in spare rooms or even garden sheds. Yet this deja vu obscures a big change: it has been demonstrated to many employers that staff can do productive work from home, a hotel room or even a poolside lounger in another country, and don’t necessarily need to be in a city centre office. As lockdown restrictions eased during the spring, many companies started to trial a hybrid model, permitting staff to split their time between the office and another location. Across a range of sectors, many of the UK’s largest office occupiers have shifted to this middle-way working pattern, from the big four accountancy firms to major tech companies. Deloitte’s 20,000 UK employees were told in June they could decide “when, where and how they work” following the success of remote working during Covid. Very few large corporates now expect staff to return to their desks for five days a week, with the exception of some major investment banks, who have been the loudest proponents of the return-to-office mantra. The end of the space race Remote working in 2021 also offered companies a chance to downsize their offices and slash their rent bills. Capita, one of the major providers of outsourced services to the UK government, announced in the spring it would close more of its offices to make bigger cost savings. Sir Martin Sorrell’s advertising and marketing firm, S4 Capital, told investors in the summer it had “terminated a number of office leases”, adding it was developing its hybrid office model to suit its workers, who it described as “digital natives”. Meanwhile NatWest said it expects just 13% of its 64,000 staff to work full time in its offices in future. A third of the bank’s employees will be allowed to live and work anywhere in the UK and will only have to attend a NatWest building twice a month. Winners and losers Working parents, people with caring responsibilities, and some disabled workers are among those who have welcomed the widespread shift to flexible working, which they have long demanded. However, employment experts warn that, without proper monitoring, the switch could worsen workplace gender inequality. Traditionally, more women have requested flexible working than men, and analysts caution that employers will have to ensure that those who attend the office less frequently do not miss out on opportunities for promotion. A fifth (22%) of workers worry home working could affect their promotion prospects, according to a recent survey for stockbroker AJ Bell. The poll also found the burden of childcare among home workers still falls disproportionately on mothers, with more than a third (36%) of women with children under 16 reporting they do the lion’s share of childcare during work hours, compared with 19% of men. There is also concern about the effect on pay. Evie, an executive assistant from Essex who did not want to give her surname, has enjoyed working from home, but said she was being offered lower salaries by prospective employers than before the pandemic. “It’s been said to me in an interview [the salary was lower] because I’d be working from home and wouldn’t have to commute,” she said. “It’s definitely a game a few employers are playing. They’ll get you to sign the contract, but when restrictions change and we go back to the office, I know they won’t put the money up.” The working week Once the slow and steady return to the office began in the spring, it became clear that workers were ditching their commute on Mondays and Fridays. In a national trend, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday became the busiest days of the week for office visits, according to regular analysis during 2021 by real estate consultancy Remit Consulting. “The pattern so far during the pandemic has been for Thursdays to be as busy as Wednesdays, and sometimes busier,” said Lorna Landells of Remit Consulting, adding that Friday was slipping behind as an office day. If this change becomes permanent, it will have lasting implications for transport companies and the city-centre service businesses – from sandwich shops and coffee bars to hairdressers and dry-cleaners – who depend on passing trade. Some companies and some countries – including the governments of Spain and Scotland – are considering going further, and taking a fresh look at four-day week through pilot schemes. Durham-based online bank Atom is one of the few employers which has taken the leap. It moved all of its 400 staff to a four-day week, with no change in salary, at the start of November. The company said its operations and customer service have not been impacted by the change, although it had seen a 500% surge in job applications. “Our adoption of a four-day working week has been a huge success, and we are proud of how well our employees have adapted,” said Anne-Marie Lister, Atom’s chief people officer. “We firmly believe that a four-day week is the future of work for many.” Staff walkout For some, the future of work means handing in their notice. In what has been termed “the great resignation”, more than a quarter of workers reported they were actively planning to change jobs in the coming months. Having stayed in posts where they were unhappy during the height of the pandemic, employees have begun to look for new roles, according to a survey of 6,000 workers by the recruitment firm Randstad UK. Others have been spurred on to look for a new employer by high levels of job vacancies and higher pay offers from those desperate to recruit. For now, power looks to be in the hands of employees – not their employers – and they know what they want: more flexibility about where and when they work. Many will benefit from a better work-life balance, but the repercussions for city centres and society will be felt for some time to come.Much of the British public is unaware of sweeping changes to the Highway Code that are due to come into force at the end of January, prompting claims that transport ministers are “missing in action”. The revamped code establishes a hierarchy of road users, which means those who pose the greatest risk to others have a higher level of responsibility. This means someone cycling will have greater responsibility to look out for people walking, while someone driving will have greater responsibility to look out for people cycling, walking or riding a horse. At least two in three drivers were unaware of the changes before Christmas, according to the AA, which polled 13,000 of its members on the subject. Duncan Dollimore, Cycling UK’s head of campaigns, welcomed the changes but said they “will be of limited benefit if the public aren’t aware of them”. Many of the rules in the code are legal requirements, and to disobey these rules is to commit a criminal offence. The changes introduce new advisory measures that are not legal requirements but could be drawn upon in court proceedings. These include advice that drivers: Should give way to pedestrians crossing or waiting to cross a road into which or from which their vehicle is turning. Should not cut across cyclists or horse riders going ahead when turning into or out of a junction or changing direction or lane, to prevent “left hook” collisions. Should open car doors using the “Dutch reach” method, with the hand on the opposite side to the door they are opening. This makes drivers turn their heads to look over their shoulders and reduces the likelihood of “dooring” a passing cyclist. Should leave at least 1.5 metres when overtaking cyclists at speeds of up to 30mph, and give them more space when overtaking at higher speeds. The code also advises cyclists to give way to pedestrians on shared-use cycle tracks and to horse riders on bridleways, and to “slow down when necessary and let them know you are there, for example by ringing your bell (it is recommended that a bell is fitted to your bike) or by calling out politely.” Dollimore said: “Many people won’t have read the Highway Code for years, so it’s essential that the key changes are clearly explained, with simple, accurate and memorable messages. “These changes have legal implications. Just as we saw with the introduction of other road safety measures like mandatory seatbelts and stricter drink-driving laws, the public needs to be accurately informed about the new rules. The hierarchy of responsibility and changes to junction priority need to be explained and communicated properly, regardless of whether or not everyone agrees with them.” Louise Haigh, the shadow transport secretary, said: “With cyclists feeling increasingly unsafe, these are welcome changes, but they will be totally meaningless if the public don’t know anything about them. A comprehensive national safety campaign is needed to keep cyclists safe on our roads, but ministers are missing in action.” Cycling UK called on the government to implement “a long-term and well-funded communications campaign” to raise awareness of the new code. A spokesperson for the Department for Transport said: “The proposed upcoming changes to the Highway Code will improve safety for cyclists, pedestrians and horse riders and were announced to national press. “The department has established a working group of key organisations to ensure that messages about the changes are as widespread as possible, and our well-established Think! campaign will continue to ensure all road users are aware both when these changes come into effect and beyond.” If approved by parliament, the changes to the Highway Code will come into force on 29 January 2022.Before England’s Test visit in 2017, the Australian spinner Nathan Lyon offered a line much repeated since about hoping to end some England careers. It was taken as it was intended, as a piece of pre-series bluff and bluster. The thing is, Lyon was close to the truth. In the Ashes-obsessed Test calendars for the English and Australian men’s teams, results in that series do make or break careers, on the field and off. Cricket cycles and career cycles have their ends and beginnings marked by these contests. Plenty of players have their last appearance in an Ashes defeat, tending to be pensioned off thereafter in an effort to make whatever comes next seem like a fresh start. Captains too tend to call it quits – see Ricky Ponting, Michael Clarke and, if not for an early newspaper story, Tim Paine. An Australian coach can survive a loss in England if it isn’t dire, but would never survive one in Australia. England’s current coach, Chris Silverwood, is hotly tipped to hit the exit even with two matches of the ongoing series still to play. All of which makes the position of Justin Langer as Australia coach especially interesting. Early in 2021, and again through the middle months, stories abounded about player discontent with the boss. Those with an interest in being defensive about the situation have tried to cast it as a media concoction, but the initial information did come from within the dressing room. There was substance behind the speculation. This does not make Langer a bad person or a bad coach. It seemed simply to be what we might call Flatmate Syndrome – when you live or work closely with someone for long enough, you can start to get on each other’s nerves. Most coaches start out with goodwill, described by players as refreshing because of their new approach. Gradually, familiarity breeds irritation. The dynamic changes. Things that would be harmless to anyone outside become intolerable. During Australia’s 2020-21 summer of quarantines and bio-bubbles, in a side losing to India, annoyances had the perfect circumstances to hit their highest pitch. As the story rolled on, Cricket Australia backed Langer. In August 2021 senior players and senior administrators arranged a meeting to thrash out what to do next. Shortly before it took place, CA released a statement saying that Langer would see out his contract until early 2022. Being pre-empted didn’t please those players, but it essentially left no option but to work out a compromise. That involved changes to the way coaching sessions were run and to the hierarchy of input, with what seemed like an implicit understanding that Langer would move on after finishing his time. In the few months since, Langer has won Australia’s first T20 World Cup title followed by the Ashes in straight sets. His tactical arrangements have worked, as have a number of creative inclusions aided by the selector George Bailey. The coach is having a golden run. A couple of weeks ago, when asked in a press conference whether he would like to continue in the job after his current term, his answer was simply: “Yes.” If an Ashes loss tends to cost coaching jobs, an Ashes win gives a coach more scope to call the shots. But all of this recent success has still come from working with players who have expected the term limit to stay in place. Perhaps those who were unhappy now feel differently. Presumably the team room is now a more harmonious place. But equally, knowing that there is an end in sight can take the pressure off difficult relationships, where staring into an indefinite future can crank that pressure up. It is no surprise that Langer’s impulse will be to continue. There is no confection about the fact that he loves the job, the sport and the national team. Working at the pinnacle of all of those things must be deeply gratifying, and nothing else would match it. And Langer has always loved a scrap, proving that he can do things when other people say that he cannot. If he really wants to stay on as coach, he is now in a position where he can probably make that so. It is also worth considering, though, that Australia’s listed assignments for 2022 involve nine Tests in Asia, touring Pakistan, Sri Lanka and India. These trips have historically been tough for teams who struggle in the conditions, and will have to be carried out under heavy biosecurity rules with the background anxiety of Covid infections. The dressing room could very quickly become claustrophobic again. Perhaps Langer sees the coming year as a challenge and an opportunity to make history. Mind you, Joe Root said the same things before Brisbane. The alternative is for the coach to choose his own exit at a high point of success: it could be a 2022 farewell after an Ashes whitewash, just as he did as a player in 2007. These series do get too much attention, but they are still the thing that people in the competing countries most remember. There can be honour in choosing the right time to stop the fight.Though he largely escaped scrutiny in Ghislaine Maxwell’s trial, the Duke of York will not be able to dodge the spotlight in the new year when he is sued for alleged sexual assault. Prince Andrew will have been deeply relieved when his accuser, Virginia Roberts Giuffre, was not called as a witness in Maxwell’s case. But next week she is due in a New York court for the next stage of her civil action against him – a lawsuit Andrew’s lawyers will do everything to get thrown out. She claims the Queen’s son had sex with her on three occasions two decades ago when, aged 17, she had been sexually trafficked by Jeffrey Epstein, allegations Andrew vehemently denies. Following Maxwell’s conviction on Wednesday, Giuffre said: “I hope that today is not the end but rather another step in justice being served. Maxwell did not act alone. Others must be held accountable. I have faith that they will be.” Her absence in the witness box at Maxwell’s trial was perplexing to many. Her name was introduced countless times, her photograph was shown in court and she has been one of the most prominent accusers of Epstein and Maxwell. A deposition, given by Maxwell in a 2016 civil suit brought by Giuffre, formed the basis of two perjury charges against the British socialite, who denied all charges. Giuffre was “available” if called upon to give evidence, the court heard. “Certainly, if she had been called, it would have seen Andrew centre-stage,” said Mark Stephens of the law firm Howard Kennedy. Prosecutors gave no reason for their decision. But they may have feared it would complicate the case, especially if inconsistencies could be shown in accounts Giuffre has previously given over the years. It could be, said Stephens, “that the reason the prosecution did not call Giuffre in the Ghislaine Maxwell case is that they risked an own goal if her credibility could be undermined, which would have given Maxwell a leg-up”. Andrew’s lawyers have sought to target Giuffre’s credibility as they attempt to get the case against him dismissed in the civil proceedings she has brought. His legal team has painted her as an unreliable witness, querying certain dates and figures she has provided, and accusing her of seeking another “payday”. She has previously explained any discrepancies as innocent mistakes, and the result of recalling events from many years ago that had left her traumatised. Andrew’s part in Maxwell’s courtroom drama was, therefore, reduced to mentions of him being a guest onboard Epstein’s “Lolita Express” private plane, with the pilots testifying to seeing nothing to suggest sexual activity on the part of those onboard during flights. “It’s fair to say, I think, there must be some relief for Andrew that Giuffre did not appear, because it does distance him, somewhat, from the case,” said Stephens. Nonetheless, he added, “it did not matter if Maxwell was found guilty, or innocent”, as the prince’s reputation was already tarnished, “indelibly so, as, frankly, the association with a convicted paedophile like Jeffrey Epstein is enough”. “A guilty verdict on Ghislaine Maxwell, you might say, is almost priced in regarding Prince Andrew and reputational damage. People have already made up their minds about him and the verdict would have no impact on how they view him.” Now Andrew must brace for the next round in the civil case against him, with the US district judge Lewis Kaplan in Manhattan scheduling a 4 January hearing when the royal’s lawyers are expected to argue for a dismissal of the case. If they are not successful, or if the case is not settled, it is expected to go for trial between September and December 2022. Gloria Allred, a lawyer who represents 20 accusers of Epstein, said it was now a matter of having to wait and see if the civil sexual assault case in the US against the duke ever gets to trial. She told BBC Breakfast that “to prove a criminal case, the burden of proof is beyond a reasonable doubt” but “only a preponderance of evidence must be shown in order for there to be the possibility of the defendant being held liable” in a civil case.Reducing self-isolation to five days for positive Covid casescould increase the infection risk for vulnerable patients in hospital if the approach is not completely safe, a senior NHS leader has said. Since 22 December, people in England who test positive for Covid can cut their self-isolation period from 10 days to seven if they have a negative lateral flow test on day six and day seven and no high temperature. Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have stuck with the 10-day rule. However, pressure has been rising on the government to consider further cutting self-isolation to five days, with some experts tentatively backing the idea. It has also gathered momentum within the hospitality industry, but they still believe it is the job of scientists to ascertain the move’s safety. Now Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, has weighed into the debate, suggesting the decision is far from simple – even if it might help tackle staff absences in the NHS. “Covid-19 keeps throwing up policy decisions requiring difficult judgments between competing objectives. Reducing Covid isolation from seven days to five is another one of these,” he wrote on Twitter. In a series of tweets, Hopson noted one consideration is high staff absences due to self-isolation across the economy, including in the health service. “If staff absence rates and care quality/patient safety risk rise, pressure for a change to the isolation period will, inevitably, rise as well,” he said. However, Hopson noted that a shift to a shorter self-isolation period could be problematic if it increases the risk of hospital-acquired Covid infections. And if people do remain infectious after five days of self-isolation, there could be a rise in community infection rates – a concern given the uncertain impact of Omicron on older populations. Another issue is that there have been disruptions in the availability of lateral flow and PCR tests. “A policy based on people needing negative PCR or lateral flow test results to exit isolation requires rapid, reliable and widespread access to those tests. This is not, currently, consistently the case,” he wrote. Hopson added there is considerable debate within the scientific community as to whether, or to what degree, people with Omicron are infectious after five days. Leading figures in the hospitality industry, where festive takings have been down by as much as 60%, said a shorter isolation period could relieve some of the pressure on the struggling sector. Phil Urban, the chief executive of the 1,700-strong pub and restaurant group Mitchells &amp; Butlers, which owns the Harvester and O’Neill’s chains, stressed that it was for the government’s scientific advisers to determine the length of the Covid isolation period. But he said a shorter gap would help the industry. “If people are isolating who are fine otherwise, the shorter the time period, the better it is. That would certainly be helpful.” The trade body UK Hospitality said a shortage of tests meant the industry was being hit by a double whammy of staff taking longer to come back to work and customers staying away. “We’re kind of agnostic [on five-day isolation] because it’s so far out of our sphere of expertise,” said the chief executive, Kate Nicholls. “It’s welcome news that they’re looking at it but we’d only want that if it was safe. We do need to make sure that we have a continued ready supply of lateral flow tests.” The US has recently announced it is moving to a five-day self-isolation period for those with Covid but no symptoms – albeit with mask-wearing for a further five days. However, some experts have criticised the move as the US does not require people to have negative Covid tests before exiting self-isolation. Lawrence Young, a virologist and professor of molecular oncology at Warwick medical school, said the time to becoming and remaining infectious varies from person to person, and by variant, with some evidence suggesting it takes only two to three days between infection and becoming infectious with Omicron. “This infectious period can occur before the onset of symptoms and last for between two and three days after you become symptomatic,” he said. Young added that the current seven-day plus testing approach adopted in the UK is sensible and provides a margin for person-to-person variability. But, he added: “Reducing the self-isolation period to five days without robust evidence is a concern and could only be introduced with the strict enforcement of lateral flow testing.” A paper by scientists at the UK Health Security Agency, yet to be peer reviewed, suggests that relying on two negative lateral flow tests alone would risk a high proportion of people being released while still infectious due to false negatives, suggesting a mandatory isolation period is also necessary. “A mandatory isolation period of longer than seven days will not provide much more safety but lowering this mandatory isolation point will increase the percent of ‘false releases’ dramatically,” said the team. A government spokesperson said: “There are no further changes to the isolation period planned at this time, but we keep all rules under review based on the latest health data.”Victoria Beckham’s fashion and beauty business remained lossmaking in 2020, as the former pop star, her husband David and other shareholders pumped in millions of pounds to keep it afloat during the pandemic. Sales fell 6% compared with a year earlier to £36m, according to accounts filed for Victoria Beckham Holdings (VBH), which owns the former Spice Girls member’s fashion business, as well as the majority stake in her beauty range, which launched in 2019. However, the company’s £6.8m pre-tax loss was less than half the £15.6m loss for 2019, which the company attributed to better management of its supply chain, and a new business model whereby the brand sold more of its goods directly to consumers. Sales of its high-end clothing slumped when UK Covid restrictions closed stores for several months of 2020, combined with a sharp fall in the number of international visitors to Britain. As a result, Beckham announced in July 2020 she was cutting about a fifth of staff at her fashion label, and was slashing by one-third the number of garments produced for each collection. Beckham faced criticism in 2020 for using public funds to furlough 30 staff at the start of the first Covid lockdown, despite her estimated net worth of £335m, a decision that was later reversed. VBH employed an average of 130 people during 2020, with annual staff costs reaching £9.3m. The highest-paid director earned £120,000 during the year after taking an 80% cut to their salary compared with a year earlier. During the 12 months to 31 December 2020, the company’s shareholders – which include the Beckhams and the private equity firm Neo Investment Partners – were required to provide £9.2m in loans to keep the business going during the early months of the pandemic, as well as repaying a bank loan from HSBC. Shareholders provided a further £600,000 in 2021. VBH forecast it would continue to rely on shareholders for financial support, amid continued economic uncertainty and a change in strategy, leading the firm’s auditors to express uncertainty over its ability to continue as a going concern. However, the group’s directors said they expected the Beckhams and other shareholders to carry on funding the company. The group reported the Victoria Beckham Beauty brand performed well during its first full year of trading, reaching £7.3m of sales in 2020 of its skincare and makeup range, including Posh Lipstick, which nods to Beckham’s nickname in the Spice Girls. During the past six months, Beckham’s fashion label has cut the price of its dresses by as much as 40%, using fewer embellished fabrics and simpler designs, in an attempt to widen its appeal.The high street lender Santander accidentally paid out £130m to thousands of individuals and businesses in a Christmas Day blunder. About 75,000 people and companies who received one-off or regular payments from 2,000 businesses with accounts at the bank were inadvertently paid a second time on 25 December. The issue has led to the bank having to try to claw back the cash. Payments included wages or money from suppliers. Santander said the problem was as a result of a scheduling issue. “The transactions comprised a range of regular and one-off payments. The recipients and purpose of payment will have varied among clients but could have included wages or supplier payments,” the bank said in a statement. Initial reports on the mistake from the Times said account holders at Barclays, HSBC, NatWest, Co-operative Bank and Virgin Money were among those affected. The banks can retrieve the cash but some are said to be worried that it may already have been spent and they do not want to risk pushing customers into overdrafts. One bank said it would be reluctant to take the money back if it meant the account holder was tipped into overdraft as a result, according to the Times. Pay UK, which runs the main payment systems in the UK, is holding talks on how to reverse the payments and some cash has already been recovered. Under the “bank error recovery” process, Santander is talking with rivals and approaching some customers directly. A spokesperson said: “We’re sorry that due to a technical issue some payments from our corporate clients were incorrectly duplicated on the recipients’ accounts. “None of our clients were at any point left out of pocket as a result and we will be working hard with many banks across the UK to recover the duplicated transactions over the coming days.” Sara Williams of the Debt Camel blog, said she was concerned the mistake could lead to new scams by criminals who would ask people to “return” the second payment. “Santander really should publish some details about this, so people know what will happen,” she said. “If you are contacted by someone claiming to be from Santander, I suggest you speak to your bank’s fraud reporting. They may be able to advise whether the contact you have had is genuine.”A former beauty queen who shot to fame when she killed her husband’s killer in Naples at the age of 18 and went on to become the first female boss in Italy’s powerful Camorra mafia clan has died aged 86. Assunta Maresca, better known as Pupetta, or “Little Doll”, was the daughter of a notorious black marketeer. In the mid-1950s, 18 years old and six months pregnant, she tracked down Antonio Esposito, the Camorra boss who had ordered the killing of her husband, and shot him dead in broad daylight on a street in Naples. Investigators believed there had been more than one shooter on the scene, but keen to establish her status and defend her position in the Naples underworld, Maresca always insisted she was solely responsible. During her trial for murder in 1959 she defiantly told the court: “I would do it again!” Maresca gave birth in prison, and after her release 14 years later was reunited with her son, Pasqualino. In the years after leaving prison she acted in a film that was inspired by her life and opened two clothes shops in Naples. But her private life continued to be turbulent. She moved in with the drug trafficker and arms dealer Umberto Ammaturo, and they had twins. But Ammaturo was jealous of Pasqualino, who had ambitions to rise in the Camorra. When Pasqualino was 18, in January 1974, he went to meet Ammaturo on a construction site for the Naples flyover, and disappeared. His mother suspected her lover had murdered the boy and buried his body in cement. As she told the Guardian in an interview in 1995, she questioned her lover to tell her what he had done. But although they fought viciously, her priority was protecting the twins, and she did not leave him. Maresca was later accused of being behind the killing of Ciro Galli, a member of the Nuova Camorra Organizzata, an organisation formed by Raffaele Cutolo in an attempt to renew the Camorra. In 1982, Maresca openly challenged Cutolo during a press conference and in the same year was arrested alongside Ammuturo for the murder of Aldo Semerari, a forensic scientist and well-known neo-fascist. Maresca served four years in prison before being acquitted. The only girl in a family of four brothers, Maresca reportedly showed violent traits as a child and attacked a classmate, causing serious injuries, according to Corriere della Sera. She won a local beauty contest in 1953 and was crowned Miss Rovegliano. Maresca died at her home in Castellammare di Stabia, near Pompeii, after an illness. Naples godmothers have always had a higher profile than their counterparts in the Sicilian Cosa Nostra. In the 1970s and 80s, Rosetta Cutolo, “Eyes of Ice”, sister of the serial killer and mafia boss Raffaele, was rumoured to run her brother’s criminal organisation while he was in prison. Anna Mazza, known as the Black Widow, was accused of training her four sons to be killers. Erminia Giuliano, known as “Celeste” because of her pale blue eyes, of the celebrated family based in the Forcella district, took over as boss of the Giuliano clan after her brother Luigi’s arrest, before she too was arrested in 2000.Since the Covid-19 pandemic began to emerge across the globe almost two years ago, Australia has often appeared to be living in a parallel reality. In November last year, when more than 50,000 people had already died in the UK and daily case numbers were hovering at about 33,000 during a suffocating lockdown, the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, was boasting of packed crowds at rugby games. In Victoria, the only state in the country to experience a significant outbreak of the virus in 2020, the term “donut day” had been coined to celebrate the arrival of zero new cases of the virus. Australians have largely been content to endure their enforced isolation from the globe on the basis that life continued largely unaffected by a pandemic which has killed 5.4 million people globally to date. But that policy of Covid zero, dubbed “fortress Australia” or “the hermit kingdom”, has now been profoundly deserted after the arrival of the Omicron variant coincided with a loosening of Covid-era restrictions. On Thursday Australia’s largest state, New South Wales, recorded more than 12,000 new cases, up from 6,000 two days earlier. The state is now recording about 1.4 cases per 1,000 people in the population, rapidly catching the UK’s figure of about 2 per 1,000. Victoria also reported a record 5,100 cases, up about 2,000 from the previous record set the day before. States which attempted to eradicate the virus for longer, such as Queensland and South Australia, are setting daily case records. In all more than 20,000 cases were reported on Thursday. Though the leap in cases has mirrored the explosion globally since the emergence of the highly-contagious Omicron variant, much of Australia now finds itself grappling with the reality of living with the pandemic for the first time. On Christmas Eve, two years into the pandemic, Queensland health minister, Yvette D’Ath, warned residents to “get ready for Covid”. Not to be outdone, her NSW counterpart declared “we’re all going to get Omicron”, a stunning departure from public health messaging from only months ago. Though Omicron has driven the increase in cases – by last week it accounted for about 80% of all Covid infections in NSW – the end of Covid zero had long been mooted. As the two-dose vaccination rate reached above 80% in November and weariness with Covid-era restrictions rose, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, became increasingly bullish about the country’s re-opening. “Planes are back in the air, the kids are back at school, the restaurants are opening and a big Christmas is coming for all of us,” Morrison said at the time. Although the federal government attracts most of the attention of the press, Australia is a nation of federated states, and it is those leaders which have driven the response to Covid during the pandemic. The arrival of a new premier in NSW in October after a public scandal heralded a dramatic change in the entire country’s approach to the pandemic. Dominic Perrottet, a 39-year-old conservative Catholic with a background in student politics, quickly adopted what critics dubbed a “let it rip” approach to the pandemic, bringing forward a loosening of restrictions after a long lockdown caused by the Delta variant and agitating for the country to reopen international borders. That approach was quickly followed by other state leaders. While Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, maintained a steadfast Covid-zero policy throughout much of the pandemic, increasing dissatisfaction with a series of gruelling outbreaks which saw the state’s capital, Melbourne, spend more time in lockdown than any other city in the world, led him to declare in October that the policy would not be repeated. “Now we have the vaccine, and quite amazingly Victorians have gone and got the vaccine in record numbers, and really fast, we don’t need lockdowns anymore,” he said at the time. Where Australia’s two largest states have gone, the rest have been obliged to follow. As cases rise across the country even Mark McGowan, the Western Australia premier and most fervent adherent to the Covid-zero approach, has been forced to acknowledge the state will eventually have to live with the virus. When Western Australia recorded five new cases on Christmas Eve after a French backpacker tested positive for the virus, he declared that a scheduled border reopening with the rest of the country on 5 February could become “redundant” if there was significant spread of the virus in the state. Increasing evidence of the Omicron strain’s reduced severity, coupled with Australia’s high vaccination rate, means leaders such as Perrottet have remained bullish about the need for the country to “live with the virus”. But it has presented a test for a country attempting to grapple with a dramatic about-face in its approach to the virus. Perrottet has been forced to back-track on some of the loosened restrictions including a decision to reintroduce an indoor mask mandate, and on Wednesday he urged NSW residents not to line up for PCR tests unless they were sick amid an explosion on Covid testing lines and delays in results. “In every press conference we’ve said case numbers will increase. Now they’re increasing. We need to learn to live alongside the virus and we’re doing just that. And in the meantime there will be inconveniences as naturally as a society we adjust to those settings, and that’s OK,” he said.Former British socialite Ghislaine Maxwell on Wednesday was convicted of recruiting and grooming teenage girls for sexual encounters with the disgraced late financier Jeffrey Epstein between 1994 and 2004. Maxwell was arrested last July and was charged with involvement in ex-boyfriend Epstein’s sexual abuse of teenage girls, some as young as 14. Below is an explanation of what comes next for Maxwell, the youngest child of the late British media baron Robert Maxwell: What was Maxwell charged with? Ghislaine Maxwell was found guilty of five out of the six charges in her trial, including sex trafficking a minor. The jury came down with its verdict after about 40 hours of deliberation. Jurors did not find Maxwell guilty of one account: enticement of an individual under the age of 17 to travel with intent to engage in illegal sexual activity. When will Maxwell be sentenced? Maxwell’s sex trafficking charge is the most serious one she faced, with a maximum prison term of 40 years. In total, Maxwell faces up to 65 years in prison when sentenced. At 60, it is likely she will spend the rest of her life behind bars. Judge Alison Nathan did not say when Maxwell would be sentenced. She also separately faces two perjury counts that will be tried at a later date. Sarah Krissoff, a former prosecutor with the southern district of New York, told the BBC she expects “a very significant prison sentence” for Maxwell. “Given the involvement of minors, the judge has really great discretion to impose a significant sentence, and based on the evidence that was presented at trial, frankly, I expect the judge to impose a very severe sentence upon her.” Will Maxwell appeal? Maxwell’s lawyer Bobbi Sternheim told reporters the defense was disappointed with the verdict and will appeal. “We have already started working on the appeal, and we are confident that she will be vindicated,” Sternheim said outside of the courthouse. While the judge dealt several blows to the defense – ruling, for example, that their witnesses could not testify anonymously as some of Maxwell’s accusers did – legal experts said Maxwell would struggle to overturn a guilty verdict. To succeed, her lawyers would have to show that the judge violated federal rules of evidence or abused her discretion, and that the error impacted the verdict. In a statement issued late Wednesday, the Maxwell family said it would support the socialite’s efforts to appeal her conviction. “We believe firmly in our sister’s innocence. We are very disappointed with the verdict,” read the family statement. “We have already started the appeal tonight, and we believe she will ultimately be vindicated.” What charges does she still face? The two perjury counts relate to allegations that Maxwell lied under oath about her role in Epstein’s abuse during a deposition for a separate civil suit in 2016. Nathan in April granted Maxwell’s request to sever the two charges from the rest of the counts. The two perjury counts each carry a maximum prison sentence of five years. Where will Maxwell go now? Maxwell will return to Brooklyn’s Metropolitan detention center, where she has been held in isolation since July 2020. Maxwell has said she has been served moldy food at the jail and that the smell of raw sewage has permeated her cell. Maxwell has also been subjected to water deprivation, “hyper-surveillance” by overbearing guards and other unacceptable treatment in jail, according to her lawyers. Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlThe chairman of Credit Suisse, Antonio Horta-Osório, broke Covid rules for a second time and may have committed a criminal offence in order to attend the Wimbledon tennis finals in London in July, it has emerged. The latest breach, first reported by Reuters, was discovered through a preliminary investigation by Credit Suisse’s legal team, which found that the former Lloyds Banking Group chief executive broke British quarantine rules by attending the Wimbledon tournament on 10 and 11 July. The Portuguese banker had flown in from Switzerland, which had been on the UK government’s amber list of countries that required arrivals to isolate for 10 days. Breaching quarantine rules is a criminal offence, according to UK government guidance, which states that police could issue offenders with fines starting at £1,000 and rising to £10,000 for repeat offences. A government spokesperson would not comment on individual cases, but explained breaches could also result in jail time in some circumstances. “Passengers are responsible for ensuring they comply with all travel rules, including providing accurate information on their passenger locator form, and failure to do so could lead to a fine or imprisonment.” The news comes just weeks after Horta-Osório admitted that he breached Covid rules in Switzerland at the end of November, having flown out of the country within three days of arriving on 28 November, despite being required to quarantine for 10 days. Horta-Osório could face a fine worth up to 5,000 Swiss francs (£4,000) if he is found guilty of breaching Swiss rules by authorities reviewing the case in the country’s canton of St Gallen. It is a further embarrassment for the investment bank and wealth manager, which recruited Horta-Osório in an attempt to clean up its reputation after a string of scandals, including the dual collapse of Greensill Capital and Archegos Capital earlier this year, as well as findings that it had spied on former staff. The chairman joined Credit Suisse in April after a decade at Lloyds, where he was tasked with returning the bank to profit and private ownership amid a spate of scandals of its own. Lloyds is still dealing with the fallout of a £245m loan scam at the HBOS Reading branch that predated his appointment in 2011, as well as suggestions the bank tried to cover up the scam. Credit Suisse declined to comment.On 8 March 2021, women across the world took part in protests to mark International Women’s Day. In Mexico, there is an added poignancy to the annual event, as at least 10 women are murdered in the country each day; in 2021 the date was was marred by additional violence. In the runup to the day fences were erected around the national palace in Mexico City’s main square, where thousands of women were due to gather. “There was this tension building,” says Mahé Elipe, a French photographer living in Mexico City. “Mexican politicians [have given the impression that they] don’t care about the rights of women. During the pandemic, cases of domestic violence went up while the government prioritised the economy. So many women were without any help.” Mariel Velázquez, 23, a student and women’s rights activist, who was in the crowds protesting on 8 March, saw the fences as a direct affront and rejection of the feminist cause. “There was a metal wall,” she says. “We were mad when we saw that. In a symbolic way, it was a wall between our authorities and us. It’s like they didn’t want to listen to us, or hear anything about the protest.” As women and children gathered in the square, they laid flowers, sang, shouted and chanted slogans, and wrote the names of female murder victims on the fences. In 2020, Mexico recorded the murders of 3,723 women. About 940 of those murders were investigated as femicides but the issue has been belittled by Mexican authorities. Last year, Mexico’s president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, said the topic of femicide had been “manipulated a lot in the media”. Violence erupted and there were clashes between protesters and the police. “The police were really violent,” says Velázquez. “They started shooting at us with rubber bullets. In my head, I was like ‘I’m going to die’ because it sounded like a real gun. Mentally it was a shock for me. I felt pain in my back. They shot me from a distance of less than one metre.” She adds: “I shouted at the police – ‘Stop it! Why are you doing this?’ Their answer was teargas. They threw it at me about 15 times.” Activists tried to tear down the metal fences with hammers and wooden sticks. It was amid this chaos that Elipe took the photo of the unidentified woman in black wearing black goggles and a face mask with Ni una más (not one more) written on it. “This was a moment. I had the impression, without romanticising things, that it was a civil war,” she says. “There was such enormous chaos; women were shouting everywhere, people were throwing teargas, nobody could breathe. The police threw bottles of piss at us. I was just there with my camera taking pictures. “This woman in front of me was calling to others shouting: ‘They’re killing us!’” More than 80 people were injured in the clashes. Velázquez walked home and arrived at around 9pm. Her mother saw her and was shocked. “I had scars everywhere, and the teargas had affected my eyes. I was covered in dirt,” says Velázquez. She is not sure she wants to continue protesting. “It got really dangerous. It’s one thing to protest, it’s another to expose your life to [danger].” The day was also full of emotion for Elipe, whose work often focuses on women’s rights. “There were so many emotions that day. I cried. I can’t talk about it now without getting goosebumps.” She adds: “I see something so beautiful in the idea of solidarity, in these women gathering together and continuing the fight … There’s an incredible strength in seeing what they’re doing, the danger they put themselves in. They’re young women – they make me hopeful for the future.” Both she and Velázquez think women’s rights in Mexico are neglected by the government and don’t get enough attention. But, says Elipe: “Speaking about it, exposing what’s going on, putting the issue on the table – this is worth its weight in gold.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Throughout the pandemic, I, like many others, found myself turning to familiar music I listened to as a teenager, seeking comfort in 2000s nostalgia playlists and the hollow, monotonous “landfill indie” of the 2010s. It wasn’t that I especially enjoyed listening to music that I’d last heard on student nights at bad nightclubs in York, or that they marked a particularly happy period of my life. Instead, I returned to these playlists because I found myself unable to listen to new music. Initially, I blamed this on Spotify. It’s well documented that the platform’s recommendation algorithms are less likely to introduce you to new, interesting genres of music than to recommend songs that sound similar to your favourites – producing an endless feedback loop, where music is not something to be enjoyed and shared, but rather a way to fill silences with constant background noise. I was listening to more music than ever, but appreciating barely any of it. In early 2021, YouTube recommended I watch a video called First reaction to “Rock Music” Linkin Park. I immediately clicked on it – the song in the video, Faint, remains my favourite Linkin Park track, and one that has been a constant on my Spotify playlists. The reaction video was made by Desean Hunton, an American rapper, music producer and YouTuber, whose channel, LaydbakDFR, became hugely popular on the platform for its music “reaction” videos, especially those where hip-hop fans listen to rock music and vice versa. Hunton’s video series, Trash or Pass!, shows him discovering songs and genres for the first time, filming live reactions as he listens. In each video, ranging from reviews of the Beastie Boys and Disturbed to UK acts like Dave, we see Hunton dancing, head-slamming, at times even pausing and rewinding the track, to parts that he’s awed by. While there are thousands of music review channels on YouTube, Hunton’s strips the format back to its basics. Absent of overanalysis of lyrics, deep dives into production credits or engaging in the lore of fandoms, Hunton’s metrics are simple: is this a bop? Hunton’s videos represented a feeling I’d long been missing, even before the pandemic – of the genuine excitement of discovering, enjoying and sharing in something new. Watching his videos over the past year took me back to the first time I’d discovered the rock and emo bands that would define my teens, the first time I’d snuck out of my parents’ house and travelled into London to go to a gig in a shady pub, the first time I went to a music festival (Reading 2008). Reading the comments under Hunton’s videos – overwhelmingly sharing in his excitement – also made me realise that as streaming services continue to eclipse the music industry and the freedom given to artists, they also remove the social culture that made discovering music so exciting in the first place. Bonds were forged through swapping MP3s, making mix CDs and discovering new bands on platforms like Myspace. In all these cases, it wasn’t just about finding the music itself, but also the friendships and relationships that were part and parcel of discovering new bands. Hunton’s videos were a reminder that even at a time when popular culture is increasingly mediated through automation and surveillance-based algorithms, the desire for collective social experiences is still very much present. People find genuine joy in seeing others enjoying themselves.It is now accepted unequivocally that the virus responsible for Covid-19 is airborne, travelling metres on an infected person’s breath within liquid microdroplets and aerosols. One of the most important measures to prevent transmission of an airborne respiratory virus is the use of masks. Any face covering is better than nothing, but in the UK the government hasn’t informed people about the most effective protection, or ensured that they have access to it. Nearly two years into the pandemic, official guidance remains confusing. The government still discourages non-healthcare workers from obtaining PPE, including certified respiratory protection, stating that it is used in a limited number of industrial and healthcare settings. As a result, high-quality masks are not standard issue, even among healthcare workers. Very few beyond critical-care teams have been supplied with effective respiratory protection. This is despite studies showing they could reduce infections among hospital staff. This week, the British Medical Association and other medical organisations called for all frontline NHS staff to be supplied with effective respiratory protection. The government is not averse to mask regulations in general. In England, it became law to wear a face covering on public transport on 15 June 2020 and a second law, covering public indoor areas, such as retail spaces and places of worship, came into effect five weeks later. Both laws were revoked on 18 July 2021, on the eve of “freedom day”. As a response to the threat of Omicron, a new law enforcing face coverings on public transport and in some indoor spaces was brought into force on 30 November. Similar laws are in place in the devolved nations. However, the regulations say little about the best kind of protection. The laws for the public enforce the use of “face coverings”, not “face masks”. The government defines a face covering as “something which safely covers the nose and mouth”. This may be made of cloth; the government recommends a comfortable, breathable material, such as cotton. The guidance says that, by covering the nose and mouth, such coverings protect the wearer and others against the spread of infection. This is only partially true. The guidance dates back to a time when this coronavirus was thought to spread primarily within large droplets, emitted when someone sneezed or coughed. The idea was that a cotton covering would capture those globules, as surgical masks are designed to do, thereby protecting others from being infected. Such coverings might also provide limited protection if other people’s droplets land on you. This is good advice when cloth is all you have available, and government guidance goes on to recommend that the cloth is at least two layers thick, and forms a good fit around the mouth and nose. But almost two years into the pandemic we should be doing better. Many coverings on the market, or made at home, do not have features such as a mouldable nose clip that help secure them to the face. As a general rule of thumb, if you feel air blowing into your eyes and your glasses fog rapidly, or if you can feel your breath escaping around a mask’s edges, then contaminated air can also get in. Masks are available that are designed to filter tiny particles and aerosols and which have been proven to be effective. So why doesn’t the government simply recommend these highly effective, certified masks (known as FFP2 or FFP3 in the UK, and N95 or N99 in the US; see also footnote below)? Initially, this was because they were in short supply. This made sense at the beginning of the pandemic; the World Health Organization said it was essential to preserve limited stocks of personal protective equipment (PPE) for healthcare use. There has been ample time to repurpose UK factories to produce masks (as has been done elsewhere in the world) or to order them from existing sources, and for those sources to scale up their manufacturing and supply chains. But in most UK health and social care settings, such as GP surgeries and care homes, respiratory PPE has not been provided, apart from surgical masks that are not designed to form a facial seal. This is despite overwhelming evidence that standard surgical masks are not highly protective against infection. From a public health and a humanitarian standpoint, it is ethically dubious not to inform people that more effective interventions are available. People also have a right to know that open-weave cloth coverings may provide inferior protection against infection by aerosols and microdroplets, particularly if they are poorly fitting. People need the facts on high-efficiency masks, and need the encouragement to use them. Many of the concerns voiced about masks could easily be addressed. They can even be reworn – a fact little-known by the public. Although manufacturers recommend discarding masks after eight hours, this advice is intended for highly contaminated settings, such as an infectious disease ward. For the public, it is in fact fine to reuse FFP masks until they break or become visibly unhygienic. Having several masks that you wear in rotation, wearing a different mask each day and then leaving it to “decontaminate”, can allay concerns about buildup of pathogens. This not only cuts down the cost, it also helps with concerns about masks as plastic waste. It is also important to choose a mask that does not have a plastic valve on the front or side, as some FFP masks do. Masks with valves let a portion of your breath out unfiltered, so they give insufficient protection to those around you. It is time to revise the guidance. The government must encourage people to wear better masks. Countries such as Germany promote the use of high-quality masks, making them widely available and even mandating their use on public transport. It’s a simple intervention that can have a big impact, and the UK needs to catch up. Claire Horwell is professor of geohealth at Durham University and has an honorary contract with the UK Health Security Agency This article was updated on 31 December 2021 to include guidance on avoiding – in the context of public mask wearing during the Covid pandemic – FFP masks that have valves.A Hong Kong court has denied bail to two former senior editors charged with conspiring to publish seditious materials, a day after police raided Stand News, a pro-democracy media outlet, prompting its closure. About 200 officers raided the office of the online publication on Wednesday, froze its assets and arrested seven current and former senior editors and former board members, in the latest crackdown on the city’s press. Campaigners and some western governments including the US have criticised the raid as a sign of further erosion of press freedoms since China imposed a sweeping national security law in the former British colony last year. A magistrate at West Kowloon court denied bail applications for the former Stand News chief editor Chung Pui-kuen and the acting chief editor, Patrick Lam. Hong Kong laws restrict media coverage of bail hearings. Along with Best Pencil (Hong Kong) Limited, the corporate entity behind Stand News, the two men were charged with conspiring “to publish and/or reproduce seditious publications,”, according to the charge sheet. Four former members of the Stand News board – Margaret Ng, a former democratic legislator and barrister, Denise Ho, a pop star, and Chow Tat-chi and Christine Fang – were released on police bail pending further investigations. Ng told reporters as she left the police station that “continuing to care for each other is very important”. Ho, a Canadian citizen, left without comment. Chung’s wife, Chan Pui-man, formerly a senior editor with the pro-democracy Apple Daily newspaper, was already being held and remains in prison on separate charges. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, has called for all seven to be released. “We call on PRC [People’s Republic of China] and Hong Kong authorities to cease targeting Hong Kong’s free and independent media and to immediately release those journalists and media executives who have been unjustly detained and charged,” Blinken said. “A confident government that is unafraid of the truth embraces a free press.” Blinken said “journalism is not sedition” and that “by silencing independent media, PRC and local authorities undermine Hong Kong’s credibility and viability”. Stand News shut down on Wednesday less than 10 hours after the police raid. The national security department confiscated boxes of evidence and froze HK$61m ($7.8m) of its assets. Stand had been the most prominent remaining pro-democracy media outlet in the city, after Apple Daily was forced to close in June after a similar crackdown. All members of staff have been dismissed, Stand said in a statement announcing its closure. The news site and all social media channels were erased late on Wednesday evening. Hong Kong’s Foreign Correspondents’ Club said: “These actions are a further blow to press freedom in Hong Kong and will continue to chill the media environment in the city following a difficult year for the city’s news outlets.” Peter Stano, the lead EU spokesperson for external affairs, tweeted that the raid marked a further deterioration of press freedoms in Hong Kong. The UN Human Rights Office in Geneva expressed concern at the “extremely rapid closing of the civic space and outlets for Hong Kong’s civil society to speak and express themselves freely”. Canada’s foreign affairs minister, Mélanie Joly, expressed “deep concern” over the arrest of Ho, who is a Canadian citizen. Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen, also condemned the raid. “We in #Taiwan regret to see their detention &amp; call on the international community to stand up for freedom &amp; democracy in HK,” she tweeted. Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, rejected calls for the seven to be released on Thursday, saying the arrests were law enforcement actions and not aimed at the media industry. “These actions have nothing to do with so-called suppression of press freedom,” Lam said. “Journalism is not seditious … but seditious activities could not be condoned under the guise of news reporting.” Beijing’s foreign ministry in Hong Kong also rebuffed international criticism, accusing the EU external affairs office and Hong Kong’s Foreign Correspondents’ club of “openly spreading harsh remarks” and “wantonly slandering the rule of law and freedom in Hong Kong”. A not-for-profit outlet, Stand News was founded in 2014 in the wake of the city’s pro-democracy umbrella movement. It was known internationally for its livestreams during the months of pro-democracy protests that rocked the city in 2019. Reuters contributed to this reportRevellers will be celebrating on the beaches, in the hills, on rooftops, pub terraces and in back gardens as temperatures on New Year’s Eve soar towards record-breaking levels. Tens of thousands of people who will not or cannot throw a party indoors because of Covid concerns, restrictions or a lack of tests are expected to opt to see in the new year alfresco thanks to balmy weather. Many holiday hotspots are packed with people planning to celebrate in the fresh air while garden centres across the UK have benefited from hosts investing in fire pits and barbecues. Pubs, bars, restaurants and clubs have spruced up outdoor spaces where restrictions allow them to open and are expecting a bumper night despite surging Covid case numbers, with some opting for winter wonderland and apres-ski themes that may make it feel a little more seasonal. The Met Office said on Thursday there was a good chance of the UK experiencing the warmest New Year’s Eve on record, beating the current high of 14.8C in Colwyn Bay, north Wales, in 2011. A low pressure system near Ireland drawing in warm air from the Azores means it is also possible that New Year’s Day temperatures could exceed the 15.6C recorded at Bude in north Cornwall in 1916. “Records are under threat on both days,” said Met Office forecaster Craig Snell. “Even at midnight it is likely to be 10-12C when you would expect it to be more like 3-5C. You won’t need a full winter outfit on and you can probably move your celebrations outside.” While it has been warm, December has been very dull with the UK experiencing an average of 27 hours of sunshine – about 40% less than normal for this time of year. Snell said it was impossible to say if this period of warm weather was due to the climate emergency. “But what we can say is that these sort of extremes are becoming more common.” He pointed out that on Boxing Day the Alaska island of Kodiak recorded a temperature of 19.4C, the highest ever for December in the state. Though many official outdoor public events in the UK have been cancelled, such as the fireworks display in London and Scotland’s main open-air Hogmanay and New Year’s Day events, people are still expected to gather for their own smaller-scale open-air events. The Cornish seaside town of St Ives, a popular new year’s spot, is busy with visitors. Alan Spencer, joint owner of the holiday rental agency So St Ives, said all his properties were let. The fireworks display has been cancelled, but people are expected to gather in fancy dress on the harbour. “Some will be nervous but it’s mostly an outdoors experience,” said Spencer. Hardy types are heading for the hills. Fi Darby, a writer specialising in the outdoors, said she and her husband, Simon, were planning a winter wild camp on Dartmoor. “The intention is to pack everything we need for an overnight stay and breakfast into our rucksacks, and walk off to find a lonely spot within the Dartmoor national park wild camping area. If the weather allows, we’ll be sleeping in bivvy bags but otherwise we’ll take a small tent.” The less adventurous may stick to their back gardens. The Garden Centre Association reported that sales of furniture, barbecues and fire pits are up by 60% on last year. The warm temperatures are not here to stay. Cooler weather is due to move in next week with snow possible in Scotland.The former Afghan president Ashraf Ghani has broken his silence with his first interview since fleeing Kabul four months ago, in effect blaming the international community and in particular the Americans for the fall of the republic. Ghani told the BBC he was rushed into fleeing Kabul on a helicopter by his “terrified” national security adviser, Hamdullah Mohib, and the commander of the collapsing presidential security detail. “They said the PPS [presidential protection service] has collapsed, [and] if I take a stand they will all be killed,” Ghani said. “He [Mohib] did not give me more than two minutes.” He was speaking to the former chief of the British defence staff, Gen Sir Nick Carter, who was guest-editing BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. The Taliban were clearly on a path to controlling Afghanistan before Ghani’s flight into exile, but his hasty departure ended hopes of an orderly handover of power that might have kept some aid flowing, and scuttled plans for an inclusive government. Now Afghanistan is stalked by famine; its economy has contracted by more than a third, and its health and education sectors have been crippled by an abrupt halt to foreign funds on which they relied. Asked by Carter what he would say to the Afghan people, many of whom “blame you as their leader” for the current catastrophe, Ghani said his biggest mistake had been relying on Afghanistan’s allies. “What they rightly blame me for, they have a total right to, I trusted in our international partnership and pursued that path,” he said. “All of us made a huge mistake assuming the patience of the international community would last.” Ghani criticised Washington for leaving his government out of years of peace talks with the Taliban, claiming that deals signed under the US peace envoy Zalmay Khalilzad in effect sacrificed Afghans for a smooth departure of US troops. “Process-wise, outcome-wise, the responsibility has to clearly rest with the [American] team,” he said. “We were never given the opportunity to sit down with them [the Taliban]. Ambassador Khalilzad sat down with them; it became an American issue, not an Afghan issue. They erased us.” Khalilzad said in his own interview with the Today programme that the collapse of the republic was due to a “failure of Afghan leadership” and Afghan troops that did not “resist hard” against the Taliban. Six months ago the two men were among the most influential figures shaping Afghanistan’s future; now neither are willing to accept any responsibility for the tragedy stalking the country. Carter asked the former president about any personal regrets that had surfaced in the last 100 days. Ghani did not mention the humanitarian crisis, but he lamented the damage to his reputation and legacy. “My work has been destroyed. My values have been trampled on, and I’ve been made a scapegoat.”US airline JetBlue has cancelled almost 1,300 flights over the coming fortnight as the rapid spread of the Omicron variant wreaks havoc for airlines. Airlines are struggling with the combination of harsh winter weather in some parts of the northern hemisphere and the spread of Omicron, which has caused surging Covid-19 case numbers in countries including the UK, France, Italy and the US. US airlines in particular are struggling with the Omicron surge because many are running schedules at or near pre-pandemic levels. United Airlines on said Wednesday that 150 flights were cancelled because of Covid-19 staffing issues, and on Thursday it cancelled another 188. Delta Air Lines cancelled 87. JetBlue’s cancellations will continue until 13 January. “We expect the number of Covid cases in the north-east [US] where most of our crew members are based to continue to surge for the next week or two,” a JetBlue spokesperson said. “This means there is a high likelihood of additional cancellations until case counts start to come down.” A United spokesperson said: “The nationwide spike in Omicron cases this week has had a direct impact on our flight crews and the people who run our operation.” British airlines, on the other hand, had announced reduced schedules weeks ago because of low demand. British Airways has not been forced to cancel any flights at the last minute because of the spread of the variant, even though some workers are off sick. EasyJet also said it had not suffered from any staffing issues. More than 4,700 flights worldwide that were originally scheduled for Thursday have been cancelled, according to FlightAware, a data company. More than half of those cancellations were confirmed only on the day. It added to almost 2,900 cancellations on Wednesday, the data showed. There were 152,000 flights on 29 December, about 16,000 fewer than in 2019 before the pandemic but better than the same day in 2020, before vaccines were widespread in rich countries, according to FlightRadar24, another data company. Nick Cunningham, an aviation analyst at Agency Partners, said: “We suspect that this will prove to be a relatively short-lived disruption, because the exponential of cases is so steep, suggesting a rapid peaking – but that also implies that while it lasts it could be very disruptive. “Unlike previous waves the impact could be more on the supply side (in the sense of airlines struggling to operate capacity), than from weak demand or government restrictions.”A handful of local administrations in Spain have become among the first in western Europe to offer menstrual leave to their employees, in an attempt to strike a better balance between workplace demands and period pains. This year the Catalan city of Girona became the first in the country to consider flexible working arrangements for any employee experiencing discomfort due to periods. In June it announced a deal with its more than 1,300 municipal employees to allow women, trans men and non-binary individuals to take up to eight hours menstrual leave a month, with the caveat that any time used must be recovered within a span of three months. “Girona is known for many things and I think today we’re adding a new item to the list as we pioneer the approval of menstrual leave,” the city’s deputy mayor, Maria Àngels Planas, said at the time. “We are eliminating the taboo that exists around menstruation and the pain that some women suffer – that we suffer – during menstruation.” Soon afterwards the Catalan municipalities of Ripoll and Les Borges Blanques announced similar policies. In September the eastern Spanish city of Castellón de la Plana said it had signed an agreement with its 1,500 municipal workers that included a menstrual leave policy similar to Girona’s after requests from several employees. Period policies have long been enshrined in law in many parts of Asia, often rooted in concerns that workplace demands could hinder women’s ability to bear children. In 2016 the Guardian spoke to several women in Japan and China who said they were reluctant to use the entitlement over fears that doing so would antagonise male colleagues or damage their chances of a promotion. That same year Coexist, a social enterprise in Bristol, said it would become one of the first workplaces in the west to embrace menstrual leave, hoping to do away with an office culture that forced employees to choose between working while grappling with severe menstrual symptoms or using sick days or holiday. The decision triggered global debate over the policy’s merits, even as managers at Coexist reported increased commitment and productivity, and research suggested as many as 14% of women had taken time off from work or school due to periods. It was against this backdrop that the local workers union in Girona first proposed the measure. “There was a lot of controversy,” said Sílvia Rubio of the Intersindical-CSC union. Union reps initially considered asking for up to two days of leave a month, but the idea was quashed owing to concerns that it might make employers more reluctant to hire women or give them decision-making roles. “To avoid any discrimination based on sex, we made it so that any hours used would be made up later,” said Rubio. The negotiations with the city council proved another obstacle, forcing them to whittle down their initial request of 16 hours a month to eight hours. But what surprised many of them was that the policy was also a tough sell among some of their colleagues. “There was a lot of conflict,” she said. “We had women who said: ‘My husband has migraines, why can’t he take this leave?’” Others worried the policy would stigmatise women or brand menstruation as something that is always painful. Rubio responded by pointing to the wider picture. “We think it’s fantastic that we’ve achieved this. This is a women’s issue around the globe, there’s a lot of embarrassment around it and nobody is tackling it. We managed to do it,” she said. “But we don’t want the struggle to end here.” Instead she saw the policy as a first step towards building a workplace culture that would allow greater flexibility to address needs ranging from chronic illness to care obligations. “All of this ends up being a journey to improve workplaces for both women and men, and in both the public and the private sector.”An operation to remove the masts from a sunken cargo ship in the River Thames, containing 1,400 tonnes of unstable explosives onboard, will involve Royal Navy specialists. It is believed that if the unexploded ordnance on the SS Richard Montgomery were triggered it could lead to the nearby oil and gas facilities in Sheerness being damaged, the Daily Telegraph reports. A Ministry of Defence report said an explosion “would throw a 300 metre-wide column of water and debris nearly 3,000 metres into the air and generate a wave 5 metres high”. The ship has remained a hazard in the shipping waters around Sheerness since it sank on 20 August 1944. Its cargo of explosives in the forward holds has not been unloaded. Masts from the wreck of the SS Richard Montgomery, beached in the sands below, have been pictured poking above the water. A no-entry exclusion zone extends around the wreck and a local port owner is responsible for marking it with warning notices attached to the masts. Protective buoys circle the ship. The MoD was supporting the Department for Transport, which in turn has a contractor that will undertake the mast removal process over a two-month period. MoD-assured experts were due to assess the best way of surveying the area, identify any objects of interest, decide which of those objects need further investigation, and ensure that the mast removal work can be undertaken as safely as possible. Two Royal Navy specialists had been tasked with providing specialist survey and identification advice and expertise. A recent Department for Transport survey found the ship’s three masts were deteriorating and in a poor state. The MoD had warned that the unexploded ordnance could detonate if any of the ship’s masts collapsed. Previously the ministry had offered to pay £5m to any company that was able to safely remove the masts. Peel Ports, which operates Sheerness docks, is responsible for marking and guarding the wreck. The seabed was surveyed in October to check for spilled explosives before the dismantling of the masts begins. An MoD document reportedly seen by the Telegraph said that in the worst case the masts collapse or removal operation could cause “an explosion impacting the local area including the nearby oil and gas facilities in Sheerness leading to mass damage and potential loss of life”. A spokesperson for the Maritime and Coastguard Agency said the risk of a major explosion was “remote”. Built in Jacksonville, Florida in 1943, the Richard Montgomery was originally used to take vital supplies to Europe and it sailed across the Atlantic in convoy. The ship went aground on a sandbank after the captain was ordered to anchor off the Great Nore. The water was too shallow and the ship got stuck as the tide fell. Attempts to unload the vessel were abandoned after stevedores and navy divers faced treacherous weather conditions and greater danger as the ship settled. After years of sonar surveillance, divers were again employed on site during a 2003 survey which involved an ultrasonic hull thickness analysis. An up-to-date assessment of the level of seabed support of the wreck was obtained and the status of a large crack in one of the main holds was obtained. In 2013, a hull thickness survey was repeated. This story was amended on 30 December 2021. An earlier version described the cargo vessel SS Richard Montgomery as a warship.Tesla has recalled close to half a million vehicles in the US to fix rear-view camera and trunk issues that the regulators said could increase the risk of crashes. The electric vehicle manufacturer is recalling 356,309 of its 2017-2020 Model 3 vehicles to address rearview camera issues and 119,009 of its Model S vehicles due to front hood problems. Opening and closing the trunk could damage the cables attaching the rearview mirror on the Model 3, according to filings issued by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). The Model S recall relates to concerns about latches securing the vehicle’s front trunk (known as the frunk). “Unavailability of the rearview camera display may affect the driver’s rear view and increase the risk of a collision,” the NHTSA said. Tesla is not aware of any crashes, injuries, or deaths related to the issues with the recalled vehicles, the NHTSA said, and the company estimates that only 1% of the Model 3 vehicles will display the defect, compared to 14% of the recalled Model S vehicles. The recall is Tesla’s second run-in with NHTSA this month. The regulator announced before Christmas that it is investigating a report that Tesla vehicles allow people to play video games while driving. The issue was reported by Tesla vehicle owner Vince Patton, a 59-year-old retired broadcast journalist, who saw a YouTube video of a Tesla owner playing a video game on his touch-screen while the vehicle was moving. Patton replicated the video in an empty community college parking lot, activating the games Sky Force Reloaded and Solitaire. “I was just dumbfounded that, yes, sure enough, this sophisticated video game came up,” said Patton. “Somebody’s going to get killed,” he said. “It’s absolutely insane.” Tesla’s share price dropped close to 2% on the news. Agencies contributed to this reportGhislaine Maxwell’s lead defense attorney, Bobbi Sternheim, and members of her family vowed to appeal the five guilty verdicts on sex trafficking and conspiracy charges as they left court on Wednesday, but their efforts to clear her face considerable obstacles. The challenges will probably center on judicial rulings during the defense presentation that prevented Maxwell’s lawyers from putting some witnesses on the stand anonymously, and another that prevented defense attorneys from recalling two of Maxwell’s accusers. “We have already started working on the appeal, and we are confident that she will be vindicated,” Sternheim told reporters outside the court. To succeed in any appeal, the team would need to show that Judge Alison Nathan abused her discretion or violated rules of evidence. “It will be a difficult talk for the defense to win on appeal,” said New York appeals attorney Julie Rendelman. “Judge Nathan worked very hard to seat an impartial jury, and the defendant received a fair trial.” One area that Maxwell’s defense could try and use as grounds for appeal is whether the jury felt rushed in their deliberations after they were told they would have to work through New Years and pressure from the risk of Covid interrupting deliberations. “Did that play any role in their decision-making? At the same time, the jury was very expressive in their notes to the judge that they were taking the time they needed. The fact that they came back not guilty on one of the counts showed that they were taking the time to go through every piece of evidence,” Rendelman said. Another issue to be raised could be the role of compensation to Epstein’s victims. Ahead of the trial, for instance, Maxwell’s defense said they planned to call officials from the Epstein Victims Compensation Fund, which has awarded nearly $125m to about 150 individuals. The four witness against Maxwell received sums of up to $5m, and Maxwell’s defense had planned to introduce their statements to the fund to illuminate any inconsistencies in their testimony to the jury. But lawyers say that even if an appeals court agreed to hear the case, Maxwell’s lawyers would need to show that any violations were material to the trial’s outcome. A “harmless error” is not enough to overturn a conviction, Bennett Gershman, a professor at Pace Law School, told Reuters. Appeals lawyers could also argue as grounds for a challenge Nathan’s instruction to the jury that Maxwell could be found guilty even if she had deliberately ignored evidence of Epstein’s wrongdoing. Maxwell’s lawyers may also raise on appeal Nathan’s ruling preventing three defense witnesses from testifying anonymously. “There’s precedent when it comes to sexual crimes for witnesses to have their names removed, but there’s no precedent in the defense’s request to have their witnesses testify under a pseudonym, so I think Judge Nathan felt she had no choice but to rule them inadmissable,” Rendelman said.It was one of the most heartwarming images of the Tokyo Olympics. In the aftermath of the women’s BMX final, the newly minted gold medallist Beth Shriever sat slumped on the track in front of a metal barrier, her legs splayed uselessly in front of her. She had pumped every last drop from them to see off the world No 1, Mariana Pajón, in a thrilling chase to the line. Now they couldn’t even lift her to her feet. Within seconds, her GB teammate Kye Whyte was at her side. Whyte had taken silver in the men’s race that preceded Shriever’s, but you could see in his face what meant more to him. She mumbled something about not being able to feel her limbs. So he scooped her up in her arms and they celebrated the moment together. BMX is such a male-dominated affair in Britain that UK Sport initially withdrew its funding for female athletes after Rio, believing there wasn’t enough talent to justify a programme. Just two days after Shriever won Britain’s first BMX gold, Charlotte Worthington secured its second in the women’s freestyle title. In her final routine, the 25-year-old became the first woman to land a 360-degree backflip in competition – she had been competing for only four years. Shriever says she hopes that their joint achievements have “proved our point”. “What Charlotte and I have done has made people realise there’s high potential for women to succeed in this sport,” she says. What’s interesting about the experiences of these two champions is that after their experiences outside the system – crowdfunding to cover travel expenses, working part-time as a teaching assistant and waitress respectively – Shriever and Worthington had spent the past couple of years training full-time with their male peers. The reason Whyte was so excited for Shriever was that he had witnessed first-hand what she had put herself through. In 2021, sport seemed more open than ever to the notion of women training, performing and competing on the same stage as men. Mixed relay events made their debut at the Olympic Games in the pool and on the track. Cricket launched a new tournament that offered the same profile to its women’s and men’s teams. The trend is a promising one for gender equality, not least because it breaks the mould that has for so long cast women’s sports as an adjunct to men’s. The advantages of more gender-mixed environments have been many and instantaneous. Worthington says that in other circumstances, that famed 360 might never have been in her arsenal. “Performing tricks is so much about mental capability and confidence,” she says. “If I’d been training with women I might have been held back by what’s been achieved already – or rather, what had never been achieved.” Shriever, meanwhile, watched as the men around her learned a new attitude from the way she worked. “They’ve learned to treat and respect women a bit more. It creates a much more positive environment.” The staging of the Hundred, English cricket’s new domestic tournament, spread those happy outcomes even further. While plenty of fans had decried the need for more short-form cricket in the game’s already strained calendar, most of them agreed on one thing: it did wonders for the prestige, and the following, of the women’s game. In a counterintuitive piece of scheduling, the Hundred kicked off with a women’s fixture at The Oval which instantly broke both attendance and viewing figures, and records continued to be broken throughout its six-week run. The BBC’s prime-time coverage created a number of new stars among the young fanbase it was targeting – including the then 16-year-old Alice Capsey, who was still waiting for her GCSE results when she scored a half-century on her debut. “That first game was daunting,” admits Capsey. “There were international players like Tash Farrant and Mady Villiers and Dane van Niekerk all saying that was the best crowd they’d played in front of. I was a bit naive going into it, I’d only played a bit of county cricket – this was a completely new experience, not being able to hear what your teammate was saying 10 metres away!” Capsey ended up playing every game, including the final against Southern Brave at Lord’s, where she contributed to Oval Invincibles’ victory with both bat and ball. She says there is huge anticipation among her fellow cricketers at the massive interest the Hundred has sparked in the women’s game. “Everyone’s really excited about how we’re going to build on it next year,” says Capsey. She hopes that in its next edition the men’s and women’s teams will be more closely integrated – “some teams like Southern Brave and Birmingham Phoenix were really big on combining the two sides, but Covid regulations made it more difficult.” For many, one of the most enjoyable features of the Hundred was itself a byproduct of Covid – the fact that most of the games were played as double-headers, ensuring unusually gender-mixed crowds in the stands. The family-friendly atmosphere was a good look for the sport, whose one-day and T20 matches can often evolve into rowdy, binge-laden affairs. Sports fans have long resigned themselves to the idea that antisocial behaviours are just the price you pay for a stadium atmosphere: here was proof that a change in tradition isn’t always a bad thing. Elsewhere, 2021 saw major sporting breakthroughs in a variety of traditionally masculine arenas. There are certain sports where the only thing that has ever prevented men and women competing on an equal footing has been male opposition to the idea. Darts is one of those – and in the Nordic Darts Masters, Fallon Sherrock finished runner-up to the legendary Michael van Gerwen, before becoming the first woman to reach the quarter-final of the Grand Slam of Darts in November. While Sherrock’s ceiling-smashing achievements made her the darling of the oche, jump racing was experiencing an even more seismic shock. At the Cheltenham Festival, Rachael Blackmore’s six winners – including the Champion Hurdle – led to her being named the leading jockey, the first woman ever to receive the title. But it was her pitch-perfect race on Minella Times in the Grand National that secured her the national spotlight, and an everlasting legacy. Only 20 women have ever competed in Aintree’s marquee race; half of their rides have come in the past decade. The speed with which they have proved themselves on equal terms is astonishing. Given the natural weight advantage and tradition of horsemanship that pertains to women, it is just as extraordinary that is has taken so long for horse racing to learn to value them. For Laura Collett, who won team eventing gold in Tokyo alongside Tom McEwen and Oliver Townend, the injustice is stark. “In equestrianism, gender has never been an issue: we’re all treated as completely equal and see ourselves that way. But in racing, which I’m very into, it’s only recently you’ve got the likes of Rachael or Hollie Doyle being given the opportunity. Rachael sees herself just as a jockey, not a female jockey – that’s what it should be like. It makes me realise how lucky we are in our sport.” Within days of returning home from the Olympics, Collett, McEwen and Townend were back competing against each other in their regular events. And while mixed relay triathlon was a first for this year’s Olympics, teaming up was nothing new for its inaugural winners. “I’ve been doing mixed relays for a few years now and I’ve always loved it,” says Georgia Taylor-Brown, who took gold alongside Jess Learmonth, Jonny Brownlee and Alex Yee. “I was really aware that if we did well in the very first one at the Olympic Games we’d go down in the history books.” Their triumph was more than just another notch in GB’s medal tally: it fired the imagination of the watching public. For Taylor-Brown, it was an expression of the strong collegiate spirit that exists between Britain’s male and female triathletes. “We’re quite a small family – we’ll go to a world series race with only 10 or so athletes, so you’re all close and it’s very inclusive,” she says. “I’ll go out with the guys’ group ride, and Jess will swim with them in the pool because she’s probably quicker than a lot of the boys anyway.” Taylor-Brown thinks we’ll see more and more sports adopting a more mixed-gender approach in future. “Mixed genders adds an even better dynamic to the race because you don’t know what’s going to happen,” she says. “Just look at the swimming mixed relay, when GB were quite far behind after the first leg. All of a sudden Adam Peaty’s chasing down the women’s 100m breaststroke champion – it’s really dramatic, and tactically fascinating.”The Canadian film-maker Jean-Marc Vallée, who has died aged 58, apparently of a heart attack, handled serious subjects with bounce and briskness, earning prizes and respect in the process. His film Dallas Buyers Club (2013), starring Matthew McConaughey as a rodeo rider who illegally imports retroviral drugs for himself and his fellow Aids patients in the mid-1980s, was directed with great clarity. McConaughey and his co-star Jared Leto, who played an HIV-positive transgender woman, won Oscars. Moments in the film that might have been heightened or underlined – such as a sexual encounter that qualifies as carefree only because both participants have already contracted Aids, or a fantasy scene in a room full of butterflies – were instead folded nonchalantly into the mix. “It really comes down to the fact that I just don’t want to show off in any way,” he said. “I love telling these stories that feel real, and authentic, so I try not to get too ‘Hollywood’ with it all when I am shooting. I just say, ‘Let’s get rid of this, go handheld, use natural light.’” The critic Anthony Lane called him “a film-maker of considerable cunning, who takes predicaments that should by rights deflate the heart … and turns them into nimble entertainments”. He was equally successful in television. In 2017, he directed a starry cast (Nicole Kidman, Reese Witherspoon, Laura Dern) in the first series of Big Little Lies, a murder mystery set in an affluent community in Monterey, California. The show won multiple acting prizes, while Vallée took home a Primetime Emmy and a Directors Guild of America award. Citing his interest in “complicated, strongly etched female leads”, the DGA Quarterly called him “the George Cukor of our times”. He had previously worked with two members of the show’s cast on Wild (2014), in which Witherspoon played the writer Cheryl Strayed, for whom a 1,100-mile solo hike becomes a way of coping with and reflecting on her troubled past; Dern is seen in flashback as her late mother. Both women were Oscar-nominated. Vallée was born in Montreal, Canada; his father was a music programmer at the city’s radio stations. It was while studying business management at Collège Ahuntsic, Montreal, that Vallée took a film class for reasons of “pure laziness”, only to find the subject enthralling. He went on to study film at the University of Quebec, and directed music videos and several award-winning shorts after graduating. He made the thriller Black List (1995) before coming to Hollywood to direct the western Los Locos (1997). His international breakthrough came with C.R.A.Z.Y. (2005), a coming-out drama set in the 1960s and 70s. Having tried to get it off the ground for a decade, he was finally inspired to make it after seeing the British hit Billy Elliot. “I was frustrated with my films in the past,” he said. “I was having some kind of midlife crisis with my career and who I was … Seeing [Billy Elliot] really made me think that I’d better hurry up and make my film.” C.R.A.Z.Y. was curiously tentative about its hero’s sexuality, though Vallée’s use of music to express characterisation could not be faulted. He ploughed his entire fee, C$600,000 (£350,000) into securing rights to songs by David Bowie, Pink Floyd and others. Music shaped his approach to directing. He created playlists to help his actors get into character, and blasted out the Rolling Stones on the set of The Young Victoria (2009), scripted by the Downton Abbey creator Julian Fellowes, co-produced by Sarah Ferguson and starring Emily Blunt as the youthful monarch. But his hopes of using songs by the Icelandic rock band Sigur Rós on the soundtrack were scuppered by the producers. “I lost creative control,” he said. “It’s not my cut. I would have done something different, mainly with the music.” He called the final score “traditional, classical, almost too cliched”. He had a happier time making Café de Flore (2011), which juxtaposes the travails of a celebrity DJ in latter-day Montreal with the story of a single mother raising a son with Down’s syndrome in late-60s Paris. Aside from C.R.A.Z.Y., it was the only one of his films on which he took a writing credit. He also directed Demolition (2015), starring Jake Gyllenhaal as a widower whose grief is expressed in a compulsion to destroy or dismantle his surroundings. Vallée went straight from Big Little Lies into another TV miniseries: Sharp Objects (2018), adapted from Gillian Flynn’s novel about a wayward reporter, played by Amy Adams, covering a murder story in her home town. Vallée, who had previously worked with Adams on an unmade Janis Joplin biopic, directed all eight episodes. The second series of Big Little Lies (2019), in which Meryl Streep joined the cast, was less rapturously received. It was also overshadowed by reports that material shot by its British director, Andrea Arnold, had been recut against her wishes by producers and editors, Vallée among them, to bring the series more in line with its predecessor. Vallée’s upcoming projects included a film about John Lennon and Yoko Ono, and an adaptation for television of Zack McDermott’s book Gorilla and the Bird: A Memoir of Madness and a Mother’s Love, about a lawyer who is admitted to a psychiatric hospital after suffering a breakdown. “I have a thing for underdogs, where they’ve got to put up a fight to find their happiness and to find themselves,” he said. “I guess I had to do it, too.” He is survived by his sons, Alex and Émile, from his marriage to the writer Chantal Cadieux; the couple divorced in 2006. • Jean-Marc Vallée, film director, born 9 March 1963; died 26 December 2021A soldier on a patrol march collided with a child who fell under their feet at the Tower of London. The incident involving a Coldstream Guard, a division with a ceremonial role of providing protection for Royal palaces and known for their no-nonsense approach to tourists, was filmed and has been widely shared. A spokesperson for the army said the public had been warned a patrol was approaching, adding that the soldier checked on the child afterwards and was reassured they were not injured. The footage shows two guards on patrol when a young girl falls under their path and does not move in time as the soldier walks over her without looking back. In the video, a cry can be heard before the collision. An Army spokesperson said: “We are aware of an incident at the Tower of London earlier today during a routine patrol. “The Guardsman on duty warned members of the public that a patrol was approaching, but the child unfortunately ran out in front of the soldier unexpectedly. “The soldier tried to step over the child and continued on his duty. “Following the incident, the soldier checked on the child and was reassured that all was well.” The incident has prompted a mixed reaction, however, with some criticising the soldier’s actions and others arguing that the child was unharmed and should not have been in their way. The Coldstream Guards is the oldest continuously serving regular regiment in the British army. One of its principal roles is the protection of the monarchy so it often participates in state ceremonial occasions. Recruits to the Guards Division go through intensive training devoted to drill and ceremonies. • The headline and introduction of this article were amended on 30 December 2021 to describe the incident more accurately.Industry groups have denied pressuring federal and state authorities to renege on a commitment to provide free rapid antigen tests to Australians. This is despite Scott Morrison’s claims the decision to allow “private market” operators to provide the kits was the result of concern from suppliers. Following Thursday’s national cabinet meeting, the prime minister announced that, although the New South Wales and Victorian governments had committed to provide free RAT tests to the community, they would now only be made available to certain sectors of the community, such as those in aged care. “But for all other casual uses – you would just like to get a test or something like that – well, that is what the private market is for,” Morrison said. During his press conference Morrison suggested the decision not to provide them to the wider community free of charge was as a result of “concern” from suppliers that the tests would be made free. “[W]e believe as a result of making this change, and being very clear about who is being provided with a public test and who is not, all the private industry who gave us that advice this week, they can go now, they can book their supplies, they can get them on the shelves and not have any concern that somehow a new policy will come in and tests will be handed out to anyone who wants one,” he said. “It was agreed today that will not be the policy in Australia. Rapid antigen tests will be provided publicly at those testing centres for those who require one according to the rules I have set down and have been taken out of national cabinet today.” But the head of the peak body for manufacturers and suppliers of rapid tests, told Guardian Australia the industry did not have a position on whether they should be free or not, saying all providers had asked for was certainty about a “clear role” for the products during Australia’s pandemic response. “It doesn’t matter to us whether they’re free, subsidised or other some other thing,” said Dean Whiting, the chief executive of Pathology Technology Australia, a group which represents about 70% of rapid antigen testing suppliers in the country. “What we as an industry have been more concerned about is having a clear role for rapid testing in managing infections, in keeping the economy going and in keeping people safe. “In a sense I don’t think we really care if they are free or not in terms of supply of the tests, as long as there is a clear position from governments on the role of the tests. The industry doesn’t have a position because we sell to the government for market price and we don’t care if they are free or not. “I am on the record saying that if they were free it would improve access and equity in testing and access to tests. But that isn’t a point about market supply.” Similarly, the president of the Pharmacy Guild, Trent Twomey, said his group had not lobbied the government on the issue. “That’s not a conversation he had with us,” he said. Twomey said access to RATs “shouldn’t depend on whether or not I’ve got a disposable income and I can afford to buy them”. “So our representation to them [the federal government] has always been that there needs to be a hybrid system, because it may only be $10 or $15 a test and yes, that may be a lot cheaper than a PCR test,” he said. “But $10 or $15 per person per household twice in a seven-day period is still not affordable for some low-income earners.” Guardian Australia contacted both major supermarket providers, Woolworths and Coles, to ask whether those companies had urged the government not to make the tests free. Coles declined to comment, but in a statement Woolworths denied seeking to influence the government’s distribution of the tests. “How governments distribute the rapid antigen tests is a matter for them and we have not sought to influence those decisions,” a spokesman for the grocery giant said. Instead, a source with knowledge of the talks between industry and governments said supermarkets did not lobby for the position. Instead, it was proposed by state and federal governments, which did not want to pay for the supply required to make the tests free for all, and agreed to by both supermarkets and pharmacies. States have been scrambling to make bulk orders of rapid antigen tests in a bid to ease pressure on overwhelmed PCR testing clinics, with both NSW and Victoria confirming large orders of the RATs in recent days. In NSW, the premier, Dominic Perrottet, said as recently as Wednesday that the state government had bought a total of 50m rapid tests to be distributed for free from the end of January. But on Thursday Morrison said all states had agreed to distribute them in a more targeted way. He told media that certain industries such as health and education would be provided with the tests, as well as people who had been identified as close contacts of positive cases. “In addition to that, we’re looking at vulnerable groups of people, particularly Indigenous populations, especially in remote areas, and are looking at how we will do this in schools, so they will be a role for public provision in these circumstances,” he said. Despite that, though, an expression-of-interest form for businesses circulated by the NSW government suggests it is still considering reimbursing businesses for test kits if they are provided free to residents. “To ease the pressure on Covid-19 testing clinics, we are exploring options to provide all residents with free rapid antigen self-testing kits,” the form states. “We are taking expressions of interest from businesses that would like to be involved in the rollout of these tests. These tests must be approved by the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA). We may ask successful suppliers to source, deliver and/or provide these tests free of charge to the residents of NSW. We will cover the costs to you.” In its statement, Woolworths said it had been in discussions with the NSW government over the distribution of the tests. “We want to play a constructive role in the supply of rapid antigen testing alongside governments,” a spokesman said. “We’ve already offered to support the NSW government with its rapid antigen rollout plans and would be happy to do so for other states and territories if it’s helpful.” The decision not to widely supply rapid antigen tests was criticised by the Australian Council of Trade Unions, with president Michele O’Neil telling the Guardian that “nobody should be excluded from accessing rapid antigen tests because of their income or their postcode”. “Workers have been calling on the prime minister to provide greater support on rapid antigen testing, but today he has thrown them to the wolves,” she said. “Scott Morrison is putting the interests of private business above public health by refusing to make rapid antigen tests free and widely available.”Queensland landholders are clearing the equivalent of about 1,000 MCGs a day, including endangered ecological regions, according to state government data that raises new doubts about the accuracy of Australia’s carbon emissions claims. The Statewide Landcover and Trees Study (Slats) for 2018-19 showed landholders cleared 680,688 hectares of woody vegetation, or about 0.7% of Queensland’s total. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Improved accuracy of remote sensing make precise comparisons with earlier years difficult. The government had said the 2017-18 clearing rate was 392,000 hectares. About 84% of 2018-19 land clearing destroyed vegetation that was at least 15 years old, the new report said. The great bulk of the deforestation, or 88%, involved land with less than 50% tree cover. The report said 3% was in ecosystems “identified as of concern”, while less than 1% of the clearing involved endangered ecological communities. Stuart Blanch, a WWF Australia conservation scientist, said the figures were “a real shocker”, deliberately released ahead of New Year’s Eve to stir up the least attention. The data also suggests Australia’s carbon emissions are worse than reported, he said. “It’s a carbon bomb for the Queensland and federal governments because it shows we are vastly underestimating carbon emissions from land clearing,” Blanch said. “That’s going to really jeopardise our net zero commitments and any 2030 abatement targets. “We’re a massive land-clearing nation. Queensland has got the vast majority of it, and the vast majority of that is for beef.” Guardian Australia sought comment from the Palaszczuk and Morrison governments. In its 2021 projections update, the federal government predicted Australia’s carbon emissions in 2030 would be 30% below 2005 levels, beating the 26-28% reduction pledged at the 2015 Paris climate summit. That estimate, though, included recent years when the land sector was deemed to have absorbed more carbon dioxide than it released. In 2019, for instance, the sector contributed a net negative 25m tonnes of CO2 equivalent, that report said. Blanch, though, said Queensland’s new dataset, which assessed changes in vegetation down to 10 sq metre satellite imagery, were three times more accurate than that used to compile the National Greenhouse Gas Inventory figures. In 2018, for instance, the federal government estimated 2018 national land clearing to be just under 370,000 hectares, well shy of the 680,000-plus hectares reported by Queensland alone in 2018-19. As Guardian Australia reported last month, an analysis by Queensland researcher Martin Taylor showed earlier technology used to compile Slats was already detecting large areas of land clearing that was not picked up by the federal survey. Glenn Walker, a senior campaigner for Greenpeace, said the Slats data was “extraordinary, horrifying figures” that showed Australia remained one of the world’s fastest deforesting nations. “Behind these figures are millions of killed and maimed native animals like koalas and huge amounts of carbon emissions from burning and rotting trees,” Walker said. “Clearly the current laws aren’t working and the beef sector isn’t taking this issue seriously. This should be a huge wake-up call to act fast before we lose more precious bushland and wildlife.” The new data also indicate changes by Queensland Labor to tighten land-clearing regulations eased by the former Liberal National government under Campbell Newman were failing, Blanch said. Areas deemed to be so-called “category X” that remain excluded from the 1999 Vegetation Management Act accounted for just over 70% of the total cleared area, the government said. Costly efforts to reduce the amount of silt washing into the Great Barrier Reef region also appear to be undermined by the land clearing. About one-third of the 2018-19 deforestation, or 217,419 hectares, occurred in catchments flowing into the reef region. About 85% of that clearing remains exempt from the law changes introduced by Labor in 2018 as category X, Blanch said. The report also showed remnant clearing increased by 58% in the important Brigalow Belt in 2018-19 from the previous year to 35,550 hectares. “The Brigalow Belt supports the highest bird diversity of any bioregion in Australia and is home to at least three species of reptiles that do not occur anywhere else in the world,” Blanch said. “So the spike in clearing here is particularly heartbreaking. “It’s very disappointing the Queensland government sat on this data. They knew it was bad news and they buried it.” The deputy premier, Steven Miles, said on Thursday a group of scientific experts would be assembled in early 2022 to better understand the study results and find ways to help avoid clearing or whether other measures were needed.In a year whose emotional trajectory oscillated from a series of flatlines to over-the waterfall slumps, December arrived with the sounds of summer but little of its usual carefree joy. The first Ashes Test of early December brought with it the opening soundtrack; the clop of willow on ball and droll commentary echoed through the house while I worked through the year’s final tasks. For weeks the main sound of “normality” – the flight path above our house – had been re-busying, the drone of aircraft engines blotting out the morning call of birdsong that had become one of the glorious upsides of lockdown, together with a cleaner harbour and skies. Travellers were coming back to this city just as we were tentatively setting foot in the coffee shops and pubs and eateries that had miraculously survived almost two years of pandemic austerity. You could hear the distant heartbeat, sense the quickening pulse, again. But then the spectre of Omicron arrived in Australia with the cricket whose languid, soothing sounds, it transpired, were deceptive of the new anxiety that now grips us. Suddenly, everything was cancelled again. Managers were sending their staff to work at home. Christmas parties were called off. Get-togethers. Restaurant bookings. Catch-ups with mates at the pub. All no longer happening. And all this, just when we thought it may no longer be necessary to dwell eternally in the present – that it was safe, perhaps, to start seriously contemplating, even pencilling in, the future without succumbing to anxiety. The new self-imposed lockdown finds irony in its coincidence with a blatantly polling-driven message from a desperate prime minister that Australians are at once sick of having governments tell them what to do and should exercise personal responsibility to combat the latest variant. While it’s evident that more of us don’t necessarily want federal and state governments to reverse the government-community onus of responsibility on pandemic public health measures, it’s increasingly apparent more of us most definitely do want his government out of our lives. I also get a distinct feeling I’m not alone in finding thoroughly galling a PM who accepts liability for so damned little (not the delayed vaccine and now booster roll-out, not the knowledge within his government of an alleged rape in the executive wing of parliament, not all the other ministerial impropriety on his watch) hectoring me about what we want while urging us to take personal responsibility? If he’s picking up on a vibe that people are sick of – and sickened by – politics he’s probably spot-on. The quieter atmospherics of a pandemic lockdown had a way of amplifying this year’s scandalous and shameful federal government shit-show – a ruckus that would ordinarily be heard above the din of a category five cyclone. But do most people really want governments out of their lives, especially in life-threatening pandemic times? Or do they actually want governments and leaders who are competent, above all honest and more concerned with public safety than the libertarian outliers they pander to in order to retain power? No. Yes. Governing competently, responsibly and for the most part relatively under-the-radar, is always desirable. Attempting invisibility, doing little even in such an emergency, because voters are sick-to-death of your scandalous bullshit, quite another. If that’s 2021 done, I can well wait for ’22. This time last year I wrote about the importance of hope. About how I bought a colourful desk diary and began planning the year: social events, trips interstate to see families, research travel, live theatre and music, holidays. It seems misguided given all that’s happened since. Time compressed. The world, the country – even the neighbourhood – shrunk. Some delights emerged, however, through the simple beauty of routine, albeit often monotonous, amid the concentrated household company of family and dogs – the four legs, whose delight at the endless companionship grew along with their humans’ ballooning claustrophobia. Like most I’m a hostage to the calendar and clock, succoured somehow, even now – amid all portents to the contrary – by some faith that 1 January and the (utilitarian, week-per-page and empty) 2022 diary on my desk holds some promise. Living in the now, I’m assured, is a surefire way to avoid the anxiety which roots itself in our fears of unknown future. But that can seem impossible. Not least when you have the future of others, especially the vulnerable elderly and the young, so firmly in mind. The young, with all their remarkable resilience, who just lost another year at school, whose federal government refuses to act in their interests on climate change mitigation amid ever more distressing signs of ecological catastrophe. (As it happened, the sound of summer – the Ashes – coincided this year with news 124 Australian species, including the bogong moth, had been added to the endangered species list.) The young, who switched off the politics of nothingness so long before their elders began to do so. That is why merely investing in hope for them right now, somehow, feels inappropriately passive. It’s well past time to engage and act. That’s why at this stage 2022 would seem to have one thing going for it: it’s a federal election year.I divorced my husband after his affair eroded our 22 year marriage (three children). We then had new spouses for another 20 years. He has now left his wife and is with the woman he was involved with during our marriage (her husband died). My children were initially abhorred by this union once I told them who she was, and the pain the affair caused me. She frequented our house whilst the affair was going on. But my children are slowly accepting her. I know I can’t make them feel the way I do but this feels like the ultimate betrayal to me. This woman is by stealth moving in on my family once again, and they are accepting her. Please help me not to feel this way about their father and my adult children, it is ruining my life. Eleanor says: I don’t know why people say time heals all wounds when often after years the same wound hurts as badly and the only difference is other people expect it won’t. The first thing I want to do here is commend you for wanting to change this. Plenty of people wouldn’t. Especially in the grip of fear and betrayal, many of us turn our own reactions into concrete truths; we move from “this makes me feel betrayed” to “I’m being betrayed”, from “I feel invaded again” to “They’ve set out to invade me”. The fact that you haven’t done that speaks to your dignity as a person and your strength as a mother. Happily, it also proves why you’re the kind of parent who won’t easily be discarded: by wanting to be rid of this feeling, you’ve already shown how much you love your children and prioritise their wellbeing. That’s the kind of selfless regard kids detect and cherish even well into their adulthood. Two additional thoughts might help when you feel the bile rising. One is to try to separate this actual woman from what she (reasonably) represents. Sometimes the Other Woman can take on a spectral, shapeshifting quality; she’s a shadow disappearing down a hallway, her only known characteristic that she’s not you. Like the monster in the horror movie before you actually see it, she becomes an amalgam of all fears – even when they’re contradictory. But just like the monster, she’s less scary once known. She invariably turns out to be just some person who gets things stuck in her teeth and misses the bus like the rest of us. Though it’s natural this particular woman would roil up feelings of neglect and abandonment, those feelings are bruises, not predictions. She herself is not the loss of your home life (you already survived that), or the end of your children’s love (no chance). She’s just Carol, or Susan, or whatever her name is, and she has edges and boring bits too. If you were ever able to find a complex peace with your ex-husband about the affair, you may someday find that with her – once she strikes you as a regular old person. The other thought is that when we feel scared, threats can look bigger than they are. We confuse the long shadow of a horrible possibility for the possibility itself. You talk about this woman “moving in” by “stealth”; the echo of being invaded or compared. But there is space between her getting to know your kids and you being devalued or at risk. The kids might have dinner or holidays with her, but I promise that doesn’t mean they’re replacing you or that they’ve forgotten about your pain. They may just be guided by the same thought you are; “how can I act normal for everyone else’s sake?”. You don’t have to heal from this completely to declare it’s in the past. It will still hurt. But let it hurt at the size it is – a reminder of pain; not the size it wants to be – a sign of more to come. In time you’ll be able to feel what Emma Thompson said years after Kenneth Branagh’s affair with Helena Bonham Carter; “it’s all blood under the bridge”. *** Ask us a question Do you have a conflict, crossroads or dilemma you need help with? Eleanor Gordon-Smith will help you think through life’s questions and puzzles, big and small. Questions can be anonymous. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service hereLike many others, I spent a significant portion of 2021 in activewear. As a plus-size woman, my choice of activewear was somewhat limited. Now that dressing to leave the house is back on the cards, I’m doing it with comfort, joy and rebellion at the front of my mind. I’m a 34-year-old fat woman – I use the word fat with love, as a neutral descriptor of my size – and I have felt locked out of the “fun” of dressing for most of my adult life. I spent years in my early adulthood thinking more deeply about the size and shape of my body than anything happening outside of it. This bought me the privilege of fitting into “straight-sized” clothes, but it also means that time of my life is a blur of calorie counting, uphill runs, guilt, shame and punishment. Nevertheless, when I went to loud, sweaty gigs in tiny pubs I was able to do it wearing fitted tartan pants and a ripped-up T-shirt that told the world I didn’t care what anyone else thought. This is the power of getting dressed: it turns your body into a billboard where you can project your values, moods, tastes and desires. At least, this is the power for thin people. When I quit dieting, I also had to quit expressing myself through my clothing choices. The options available for dressing a larger body, especially on a minimal budget, are few and often poorly made. My beloved band T-shirts gave way to hoodies, purely because the sizing was more inclusive. I started wearing loose shirts in the hope of hiding my belly. Getting dressed shifted from being about self-expression to being about camouflaging my shame. The power of clothes is targeted to plus-size people in particular ways. Here are a few of the main themes: it’s part of a weight-loss redemption story; it’s a product that controls your unruliness (hello, tummy-holding-in undies!); or you are exceptional (“pretty for a fat girl” style). Black used to feature prominently. Now it’s more about florals. What is offered in extended sizes from mainstream brands often puts ethics on the backburner, so that plus-size people are denied the opportunity to put their money where their values are and are forced to opt for fast fashion instead. Extended sizing often isn’t carried in store, so plus-size people must shop online, consult size guides with a tape measure handy, and pray to the online shopping gods (AND pay shipping) instead of wandering into a store like their straight-sized friends. Because I’m a “small fat”, extended sizing usually includes me. This is not true for people in larger bodies. There’s still a way to go in extending this right to all people. Luckily, local designers are filling the gap. Small designers are coming forward who tailor exclusively for larger-bodied people, providing a personal connection to what we wear and accountability for its production. Some bigger brands are slowly expanding their size ranges as they realise that catering for a broader portion of the population is profitable. I’m learning to dress in ways that make me happy: what’s comfortable, what feels good, what makes me feel powerful and capable. Relinquishing the activewear and returning to the office has especially made me question who I’m looking presentable and put-together for. While living in activewear, I learned new lessons about clothes and my fat body. For example, I can be comfortable and other people don’t get to be offended by that. A big meeting calls for brand new socks. I keep a stash in my bedside drawer for occasions when I need to feel held and safe; the unworn fibres cradle my arches and I know I’ve got this. I swish back into the office wearing palazzo pants, my curly hair large and defined. In a world that demands for me not to take up space, here I am. I can move up and down the staircase with ease. I can sit how I like during meetings. I am powerful and capable. I kick intentionally against the lessons I’ve been handed by unreasonable beauty standards and a biased fashion industry. For example: bellies are bad, the more pronounced the worse, so hide them. Mentally scrunching up the Post-it of shame and discomfort, I put a belt around mine and march into the day. Big earrings are joy. Sometimes they explicitly state my message (CUTE hangs from one earlobe and CURVY from the other), others times they’re more subtle. A little gold fleck winking from underneath my hair. Because I live in a bigger body, dressing for joy is a radical act. I’m expressing myself, yes, but I’m also a living message to bigger-bodied people around me that says: “We have the right to take up space, too.” All the messaging I’m surrounded by tells me that nothing could flatter my plus-size body, and that excellent clothes aren’t made for me – these lessons are wrong. Carving out lessons of our own is powerful and rebellious. This summer, I’m dressing fabulously. • Sam van Zweden is the author of the essay collection Eating with My Mouth Open and co-owner of the A Plus MarketYou know it has been a bumper year for Australian television when shows as good as The Newsreader and Firebite get listed in the bottom half of the top 10 titles. The stench of 2021 provided a challenging period that most of us would like turfed into the dustbin of history – and yet the excellent output of the Aussie screen sector reminds us there are some things worth saving. From an exhilarating vampire series to a euthanasia black comedy, a trippy science show and more, here are the best Australian TV shows of the year. 10. Laura’s Choice Premiering at Revelation film festival in 2020 and arriving on ABC iView in March, this two-part series captures the journey towards death for the lovable and articulate 90-year-old Laura Henkel, who decided to end her life on her own terms and asked her daughter and granddaughter – Cathy Henkel and Sam Lara – to make a documentary about it. The result is a production told with a tenderness that could only come from family connection, the film-makers imbuing it with ruminative qualities including voiceover narration in the form of letters to their beloved matriarch. With a warmth and softly inquisitive style that reminded me of Sarah Polley’s Stories We Tell, Laura’s Choice demonstrates the power of framing important social issues through a personal lens. Though sad in some respects, it’s an ultimately uplifting story: a celebration of a woman who did it her way, as they say, and left behind a deeply meaningful legacy. 9. The Newsreader Creator Michael Lucas and director Emma Freeman’s 1980s-set period drama, based in the world of television journalism, has a slightly glossed-over vibe – evoking a feeling that some of the rough edges of history have been smoothed. And yet the series, starring Anna Torv and Sam Reid as colleagues and potential lovers working in a TV newsroom, is crafted with a dignified sensibility and uses historical events as dramatic scaffolding. Sometimes these events are fun and innocuous (Paul Hogan winning the 1985 Australian of the Year award) and sometimes dark and tragic (the Aids crisis and how it was reported). The elegance of the show’s compositions and the relatability of its well-developed characters keeps it a pleasure to watch. 8. Firebite In Warwick Thornton and Brendan Fletcher’s revisionist vampire series, blood-sucking fiends are sent to hell via boomerangs to the heart. Tyson (Rob Collins) and his adopted daughter Shanika (Shantae Barnes-Cowan) patrol the outskirts of Opal City, “keeping this mob safe” before the arrival of head vamp “The King” (Callan Mulvey) throws relative stability into chaos. Death by boomerang is one small example of how Firebite reinvigorates dusty old genre tropes with a fresh Indigenous perspective, which leads to fascinating political allegories: in this universe, for instance, vampires arrived on the first fleet. The show’s scuzzy junkyard aesthetic is vaguely reminiscent of Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome, another production (like Firebite) featuring scenes shot in and around Coober Pedy. 7. The End The ongoing debate about euthanasia and assisted dying doesn’t exactly scream “hilarious”. But this topical and wittingly entertaining series from creator and writer Samantha Strauss turns it into comedy gold, albeit of the darkly humorous kind, walking a tightrope between morbidity and absurdity. An ultimately humanistic spirit shines through in the story of Kate (Frances O’Connor), a doctor who works in palliative care and is opposed to assisted dying – though her perspective changes after her mother, Edie (Harriet Walter), tries to take her own life. The tone is provocative and a little off-kilter, with occasional moments that take your breath away – including a surreal scene featuring Roy Billing ascending a ladder into the sky. 6. Why Are You Like This Modern phenomena such as cancel culture and identity politics are, from a comedian’s perspective, opportunities for joke-making but also dangerous minefields to navigate. This prickly comedy (created by Naomi Higgins, Humyara Mahbub and Mark Bonanno) about a trio of super-entitled and opportunistic gen Zers – Mia (Olivia Junkeer), Penny (Higgins) and Austin (Wil King) – rushes right in, entering the domain of the brave and the damned, finding satire in our rapidly evolving cultural mores. The underlying message is that opportunistic human behaviour will always continue despite and even because of positive cultural change. It’s a ballsy premise, finding dark humour in exploitation of issues including gender, ethnicity and religion. 5. Jack Irish Originating from Peter Temple’s novels and journeying to the screen in three telemovies and three TV seasons, the final outing of Guy Pearce’s cardigan-wearing gumshoe is a return of sorts to his roots, the plot of a new investigation retrospectively revealing details about the murder of his wife – which kicked off the first Jack Irish telemovie. In addition to the twisty plotting and pacy execution we have come to expect, the third season has an emotional kick, with poignant character arcs and a satisfying “this time it’s personal” plot. Sprinkled with visions of cafes, pubs and laneways, Australian neo-noir is rarely as good, and rarely as Melbourne. 4. Exposed: The Ghost Train Fire “White knuckle” is a term critics usually apply to thrillers and action movies, but this alarmingly good investigatory series reminds us that it can describe documentaries too. Comprising three feature-length instalments, the focus is an almost unbelievably horrific real-life tragedy: a fire in Sydney’s Luna Park in 1979 that burnt down the titular ride, resulting in the death of six boys and a man. A prolonged nerve-jangling sequence in the first episode weaves together witness accounts and dramatic recreation, resulting in one of the most electrifying scenes I have seen in any Australian documentary. Core to the show’s integrity is the excellent journalism of Caro Meldrum-Hanna and her team, who approach a dusty old story with newfound urgency. 3. Mr Inbetween There’s an uneasy relationship between comedy and menace across all three seasons of Mr Inbetween, and more broadly in the work of its excellent director Nash Edgerton. Scott Ryan is unforgettably good as Ray Shoesmith, a hitman who keeps the kind of company you’d expect – including an amusingly dodgy best friend (Justin Rosniak) – but also has a cute young daughter (Chika Yasumura) and a pleasant girlfriend (Brooke Satchwell). Rather than milking the “hitman with a heart of gold” cliche, Edgerton performs his signature combination, mixing uneasiness with humour. One moment Ray has arrived to rough up a goon; the next, he’s sitting down for a cuppa and a chinwag with the bloke’s mother. 2. Phenomena I can hear the colours, man! I can see the sounds! Science meets art in this trippy and visually gobsmacking short-form YouTube series, which has an additional 28-minute compilation episode available on ABC iView. It turns a laboratory into a film set, creating amazing effects by mixing chemical compounds and accompanying them with an expansive electro soundtrack from the Presets’ Kim Moyes. Separated into episodes devoted to different scientific fields (electricity, energy, matter and magnetism), director Josef Gatti embraces the magic of chemistry rather than the magic of motion pictures. Or, to look at it another way, he demonstrates that they can be one and the same, finding the ultimate effects in properties that bind together the known universe – elements that are, in the words of Phenomena’s narrator, “written in the patterns of nature”. 1. Wakefield Nothing breaks realism quite like characters bursting into song – a risky concept for even experienced film-makers to execute. There is indeed an element of risk-taking in this wonderfully inventive and superbly staged drama (created by Kristen Dunphy and directed by Jocelyn Moorhouse and Kim Mordaunt), which is not a musical per se but occasionally features singing and dancing, as well as taking on other tough challenges – including how to visually illustrate an earworm. Nik (Rudi Dharmalingam), a psych nurse at a mental health facility, gets Come On Eileen stuck in his head, which sounds innocent enough but it in fact threatens to unravel the skein of his sanity. Very skilfully executed from go to whoa, with narrative loose ends and thematic callbacks that take the entire eight episodes to resolve, Wakefield is exquisite, deeply moving television.After two years of online learning, it wasn’t only students who were looking forward to farewelling “Zoom university”, many staff were also hopeful of a return to campus and a bit of normality in 2022. “Being surrounded by students who are passionate about this thing that you’re passionate about as well is energising,” Tito Ambyo, a journalism lecturer at RMIT, says. “And now, especially if you’re in a classroom where students don’t turn on their video cameras, it’s tiring.” But what counts as “normal” on university campuses has changed during the pandemic – and a return to campus doesn’t necessarily spell relief for teaching staff. As international students began arriving in Australia in December for the first time since closed borders locked them out of the country in March 2020, many faculty members were busily planning the adoption of hybrid teaching models next year, with both in-person and online learning. The National Tertiary Education Union says the proliferation of dual learning is leading to the exploitation of university staff, who aren’t being adequately compensated for the extra time and effort they are putting in to cater to both in-person and online students. The union’s president, Dr Alison Barnes, says a union survey showed the pivot to online learning has led to significantly increased workloads and an increase in unpaid hours. That, combined with a lack of support from universities, has affected the work-life balance of teaching staff as well as their ability to disengage during non-work hours. “Members have reported increased stress and anxiety, and many have suffered from workload burnout,” Barnes says. Socialising is a workplace skill Staff have other concerns too. Ambyo partially attributes his online teaching fatigue to the amount of extra time he spends looking at screens, but he also worries about how to protect the intellectual rights of teaching materials shared online amid increasing casualisation and job cuts. “[The university] basically can kick you out and use your online teaching materials,” he says. “I think there’s also that fear of what that mean[s] for the future of our careers.” Elizabeth Brogan, a nursing lecturer at University of Technology Sydney says online teaching also makes it difficult for relationships to develop between students, which could in turn prevent them from acquiring the skills they should gain from their time at university. “[Students] don’t build those peer-to-peer relationships where they can talk to their friends in the classroom,” says Brogan, adding that interpersonal communication skills are part of the nursing undergraduate curriculum. “Nursing is a very social workforce,” she says. Brogan is also concerned that not all students have good internet connections, which can create accessibility issues. There are benefits to online teaching too. Ambyo has found it better for engaging introverted students. And he says digital technology can enrich teaching content. Diarmuid Cooney-O’Donoghue, a tutor in Asia-related subjects, agrees, saying it’s more convenient for students to access materials and notes, while he can use tools like Zoom breakout rooms to guide students in discussions. A PhD candidate researching academic freedom and the Chinese Communist party’s influence on Australian campuses, Cooney-O’Donghue says online tutorials can also encourage international students to join discussions on sensitive topics. “When you’re discussing human rights in China or something like that, if it’s in person, there’s no way to hide,” he says. “But if it’s online, you can blank out who that person is, and there are advantages for those students to be able to discuss something without having their identity revealed.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Nevertheless, Cooney-O’Donghue doesn’t think the benefits of online teaching outweigh what is lost from in-person interactions. “I just think it’s much harder to give good feedback to students when they are not in class,” Cooney-O’Donghue says. “You don’t know who they are, and often students don’t engage as much.” Jan Sam, a Melbourne resident and psychology student has found online learning a double-edged sword. Sam, a 23-year-old Malaysian international student living with disability, found the lockdown significantly increased their difficulty in walking. In March, when in-person tutorials were available in their subjects, Sam chose to continue studying online as they worried about their safety when traveling to campus. But online learning created a new accessibility issue for Sam, who has auditory processing disorder: they couldn’t follow what lecturers were saying on pre-recorded lectures without closed captions, and couldn’t immediately understood tutors’ instructions on Zoom. Sam hopes online learning will still be an option as universities embrace the new Covid normal, albeit with some improvements. “If online learning is continued, there should be closed captions. There should be subtitles so that students can read what the tutor and the lecturers are saying.” If it’s all online, why go to a local uni? Education experts say regardless of online or in-person classes, higher education teaching should be tailored to the needs of students. Andrew Norton, a professor in the practice of higher education policy at ANU, analysed results of the Student Experience Survey, a federal government initiative. It shows “only fairly small declines” in satisfaction with questions related to teaching during Covid-19, he says. “I think part of the problem is online teaching that is carefully planned and has all the right technology is actually pretty good,” Norton says. “But what a lot of students experienced last year – probably to a lesser extent this year – was courses that were supposed to be delivered on campus for a couple of weeks were delivered online instead.” Norton says reductions in government funding for higher education may encourage universities to offer bigger classes, which could push them to turn to online teaching to reduce costs. Glenn C Savage, an associate professor of education policy at the University of Western Australia, says universities need to offer more support for teaching staff to develop online teaching skills. “I think universities are becoming much more aware that there’s online learning, and then there’s good online learning, and they’re very different things,” says Savage. As they adopt a hybrid of online lectures and in-person tutorials, Savage says universities risk losing students. “If things move too much online, and students lose that connection to the materials, space of the university campus and so on, I think students will start thinking, ‘Why do I go to my local university when I can go to another university?” The chief executive of Universities Australia, Catriona Jackson, says before the pandemic, Australian universities were already providing both face-to-face and online courses. “That blend of a rich range of options will continue, with high-quality teaching and exceptional student experience very much at the centre of any decision.” • This story was amended on 31 December 2021 to remove a reference to Curtin University scrapping in-person lectures entirely. It has not done so.My mum used to share a holiday house with her brothers and sisters down on the Mornington Peninsula. When they told us one year they wanted to sell it, my cousin, sister and I so desperately wanted to keep it that we came up with an idea: we’d start throwing mini festival parties in summer to show them how many people loved the house. Every February, we invited people to camp, and we’d book about 20 local acts – always trying to make these events really special. Sometimes we created interesting collaborations; other years there were one-off performance art events. But finally the time came: the house was put on the market. We’d have one last send-off, so we decided to hold that year’s event on the water. We hired a violinist and trumpeter – and a group of fiddlers – to lead everyone down from the grass to the shore. We formed a conga line, all dancing down the street, down the steep little cliff path towards the beach, where we were met by a surprise. Musician Oliver Mann was there to greet us, in the water just above his knees, serenading us with opera. The water was so still it looked like glass; you could see his reflection so perfectly. We all lay in the water – it was one of those stinking hot days – listening to his offer. We had timed it so well too. The sun was just setting – it looked as if the bay was on fire. We live in a painting, I thought. It was one of those moments when you realise just how gorgeous Australia is. From there, everyone started partying as night fell. We’d set up a sound system and we danced until the early hours. (Dancing on sand was, of course, an epic leg workout.) I have snatches of memories from that party: points where slowed-down bootleg remixes started playing, and it felt like everything was happening in slow motion; lying in the boat shed with my head melting into the steps. People slowly peeled away, returning to the campsite, and at sunrise, there were only a few of us left. As usual, I’d wandered off – which is something I tend to do at parties – and I found myself in a canoe, high on mushrooms, with a boombox blasting Mariah Carey. I cannot explain how I got into that canoe – but there I was, enjoying the bliss while someone else paddled out. If I’d had my senses about me, I would’ve thought being out at sea in a tiny boat was a little bit dangerous. But the sun was rising. My friends were on the shore. You could see all the way down to the bottom of the sand. And Touch My Body was playing. So there was no fear – just the safest feeling. That day, as we all woke up and started to recover, we made our classic morning-after meal: just three to four packets of mi goreng to yourself topped up with fried eggs and peas and butter. The meal you had when you knew you’d had the perfect evening. I realised I had managed to work myself so hard that my legs were cramped and stiff as boards – well worth it for the night that was. The ending was so bittersweet. We were never going to have this house again; it was the last party down that side of the coast where I’d spent my whole childhood. But we’d had a beautiful moment, shared with everyone – a story we would tell in years to come. Banoffee’s latest album Tear Tracks is out now.In his seminal work on nationalism, Eric Hobsbawm wrote that “the imagined community of millions seems more real as a team of 11 named people.” He meant that as a criticism – the line is drawn from a passage where the historian described the use of sport, especially football, to inculcate nationalist fervour in Europe during the interwar years. “The individual, even the one who only cheers, becomes a symbol of his nation himself,” Hobsbawm added. But in 2021, the power of sport for good was firmly on display. Amid the darkest year for Australia in decades, sport has offered hope, distraction and unity. When a majority of Australians were midway through a bruising lockdown, the nation’s Olympians and Paralympians delivered inspiration and joy in equal measure. The somewhat-fragile imagined community of Australia manifested on the shoulders of its successful athletes in Tokyo. And what success it was. Australia’s 17 Olympic gold medals this year equalled its best performance ever, matched only by Athens 2004. After a slide down the medal table at London 2012 and then Rio 2016 (where the green and gold took home just eight gold medals), Tokyo represented an emphatic return to form for a historically dominant sporting nation. In the pool, Australia’s swimmers had their best ever Olympics. Emma McKeon’s seven medals, including four golds, made her the most-decorated Australian athlete at a single Olympics. A new golden generation emerged before our eyes – Ariarne Titmus dethroned American Katie Ledecky as queen of the pool, while backstroke supremo Kaylee McKeown had viewers in tears as she paid tribute to her recently-deceased father after each of her three gold medals. Aged just 21 and 20 respectively, the pair have distinguished careers ahead of them. Australians dominated on top of the water, too, in rowing, surfing and canoeing. Owen Wright and Jess Fox offered lessons in determination and persistence – Wright won bronze as surfing made its Olympic debut, five years after he suffered what could have been a career-ending injury, while the flying canoeist Fox won the gold medal that had eluded her for a decade. At the Tokyo stadium, sprinter Rohan Browning came agonisingly close to breaking the 10-second barrier, while Peter Bol captivated the nation with his endurance in the 800m and his eloquence in the spotlight. On the last weekend of Olympic action, the Boomers finally won Australia’s first men’s basketball medal, led by the inspirational Patty Mills, who had earlier become the first Indigenous athlete to carry Australia’s flag in the opening ceremony. It felt, at least momentarily, that a divided nation had come together; to collectively celebrate victory, mourn defeat and appreciate the raw humanity of sport. “To Australia I’m thankful,” Bol said after winning his semi-final. “We’re just human at the end of the day. We inspired the whole nation – that’s the goal.” While the Olympics and subsequent Paralympics offered a temporary reprieve from a difficult reality (plus, some months later, a maiden T20 World Cup triumph for Australia’s cricketers), the joy did not last. The AFL and NRL’s high-profile vaccine mandate dilemmas were not a distraction but a microcosm of wider societal tensions over the jab. One of Australia’s premier cycling teams accepted sponsorship cash from Saudi Arabia as part of the murderous regime’s efforts at sportwashing its image, while Winter Olympians were left in an invidious position by the silence of international and Australian Olympic committees on China’s human rights record as the 2022 Winter Games in Beijing loom. Just as Australia at large was grappling with an allegation of gender-based and sexual violence – most prominently at Parliament House – so too did a cloud of abuse and mistreatment linger over sport. Six months before its parliamentary equivalent, the Australian Human Rights Commission released a report on “systemic” problems in gymnastics. A lawyer who represented numerous athletes during the inquiry described the sport as a “petri dish for abuse”. On the eve of the Olympics, Rio medallist Maddie Groves made allegations of abuse and mistreatment within swimming. More recently, an investigation by the ABC raised separate allegations of historical sexual abuse in the sport. Football and hockey also confronted concerns about high-performance culture over the past 12 months, while an independent review found that AFL club Collingwood had a culture of structural racism. The NRL continues to grapple with allegations of domestic and sexual violence against star players. While it is depressing to admit, perhaps none of this should surprise us. We know, both anecdotally and empirically, that Australia has a sexual harassment problem, an abuse problem and a racism problem. Just as sport offers a vivid image of our imagined communities – a heady mix of tribalism and nationalism – so too does it reflect society itself. We would be naïve to think otherwise. If harassment is rife in our parliament, why wouldn’t it be prevalent in our locker-rooms? Both must be urgently addressed. 2021 was a year which highlighted the best and worst of Australian sport. The same can be said of Australian society as a whole. Hopefully 2022 offers more highs and less lows – that, surely, is something we can all cheer for.The conviction of Ghislaine Maxwell in her sex-trafficking trial is a resounding victory for her prosecution team and especially assistant US attorney Lara Pomerantz, who become one of the high-profile figures in court. The prosecution team – led by former acting US attorney for the southern district of New York (SDNY) Audrey Strauss – had faced immense pressure to secure a guilty verdict and had been portrayed as relatively youthful compared to Maxwell’s heavy-hitting defense team. But in the end, by securing guilty verdicts on five out of six charges, including sex trafficking, the prosecution fulfilled its goals. It was a particular triumph for Pomerantz, 37, who hit the headlines by delivering the prosecution’s opening statement. She described Maxwell in clear terms as a vital enabler in her ex-boyfriend Jeffrey Epstein’s abuse of his young victims and physically present. “She put them at ease and made them feel safe, all so that they could be sexually abused by a middle-aged man. There were times when she was in the room when it happened,” she said. Pomerantz’s words set a tone for the whole trial, as the prosecution hit home its message that the crimes were not just the acts of Epstein, but of Maxwell too. “They were partners in crime. They had a playbook,” Pomerantz said. The Maxwell trial is not Pomerantz’s first-high profile case involving sex crimes though. In August 2016, she oversaw the prosecution of six men who were charged with trafficking minors and in September 2020, she helped lead the prosecution of UN employee Karim Elkorany for attempting to cover up sexual assaults while working for the international body. Currently, Pomerantz works with the SDNY’s public corruption unit, which deals with bribery, corruption, embezzlement, and fraud. It often works closely with the FBI and other federal, state, and city agencies. Before working for the US Department of Justice, Pomerantz was in private practise at the New York law firm Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett. Pomerantz studied at Duke University and the University of Pennsylvania law school, where she in 2006 won a Fulbright scholarship to study the future of sex education in the Dominican Republic. She is married to fellow lawyer Jonah Ari Peppiatt. According to a wedding announcement in the New York Times, the pair met at a “Festivus” party in 2010, a holiday celebration made famous in an episode of TV sitcom Seinfeld.Germans seeking to defy a government ban on the domestic selling of fireworks before new year celebrations are heading in their droves across the border to Polish shops and factories. A ban was announced this month for a second year in a row in an attempt to prevent large gatherings during the pandemic and to ease the burden on hospitals, which regularly have to treat serious injuries such as burns and lacerated limbs resulting from pyrotechnic accidents. It is one of a range of post-Christmas measures being introduced as Germany braces for a new wave of coronavirus caused by the Omicron variant. On New Year’s Eve, private gatherings will be limited to a maximum of 10 people who are vaccinated or recovered, excluding children under 14. Clubs and discos are not allowed to open, and restaurants can operate only under strict conditions. At one firework factory shop in Slubice, western Poland, close to the German border, people who had travelled from across Germany reported queueing for up to three hours this week, filling the boots of cars and vans before the so-called “Silvester” celebrations, which are named after a fourth-century pope and are a key event in the German calendar. A limit of 50kg of goods is allowed per vehicle, and extra police are in the area to carry out random checks, according to media reports. A majority of Germans support the ban, according to a recent YouGov poll carried out for the news agency DPA. The survey found 66% were in favour of the decision while 27% said it was wrong. The pyrotechnic industry has announced it will take legal action, calling it unfair that customers were allowed to bring fireworks in from abroad, and arguing that serious injuries were “practically impossible” if the products were used as specified in the instructions. Many accidents are caused by people taking fireworks apart and building bigger ones with the gunpowder. German firework producers make about 95% of their annual turnover of about €200m in the three days before the turn of the year when fireworks are usually allowed to be sold. Germany is the biggest market in Europe, equivalent to that of the US. Some manufacturers have said they believe the pandemic is being used as an excuse to squeeze the industry into bankruptcy. In the past, environmental campaigners, pet lovers, doctors, the fire brigade and police have campaigned in favour of an all-out ban. The pandemic has only caused pressure to mount further. Ingo Schubert, the head of the national association for pyrotechnics, said: “We’re still lacking valid data to give plausibility to the claims that a significant amount of injuries during Silvester night are caused by authorised fireworks.” He said not enough attention was paid to the role of alcohol in accidents, as confirmed by doctors who treat the injuries. He said the ban amounted to “token politics” and was in danger of backfiring at a time when politicians urgently needed to ensure that the majority of citizens back their measures to tackle the pandemic. “It is a black day for all those for whom fireworks are a much-loved Silvester custom,” he said. The new health minister, Karl Lauterbach, a medical doctor, has campaigned in the past for a ban based on the harm he said was caused in particular to people with asthma by the fine particles emitted into the air. He has said fine particles can also cause brain inflation and dementia. “Within a couple of hours of these chaotic, DIY new year celebrations you can inhale the same amount of fine particles you’d otherwise be exposed to over months,” he told the Guardian in a 2018 interview. “I cannot enjoy being outside when I know how exorbitant the contamination is on this particular night.” His message this year is even more clearly focused, but this time relates solely to the pandemic emergency. Despite the pressure it faces, the industry in Germany is hoping for an upswing next year. In the meantime, the amount of unsold fireworks – about 30,000 tons of explosives – are mounting. They are being stored in about 30 high-security locations around the country.Authorities in the US have shot and killed a critically endangered tiger after it bit the arm of a man who entered an unauthorized area of the tiger’s enclosure in a Florida zoo. The man, who is in his 20s and worked for an external cleaning service at the Naples zoo in Florida, suffered serious injuries after an eight-year old Malayan tiger named Eko bit him, authorities said on Wednesday. “Preliminary information indicates that the man was either petting or feeding the animal, both of which are unauthorized and dangerous activities,” the Collier county sheriff’s office said in a Facebook post. It added that the third-party cleaning service which the man worked for is only responsible for cleaning restrooms and the gift shop, not the animal enclosures. “Initial reports indicate that the tiger grabbed the man’s arm and pulled it into the enclosure after the man traversed an initial fence barrier and put his arm through the fencing of the tiger enclosure,” the statement said. The attack, which happened after the zoo had closed for the day, prompted deputies to respond to the scene. The first deputy kicked the enclosure and attempted to get the tiger to release the man’s arm from its mouth. The deputy was eventually “forced to shoot the animal”. The man was then taken to a hospital by Collier county emergency medical services, the sheriff’s office said. Eko’s killing has prompted outrage online, with many users blaming the man for entering a restricted area. “They shot the tiger for being a tiger,” said one user on Twitter. Another user wrote: “Quite literally natural consequences for the human. Absolutely no reason to kill the tiger. Change that tragic policy.” “The tiger was just reacting on instinct – should not have been put down for this – the man was at fault,” someone else tweeted. Malayan tigers have been categorized as critically endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature Red List of Threatened Species. Fewer than 200 mature individuals remain in the wild, compared to the over 3,000 animals in the 1950s, according to the World Wildlife Fund. For the past two decades, Naples zoo has funded saving wild tigers. In a statement announcing Eko’s arrival to the zoo last February, the zoo called Eko “a great ambassador for his species”. It added: “When guests see him, we hope they fall in love and want to learn how they can do their part to save his cousins in the wild.”That’s all for today - here’s the main stories, starting with the UK’s housing market: The latest on Elon Musk... The ongoing travel disruption: And in other news: We’re back tomorrow for the final day of the year, with the London stock market opening for a half day session. Goodnight! GW In the City, shares have dropped back from yesterday’s 22-month highs. The blue-chip FTSE 100 index has closed 18 points lower at 7403, down 0.25% today. Electrical rentals business Ashtead led the fallers, down 1.8% - although it has been the best-performing Footsie stock this year. Housebuilder Berkeley Group (-1.5%), the London Stock Exchange (-1.5%) and telecoms group BT (-1.2%) followed. Tesla has recalled close to half a million vehicles in the US to fix rearview camera and trunk issues that the regulators said could increase the risk of crashes. The electric vehicle manufacturer is recalling 356,309 of its 2017-2020 Model 3 vehicles to address rearview camera issues and 119,009 of its Model S vehicles due to front hood problems. Opening and closing the trunk could damage the cables attaching the rearview mirror on the Model 3, according to filings issued by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). The Model S recall relates to concerns about latches securing the vehicle’s front trunk (known as the frunk). The NHTSA said: “Unavailability of the rearview camera display may affect the driver’s rear view and increase the risk of a collision.” Tesla is not aware of any crashes, injuries, or deaths related to the issues with the recalled vehicles, the NHTSA said, and the company estimates that only 1% of the Model 3 vehicles will display the defect, compared to 14% of the recalled Model S vehicles. Europe’s energy crisis has eased this week, thanks to warmer weather and a flotilla of tankers carrying natural gas heading over from the US: Germany’s DAX index has closed for the year, having gained almost 16% after a strong year for stocks. The DAX hit a series of record highs this year, before easing back from its most recent peak in November after Omicron caused markets to wobble. That roughly matches the UK’s performance (the FTSE 100 has gained about 15%), but lags Paris’s 29% surge. British Airways has scrapped flights to Hong Kong until March, Bloomberg reports, as the territory further tightens aircrew quarantine restrictions to contain the spread of the omicron coronavirus variant. The earliest available flights from London to Hong Kong are from March 1, according to a search on the carrier’s website. The carrier had previously temporarily suspended services to Hong Kong at the end of November after one employee tested positive for Covid-19 and staff were sent into quarantine. On Wednesday, Hong Kong-based Cathay Pacific Airways said it will make “significant” changes to its flight schedule from now through the first quarter of 2022, and only operate a skeletal service in January. A spokesman for BA said. “Like other airlines, due to the continuing coronavirus pandemic we are operating a reduced and dynamic schedule. We apologize to customers whose travel plans are disrupted.” More here. Back on Wall Street, the S&amp;P 500 index has hit a new record high. The US stock index has had a very strong year, ralling by 28% during 2021 thanks to America’s economic recovery, solid corporate profits, and economic and fiscal stimulus. Victoria Beckham’s fashion and beauty business remained lossmaking in 2020, as the former pop star, her husband David and other shareholders pumped in millions of pounds to keep it afloat during the pandemic. Sales fell 6% compared with a year earlier to £36m, according to accounts filed for Victoria Beckham Holdings (VBH), which owns the former Spice Girls member’s fashion business, as well as the majority stake in her beauty range, which launched in 2019. However, the company’s £6.8m pre-tax loss was less than half the £15.6m loss for 2019, which the company attributed to better management of its supply chain, and a new business model whereby the brand sold more of its goods directly to consumers. More here. On Wall Street, shares have hit fresh record highs after today’s US jobless claims report showed that layoffs remain low. The Dow Jones industrial average of 30 large US companies has jumped by 140 points, or 0.4%, to 36,628 points, as stocks end a strong year with fresh gains. Chemicals company Dow Inc (+1%) is the top riser, followed by American Express (0.9%), JP Morgan (0.8%) and Walt Disney (0.8%). Inflation has accelerated in Spain, with prices rising at the fastest pace in around 30 years. Spanish consumer prices in December rose 6.7% from the same month last year, flash data from the National Statistics Institute (INE) showed this morning. That’s up from 5.5% in November, and rather higher than the 5.7% rate expected by economists. Prices rose by 1.3% in December alone. Electricity fees drove the annual price index, as Europe’s energy crisis hit families, with the price of food also rising significantly in 2021. The drop in the number of Americans applying for unemployment benefits (see last post) is more evidence that the US job market remains strong in the aftermath of last year’s coronavirus recession, says Associated Press: The weekly claims numbers, a proxy for layoffs, have fallen steadily most of the year. Employers are reluctant to let workers go at a time when it’s so tough to find replacements. The United States had a near-record 11 million job openings in October, and 4.2 million Americans quit their jobs — just off September’s record 4.4 million — because there are so many opportunities. The job market has bounced back from last year’s brief but intense coronavirus recession. When COVID hit, governments ordered lockdowns, consumers hunkered down at home and many businesses closed or cut back hours. Employers slashed more than 22 million jobs in March and April 2020, and the unemployment rate rocketed to 14.8%. But massive government spending — and eventually the rollout of vaccines — brought the economy back. Employers have added 18.5 million jobs since April 2020, still leaving the U.S. still 3.9 million jobs short of what it had before the pandemic. The December jobs report, out next week, is expected to show that the economy generated another 374,000 jobs this month. Just in: The US jobs market remains strong, despite the rise in omicron cases. The number of Americans filing new claims for unemployment benefit fell to 198,000 last week, down from 206,000 the week before. That’s a little lower than forecast, and below the number of jobless claims before Covid. Quite a change compared with early in the pandemic, when the initial claims total hit 6 million. The number of Americans receiving at least two weeks of unemployment support returned to pre-pandemic levels too. The ‘insured unemployment’ total fell by 140,000 to 1,716,000 people, the lowest since March 7, 2020, just before the first lockdowns. The biggest shake-up to the insurance industry for decades takes place on Saturday, when insurers will be banned from quoting policyholders a higher price to renew their home or motor insurance than they would offer a new customer. After years of complaints that customers who regularly switched insurer were paying significantly lower premiums than those who renewed, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) has said they must be offered the same price. The move is expected to be bad news for households that chase the lowest new-customer premiums annually. However, the FCA expects it to result in lower renewals for loyal customers who renew automatically, typically saving them £120 a year each... Elon Musk has rejected criticisms that his SpaceX company is taking up too much room in space, by dominating radio frequencies and orbital slots. In an interview published by the Financial Times, Musk insisted that SpaceX’s network of tens of thousands of low-orbiting “Starlink” satellites wasn’t crowding out other operators, saying: “Space is just extremely enormous, and satellites are very tiny. This is not some situation where we’re effectively blocking others in any way. We’ve not blocked anyone from doing anything, nor do we expect to.” Josef Aschbacher, head of the European Space Agency, said earlier this month that Musk was “making the rules” in space. Aschbacher called for coordinated action from the EU and other countries to ensure that SpaceX’s constellation did not prevent other countries or companies from launching their own satellites. Musk compared the number of satellites with the 2bn vehicles on the Earth’s surface, suggesting there was room for “tens of billions” of satellites. The FT cited an astrophysicist disputing that claim on the grounds that satellites need large gaps to be able to safely avoid collisions. More here: Restrictions to curb a Covid-19 outbreak in China’s technogy hub Xi’an could cause further supply chain disruption. The city of 13m people is under lockdown, while multiple rounds of tests have been carried out, with over 100 new Covid-19 cases reported today. All non-essential businesses in Xi’an have been closed, while residents are barred from leaving their houses except to buy living necessities every other day or for emergencies. Samsung Electronics and Micron Technology, two of the world’s largest memory chip makers, have said their chip manufacturing bases in the area will be affected, potentially adding to the existing semiconductor shortages. Samsung says it will “temporarily adjust operations” at its Xian manufacturing facilities which produces NAND flash memory chips, used for data storage in data centres, smartphones and other tech gadgets. It pledged to take all necessary steps to ensure customers are not affected. Micron said it was also looking to source memory chips from other sources: “We are tapping our global supply chain, including our subcontractor partners, to help service our customers for these DRAM products. “We project that these efforts will allow us to meet most of our customer demand, however there may be some near-term delays as we activate our network,” Christmas is a time for giving. But Santander has taken the festive spirit too far. The high street bank is scrambling to recover £130m it accidentally paid out to tens of thousands of people and businesses on Christmas Day, in a remarkable blunder. Patrick Hosking of The Times has the details: About 75,000 people and companies in receipt of normal one-off or regular payments from 2,000 businesses with accounts at Santander were inadvertently paid a second time. Those finding an unexpected Christmas bonus in their accounts included employees of the businesses and their suppliers. The second payment was made from Santander’s own reserves, leaving the bank significantly out of pocket, but its own customers unaffected. Recovering the money will not be simple because it has gone to the accounts of customers of dozens of other banks, which are now being asked to retrieve the money on Santander’s behalf. A Santander spokesman says that: “We’re sorry that, due to a technical issue, some payments from our corporate clients were incorrectly duplicated on the recipients’ accounts. “None of our clients were at any point left out of pocket as a result and we will be working hard with many banks across the UK to recover the duplicated transactions over the coming days.” Account holders at Barclays, HSBC NatWest, Co-operative Bank and Virgin Money are among those affected, The Times says. The banks can retrieve the cash... but some are said to be worried that it may already have been spent, so clawing it back could push customers into overdrafts. Japan’s Topix index, which covers a broader range of companies than the benchmark Nikkei, had a strong year too. The Topix jumped by 10.4% this year, and also finished at its highest year-end close since 1989. Back in the markets, Japan’s Nikkei share index has recorded its highest year-end closing level in 32 years. Today was the final trading session in Tokyo, where the Nikkei 225 posted a 4.91% rise for 2021. After a small dip today, it closed at 28,791.71 points, the best finish to a year since 1989, late in Japan’s stock market bubble. The Nikkei was lifted by fiscal and monetary stimulus, and optimism for a post-pandemic economic recovery which drove global stocks to record highs in 2021. Back in September, the Nikkei hit a 31-year high of 30,670.10. Analysts expect the Nikkei to keep rising next year, Reuters reports: “The backdrop for stocks looks good next year,” said Masahiro Ichikawa, chief market strategist at Sumitomo Mitsui DS Asset Management, predicting the Nikkei will top 30,000 by end-March. “Omicron looks like it won’t result in a big shock for markets (and) investors don’t seem concerned about the prospect of two or three rate hikes by the Federal Reserve next year.” However, the Nikkei is still shy of its record high of 38,957 points set in 1989, before the market crashed: Pulling together a deposit is the biggest challenge for many new housebuyers, Nationwide’s report shows. A 20% deposit in London is now nearly £88,000 (based on the average first time buyer house price) -- that’s 183% of average annual gross income in the capital. That’s up from 130% of income a decade ago, and works out at an extra £36,000 -- a high hurdle, especially as most buyers will be paying rent. While all regions have seen an increase in their deposit requirements, the rises are much more pronounced for the South and Midlands, Nationwide adds. The Chinese ride-hailing firm Didi Global has reported widening losses and a decline in third-quarter revenue, after its domestic business took a hit from a regulatory crackdown by Beijing. The company said operating losses hit $6.3bn (£4.68bn) in the nine months to the end of September, while revenue fell nearly 2% in its third quarter. Chinese authorities have come down hard on Didi since its New York Stock exchange listing in June, demanding that it take down its software from mobile app stores while the Cyberspace Administration of China (CAC) investigated its handling of customer data. The restriction came as a blow for Didi – co-founded in 2012 by former Alibaba employee Will Wei Cheng and backed by SoftBank Group – which was the dominant ride-hailing company in China. The company now faces stiff competition from ride-hailing services by automakers Geely and SAIC Motor. Retailers are likely to increase their prices early next year, intensifying the cost of living squeeze on households. The trend is already underway, with the UK branch of IKEA announcing price increases; due to higher costs across the supply chain, including raw materials, transport and logistics. More will follow in 2022, as analysts at Saxo Bank explain: Most companies cannot absorb the costs anymore and will pass them on to consumers. In the case of the United Kingdom, the situation is even worse due to post-Brexit supply chain disruptions. In these circumstances, it is unlikely that inflation will significantly move downward in the short term, at least. The London-based think tank the Resolution Foundation estimates that UK households will face a £1,200 hit to their budget on average in 2022 due to higher inflation, soaring energy prices and big tax rise to come in April. Supply chain disruptions will also remain. The president of the UK Food and Drink Federation, Ian Wright, indicated that it is likely UK consumers will not find the great variety of products they used to in supermarkets in the post-Brexit era. British workers facing soaring costs of living in 2022 need a bigger pay rise after a “lost decade” of wage growth under Conservative-led governments, the head of the Trades Union Congress has said. In her new year’s message, Frances O’Grady urged ministers to take immediate steps to encourage faster pay growth across the British economy amid soaring energy bills and other costs. Issuing a challenge to Boris Johnson, O’Grady warned his government could not “sit this wages crisis out” after cutting benefits and announcing plans for a tax raid on workers next year, saying: “After decades of real wage cuts and falling living standards, no one can seriously say working people don’t deserve a pay rise.” More here: In the City, stocks have dipped back from their highest levels in 22 months. The FTSE 100 is down 10 points at 7410, in another quiet session with many investors having downed tools until the new year. Airline group IAG (-2%) is the top faller, as Omicron case numbers continue to surge globally. Gambling groups Flutter (-1.4%) and Entain (-1%), and telecome group BT (-1.6%) are also lower. The more domestically-focused FTSE 250 index is flat, with budget airline Wizz Air (-1.5%) and transport group National Express (-1.2%) lower. Pent-up demand could keep house prices high in 2022, argues Gareth Lewis, commercial director of property lender MT Finance: “Covid focused the minds of buyers like nothing else, persuading people to move further out of urban centres in the search for more space, aided by remarkably low mortgage rates. Unsurprisingly, house prices performed most strongly in Wales, the north of England and the south-west as working patterns changed. However, affordability in London remains incredibly stretched, making it very difficult for a young workforce to buy in the capital. Although many people have made their move, there is still plenty of pent-up demand, which will keep property prices high. An easing of stamp duty for downsizers looks increasingly necessary in order to encourage them to move, free up larger family homes and keep property price growth at a more manageable level.” North London estate agent Jeremy Leaf reports that activity slowed this month. Potential buyers digested the rise in UK interest rates, while the Omicron variant deterred some homeowners from putting their homes on the market: ’The Nationwide survey not only demonstrates the underlying strength of the market after the withdrawal of the stamp duty holiday and furlough but gives a broad hint of the direction of travel for 2022. ‘We are seeing much the same at the sharp end, too, including in the run up to Christmas with rising Omicron cases, inflation and interest rates resulting in reduced activity but not a significant correction. ‘Further Covid restrictions will only lead to a build-up of more pent-up demand. But momentum will continue to be compromised by lack of supply as we have found sellers tend to be more put off than buyers because they are concerned about having people in their homes for viewings.’ Getting on the housing ladder has become even harder in the last decade. Housing affordability has worsened in most UK regions since 2011, meaning new buyers need to stretch themselves even more to buy their first house, Nationwide’s house price report shows. Nationwide calculated affordability by working out where in the income distribution a prospective purchaser would sit if they were purchasing the typical first-time buyer property in each region, with a 20% deposit and borrowing four times their income. In East Anglia and the East Midlands the typical buyer has moved from the 50th percentile to the 70th percentile. Those in the South East and South West now need to be in the top 80th, from the 60th a decade ago, while hypothetical first-time buyers in London need to be in the 90th percentile. This means even more people are priced out of the market, or need to borrow a greater multiple of their income to buy a home - putting them at greater risk if interest rates rise, or their incomes fall. Or, they could get a helping hand from family (which may not be an option for those from less wealthy backgrounds). Wales was the strongest performing region in 2021, with prices up 15.8% year-on-year as the pandemic and the rise in home working encouraged people to leave large cities and move to more rural areas. This is the first time since Nationwide’s regional series began in 1973 that Wales has ended the year as the top performing region. London was the weakest-performing region, with prices up 4.2% in the year. Prices rose by 12.1% in Northern Ireland, by 10.1% in Scotland, and by 9.0% in England. Nationwide says: “The South West was the strongest performing English region, with annual price growth of 11.5%, the largest calendar year increase in the region since 2004. This was closely followed by the Outer South East, which saw annual price growth increase to 11.3%, from 9.8% the previous quarter. The Outer South East, which includes cities such as Brighton, Southampton and Oxford, was also one of the strongest English regions in 2021. London was again the weakest performer, with annual growth remaining at 4.2%. London was the only UK region to see lower annual price growth in 2021 than in 2020, as shown in the table below. The North West saw the strongest growth of the regions in northern England, with annual price growth of 11.2%, similar to the previous quarter. After such a strong year, house price growth is likely to slow in 2022, Nationwide says. House prices affordability has worsened since the pandemic began - with the stamp duty holiday having boosted prices over the last year, before it ended in September. Prices could also weaken if unemployment rises - with omicron already hurting hospitality businesses badly over the crucial Christmas break. But the outlook is uncertain, as chief economist Robert Gardner explains: “It appears likely that the housing market will slow next year, since the stamp duty holiday encouraged many to bring forward their house purchase in order to avoid additional tax. The Omicron variant could reinforce the slowdown if it leads to a weaker labour market. Even if wider economic conditions remain resilient, higher interest rates are likely to exert a cooling influence. Indeed, house price growth has outpaced income growth by a significant margin over the past 18 months and, as a result, housing affordability is already less favourable than before the pandemic struck. However, the outlook remains extremely uncertain. The strength of the market surprised in 2021 and could do so again in the year ahead. The market still has significant momentum and shifts in housing preferences as a result of the pandemic could continue to support activity and price growth. Indeed, the Omicron variant could serve to reinforce the shift in preferences in the near term. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. UK house prices have posted their strongest year since 2006, thanks to high demand, the stamp duty tax break, and a shortage of homes on the market. Lender Nationwide has reported that annual house price growth increased to 10.4% in December, up from 10.0% in November. That’s the fastest growth in a calendar year since 2006. Prices jumped by 1% in December. The price of a typical UK home has now hit £254,822 for the first time on Nationwide’s index. That’s an increase of nearly £24,000 over the year; the largest rise seen in a single year, in cash terms. Prices are now 16% higher than before the pandemic struck in early 2020, says Robert Gardner, Nationwide’s chief economist. “Demand has remained strong in recent months, despite the end of the stamp duty holiday at the end of September. Mortgage approvals for house purchase have continued to run above pre-pandemic levels, despite the surge in activity seen earlier in the year. Indeed, in the first 11 months of 2021 the total number of property transactions was almost 30% higher than over the same period of 2019. At the same time, the stock of homes on the market has remained extremely low throughout the year, which has contributed to the robust pace of price growth. Separate data from Halifax overnight has shown that the “race for space” between homebuyers has pushed up prices in some UK towns by about a fifth this year, with Taunton topping a list of areas with the biggest increases. Also coming up today European stock markets are set for a subdued start, as the surge in Omicron cases weighs on investors’ minds. Yesterday, the UK’s FTSE 100 hit a 22-month high, finally returning to its levels before the crash in February 2020 as trading resumed after the Christmas break. On Wall Street, the S&amp;P 500 index hit its 70th record close of 2021, as the traditional Santa Rally lifted stocks. Naeem Aslam of Avatrade says: Futures in the United States are trading flat, while those in Europe are down, and major stock market indices are on track to end the year on a high note. Investors are pleased that Santa Claus blessed the markets this year, allowing the Dow and S&amp;P 500 to close yesterday’s session at all-time highs. Overall, investors are overjoyed that we are ending 2021 on a high note after a brutal 2020. Although the appearance of the Omicron variant initially alarmed investors, the situation is now likely under control thanks to breakthrough COVID-19 vaccinations and a better understanding of the virus. However, the Federal Reserve’s aggressive tapering of quantitative easing measures to keep inflation in check could be a major factor driving volatility in stock markets in 2022. The final US weekly jobless claims data of 2021 will show the health of America’s labour market. The agenda 7am GMT: Nationwide house price index for December 8am GMT: Spanish inflation data for December 1.30pm GMT: US weekly jobless dataA paramedic who was spending his day off trainspotting with his nine-year-old son saved the life of a young man who lay down in front of a train moments before its departure. Andy Nickolls, 57, and his son Jacob were the only ones who saw the man jumping from the platform at Taunton station in Somerset and lying on the rails. Seeing that the signal had turned to green and the train was about to move, the pair waved their hands frantically and shouted to attract the attention of the driver. Eventually realising what was happening, the driver applied his emergency brakes and station staff talked the man off the tracks. Nickolls said his son, who is obsessed with railways and has his own YouTube channel devoted to trainspotting, called Jacob’s Train Adventures, appeared to have taken the incident in his stride. “He was more resilient than I expected. At school they do a lot of work on mental health,” he said. “Not many nine-year-olds can say they have done something like that. I don’t think it was heroic, we didn’t jump in front of the train or anything but it was a positive outcome.” Nickolls said he and Jacob decided to go to Taunton station on Wednesday though it was rainy and cold and positioned themselves on the central platform. He said: “We were waiting for the train from York when out of the corner of our eyes we saw a lad hovering. The train came in and stopped and the lad lay in front of the train. The driver hadn’t seen him. “My son said: ‘Dad – quick, the signal has gone green.’ We started to shout and scream and jump up and down. The driver looked at us but couldn’t hear what we were saying. We pointed at the tracks and he eventually peered in front of his cab and must have been able to see the lad’s legs so he put the emergency brakes on.” The young man was helped and the driver gave Nickolls and Jacob a cheery wave as he drove off. Nickolls spent 31 years working for the ambulance service and now serves on the council of governors for South Western Ambulance NHS trust. He remains a registered paramedic. He said he was proud of how his son reacted. “Jacob took it really well; he was more worried about the lad. It was a split-second decision to act. The lad would have been killed instantly if the train had moved.” A British Transport Police spokesperson said the man was taken to safety. “British Transport Police received a report of concern for the welfare of a person at Taunton railway station at 11.43am on Wednesday, 29 December,” the spokesperson said. “Rail staff colleagues at the station assisted and the person was taken to a place of safety.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Guardian readers were asked to offer suggestions of who they would choose as their person of the year. Dozens of names were put forward – from scientists to sports personalities, from healthcare workers to climate activists. And in a sign of the ongoing debate over gender issues, many readers also nominated the author JK Rowling, and online content creator Ranboo. Here is a selection of people you nominated. Healthcare and frontline workers Healthcare and frontline workers, they displayed the best of humanity – selflessness, compassion, stamina, courage while protecting as much of us as they could, by risking their lives everyday. Kushal, psychologist, India Eugene Goodman My choice for person of the year is Eugene Goodman, who led Capitol rioters away from the Senate chambers. He is a real hero. Lynn, retired, Colorado Greta Thunberg Greta Thunberg for challenging world leaders to take immediate action for climate change. An amazing young person, calling on all people to do their part to stop climate change. We need more people in the world like her. Anonymous, US Vanessa Nakate Vanessa Nakate. Young and courageous climate activist representing Africa and much more. Gérard, retired university professor in earth sciences, Switzerland Marcus Rashford What an incredible and inspiring young man. Yes he’s a very highly paid talented footballer but the commitment and drive he has to raise awareness and work tirelessly on such a key poverty issue as access to food is incredible and so vital. He’s not forgotten his roots or how it feels to have nothing. The way he has challenged and confronted government policy has been brilliant. I Long may his campaigning continue and inspire others to do the same. I must add that I am an ardent Liverpool FC fan but this transcends football allegiances! Anonymous, north Wales Prof Chris Whitty Prof Chris Whitty because he has to publicly present scientific policy in the midst of a global pandemic at the heart of a toxic and polarised debate. He has kept calm and a clear head while having to advise ministers on momentous policy decisions. He has also been exposed to the public in a way that he seems not to seek and with sometimes pernicious consequences. Top geek, top guy. Rob, 64, software developer, Hove Rose Ayling-Ellis Rose Ayling Ellis, for helping show that having a disability can be an absolute gift. She is authentic, true, joyful and an exquisite dancer who has helped inspire, comfort millions of disabled people, especially the deaf community who are so often marginalised. What a woman! Claire, 31, student support and guidance tutor, Brighton Dame Sarah Gilbert Prof Sarah Gilbert and her team at the Oxford Covid-19 Vaccine team, for their contribution to beating Covid, and for fighting for non-profit making vaccines. Sofia, 56, academic, London Richard Ratcliffe Richard Ratcliffe. A model of dignity and perseverance in his fight for justice for Nazanin, he has shown [his daughter] Gabriella and the whole of our society what it truly means to be a loving father and husband. His tenacity in the face of a seemingly intransigent political force is nothing short of amazing. I weep just thinking about it. Anonymous, Staffordshire JK Rowling JK Rowling. Superb writer and it’s her way of writing that has/still does, encourage children to read. Despite having experienced domestic abuse in her personal life, she uses her experiences and voice to centre women and children so that a wide audience is aware of the vulnerabilities children and women can face in today’s society. She donates to charities so is aware of her hard earned position and wants to give back to those in need. She is very inspiring for women and is supportive of women’s rights, despite people trying to drag her down. Michelle, 45, Wiltshire Simone Biles Simone Biles, for raising awareness of mental health issues in sports, and doing the right thing for herself and her health in the face of immense criticism and harassment. She still showed up and supported her teammates with grace and dignity. She’s a fantastic athlete, and an inspirational woman. Anonymous, UK Ranboo “Ranboo”, a young online content creator, notably on Twitch and YouTube, who’s had a large boost of success recently, and for good reason. He’s had a large focus of kid friendly content, and recently broke the most funds donated to the Trevor Project. He is currently one of the most watched personalities on Twitch, putting him in a position of fame which he has handled remarkably well: endorsing smart internet safety to younger children (undisclosed name or face, vigilant of what he says, who it may reach or how it may be misinterpreted). Provides widely accessible streams and videos with ADHD and dyslexia friendly captions, turning off Livestream screens with unforeseen flashing lights, epilepsy warnings. Anonymous, Australia Gareth Southgate Gareth Southgate, for demonstrating what it means to be a leader in modern England. Beyond his management of the national side to its best performance in decades, he has been a positive role model in supporting his players and fostering a culture of respect in football. He’s not been afraid to be honest and speak his mind, but at the same time has done so in a way that isn’t aggressive or antagonising. And he’s made waistcoats fashionable again, for which I am truly thankful. Janvier, OrpingtonThe Bank of England has badly misjudged the persistence of inflation. It is also underestimating the risks that its policies pose to financial stability. The problems, however, don’t stop there. For much of the last decade, its policies of low rates have contributed significantly to inequality, boosting asset and house prices. Also, it has been too quiet on one of the economy’s persistent challenges: namely, why do banks barely lend to small and medium sized firms? This problem, labelled the Macmillan Gap, was first identified in 1931 and the Bank, in 2019, acknowledged it was a mammoth £22bn. The immediate challenge for the Bank, though, is inflation. The annual rate of consumer price inflation (CPI) has risen this year from 0.7% in January to 5.1% in November. It looks set to exceed the Bank’s 2% target throughout 2022, and as a result a cost-of-living crisis will hit many people hard. I expect inflation to peak about 7% in April, and to stay elevated, before decelerating to 3% by early 2023. Notably, retail price inflation (RPI), which is used to determine many statutory prices including rail fares and student loans payments, tends to be higher than CPI and currently is 7.1%. When the pandemic hit, the Bank sensibly cut rates to a record low of 0.1%. However, it also engaged in large scale printing of money via Quantitative Easing (QE). It now holds £20bn of corporate bonds and an excessive £875bn of gilts, making it the largest holder of government debt. As the economy recovered this year, the Bank continued with QE when it needn’t have. And, as inflation rose, it could have hiked rates but didn’t. Then, this month, as the economy faced an imminent slowdown because of Omicron, it decided to raise interest rates from 0.1% to 0.25% and halt QE. Such poor judgment doesn’t augur well for the future. Regarding inflation specifically, the issue is which ‘p’ it will be – will it pass-through, persist or be permanent? It doesn’t appear permanent, as the triggers are linked to temporary supply-shocks because of the pandemic. Mistakenly though, the Bank thought inflation would pass-through quickly when it always looked likely to persist, as firms raise prices to maintain their margins in the face of rising costs and, as it persists, this leads inflation expectations to rise and people to seek higher wages. Sometimes the consensus is slow to react to shifts in the inflation climate. This happened in the early 1990s when we moved from high to low inflation. Likewise, in the 1970s when the move was from low to high. Many might wonder why the Bank raises rates when it can’t do anything to control, for instance, rising energy prices. The challenge, though, is the second-round effects. Hence the Bank’s focus on inflation expectations, which have risen, and on the tighter labour market. Monetary conditions also matter. Amazingly though, despite this, the Bank’s quarterly Monetary Policy Report never mentions the word money – suggesting they pay a low priority to monetary conditions. Regardless of whether you’re a monetarist or not, monetary developments are a key indicator on the dashboard – essential to keep an eye on. It’s not only about restoring monetary stability by curbing inflation, but the Bank’s actions also risk financial instability. The last time this happened was before the 2008 global financial crisis, and so we should be concerned. Low interest rates mean financial markets don’t price properly for risk. This encourages speculative behaviour, which is exacerbated by the scale of QE. Moreover, because the Bank is a non-commercial buyer, the scale of its buying may be distorting the price of government bonds and therefore yields. Crucially, tightening policy isn’t just about raising rates but also about what happens to the Bank’s holding of bonds, as that impacts longer-term borrowing costs. After 2008, monetary policy became the economic shock absorber. Now, monetary policy has gone from being carefree to careless – and it will be a long and painful challenge to restore monetary and financial stability. Given the vulnerability of the economy, the Bank needs a well-communicated, timely, gradual and predictable exit strategy. Dr Gerard Lyons is chief economic strategist at NetwealthThe legendary British sprinter Ron Jones, who captained Team GB at the Mexico Olympics in 1968 and was part of the 4x110yd team that equalled the world record in 1963, has died at the age of 87. After his illustrious track and field career, Jones moved into football, first as the chief executive of QPR in 1976 before becoming managing director at Cardiff and then Portsmouth. But he will be best remembered for being part of the British team – alongside Peter Radford, David Jones and Berwyn Jones – who stunned a strong US contingent to equal the world 4x110yd record in 40.0 secs. Writing in the Observer, Norris McWhirter said the performance was so good it made “the White City crowd explode with joy – just like in the old days”. The feat was even more impressive given the US team that day included Bob “The Bullet” Hayes, the world’s fastest man who would later win gold at the 1964 Olympics. It was a measure of Jones’s quality that when he faced Hayes in the individual 100yd dash earlier that afternoon he pushed him to the line. “The mighty Hayes, who breaks all the rules of fast movement by rocking and rolling as he fights his pigeon-toed way down the track, was expected to pull away,” wrote McWhirter. “But nothing of the sort happened. In fact Jones fractionally closed on him and was only beaten by two foot on the tape.” Hayes’s time was 9.5s, with Jones’s 9.6s. Such was Jones’s form that year he also set a Welsh 100m record of 10.30s – which stood for 27 years until it was beaten by Colin Jackson in 1990. His great friend Lynn Davies, who won long jump gold in Tokyo 1964 and ran in the GB relay team with Jones in those Olympics, told the Guardian that Jones was an “inspirational character on and off the track”. “Ron will be remembered for being one of Wales’s greatest ever athletes,” he said. “He was one of my heroes growing up and when we raced I could never beat him. He had such a smooth stride. And, remarkably, he did it all while working full-time as an accountant.” Davies said that, when Jones was managing director at Cardiff City, he would even take fitness training with the players. “And he also did a great deal for young people in sport in Wales as chairman of Sports Aid Cymru Wales.” “He was a very proud Welshman with a very warm and outgoing personality,” he added. “He loved company, and a glass of red wine. I have many happy memories of sitting with him and reminiscing about the good old days.”It has become very clear that there are nowhere near enough lateral flow tests for Covid-19 in England to allow the government’s policy of their indiscriminate use. Even if funding could be found to buy more tests, it is unlikely that the government could source enough tests to meet current and future demand because of the many other countries that are also trying to obtain the tests as they struggle to control the wave of infections from the Omicron variant. The government is in part to blame for the current problems with the increased demand for tests. It has encouraged members of the public to test regularly. For example, before social events such as parties and also before meeting friends and family from outside their immediate household. The very high level of Covid-19 cases in the UK (with around 183,00 cases reported on 29 December) also means that many more people will have been advised to test regularly in line with guidance from Test and Trace. This will include guidance for close contacts of cases who are asked to carry out daily tests for 10 days if they are fully vaccinated and want to avoid isolating. People with a Covid-19 infection can also test themselves on day six and day seven of their illness, and end their period of isolation if they are asymptomatic and the two tests are both negative. What can we do to improve how well lateral flow tests are used? The first step is for the government to publish data on the daily supply of tests. We then need clear guidance from the government on what groups should be prioritised for testing and how frequently they should test. Carrying out several tests in one day is not a good use of these tests. Nor is carrying out daily lateral flow tests after a positive PCR test (other than on day six and seven, as discussed above). Even daily tests are inappropriate in asymptomatic people when there is now such a large gap between the supply and demand for tests. NHS guidance is for staff to test twice a week with a lateral flow test, but many asymptomatic people are testing more frequently than this. NHS trusts and general practices need to review their testing polices and give clear guidance to staff to protect the supply of tests. Once we have information on the daily supply of tests, we can then prioritise who will have access to these tests. This kind of prioritisation is quite normal in healthcare and was done, for example, with Covid-19 vaccination to ensure access was given based on clinical and occupational priority. Groups for priority access to tests should include: NHS staff in patient-facing roles; teachers and other people working in schools; workers in essential parts of the economy such as public transport; and groups such as HGV drivers to ensure that deliveries of essential items continues. It should also include patients who are clinically vulnerable and those following guidance from Test and Trace. We are also facing a shortage of PCR tests and an important question arises for the government: should we use lateral flow tests to give better access to testing for people with symptoms and reduce testing for people who are asymptomatic? If this does happen, we will still need to decide which groups have access to lateral flow tests in place of PCR tests. But successful implementation of this policy could allow many more people to receive a test. Although lateral flow tests are not as sensitive as PCR tests, they will still identify many people with Covid-19. We need to look again at the costs of supplying these tests and to determine what we can afford to spend. Although the tests are supplied at no cost to the public, they are not free and will come at a considerable cost to the taxpayer. Access to diagnostic services and other health services always has to be limited; and based on factors such as clinical need, health outcomes, and cost-effectiveness. With the country facing record numbers of people with Covid-19, it is important to maximise the benefits of England’s testing capacity. We need the government to act quickly, decisively – and rationally. Azeem Majeed is a professor of primary care and public health at Imperial College LondonThe health secretary, Sajid Javid, is being urged to ensure NHS workers are prioritised for Covid tests or risk a “devastating” impact on patient care, after conceding to MPs that the supply of lateral flow kits would have to be “constrained” over the next fortnight in light of rocketing demand. The British Medical Association (BMA), which represents doctors, warned that the system for ensuring NHS staff receive tests was “not working”. It said its members were reporting problems with obtaining PCR and lateral flow tests, despite healthcare workers supposedly being given priority for both. The BMA’s chair of council, Dr Chaand Nagpaul, said: “Being unable to get the tests means staff may not be legally allowed to work and, at a time of acute workforce shortages and winter pressures, this could be devastating for the care that can be given right across the NHS.” Demand for tests has been surging in recent days, with new infections increasing rapidly and ministers, including the prime minister, Boris Johnson, advising the public to test themselves before attending New Year’s Eve parties or meeting vulnerable relatives. Another factor boosting demand is that the self-isolation period in England was recently cut from 10 days to seven, but only with two negative lateral flow tests. Official figures showed that 189,213 new cases were reported in the UK in the 24 hours to 9am on Thursday, and 332 people died within 28 days of a positive Covid test although this included hospital death figures from England since 24 December. NHS statistics showed 11,452 people in England were in hospital with Covid-19 as of the morning of December 30, up 61% in a week – and the highest number since 26 February. Javid has acknowledged in a letter to MPs that the supply of lateral flow tests may have to be constrained over the next fortnight. “In light of the huge demand for LFDs [lateral flow devices] seen over the last three weeks, we expect to need to constrain the system at certain points over the next two weeks to manage supply over the course of each day, with new tranches of supply released regularly throughout each day,” he wrote on Wednesday night. The shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, has written to Javid calling on him to make sure healthcare workers are given priority. “I urge you to put the key workers we have relied upon for the past two years to the front of the queue and do everything you can to prevent a staffing shortage crisis in our NHS. The government must get a grip on this crisis, bring these shortages to an end, and ensure everyone can access tests quickly and regularly,” he wrote. A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson rejected the idea that healthcare workers had been unable to obtain tests, saying they had their own dedicated supply channel. Azeem Majeed, a professor of primary care and public health at Imperial College London, said the government was “in part to blame” for the shortage of tests because of its advice to the public to test themselves before social events and outings. “It has become very clear that there are nowhere nearly enough lateral flow tests for Covid-19 in England to allow the government’s policy of their indiscriminate use,” he said in an article in the Guardian. He called for the publication of daily data on how many tests are available, and then “clear guidance from the government on what groups should be prioritised for testing and how frequently they should test”. The Welsh government announced on Thursday that it had lent an additional 4m lateral flow testing kits to England to help alleviate the supply squeeze across the border, bringing the total offered to 10m. The National Education Union (NEU) has called for teachers to be among the groups given priority, amid concerns about whether sufficient tests will available as the new term starts next week. Mary Bousted, the joint general secretary of the NEU, said: “If schools are the top priority, as Boris Johnson has said they are, there is a case for teachers being a priority group so that they can test themselves, so they can be in school educating pupils.” With all secondary pupils expected to be tested before they start the spring term next week, the Liberal Democrats have urged the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, to ensure every school has enough tests in place. The Lib Dem education spokesperson, Munira Wilson, said: “Nadhim Zahawi must provide a cast-iron guarantee that every child and teacher who needs a Covid test will be able to access one on the first day of term, to avoid yet more disruption to schools next week. We cannot afford a repeat of last year’s fiasco when pupils returned for one day before being sent home again.” A Department for Education spokesperson said the government had delivered 28m test kits to schools in the final two weeks of last term. “Schools and colleges use a different priority supply route to get their lateral flow tests. Most kits have already been received for the start of the new term and we have emergency arrangements in place to make sure every school has the testing it needs,” the spokesperson said. One south London headteacher, Ben Roberts, of Heathbrook primary school in Lambeth, said his school had ordered tests from the DfE two weeks before the end of term and was yet to receive them. He said he had been touring local pharmacies trying to obtain test kits. “We were expecting staff to go in for an inset day on Tuesday. If staff haven’t had a test prior to that, all we’re doing is super-spreading again. So I for the last few days have been trying every which way to get hold of any more.” The Pharmaceutical Services Negotiating Committee (PSNC), which represents NHS community pharmacies in England, said some pharmacy staff were being verbally abused when stocks of lateral flow tests ran out. Alastair Buxton, the PSNC’s director of NHS services, said: “Public demand for test kits remains exceptionally high and, despite UKHSA delivering some 2m tests to pharmacy wholesalers on some days, this is still falling short of demand. Members of the public being directed to pharmacies for tests are rightly frustrated when they cannot get them, but it’s concerning that some pharmacy teams say they are still being verbally abused when this happens.” A government spokesperson said: “The NHS has additional stock of lateral flow tests and those who live or work in vulnerable settings have access to dedicated testing order routes. If at some point it is necessary to do so we will always prioritise protecting the most vulnerable as well as critical workforces, as we have done throughout the pandemic when it comes to vaccines, boosters, testing and other infection control measures such as PPE.”Hospitality bosses have urged consumers not to desert their local pub during “dry January”, the month when many people abstain from alcohol, as hard-hit venues struggle to recover from a nightmare Christmas. Takings over the crucial festive weeks have fallen by as much as 60% compared with the same period in 2019, making this the second year in a row that pubs, bars and restaurants have lost out during the most lucrative time of the year. The slump means venues have not built up the cash reserves they need to survive the typically quiet January and February, piling pressure on a sector already reeling from pandemic-related losses and ballooning rent debts. Several leading figures in the hospitality industry told the Guardian that pubs would fall into even greater financial difficulty unless people kept visitingthem during January, the annual month when some people choose to stop drinking. Kate Nicholls, the chief executive of the trade body UK Hospitality, said: “I think we could definitely dispense with it [dry January].” She called on people who are trying to avoid alcohol to consider choosing something else at the bar or going out for food. “This year, there are an awful lot more non-alcoholic options available that are really good quality, so there’s no excuse not to go out and support your local hospitality business.” Greg Mulholland, the Campaign for Pubs director, said: “Pubs and publicans will need support throughout January and we’d urge people to continue to go to the pub. “The pub is about so much more than having a drink, so we hope people recognise the important role pubs play in our communities and get out and support them, whatever they choose to drink and eat.” He also stressed the improved availability of non-alcoholic options in the UK’s network of pubs, the number of which has been in decline in recent years and currently stands at about 47,000. Concern about alcohol intake has increased during the pandemic, following a Public Health England report that detailed a rise in problem-drinking deaths associated with successive lockdowns. However, the report found that the steepest rise in alcohol sales came from people drinking at home during lockdowns that forced hospitality venues to close. Paul Crossman, who runs three pubs in York including The Swan, said it was still possible for people to order at the bar without compromising their health goals. “It would be much appreciated if people did forego dry January, but loads of us have really good alcohol-free options too. It’s about supporting local hospitality businesses so that they can get through it,” he said. The pub group Fuller’s was forced to close several venues earlier this month as a result of slow trade, partly because its portfolio of more than 380 pubs and inns is weighted towards London, where cases of the Omicron Covid variant have soared and work-from-home guidance has left parts of the city deserted. The chief executive of Fuller’s, Simon Emeny, said he hoped there would be “enormous pent-up demand” after people sacrificed pre-Christmas nights out to ensure they could still see family. He pointed out that while the aims of dry January, promoted by Alcohol Change UK, are laudable, there is conflicting opinion about whether it’s the right approach to counteracting overindulgence. “Medical evidence says that drinking in moderation is more sensible than abstaining for an entire month,” Emeny said. “I do think that having been denied the opportunity to mix and socialise, a lot of people will say they’ll make up for lost time and be more sociable in January.” While many pubs fear a downturn in January partly due to people choosing not to drink Peter Marks, who runs the UK’s largest bar and nightclub business Rekom UK, said young people were less likely to abstain. “They’ll take a couple of weekends for their wallet to recover from Christmas and New Year, but as long as students come back in that third week of January, we never see any effect from dry January,” he said.A coroner will investigate the deaths of two women from herpes following childbirth, amid fears they contracted the virus from their surgeon. Kim Sampson, 29, and Samantha Mulcahy, 32, died weeks apart after their babies were delivered by caesarean section at different hospitals in Kent. Their families have campaigned for answers as to whether they contracted the infection from their surgeon, after a BBC investigation found the women were treated by the same person. The inquests have been listed to open and adjourn in Maidstone on 4 January, with a pre-inquest review the following month and full inquests at a later date. Sampson’s mother, Yvette, said: “We’ve wanted this since Kim died in 2018 – it’s been a long time coming. We hope we are finally going to get answers to the questions we’ve always had – both for ourselves and for Kim’s children.” Herpes infections are commonly found in the genitals and on the face, often with mild symptoms. Sampson’s baby boy, her second child, was delivered at Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother hospital in Margate in May 2018, but she died at the end of the month in hospital in London after becoming infected. In July the same year, first-time mother Mulcahy died from an infection caused by the virus at William Harvey hospital in Ashford. Dr Rebecca Martin, chief medical officer for East Kent hospitals, said: “Our deepest sympathies are with the families and friends of Kimberley and Samantha. “We will do everything possible to support these inquests and our thoughts are with Kimberley and Samantha’s families at this time.” A coroner had previously ruled out inquests into their deaths but now this decision has been reversed. The families had initially received a letter from coroner Katrina Hepburn saying there would not be an inquest for either case, acknowledging the similarities but saying there was “no connection”. Sampson had a good pregnancy but struggled with the birth and she kept saying the baby was stuck, her mother said. Doctors performed a C-section to deliver her son and Sampson needed a blood transfusion after injuries sustained in the operation. She was rushed back to hospital following discharge after the operation as doctors believed she had bacterial sepsis. She was given antibiotics, but her condition worsened. Mulcahy went into labour four weeks ahead of her due date. Her hospital was part of the same trust as that where Sampson was treated. She had 17 hours of contractions and was taken for a C-section after some worrying blood test results. After giving birth, Mulcahy was kept in for observation. She became increasingly unwell, and doctors also thought she had bacterial sepsis. She spent four days in intensive care, where a doctor suggested antiviral medication, but the microbiology department advised them to continue with antibiotics. Mulcahy died from multi-organ failure following a “disseminated herpes simplex type 1 infection”, a postmortem found. Both women had a “primary infection” which means that this was the first time they had contracted the virus and neither of their children were found to have it. Sampson’s family requested documents from Public Health England which revealed emails from the trust, some NHS bodies, staff at PHE, and a private lab. The messages showed that the same two clinicians – a midwife and the surgeon who carried out the C-sections – had been involved in both births.Your series of articles rightly cite many who have helped Guardian writers through 2021. But it is those writers themselves who have provided clarity of thought, insightfulness and humour to the paper’s readers. While there are too many to mention from my own point of view, I hail Marina Hyde and John Crace for providing me with laugh-out-loud moments – precious indeed. Many thanks. Sarah Foxall Collingbourne Ducis, Wiltshire • Mary Pickard is correct about animals leading a more orderly existence than humans (Letters, 28 December). My cat, who sleeps on my bed all night, regularly bites my hair at 6.30am so that I have to get up and feed him. If only the prime minister was as reliable. Meirion Bowen London • “Thanks Peter God” (Letters, 27 December) reminded me of the tale of the children burying their recently deceased pet rabbit in the garden. As they reverently lowered the shoebox coffin into the grave, they were overheard reciting the appropriate words: “In the name of the Father, the Son and in the hole he goes.” Chris Pietryga Plumpton, Cumbria • I thought a girl in my class was especially favoured when I sang “He made their glowing Carlas” in All Things Bright and Beautiful. Alyson Elliman Carshalton, Surrey • I’ve always read dishevelled as dis-hevelled, and am disappointed to find there’s no verb “hevel” meaning “to make tidy” (From respair to cacklefart – the joy of reclaiming long-lost positive words, 26 December). David Parlett London • Up to and including 2020, you have published on average 8.5 letters of mine per year. Having got eight in so far this year, I wonder if you could find room for just a half-letter, so that I might maint- Fr Alec Mitchell Holyhead, Anglesey • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Now that the British former socialite Ghislaine Maxwell has been convicted in her sex-trafficking trial, speculation is growing that she may try to cut a deal and become a government witness in any broader investigation into the elite social circle of her ex-boyfriend Jeffrey Epstein. Maxwell would be aiming for a reduced sentence by naming powerful names when it comes to others who may be involved in Epstein’s crimes. But defense lawyers and sexual-crimes prosecutors have cast doubt on the government’s appetite to strike a bargain. They question whether Maxwell has any vital information the government does not already have, and whether it represents a strategy Maxwell has previously attempted that has failed. “It all depends on who she would be cooperating against, and what she has to offer,” said Jeffrey Lichtman, the defense attorney who represented the Mexican drug trafficker Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán at trial two years ago. “I would not be surprised if she had already tried to cooperate and it had failed.” Maxwell, who is expected to appeal her conviction, was found guilty on five of six charges for her involvement in Epstein’s sexual abuse of teenage girls. Prosecutors said Maxwell “preyed on vulnerable young girls, manipulated them and served them up to be sexually abused”. She is expected to receive a significant prison term. According to Lichtman, there are defendants who, in the eyes of the government, are so bad that it does not want to strike a deal in exchange for testimony. “They don’t want to take the hand of someone involved a criminal operation and let them cooperate against people who are well below them.” “That may be the case here – they just feel that she’s so bad they won’t allow her to cooperate,” Lichtman said. But that does not preclude Maxwell and her lawyers from making an offer. “There’s a tremendous amount of information she has on some very important people. Now that she’s been convicted she may be more eager to discuss. She certainly should, in my mind, because a lot of people skated here, while she bore the brunt of the government’s full wrath,” Lichtman said. Former federal and state prosecutor Elie Honig said on Twitter: “Maxwell’s cooperation is not particularly likely, but it is possible. You’d need (1) Maxwell to be willing and fully on board, (2) SDNY to be fully convinced of her truthfulness, and (3) a realistic plan to use her information versus others.” One obstacle to any state prosecution based on Maxwell’s cooperation would be the statute of limitations on criminal and civil sexual crime complaints. The civil case bought by Virginia Giuffre against Britain’s Prince Andrew only exists because of a briefly opened window under the New York Child Victims Act, which allowed accusers to sue beyond the statute of limitations. But there is also pressure for high-profile visitors to Epstein’s properties in New York, Palm Beach and the the US Virgin Islands to be held accountable for any potential crimes, particularly as the government’s case against Maxwell appeared to avoid reference to broader aspects of the conspiracy. “Of all the people supposedly involved with Epstein, 99% of them never made it into the government’s evidence,” said Lichtman. “Perhaps they were trying to avoid any frolic by the jury – that they’d get distracted by the bold-face names – but many people didn’t get prosecuted here when it seems like they could have,” he added. According to Wendy Murphy, a former federal sex crimes prosecutor who now teaches at Boston Law, the relative absence of Epstein from Maxwell’s conspiracy trial was part of the government’s strategy. “They didn’t need more to prove conspiracy,” she said. “They didn’t need to overdo it. There was some weakness in the victims testimony but it was more than offset by other evidence.” The next chapter of the Epstein case, Murphy said, is likely to come through the civil action against Prince Andrew. “Prince Andrew may be the next shoe to drop, and it may be the only shoe,” she said. The windows have closed on lawsuits for the most part, and I don’t know of another lawsuit with the potential to expose information.” But if more investigations do happen, Murphy said Maxwell could get time off her sentence if the government wants important information she has. “I’m not sure the feds are asking and I’m not sure she’s willing to give. She’s probably not going to say anything, and they don’t need her to, because they already have a lot of information. If they don’t need anything, they’re not going to give her a discount.” Ultimately, said Bennett Gershman, professor of law at Pace University in New York, much depends on whether the government feels there is political mileage in continuing the investigation and identifying high-profile people who may have been part of the scheme. “It’s hard to say what the government is interested in further on. We can’t answer that. Are the victims and people who really care about this case satisfied now Maxwell has been convicted or do they want to see other people in the larger network investigated?” He added: “They have limited resources and personnel, so does this case cry out for further investigation and prosecution? That’s a political decision by the US department of justice and the US attorney’s office.”I read your article (Covid test shortages threaten New Year’s Eve celebrations in England, 28 December) and I fully appreciate how the hospitality sector relies on these annual celebrations to swell their depleted coffers. I have great sympathy for their anxieties. But we have had the “save Christmas” mantra, and now it is the turn of new year festivities. Even so soon after Christmas, if you inquire if friends had a good one, there is a pause, and a slight problem of recollection ensues. Of course, revellers are doing the right thing in wanting to do a test before stepping out, but I shall be stepping in. I will be quietly, but not abstemiously, seeing 2022 in and then going to bed, conscious of the fact that 1 January will be very much like the day before, but probably with a significant rise in Omicron cases. C’est la pandemic vie. Judith Daniels Cobholm, Norfolk • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I cannot believe that New Beacon Books is being allowed to close (Dismay as UK’s first specialist black bookshop forced to close, 29 December). New Beacon played a crucial role in supplying Caribbean, African and Indian fiction to schools such as Clissold Park comprehensive in Stoke Newington, where I was lucky enough to teach English. The head of English, Joan Goody, made sure that we young teachers visited the shop, read the books, met the authors and participated in multicultural events, and that pupils had access to fiction from their own and worldwide postcolonial backgrounds. The partnership of bookshop – really a cultural centre – and school was symbiotic and very exciting. Joan Goody’s archive is housed at New Beacon, a source of guidance to modern educationists who wish to develop a multicultural, antiracist curriculum. New Beacon was a pioneering intellectual resource in London and is still at the geographical centre of a diverse area. It deserves to be saved. Dr Carol Fox Bexhill-on-Sea, East Sussex • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Simon Hattenstone’s article (I didn’t want anyone else to look after Mum – until I realised what she wanted, 27 December) almost exactly mirrors my mother’s story. Aged 94, frail but still living independently in a small cottage in London, she fell in late November and spent much of one night on the floor, in pain and disorientated. Hospital followed for one week at St George’s, Tooting. There she received the most amazing care with the doctors, nurses and auxiliary staff all meeting my expectations of the amazing NHS at its very best, even during these trying times. But it was evident that she couldn’t return to her house alone. Luck struck. A close friend had recently died and her carer was available to move in with my mother. Outcome? An elderly woman who seems more contented and at ease than previously, perhaps because the worry of living alone at a great age has now been taken away. She has support, friendship and the most amazing care, and she’s still “at home” – that being her greatest desire of all. But here’s the bit that Hattenstone’s article doesn’t address: money. In my mother’s case, and I’m assuming in Hattenstone’s too, there is sufficient family income to cover the costs of a live-in carer. For most this simply wouldn’t be an option. Until a system is devised, and funded, that would offer all people dignity and independence in old age, we can’t rest easy. It’s so good that Hattenstone’s mother and my mother are now thankfully content and well cared for, but that should, in a civilised society, be the lot of all older people. It clearly isn’t now. Jol Miskin Sheffield • Simon Hattenstone’s article was an excellent sharp focus on the importance of listening to those in need of care. A good carer can give independence, reassurance, dignity and friendship, and even the most of complicated of houses can be adapted if someone wants to stay in their own home. We put raised floors throughout the downstairs of Mum’s cottage, suspended over all manner of steps and uneven floors, so that a wheelchair could move smoothly everywhere. Allowing one’s roots to stay rooted, with the right people and the right adaptations, can make all the difference when mobility is hampered. Penny Lewis Besneville, France • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your report on the state of the NHS (One in four Britons ‘not confident NHS can care for them’, survey reveals, 26 December) was summed up by the quote from Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary: “With record waiting lists, 100,000 NHS staff shortages and 112,000 vacancies in social care in 2019, the Tories left our health service criminally ill-equipped for Covid.” My husband, in the final stages of dementia and awaiting a place in care, is in a holding ward. Insufficient nurses try to cope, but mouth hygiene is neglected. And no shower or hair wash for more than a month. He deserves better. Hardly God’s waiting room, more like death row. Aneurin Bevan will be turning in his grave. Hilda Reynolds Bristol • You report that one in four of us is not sure that the NHS can care for them. I wonder if this stage in public sentiment was envisaged or even engineered as part of a transition to a system of private healthcare. For almost two years we have been bludgeoned with the command to protect the NHS. But protecting the NHS is not primarily our responsibility – it’s the government’s. There’s nothing inevitable about the NHS having to struggle along on inadequate resources while its staff compensate for the deficit with heroic amounts of goodwill. Susan Tomes Edinburgh • In the past four months, three friends of mine, all ardent believers in the NHS, have swallowed their principles and paid for private operations to avoid a wait of up to two years for surgery that would restore their quality of life. They have no doubts about the quality of care provided by the NHS, but its underresourcing means that long waits for non-urgent interventions have become painfully inevitable. With a heavy heart, I fear that I would do the same in their position. This is what 11 years of underfunding has come to. And yes, I do believe that this is a Conservative strategy towards private healthcare, in which, because we can afford to do so, we find ourselves colluding. Ruth Pickles Congleton, Cheshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Ghislaine Maxwell is going to jail, and for a very long time indeed. Prince Andrew’s good friend of many decades, and Donald Trump’s regular guest at his Florida retreat, has been convicted of grooming and trafficking girls for sex in a verdict that will reverberate through the highest reaches of the transatlantic establishment. No more invites to Balmoral for the woman who turned vulnerable teenagers into rich men’s sexual playthings, and no more hobnobbing with friendly newspaper editors either. No more private jets or haughty instructions to staff to keep their mouths shut, even as they were picking up discarded vibrators from the bedroom floor. And presumably no more public sympathy of the kind Rachel Johnson expressed recently in the Spectator, fondly recalling Ghislaine’s “naughty eyes” as she flirted with a young Boris Johnson at Oxford, back in the days when none of them had ever heard of the paedophile Jeffrey Epstein. For all that Maxwell’s lawyers sought to paint her accusers as gold-diggers chasing damages from Epstein’s estate, the lesson many will draw from this case is that the rich are far more often protected by their money and connections than rendered vulnerable by them. Well, now the world can finally see the seedy billionaire and his predatory girlfriend for what they were. Much like the guilty verdict handed to Harvey Weinstein almost two years ago, the result goes some way to restoring faith in the battered principle that nobody should be above the law. Yet there’s something profoundly unsatisfying about it nonetheless. That the woman who procured girls for Epstein and his wealthy friends will now die in prison, while the men involved remain either free to live their lives or (in Epstein’s case) beyond the reach of any mortal judge, provokes a nagging sense of unfinished business. It goes without saying that Ghislaine Maxwell is not the victim here. Although her lawyers made much of the fact that Epstein’s prison suicide left her to carry the can for his crimes, suggesting rage at him had been unfairly projected on to her, the prosecution argued more convincingly that she was in fact critical to the enterprise. A lone middle-aged man asking teenage girls to visit his ranch is creepy, but the same invitation from a couple feels respectable, even benevolent. From an early age, we drum into children the idea that if they’re lost or scared they should seek help from a police officer first and, failing that, a woman. The girls Maxwell lured into her boyfriend’s clutches were reassured by an older woman’s presence and it’s the betrayal of that female trust that feels so monstrous. While these vulnerable teenagers looked to her for support, she was grooming them for sexual exploitation, normalising the perverted anything-goes culture inside his mansion. Strip away the yachts and the servants and all the other trappings of a billionaire lifestyle, and there is frighteningly little separating Maxwell from that tiny but grotesque pantheon of female offenders seemingly so desperate to be loved that they collude in their partners’ abusive fantasies, even to the point of helping persuade someone else’s daughter into a car. We may never know whether Maxwell got her own kicks from this twisted game or whether she was simply too damaged to resist it, conditioned perhaps as friends have suggested by a childhood in the shadow of her bullying father, the late tycoon Robert Maxwell. But the “poor little rich girl” thesis sits uneasily with some of the stories her accusers told in court, which imply a woman accustomed to dealing with problems as only the rich can: by paying someone to make them go away. Kate, who was 17 when she first met the couple, recalled Maxwell complaining about Epstein’s voracious sexual appetite and asking “if I knew anybody who could come and give Jeffrey a blowjob because it was a lot for her to do”, much as she might seek recommendations for a butler or a pool boy – except in this case it was imperative they be young. Carolyn, who was 14 when she was first paid to give Epstein one of his infamously sexualised massages, described how Maxwell felt her breasts and bottom much as if she were checking over livestock for sale, and concluded she had a “great body for Mr Epstein and his friends”. And it’s on those nameless “friends” that the spotlight must now fall. First and most obviously in the firing line are the men against whom direct allegations have been made, chief among them Prince Andrew. Virginia Giuffre, who is currently attempting to bring a civil suit against the prince accusing him of a sexual assault he has vehemently and repeatedly denied, can only be encouraged by a verdict she welcomed with a pointed tweet, arguing that “Maxwell did not act alone. Others must be held accountable.” Whether her lawsuit succeeds or fails, however, the unmasking of his good friend Ghislaine as a convicted sex trafficker makes it almost impossible to envisage a way back to royal ribbon-cutting duties for the prince. But there are plenty more high-profile men who flew on Epstein’s planes, enjoyed his lavish parties, even stayed overnight in one of those mansions hung with tacky erotic art, and say they saw nothing amiss. Was he simply so discreet that nobody could possibly have suspected a thing? Or could it be that a predilection for teenage girls simply didn’t seem all that shocking, inside a rich man’s world where trading in an ageing first wife for someone barely older than your daughter is no big deal? Meanwhile, in the US, there are disturbing questions to answer about a long, oddly flat-footed investigation into Epstein that left victims fearing they would never get their day in court and conspiracy theorists emerging to fill a judicial vacuum. That Maxwell held her tongue even when she eventually came to trial, refusing to testify in her own defence in a way that meant she could be asked no incriminating questions about the household names peppering the victims’ testimony, has only encouraged the latter. Some still hope she might share whatever she knows now, given the conviction has left her with nothing much to lose. The family’s decision to appeal makes that unlikely at least in the near future, and it remains to be seen whether a woman who has traded on her connections all her life is capable even now of turning on them. But she cannot be the only one who knows more than she is telling about that tainted circle through which so many powerful men have moved. Justice is surely neither done, nor seen to be done, until all their dirty little secrets are out. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistA 12-year-old girl who vanished from her home in Devon 10 days ago has been found safe and well almost 300 miles away in Boston, Lincolnshire. Leona Peach, from Newton Abbot in south Devon, was last seen wearing flip-flops and a fur coat. Police were working on the theory that she might have travelled to north Devon where she has family connections. But she was found at an address in Boston, and a 34-year-old man originally from Devon has been arrested on suspicion of child abduction and kidnap. A Devon and Cornwall police spokesperson said on Thursday: “Following an extensive policing operation, 12-year-old Leona Peach who was reported missing from Newton Abbot on the morning of Monday 20 December has been located safe and well. “Aided by officers from Lincolnshire police and with support from Devon child services and Lincolnshire child services, units attended and undertook a search of an address near Boston this afternoon and located Leona. She will continue to be supported by specialist officers and child services. “During the search police have arrested a 34-year-old man, originally from Devon, on suspicion of child abduction and kidnap. He is due to be transferred into police custody within Devon and Cornwall for questioning in due course. Officers would like to thank the public for their support.” The police made several appeals for information about Leona and called on her to get in touch if she could. Officers became increasingly alarmed after she missed Christmas with her family, and her relatives were being supported by specialist officers. Police have not revealed the identify of the man arrested but he is believed to have been known to Leona.Germany’s health minister has said he is in favour of modifying quarantine rules to cope with a new wave of coronavirus caused by the Omicron variant, which is already dominant in some parts of the country. Anyone infected with Omicron is required to quarantine for 14 days, and the same applies to their contacts, even if triple vaccinated. Some experts have suggested reducing the quarantine length to five days for people who show no symptoms and return a negative test result. England and Spain have shortened their quarantine times from 10 to seven days, and the US to five. Omicron accounted for about 17,000 out of Germany’s almost 43,000 new confirmed cases on Thursday. The health minister, Karl Lauterbach, said the real infection rate was likely to be around two to three times higher owing to under-reporting and a lack of laboratory testing during the Christmas period, and he expected the confirmed daily figures to double within four or five days. There are fears that if many thousands of people are infected, the health system and other essential services such as policing, firefighting, schools and rubbish collection could grind to a halt. Contingency plans are in place under which the army and the technical emergency agency, the THW, would take over vital infrastructure roles. Since entering office this month Lauterbach has frequently acknowledged taking steers from experts in the UK owing to the more advanced spread of Omicron there. He said the German government’s expert council – a group including virologists, psychologists and sociologists – was working on a plan to adjust the length of quarantine required. The Omicron surge is strongest in the north of the country, in particular areas such as Bremen, Hamburg, Schleswig Holstein and North Rhine Westphalia. The Netherlands and Denmark are also experiencing high Omicron rates. With schools in Germany due to return on 3 January after the Christmas break, there have been calls for the holidays to be extended. Education ministers have called a meeting for 5 January, and the government and leaders of the 16 states are due to hold their next decision-making round on protection measures two days later. Experts have suggested decisions on school openings should be based on regional infection rates so as to cause the least disruption possible. The eastern state of Thuringia, where infections are among the highest in the country, has said school holidays will initially be extended for two days. Karin Prien, the head of the conference of education ministers, said the aim should be to keep schools open owing to the psychological and social burdens of home schooling. “The schools should be the last area to have to once again face blanket closure,” she said. Just over 71% of people in Germany are fully vaccinated, while 17.5 million people – not including the 4 million under-fives – are without any protection. A booster campaign has so far reached 38% of the population.By the end of this year, the United Nations warned recently, 377,000 Yemenis will have died from seven devastating years of war – in many cases killed by indirect causes such as hunger; in others, by airstrikes or missile bombardments. Seventy per cent of the fatalities are thought to be children under five. As 2021 began, there were hopes that Joe Biden’s arrival in the White House might bring progress towards peace. His administration quickly announced it was ending all support for offensive operations by Saudi Arabia, which spearheaded the US- and UK-backed coalition fighting for the internationally recognised government overthrown by Houthi rebels. It also revoked the Trump administration’s designation of the Houthis as a terrorist group. But Mr Biden’s team overestimated its ability to help resolve the crisis. The diplomatic push soon faltered. In October, Washington announced a $500m military contract with Riyadh which includes support for its attack helicopters, used in operations in Yemen. Meanwhile, a humanitarian catastrophe that the UN has described as the worst in the world is deepening. Just before Christmas, the World Food Programme said that it had been forced to cut aid due to insufficient funds, three months after it warned that 16 million Yemenis were “marching towards starvation”. Four million people are displaced. This was the poorest country in the region even before the war broke out, with 47% of the population living in poverty. The UN has since warned that it is on course to become the poorest in the world, with 71%-78% of Yemenis now below the poverty line. Already inadequate infrastructure and services have been devastated, with schools and hospitals targeted. Both sides have shown a ruthless contempt for civilians. The UN special envoy Hans Grundberg warns that the recent escalation is among the worst in the conflict. The Iran-backed Houthis have intensified their offensive on Marib, the last major stronghold of the government that they ousted, stalling talks. Coalition airstrikes on the airport at the capital Sana’a, held by the Houthis, halted aid flights this month, although rebels now say they can resume on a “temporary” basis. The war has become increasingly complex as the secessionist Southern Transition Council along with al-Qaida and Islamic State cells have seized their opportunity. But above all, it has been supercharged by the regional rivalry between Riyadh and Tehran. As one young Yemeni observed: “We are just a battlefield.” Saudi Arabia, which expected a quick win, has little to show for the billions that it has poured into this war. Though its ally, the UAE, withdrew most troops two years ago, Riyadh is still in search of an exit. That it is talking to Iran, after they cut ties in 2016, is a significant advance. But the two sides have very different reasons for engaging, and the lives of Yemenis are low in either’s priorities – many suspect that the Houthis hope to derail the talks, believing that a military victory is within their grasp. They have sharply increased missile and drone attacks on Saudi targets. With borders and airspace sealed, the world has largely been able to ignore the war’s impact on Yemen’s civilians. But the conflict must not be allowed to slip down the agenda again. Its grim and entrenched nature is not cause to give up on diplomacy, but all the more reason to renew the determined efforts required if Yemenis are to have a real future.In the battle with Covid, the year 2021 has turned out to be a reality check. Misleading claims at the start of the pandemic in 2020 that lockdowns would suffice to “send coronavirus packing” were replaced, at the start of the year, by another simplistic conceit that vaccinations would accomplish the same goal, enabling economic activity and social life to resume at full power. It has not turned out that way. An evolving and sometimes stop-start combination of national restrictions, individual behaviours and repeat vaccinations has kept the worst ravages under some control. Yet the spike in Omicron cases and this week’s preparation for new hospitalisations show that the crisis is very finely balanced. As we bid farewell to the old year on Friday, it ought to be clear to all but the most dogmatic ideologues that 2022 will not be a shining new virus-free era. It will be another volatile mixture, not quite the same as 2021, but not so very different either. Boris Johnson always shies away from this truth. He dislikes giving bad news even when he is popular, and especially when he is not, as at present. He pretends that simple solutions are just around the corner, even when, as now, he can no longer count on his own party’s support to implement them. That is why he has bet the farm on simply getting through the Christmas and new year season with a combination of modest and potentially contradictory policies but without bringing the NHS to its knees. He tells the public to party on, but at the same time to take regular tests; to act responsibly, but to splash the cash in bars; to observe private rules, but to spurn public ones. The essence of his policy is to cross his fingers and hope something turns up. It is desperately cynical. Mr Johnson does all this because he has lost his authority over Conservative MPs and the country. Lockdown and social distancing options are now closed off to him by the right wing of the Tory party. The vaccines route may soon become almost as prohibitive, because his party will oppose the necessary measures to incentivise the unvaccinated minority to comply. The reality is that Mr Johnson is more than ever reliant on the decency of others. If England comes through the holiday period infection spike, it will be thanks to the public, not to the prime minister. Just as he did earlier on in the pandemic, Mr Johnson has launched his latest policy with another airy promise that he knows he cannot keep. In times gone by he promised a world-beating contact tracing system by June 2020; it never happened. A month ago, to combat Omicron, he committed to a million booster jabs a day by this weekend; the target has never been met. Before the holidays, he said that people should take a test and socialise; all too often, those tests are simply unavailable. He is taking a tremendous risk. Mr Johnson is not alone in trying to balance public health caution with respect for the public’s frustrations and fatigue. Nicola Sturgeon in Scotland, Mark Drakeford in Wales and Paul Givan in Northern Ireland are navigating these same issues. None have got everything right, and although the temptation to inflate small differences for political advantage is ever present – as Emmanuel Macron is also showing – most of the UK national governments are in approximately the same place on Covid because their publics are too. As 2022 dawns, the reality that we all remain in this together should guide them all.As people across the UK prepare to ring in the new year, one thing that will be missing for many is a Covid lateral flow test. Town-centre pharmacies’ stocks have been wiped out as people seek assurance before attending parties or meeting vulnerable relatives. While it’s not unusual for shopping centres to be busy between Christmas and new year, with shoppers hitting the sales and enjoying festive markets, the most sought-after products are proving to be the tests. On Thursday the Guardian visited four chemists in Kingston upon Thames, a busy shopping hub in south-west London, and found that three were out of stock and the fourth had one kit left. Staff advised customers to come back tomorrow, with test kits also unavailable to order online. The NHS website allows users to search for tests by postcode but none of the recommended pharmacies in Kingston upon Thames had any in stock. Boxes of 20 LFTs were available at a council-run testing facility. Some shoppers told the Guardian it was the only place they had been able to pick up tests. “I’ve tried three different pharmacies in the high street where I live over the past couple of weeks and they’ve been all out,” said Sally Arnold, from Surbiton. “It’s also going to be make it tricky for people going back to work if you can’t get hold of them, as we have to go in to the office.” Her friend Lisa Sanders, also from Surbiton, said: “I ordered some about a week ago and I’m still waiting for them to be delivered – every time I look on the app it says ‘sorry, no deliveries’. “I think people are trying to be responsible and to do the right thing but if you can’t get hold of tests then what can you do? I was lucky, I saw my sister over Christmas in a different part of the country and she is able to get them and gave me a box, but you just can’t get them anywhere round here.” A member of staff at the facility, who wished to remain anonymous, said LFTs had been available at the testing site throughout the year but footfall had “shot up” since the Omicron variant led to a sharp rise in recorded cases. Ministers have been urging people to test before socialising, and the surge in demand has outstripped supply. Beverley Bairstow, from Kingston, said she had come straight to the council facility after hearing about shortages at pharmacies closer to where she lives. She said: “I didn’t even bother trying anywhere else because I heard they haven’t got them. We try to keep some in the house but now we have run out and were told our local chemist doesn’t have any left. We did also try online but there weren’t any available either. When we saw there were some here, we thought: great, at last.” Francesca Rowland said she had stocked up on tests for friends and family as well as herself. “I haven’t been able to get any tests before today, and because I work in a school I need to be doing them every day,” she said. “It’s not been easy because we can’t order online now, but luckily I knew this was here.” Lutz Amechi, from Kingston, said: “My belief is the only way we will get through this is constant, frequent testing, so we test every second day at home.”During a long, combative career in US political life, Harry Reid, who has died aged 82, made his most telling contribution as Democrat majority leader in the Senate. There, in 2010, he pushed through and then vigorously defended President Barack Obama’s groundbreaking healthcare reforms. Given the huge strength of Republican feeling against “Obamacare”, the president needed a streetfighter to drive his measures through to the statute book – and Reid was the man for the job. Quietly spoken but toughened by a hard early life and years spent swimming in the shark-infested waters of Nevada politics, he fought through the deeply polarised atmosphere that surrounded Obama’s health reforms to shepherd the Affordable Care Act through the Democrat-controlled Senate. Just as importantly, he defended that landmark piece of legislation – which aimed to extend health insurance to more than 30 million uninsured people – against repeated attempts at derailment by a Republican-controlled House of Representatives. In particular, he orchestrated Senate resistance to House amendments that would have emasculated Obamacare, and in 2013 brokered a deal that ended a partial government shutdown engineered by Republicans in protest at the legislation. Obamacare aside, in Washington Reid was a centrist Democrat, and for the liberal wing of the party far less dependable than his firebrand counterpart in the House, Nancy Pelosi. He was opposed to abortion, supported the 1991 Gulf war, and at first backed George W Bush’s 2003 invasion of Iraq, although in 2007 he came out against the second conflict there. He also raised more than a few hackles when he observed that Obama had been helped in his presidential campaign because he was “light-skinned”. But Reid survived that problem, as he survived so many others on the road to his elevated position in the Senate, and Obama acknowledged the early encouragement that Reid had given to his presidential aspirations. To the Democrats, he was a usefully blunt, outspoken scrapper who was happy to tackle the Republicans head on – and was prepared to publicly call Bush a “liar” and a “loser”. Although a pragmatist, he would not cut deals with the Republican leadership on what he saw as vital issues. “I know my limitations,” he once said. “I haven’t gotten where I am by my good looks, my aesthetic ability, my great brain or my oratorical skills.” Reid’s strengths were his sheer energy and political shrewdness, honed during a long rise to the top from difficult beginnings. He was born in Searchlight, Nevada, a tiny, searingly hot former gold-mining town in the Mojave desert, in a shack that had no toilet or hot water. Until the 1950s, Searchlight was best known for a notorious brothel called the El Rey, where it was said that Reid’s mother, Inez (nee Jaynes), did the laundry. His father, Harry Sr, was a miner and an alcoholic; in 1972 he shot himself. There was no high school in Searchlight, so Reid had to stay with relatives 40 miles away in Henderson, outside Las Vegas, where he went to high school at Basic Academy. His lucky break came there in the burly shape of Mike O’Callaghan, the school’s football and boxing coach. Young Reid was tough: he boxed as a middleweight and played on the football team. “I’d rather dance than fight, but I know how to fight,” he said later. An ambitious young man, he graduated from Utah State University, where he became a Mormon. He went to Washington DC and found a job with the US Capitol police, who are charged with protecting Congress, while he worked for a law degree at George Washington University. From there he returned to Nevada to become a prosecutor and, shortly after his father’s suicide, married Landra Gould, the daughter of Jewish immigrants. He soon became involved in Democratic politics, first in Henderson and then statewide. By 1968 he was a member of the state assembly and in 1970 was asked by his high school mentor, O’Callaghan, to run with him. O’Callaghan was elected governor of the state and Reid became his lieutenant governor. In 1974 he ran for the Senate, but was narrowly beaten by Ronald Reagan’s friend Paul Laxalt. In 1975 he stood, again unsuccessfully, for mayor of Las Vegas, a city dominated by gambling, tourism and entertainment. From 1977 to 1981 he was chair of the Nevada Gaming Commission, a job that was to be the making of him. When he was offered a bribe of $12,000 by Jack Gordon, the Las Vegas gambling and prostitution operator, Reid tipped off the FBI. At the moment when Gordon produced the money, FBI agents rushed in; he was sentenced to six months in prison. In 1981, a bomb was found under Reid’s car, which he always blamed on Gordon’s heavies. After that, the more respectable elements of the US gambling industry supported Reid, although his opponents repeatedly tried to tar him with suggestions of ethical violations. In 1982 he was elected to the House of Representatives from the Las Vegas district, and served there until 1986, when he entered the Senate for the first time. He was re-elected easily in 1992, but six years later was nearly beaten in a high-spending campaign that his Republican opponent, John Ensign, a man with casino connections, freely conceded was “nasty”. Nonetheless, Reid and Ensign eventually became good friends as Nevada’s two senators. By 2004, when Reid’s time for re-election came around again, Nevada’s population had grown so fast that many of his constituents had never heard of their senior senator. So Reid raised a lot of money for a campaign to make himself known. He became the leader of the Democratic minority in the Senate in 2005 after Tom Daschle failed to be re-elected, and after the 2006 election – when the Democrats benefited from the unpopularity of the Iraq war and the mishandling of the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina – he was confirmed as the Democrats’ majority leader, serving in that role until 2015. He retired from the Senate as minority leader by not seeking re-election in 2016, following injuries in an accident with exercise equipment in his home. In 2018 he revealed that he had been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer. Reid was known in Washington for his terse manner. In a tribute to him in 2019, Obama joked: “Even when I was president, he would hang up on me.” Shortly before his death, Las Vegas’s airport was renamed after him. Reid is survived by Landra and by their four sons and one daughter. • Harry Mason Reid, politician, born 2 December 1939; died 28 December 2021 • Godfrey Hodgson died in January 2021The South Africa wicketkeeper-batter Quinton de Kock has retired from Test cricket with immediate effect. The shock announcement from the 29-year-old came on the day the Proteas suffered a 113-run defeat to India in the first Test at Centurion and comes during a controversial year for the player, who apologised after refusing to take a knee during the World Twenty20 tournament. De Kock said he wanted to spend more time with his family – with his wife expecting the birth of their first-born child in the coming days – but the decision was still a surprise given CSA had agreed to give him time off for the rest of the three-match Test series to attend the birth. “This is not a decision that I have come to very easily,” De Kock said in a statement. “I have taken a lot of time to think about what my future looks like and what needs to take priority in my life now that Sasha and I are about to welcome our first child into this world and look to grow our family beyond that. My family is everything to me and I want to have the time and space to be able to be with them during this new and exciting chapter of our lives. “I love Test cricket and I love representing my country and all that it comes with. I’ve enjoyed the ups and the downs, the celebrations and even the disappointments, but now I’ve found something that I love even more. “In life, you can buy almost everything except for time, and right now, it’s time to do right by the people that mean the most to me. “I would like to take this opportunity to thank everyone who has been a part of my Test cricket journey from the very beginning. To my coaches, teammates, the various management teams and my family and friends – I couldn’t have shown up as I did without your support. “This is not the end of my career as a Protea, I’m fully committed to white-ball cricket and representing my country to the best of my ability for the foreseeable future.” The left-hander leaves the Test arena having played 54 matches with an average of almost 39, having scored 3,300 runs. He also scored six centuries and 22 half-centuries during that time after having made his Test debut in 2014. De Kock will be sorely missed behind the stumps, however, with 232 dismissals, including 221 catches and 11 stumpings.The viability of thousands of small businesses is at risk as escalating energy costs take their toll on companies just as they try to recover from Covid restrictions, according to a stark warning from their federation. Small businesses, which employ almost 13 million people in the UK, are expected to feel the brunt of crippling energy costs in the coming weeks as firms begin to strike new fixed-term deals amid record high energy market prices across Europe. The UK’s micro businesses, which employ fewer than 10 people each but a total of 4.2 million employees across the country, are “in trouble” due to the national energy crisis ignited by record energy market prices, according to a warning from the Federation of Small Businesses (FSB). A survey by the group found that energy costs are the biggest concern facing its members and warned that they could pose an “existential threat” to firms that have already been dealt a blow by Covid restrictions. “This is a cruel pincer,” said Craig Beaumont, at the FSB. “It will lead to some businesses realising they cannot continue as is, either [by] trying to slash costs or, the last thing they want to do, lose people. Or they could have to give up altogether, shutting the business down and letting everyone go.” The looming risk to millions working in the small business sector threatens to compound a “cost of living catastrophe” in the spring, driven by stalling wages and rising tax and energy bills, which could make 2022 the “year of the squeeze”, according to the Resolution Foundation. The FSB is expected to reveal next week that almost half of its members consider energy bills to be the biggest potential “disruptor” to their businesses, over and above supply chain concerns and worries about the cost of fuel, which have reached record highs after a rebound in the global market price for oil. “It is micro businesses which are the ones in trouble. Many small businesses tend to buy their energy via fixed rate deals but when these end they face much higher charges,” Beaumont said. “For some, energy costs could prove to be an existential threat, particularly for the fragile end of the small business sector which is emerging from Covid-19 restrictions,” he said. “Anecdotally, we’ve found that energy bills are the main reason why some small businesses have remained closed and kept staff working from home. It is one of the only ways they can protect their finances against these costs.” Senior officials from the business department, the Treasury, No 10 and the energy regulator have met energy companies in a series of emergency talks over recent weeks in an attempt to avert a national energy crisis which could drive the average home energy bill to £2,000 a year by next April. The regulator, Ofgem, put forward a proposal on Thursday to help smooth the cost of recent energy supplier collapses which might otherwise add about £100 a year to the average energy bill. A spokesperson said the cost of its safety net had protected the credit balances of more than 4m households after the collapse of their supplier. However, the same protection is not offered to small businesses. “Small companies don’t have the commercial clout of larger firms which are able to negotiate competitive longer-term energy tariffs with a supplier, but they don’t qualify for the same regulated protections which are offered to households either,” Beaumont said. Senior industry sources said energy companies have argued in favour of a £20bn Treasury-backed fund, which could provide loans, repayable over a number of years, to help suppliers meet their costs without sudden hikes to home energy bills next year. There have also been calls to remove the 5% VAT charge from energy bills and move some policy costs into general taxation. The FSB is understood to have asked the government to extend many of the protections offered to households to help safeguard small businesses too. A spokesperson for the business department said it was “in regular contact with Ofgem and business groups” to explore how small businesses can be supported to manage the impact of rising global prices. Ofgem declined to comment.Dominic Raab has been pictured without a mask at a Chelsea match this week, despite the club having urged fans to keep face coverings on while seated in the stadium. A spokesperson for the deputy prime minister and justice secretary said he “followed the rules at all times”, given that government guidance states masks only need to be worn indoors at sport stadiums. However, the government has urged people to exercise extreme caution in the run-up to New Year’s Eve, with the Omicron variant fuelling a surge in cases to record high levels. There were 183,037 new infections reported across the UK on Wednesday, when Raab travelled to Stamford Bridge to watch Chelsea’s draw with Brighton and Hove Albion. The home club issued “important information” for fans attending the game, telling them: “Supporters will be required to wear masks in all indoor areas of the stadium, including the concourses, except when they are eating or drinking. Masks are not required when seated or walking outside the stadium, but they are recommended.” A supporter near Raab took a photo of the unmasked cabinet minister next to another fan who did appear to be wearing a face covering. Others in the background can be seen without one. An observer who wanted to remain anonymous said: “Personally I find it quite surprising that a senior minister would think it wise to sit in a tightly crowded public arena and ignore health recommendations to wear a mask for 90 minutes during this Omicron surge. “For me it’s his decision-making which should be called into question. It’s a busy football game, he can be easily spotted and Covid cases are high. He’s not really bothered about setting the best example.” A spokesperson for Raab said: “He followed the rules at all times.” Ministers have advised people to be extra careful during the festive period given that people are likely to be mingling more with elderly relatives. The rules remain that people only need to get a Covid test for certain reasons, but health officials have gone further in light of Omicron’s spread and a reluctance by minister to implement any tougher restrictions than plan B. Some government advisers have suggested people should adapt their behaviour further than the rules, for example by deprioritising socialising or getting tested before they meet up with friends. Ministers have been accused before of failing to set a good example. Boris Johnson was pictured not wearing a mask during part of a visit to a hospital in Northumberland last month. At the time, Raab defended the prime minister, telling Sky News: “Like many of us, we take the advice and guidance that we’ve got in different settings and that’s the right thing for us to do as politicians and it’s the right thing for the public to do.” • This article was amended on 30 December 2021. The prime minister was seen last month without a mask at a hospital in Northumberland, not Northumbria.Schools and businesses will suffer next if widespread shortages of Covid tests continue, after staffing difficulties in hospitals and care homes. With the government’s website indicating no availability for PCR tests at walk-in services or by home delivery, and pharmacies continuing to struggle to meet demand for lateral flow test (LFT) kits, sector leaders say the shortages will have knock-on effects once the UK emerges from the holiday period. Transport: train operators struggling to stay on track Train services have been disrupted by staff shortages caused by Covid. Great Western Railway said: “With rising numbers of staff unavailable to work because of positive Covid tests and having to self-isolate, we have taken steps to maintain service levels across the network. Unfortunately, this includes planned cancellations designed to minimise the impact on as many customers as possible.” West Midlands Railway said the Omicron variant was having “a significant impact” on its workforce. ScotRail said its services would be disrupted until 28 January because of a shortage of train crew, and services could be cancelled or changed at short notice. A shortage of staff has led Southern to halt services to and from London Victoria for two weeks. The routes had already been suspended this week due to engineering works, and the staffing problems mean the suspension will continue until 10 January at the earliest. Schools: test shortages have potential to delay start of term The Department for Education announced in November that secondary schools in England would need to test all pupils twice on site before they can return to the classroom. Schools have been given flexibility over when to carry out the tests, with many expected to spread out returns over the latter half of next week. Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said: “Schools and colleges are able to order lateral flow device test kits through an online ordering system … These orders are due to be delivered in the week commencing 3 January, and we have not been notified by the government of any issues affecting supply.” A DfE spokesperson said: “Schools and colleges use a different priority supply route to get their lateral flow tests. Most test kits have already been received for the start of the new term.” Several headteachers who spoke to the Guardian said they had stockpiled enough kits to test pupils, but feared that shortages of tests for teachers and other essential school staff such as caterers were likely to be a bigger problem. Care homes: slow results making staffing issues worse Some care homes have stopped allowing in visitors because of staff shortages, which have been affected by lengthening delays in getting results from walk-in tests. Care home staff are required to have two lateral flow tests and a PCR test each week. Nadra Ahmed, the chair of the National Care Association, said care homes were reporting delays of four days in getting PCR results, meaning the results were out of date before they arrived. “Agency nurses are not turning up, managers are having to work day shifts and night shifts just to keep the service covered – it has been horrendous. We continue to support families visiting where it is safe but some providers have had to close to visitors because they don’t have the staff to support safe visiting,” Ahmed said. Vaccinated residents who leave a home temporarily have to be tested for the following 10 days after they return, meaning availability of tests is crucial. NHS: call for tests to be reserved for staff NHS staff are required to take twice weekly tests but are not given access to lateral flow tests from their institutions and must seek their own, after a change in guidance over the summer. The surge in demand has hit NHS staff’s access to LFTs, leading to fears of staff shortages. Unison, one of the main unions representing health workers, said NHS leaders needed to “up the pressure” on the government to reserve tests for NHS staff if stocks were low. Helga Pile, Unison’s deputy head of health, said: “NHS workers are under enough pressure as it is without the additional worry of obtaining tests.” The call for priority testing for NHS staff has been supported by the Royal College of Nursing, NHS Providers and the British Medical Association, after reports that NHS trusts are reporting high numbers of absences related to Covid. Hospitality: tests needed for celebrations to go ahead A lack of tests in England could mean the efforts of restaurants, clubs and pubs to host New Year’s Eve celebrations are in vain, industry representatives said. With Boris Johnson and ministers telling the public that they needed a test before safely partying on 31 December, the hospitality sector said bookings remained at about half of that seen in a normal year. A lack of test kits could lead to that figure falling further. Kate Nicholls, the chief executive of UK Hospitality, said: “We need to make sure people have access to tests so they can continue to come to work as well as partying.”The French government has suspended a new rule that prevented British nationals legally resident in other EU countries from travelling through France to reach their homes, a move that caused confusion for thousands of travellers. Border officials would “show tolerance” in order to “allow these nationals to transit through France to reach their residence in a country of the European Union after the Christmas and New Year period”, the interior ministry said in a statement. It came as Germany also relaxed rules for British visitors. Tighter Covid travel rules introduced last week appear to allow only Britons whose primary residence is in France into the country, although EU law experts have questioned their legality. The strict application of the no-transit rule in particular was causing difficulties for those who had gone back to the UK for the holidays “in good faith” but were now unable to return to their country of residence, the ministry acknowledged. Some British travellers trying to reach countries such as the Netherlands and Belgium by car were turned back by French border officials in the UK on Wednesday night after Eurotunnel issued a warning about the new rule. Eurotunnel said a French government decision this week meant that “unless they hold French residency, British citizens are now considered third country citizens and can no longer transit France by road to reach their country of residence in the EU.” P&amp;O Ferries issued a similar tweet, warning that “only those with French residency will be permitted to enter France”. The British embassy in Paris said last week that “UK nationals may only transit France if travelling by air.” However, British nationals travelling through France to their homes in Belgium by the Eurostar train service have reported no problems reaching their destinations. A French interior ministry official said earlier the country had not changed its list of “compelling” reasons enabling Britons to travel to France since new rules were introduced, but “clarified their application” by border police. The French government announced last week that incoming travellers would require “a compelling reason to travel to, or come from, the UK, both for the unvaccinated and vaccinated” from midnight on 11pm GMT on 17 December. “People cannot travel for tourism or professional reasons,” it said. A list of valid “compelling reasons” allowing travellers specifically from the UK to enter France published on 16 December includes EU citizens living in France or transiting through France to reach their home in an EU member state. It also includes third-country nationals “with a valid French or EU residence permit or long-stay visa resident in France”, as well as “British nationals … benefiting from the Brexit withdrawal agreement” (in other words, living in the EU before 31 December 2020) – but with no reference to where in the EU they are resident. Moreover, the government’s list of “compelling reasons” applicable to countries on France’s Covid red list includes “third-country residents with a valid French or EU residence permit or long-stay visa whose primary residence is in France, or who are transiting through France to reach their primary residence in an EU country”. European law experts have questioned whether applying a no-transit rule to British residents of EU member states travelling through France breaches the Schengen Borders Code, which governs who may cross the EU’s external borders. Since the border between France and the UK is an external border of the EU, there would normally be no legal basis for France to refuse to allow third-country nationals legally resident in another EU country to cross it to reach their member state of residence. “In my view there’s a strong argument that France is in breach of the Schengen Borders Code,” said Steve Peers, professor of EU law at the University of Essex. “The code has a public health requirement for crossing external borders, but there’s a derogation for those holding a residence permit from a member state and in transit, unless they are subject to a national entry ban of the state they are crossing.” France’s UK-specific list of permitted “compelling reasons” for transiting through France includes passengers of any nationality spending “less than 24 hours in an international zone” of a French airport. In principle, this implies that if and when France reapplies the no-transit rule to British nationals and it is not challenged, those resident in other EU countries will only be able to transit through France and return home by air. A UK government spokesperson said: “The French authorities have confirmed that British nationals will face no additional restrictions while travelling through the holiday period. British nationals who are currently in the UK, but resident in the EU, will be able to return to their home through France over the New Year period without disruption. We remain in close contact with the French authorities, and will update our own travel advice with the latest information.” Meanwhile it was announced that Germany is to ease restrictions on travel from the UK. From 11pm on 3 January, a ban preventing British tourists from travelling to the country will be lifted, according to the German embassy in London. It means that people who are fully vaccinated, or “have an important reason for travelling”, will be allowed to enter. Those who are fully vaccinated will not need a negative Covid test or need to quarantine for 14 days, the embassy said.Joe Biden will speak on Thursday with Vladimir Putin regarding the Russian president increased security demands in eastern Europe. The two leaders will discuss a range of topics, including “upcoming diplomatic engagements in Russia”, said US national security council spokesperson Emily Horne in a statement announcing the call. Thursday’s talks come at the request of Russia amid Russia’s increased security presence near Ukraine as the US and its allies watch on warily. The buildup of Russian troops near the Ukrainian border has grown to an estimated 100,000 and has fueled fears that Moscow is preparing to invade Ukraine. Moscow has also announced it would hold new joint military drills with Belarus in February or March. “This dialogue should, and we expect will, proceed on the basis of reciprocity. There will be topics where we can make meaningful progress and topics where we will have differences. That’s the nature of diplomacy,” said a senior Biden administration official in a background press call. The Kremlin has said that Putin wants to speak with Biden as part of the preparations for a formal round of security talks set to begin between US and Russian delegations in Geneva next month. Asked why the Kremlin had requested an additional phone call with Biden, Putin’s press secretary Dmitry Peskov said: “This is because of the substance, the items on the agenda are extremely complicated.” Russia has demanded that Nato pledge not to admit Ukraine into the military alliance and that it remove its troops and military infrastructure from countries that joined after 1997. The United States has said it will not discuss issues that affect its allies’ security without their direct participation and has sought to assuage their concerns ahead of the call. On Wednesday, the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, spoke with the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. According to state department spokesman Ned Price, Blinken “reiterated the United States’ unwavering support for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity in the face of Russia’s military buildup on Ukraine’s borders”. “We have had very good discussions with the Ukrainian side in terms of short-term confidence-building measures that they have put on the table with the Russian side… We have seen a real willingness on the part of the Ukrainian side to put forward proposals aimed at confidence building de-escalation,” the senior official said. The talks between Biden and Putin will begin late on Thursday evening in Moscow and are expected to be conducted in private. In a New Year’s greeting published by the Kremlin ahead of the call, Putin said: “I am confident that, following up on our agreements reached during the June summit in Geneva and subsequent meetings, we can move forward and establish an effective Russian-American dialogue based on mutual respect and consideration for each other’s national interests.” Earlier this month, Biden and Putin held a virtual summit regarding the Ukraine crisis but made little apparent headway. “The discussion between President Biden and President Putin was direct and straightforward. There was a lot of give and take, there was no finger-wagging. But the president was crystal clear about where the United Stated stands on all these issues,” said the US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan. During those talks, Putin demanded “reliable, legal guarantees” that would prevent Nato’s expansion towards Russia or place missile systems in Russia’s bordering countries. Shortly after the talks, Russia put forward a list of highly contentious security guarantees it says it wants the west to agree to in order to reduce tensions in Europe and defuse the crisis over Ukraine. The demands include a ban on Ukraine from entering Nato and limiting troop deployment and weapons to Nato’s eastern flank. Russia has also asked Nato to not hold drills without previous agreement from Russia in Ukraine, eastern Europe, in Caucasus countries or in central Asia. Peskov said the two leaders are expected to continue discussions that began at the video summit and that they would also discuss upcoming talks between Russia and the US, Nato, and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe set to begin in mid-January. Moscow has said that ignoring its interests will result in a “military response” similar to the Cuban missile crisis in 1962. Putin announced this week that he will hold new joint military drills with Belarus, which also borders Ukraine. The drills are scheduled for February or March, Putin said after meeting with Belarus’s Alexander Lukashenko. He did not say how many troops would take part in the drills or what their objective would be. On Sunday, Putin said he would consider a slew of options if the west fails to meet his push for security guarantees precluding Nato’s expansion to Ukraine. In Wednesday’s statement, Horne said: “President Biden has spoken with leaders across Europe, and Biden administration officials have engaged multilaterally with Nato, the EU and the OSCE [Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe]. “The Biden administration continues to engage in extensive diplomacy with our European allies and partners, consulting and coordinating on a common approach in response to Russia’s military build-up on the border with Ukraine.” The senior official said that the US is “also prepared to respond if Russia advances with a further invasion of Ukraine”. “We have made plans to reinforce Nato’s force posture in allied states in the event of a further invasion, and we are prepared to provide Ukraine with further assistance to defend its territory,” he added. Nevertheless, he reiterated that Biden will emphasize to Putin that “there is a clear diplomacy path to de-escalating tensions in the region if President Putin is interested in taking it”.Nascar driver Brandon Brown has leaned into his unintentional association with the rightwing “Let’s go Brandon” meme by partnering with a sponsor inspired by the vulgar anti-Biden slogan. LGBcoin.io – a new, decentralized meme cryptocurrency short for “Let’s Go Brandon” that has achieved a market capitalization of more than $300m in less than six months – announced it has signed on as the full-season primary partner for Brown’s Brandonbilt Motorsports for the 2022 Xfinity Series season. As a result of the deal, Brown will drive in a red, white and blue livery with the logo and wordmark of LGBcoin aboard his No 68 Chevrolet Camaro for all 33 races next year in Nascar’s second-tier series. “We are thrilled to partner with Brandonbilt Motorsports and Brandon Brown for the 2022 Nascar Xfinity Series season,” said James Koutoulas, LGBcoin HODLer and founder of Typhoon Capital Management. “Brandon is not only an incredibly talented driver, but also a thoughtful individual wise beyond his years. His commitment and singular focus on his profession is inspiring and his personal story is one that we can all be proud of – an American story of success and perseverance. Brandon is truly America’s Driver.” Koutoulas added: “If we do our job right, when you think of us, and you hear, ‘Let’s Go Brandon,’ you’ll think and feel, ‘Let’s Go America.’” Brown will officially debut his new paint job during the Xfinity Series season opener at Daytona International Speedway on 19 Feburary. The announcement comes two months after Nascar denounced its association with the political cry. Steve Phelps, Nascar’s president, said the top motorsports series in the United States does not want to be associated with politics “on the left or the right”. Brown, 28, won his first career Nascar race in October in Alabama, and the Talladega Superspeedway crowd chanted “Fuck Joe Biden” during Brown’s interview. It was not clear if NBC Sports reporter Kelli Stavast, who was wearing a headset, could hear what the crowd was saying during the interview, and she incorrectly told Brown the fans were cheering “Let’s go Brandon”. It has since become a rallying cry for Biden’s critics, and “Let’s go Brandon” is now conservative code for the original profane chant. The meme made headlines on Friday at a White House Christmas event, when an Oregon father said it to Biden during his phone calls with children tracking Santa’s flight. Jared Schmeck insisted he was joking and meant no disrespect to the president. “At the end of the day I have nothing against Mr Biden,” Schmeck told the Oregonian newspaper. “But I am frustrated because I think he can be doing a better job. I mean no disrespect to him.”The hardest part of picking a moment from the sporting year is trying to remember which of them actually happened in 2021. Twelve months that simultaneously took forever and went by in an instant. Perhaps the pandemic. Perhaps just middle age. I’m quietly confident that Euro 2020 did happen – a blur of podcasts, radio shows at Wembley Boxpark, and England reaching the final of a major tournament for the first time in 55 years. Two days before the final I caught myself idly wondering if I actually wanted us to win. Was this the right time? So many England fans have pleaded: “Just once in my lifetime.” But if it did happen, what then? Where does the journey go? Was this the right set of players to be deified for the next 50 years – to take the mantle from Moore, Charlton and Hurst? Supremely likable and talented, maybe – but I’ve seen John Stones have bad games. I’ve seen Luke Shaw have average seasons. I’ve spent so much time watching Kieran Trippier and Kyle Walker doing mundane things, just taking throw-ins and whipping crosses in to no one in particular. I’ve seen Harry Kane’s “let’s get them, lads” team talks. I’ve never seen Ray Wilson have a bad touch, nor George Cohen misplace a pass. I’ve never seen Bobby Charlton not score from 25 yards. Bobby Moore is always tackling Pelé and strolling away with the ball. Nobby Stiles just dances. For a short time in the 80s, when I was old enough to love football but too young to understand time, I thought Gordon Banks had won the World Cup with just one eye. How could Jordan Pickford compete with that? I’ve never seen any of them warm up, get substituted or send a mundane Insta post. @Bigjackiecharlton: “Great win against a tough Argentina side, bring on Portugal in the Semis.” Granted, I’ve barely seen any of the boys of ‘66 play a minute of football, aside from a digitally enhanced repeat of the final and a few grainy YouTube highlights. Since I knew what the game was, these 11 men were otherworldly superhumans – players who have improved as every year passes. Hurst’s shot always goes in the top corner. They’ve only ever won the World Cup. And they’ve done it time after time after time. A month before Italy broke our hearts, millions of us watched Christian Eriksen’s stop. Each chest compression was broadcast to the world as the director cut from family members to teammates and back. As a screen was erected around him like a faller at Becher’s Brook, social media raged about the cameras zooming in on a life ebbing away. Yet we carried on watching. There was an emptiness that hung in the air that afternoon and an inescapable relief when it emerged he was OK. We shouldn’t have seen it, but in a perverse way perhaps it was good that we did. It reminded us that the game didn’t matter – results didn’t matter. Life mattered. #Bekind – hug the ones you love. And more cliches. Live for the moment, carpe diem, break-down-the-Wembley-barricades-and-set-fireworks-off from-your-anus. I’d hosted a TalkSport show from a pub round the corner on the morning of the final. I was the only person getting on the tube at Wembley Park at 1pm as thousands of hammered, ticketless fans streamed the other way – you could tell it was going to be an ordeal for anyone in a hi-vis vest. And maybe that grand show of unpleasantness and stupidity eased the blow of the defeat. We were recording Guardian Football Daily in my living room straight after full-time. Producer Joel, John Brewin and I were representing England, with Barry Glendenning (Ire) and Elis James (Wal) neutral – or, more accurately, supporting Italy, one more vociferously than the other. By the time Shaw hammered home in the second minute, my midweek existential crisis had given way to the unedifying shouty faux-cockney that I appear to morph into during England games. I hadn’t become one of football’s great philosophers that week – I was just a man nervously drinking Peroni, eating Kettle Chips and yelling “SHAPE” for a 120 minutes. Every one of those penalties was excruciating. Even when we scored. Pickford keeping out Jorginho. The hope. The inevitability. Bukayo Saka’s miss. The silence. I have the emotional skillset to deal with desperate defeat. I wouldn’t have known what to do in victory. The neutrals were gracious. We recorded the pod. They waited until getting in Elis’s car before tenderly embracing. I don’t hold it against them. It must have felt so sweet – another two years (or 18 months) at least of hurt. No endless phone-ins demanding he become Sir Mason Mount just yet. The following morning, amid the depressingly predictable racist messages received by Marcus Rashford, Jadon Sancho and Saka, I was on an 8am train to Cornwall, my mockney accent stowed away until the next tournament. I read pages of reports of the previous night, picking over every aspect of it. And I didn’t mind – defeat was fine. We go again. The biggest sporting day of 2021 taught me something I already knew. I am desperate to win – I really, really care. But the moment it’s gone, it’s just gone. And it’s OK. Your team – club or country – doesn’t change. We all do go again. I look forward to the draw, the wallchart, the endless speculation about who will play at left-back, the frantic calls from people who should know better to play all of the attackers all of the time. It will all come round again in Qatar in November; given the shameful nature of everything connected with that tournament, the results will matter even less. I think of the boys of ’66 we lost this year. I think of Eriksen, alive and planning his future. The results are the least important part.Quebec healthcare workers exposed to Covid-19 may have to go to work sooner than expected if staffing levels in the Canadian province’s facilities reach a critical point. Quebec’s health minister, Christian Dubé, made the announcement earlier this week, explaining that in a worst-case scenario the province would have no choice but to insist that isolating employees return to work. Cases of the Omicron variant have surged in the province: on Thursday, a record-breaking 14,188 new cases were reported, with 939 Covid patients currently in hospital and 138 in intensive care. The Quebec newspaper La Presse reported that hospitals in the province were getting close to activating the contingency plan. The Omicron wave has wreaked havoc on the province’s healthcare sector, which is already stretched thin. “A few days ago, 4,000 [healthcare workers] were absent. Yesterday was 7,000. In the coming days, it will be 10,000,” Dubé said at a news conference on Tuesday. On Wednesday afternoon, government health officials explained how the employee recall process would work. Asymptomatic employees who were randomly exposed to Covid – at a shopping centre or gym, for example – would not have to isolate at all. Instead, they would be asked to self-monitor their symptoms for 14 days and get tested every two or three days. If they tested positive for Covid, they would be required to isolate for seven to 10 days, depending on staffing conditions. If they tested negative, they would have to return immediately. However, they would also have to isolate themselves at work for 10 days. With testing capacities in the province currently overwhelmed, this could mean that staff who are asymptomatic but positive end up working in healthcare settings because they have not been able to obtain a test. During the technical briefing, Dr Yves Jalbert, the medical director of Quebec’s public health protection, said those employees would have to take their coffee and lunch breaks in isolated rooms. A media spokesperson for the health ministry told the Guardian that in situations where the worker had to be near uninfected colleagues or patients, personal protective equipment (PPE) would be required. This new contingency plan applies to healthcare workers – along with other essential service staff such as first responders – who have had at least two vaccine doses. Meanwhile, asymptomatic employees who have Covid in their household or who are in regular contact with an infected person will be required to isolate for seven days, regardless of their vaccination status. However, double-vaccinated workers could be recalled sooner in urgent staffing conditions. Public health representatives at the technical briefing said 98% of healthcare workers were double-vaccinated. They said these measures were a last resort to prevent a total healthcare system breakdown. As Dubé noted on Tuesday: “If we had the staff we needed, we wouldn’t have to do this.” Healthcare unions opposed Quebec’s decision, saying the measures put workers – as well as vulnerable patients – at too much of a risk. Réjean Leclerc, the president of a union representing 120,000 Quebec healthcare workers, told Reuters that the province couldn’t even keep up with staff testingin the current situation. “The network is not prepared to face the risks of the government’s decision to bring asymptomatic infected staff back to work,” he said. The government has not clarified how it will help hospitals and other healthcare facilities to create isolation rooms, nor how it would help exposed or infected workers who depend on public transit to get to work. Other Canadian provinces, including Ontario, are considering whether to follow in Quebec’s footsteps because of healthcare staff shortages across the country.Romelu Lukaku has given an explosive interview in which he states he is “not happy” with his situation at Chelsea, as the problems continue to mount for Thomas Tuchel. Chelsea’s record signing, who rejoined from Internazionale for £97.5m in the summer, has endured a frustrating campaign under Tuchel but has recently found his shooting boots with goals in his last two outings for the European champions. The striker has scored seven goals in 18 matches this season but has been inconsistent and has not always started. It is understood the interview was recorded three weeks ago, before Lukaku’s return to scoring form, and he has since praised his manager after the 3-1 win at Aston Villa. “Physically I am fine,” Lukaku told Sky Italia. “But I am not happy with the situation at Chelsea. Tuchel has chosen to play with another system. “I won’t give up. I will be professional. I am not happy with the situation but I am professional and I can’t give up now.” Lukaku, who fired Internazionale to the Serie A title in May, said that he hoped to one day return to Inter, adding: “Now it is the right time to share my feelings. I have always said that I have Inter in my head. I know I will return to Inter, I really hope so. I am in love with Italy.” The release of the interview will provide an irritating backdrop for Tuchel, who has seen his resources stretched by injuries and Covid-19 in the last month. Chelsea face Liverpool at Stamford Bridge on Sunday and will be without Reece James after the defender injured a hamstring in Wednesday night’s 1-1 draw with Brighton. Chelsea were awaiting scan results but fear it could be a torn hamstring which would necessitate a lengthy layoff for the 22-year-old. Tuchel is already without the wing-back Ben Chilwell for the rest of the season. Andreas Christensen is a serious doubt to face Liverpool and Thiago Silva missed Wednesday’s game through injury. Chelsea will make a late decision on Silva’s thigh issue but also on a host of players suffering lasting effects after contracting Covid-19, including Timo Werner. Tuchel said: “[Werner’s] not good, not in training. And that’s because of Covid. We don’t know any more at the moment, and nobody knows quite how the players [who have had Covid] will react. We play trial and error and see what we get. That’s why I’m protecting my team. We can play much better but we need a full squad over weeks and weeks.”Confirmed daily Covid cases in the UK hit yet another high on Thursday, with 189,213 reported in the past 24 hours, while the number of people in hospital and deaths have also risen, data reveals. On Wednesday 183,037 daily cases were reported for the whole of the UK – a record at the time – although this figure included a backlog in some nations from before and during the Christmas period, with five days of case data included for Northern Ireland. Thursday’s newly reported cases for Wales covered a two-day period. But experts have warned daily case figures do not include reinfections and not everyone who is infected has symptoms and takes a test, meaning despite cases reaching new highs the true number of infections will be higher still. The latest data also reveals that a further 332 people have died within 28 days of a positive Covid test. The figures are a steep rise on the 57 deaths reported on Wednesday. Experts say the jump is, in part, because NHS England has not reported hospital deaths since 24 December. The number of Covid patients in hospital has also increased in England, according to the latest data, with 11,452 reported on Thursday. In Scotland, it was announced on Thursday that there were 810 patients in hospital with recently confirmed Covid, an increase of 19.3% compared with the day before. Commenting on Twitter, Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said the record case figures reflect that Omicron is highly infectious. “Just as notable than cases is the steep rise in hospital occupancy, the largest single day increase in a while – a reminder that even if there is a lower percentage hospitalised through Omicron, sheer volume will still put acute pressure on NHS – and result in serious illness for many,” she wrote, adding that she was “appealing to everyone” to follow public health advice as the new year approached. In a written statement Mark Drakeford, the first minister of Wales, said that the public health situation in Wales “has deteriorated in the last week as the Omicron wave has arrived”, adding that while hospitalisations are lower than in previous waves, they are also are starting to increase. According to the latest figures the number of Covid patients in hospital in Wales is now 446, a 49% increase compared with last week. However, Drakeford said Wales was not reporting a rise in the number of Covid patients needing critical care. Prof Christina Pagel, director of UCL’s Clinical Operational Research Unit, said that reported case levels in England are now more than twice as high as the previous peak last January, and have not yet peaked, while cases are rising in all groups apart from under-10s. Hospital admissions, she added, are also rising in all age groups. While data suggested fewer admissions are leading to intensive care, Pagel said the situation was worrying. “An NHS crisis based on the wards instead of ICU is still an NHS crisis,” she tweeted.Boris Johnson is reportedly due to be cleared of breaking the ministerial code over payments for his Downing Street flat refurbishment after an independent adviser looked into whether he had been misled during an initial investigation. Lord Geidt led an inquiry that cleared the prime minister of wrongdoing in May, but is understood to have looked into a discrepancy between the findings in his report and another into the same matter published earlier this month by the Electoral Commission. The issue centred on claims a Tory peer footed the bill for refurbishments to the No 11 flat. In his first set of findings, Geidt, the adviser on ministerial interests, said Johnson told him “he knew nothing about such payments” until immediately prior to media reports in February 2021. However the Electoral Commission’s own investigation said it had seen a WhatsApp message showing Johnson had been in direct contact with the donor, Lord Brownlow, in November 2020 about the flat refurbishment. Brownlow made a £58,000 donation to the Conservatives but the Electoral Commission found it was not declared properly and fined the party £17,800. According to the Financial Times, Geidt sought an explanation from Johnson and exchanged several letters with the prime minister that could be published in the new year. The newspaper also said Johnson’s behaviour was to be “criticised” and that Geidt had described the situation to colleagues as “deeply unsatisfactory” but would not change his ruling that Johnson had not broken the ministerial code. The result of the inquiry has been closely watched, given it could prompt the launching of another inquiry by the parliamentary standards commissioner, Kathryn Stone, into whether Johnson broke the MPs’ code of conduct. A Cabinet Office spokesperson said: “We do not comment on speculation.” They also pointed to the terms of reference of Geidt’s inquiry, which said the advice Geidt gives to Johnson “will be published in a timely manner”. Asked previously if Johnson had lied to Geidt, the prime minister’s spokesperson said: “No.” Reports the prime minister is to be cleared have sparked anger from Labour. The party’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, said: “After the Electoral Commission ruled that the Conservative party broke the law on declaring donations, the prime minister has made a mockery of the standards the public has a right to expect. “While the British public is facing a cost of living crisis, Boris Johnson is busy writing to his own adviser about why he did not give him all of the information he needed for his investigation. “Lord Geidt should publish all his correspondence with the prime minister as a first step towards providing full transparency into how Boris Johnson is explaining away his WhatsApp messages with Tory donors. “It is embarrassing that when the country needs real leadership, Boris Johnson is busy trying to clear up his own personal mess.”After decades of fossil hunting in their spare time (he wooed her with two halves of an ancient beast’s vertebrae; they cut their wedding cake with a Neanderthal handaxe they had unearthed together), Sally and Neville Hollingworth made the discovery of a lifetime at the bottom of a quarry in Cerney Wick. It was a collection of mammoth bones of a size, state and number more usually found in Siberia than Swindon, left in the wake of the Thames’ ancient wanderings and dating from more than 200,000 years ago. While we wait impatiently for the 90-minute British romcom to be written by Frank Cottrell Boyce, starring Olivia Colman as Sally and Martin Freeman as Neville, as must surely come to pass, we have an equally endearing documentary about the fossil find itself. Attenborough and the Mammoth Graveyard (BBC One) opens with Sir David visiting the Hollingworths at their neat suburban home. Every wall is lined with shelves and cases housing immaculately presented fossils they have found. The mammoth bones are on the kitchen table. Attenborough floats through in a trance of delight. “It’s a great thrill, isn’t it?” the world’s most revered naturalist murmurs reverently, as he lays hands on a giant ice age humerus. “The whole of this business.” It is a stroke of genius to put such a documentary on at Christmas. Prehistory is the greatest story yet untold, and the sight of passionate experts gleaning more of it from fragments of snail shell, sediment samples, notches on preserved shin bones and scapulae, then putting new scraps of the tale together, sends a shiver down the secular spine. It is the closest we spiritually impoverished lot will come to religious awe, but I wouldn’t trade it. Evolutionary biology professor Ben Garrod is the on-site missionary and co-presenter here, now that Attenborough at 95 is forced to take things a little easier. He does most of the interviews with the people pulling miracles from the mud then performing more of their own back in the lab. Generations of Siberians thought the buried remains they occasionally came across were evidence that huge, underground burrowing creatures once owned the tundra. Seventeenth-century Europeans thought theirs were evidence of giants or unicorns. Then in 1864 a piece of mammoth ivory was discovered in France with such a detailed engraving of the animal on it that it has been considered proof that humans lived alongside these elephant-like beasts and that unicorns, alas, didn’t really enter into it (nor giant burrowing creatures, which seems even more of a shame). Now, of course, we have people who can test the radioactivity of quartz grains, pull apart layers of rock and sediment like tissue paper, and consult a secure facility full of prehistoric knapped flints to tell you what was happening when Britain wasn’t yet an island, glaciers were retreating across a tiny patch of Wiltshire and megafauna were still roaming the Earth. As with most BBC documentaries involving natural history (and especially if they also involve Attenborough), it manages the graceful feat of sticking to the facts while still incorporating the sense of mystery that helps create the fascination. We are led to the answers of exactly what species of mammoth are resting at the bottom of the former river (steppe and woolly – I didn’t even know there were different kinds, although I know several 10-year-old boys who would howl at my ignorance), how so many animals came to die at the same place, and whether Neanderthal man could bring down large beasts from a distance or only at close quarters. We are led there via moments of marvelling at the skill needed to create weapons and tools out of stone, and the possibilities represented by a Levallois flake. Prof Garrod wonders, given his understanding of the behaviour of elephants, mammoths’ descendants, whether a juvenile had become stuck in the mud, the herd had panicked and nearby Neanderthals had taken advantage of the chance to avail themselves of weeks and weeks of food. Possibly. Maybe probably. Whatever the truth, it was a salutary reminder in these violently argumentative, polarised times that it’s OK to theorise. It’s OK to entertain options. It’s all right not to know. A great thrill, anyway. The whole of this business.A little-known 17-year-old from Uzbekistan made a clean sweep of Magnus Carlsen and the global chess elite on Tuesday, incidentally setting a world age record. Nodirbek Abdusattorov won the World Rapid championship in Warsaw, claiming en route the scalps of Magnus Carlsen and the No 1’s last two challengers, Fabiano Caruana and Ian Nepomniachtchi. In rapid chess each player has 15 minutes for all moves, plus a 10 second per move increment. After 21 rounds of three-minute games on Wednesday and Thursday, France’s Maxime Vachier-Lagrave defeated Poland’s Jan-Krzysztof Duda in a tie-break to win the World Blitz title. The 18-year-old world No 2, Alireza Firouzja, was third but Carlsen was well adrift in 12th place. He said: “Some days you just don’t have it. I was nowhere near close to the level I needed to be today.” At 17 years three months Abdusattorov becomes the youngest ever world champion in open competition, surpassing Ruslan Ponomariov at 18 in the Fide version of the then disputed classical crown in 2001 and Carlsen, also at 18, in the 2009 World Blitz. The next youngest were 22 – Garry Kasparov, in his first victory over Anatoly Karpov in 1985, and Daniil Dubov and Sergey Karjakin when winning speed titles. The world women’s championship has a younger record holder, as Hou Yifan won it in 2010 aged 16, after being the defeated finalist two years earlier. Earlier in the teen from Tashkent’s blossoming career he had won the world under-eight championship, defeated two grandmasters at nine and been singled out in this column when he narrowly missed becoming the youngest ever GM at 12. Abdusattorov had his share of good fortune at Warsaw, surviving three lost positions, but he also played a very strong field where Levon Aronian and Boris Gelfand were among his other victims. After 13 rounds he was in a quadruple tie on 9.5 points with Carlsen, Caruana and Nepomniachtchi, but the regulations excluded Carlsen and Caruana from the play-off due to their inferior tie-breaks. An angry Carlsen denounced the rules as “idiotic. Either all players on the same amount of points join the play-off or no one does.” It was balancing luck for Nepomniachtchi, who in this same event and under the same rules in 2017 was excluded from the play-off, but the Russian was outgunned in the tie-break games. Abdusattorov easily drew with Black, then won the second game despite twice missing mate in two near the end. Abdusattorov is the second player from Generation Z, defined as people born from 1995 to 2010, to break through to the chess top. Firouzja, whose victories in Latvia and Slovenia last month made him No 2 behind Carlsen in the global rankings, was out of form in Warsaw in the rapid but finished strongly in the three-minute blitz to take the bronze medal and narrowly miss out on the Vachier-Lagrave v Duda play-off. Yet another Gen Z player surged into the limelight when Bibisara Assaubayeva, 17, captured the world women’s rapid championship silver medal with 8.5/11, half a point behind Russia’s “chess Queen” Alexandra Kosteniuk. The teen from Kazakhstan did even better in the women’s blitz, reversing the result to take gold to Kosteniuk’s silver. Uzbekistan has long punched far above its weight in world chess. Four of its teenagers did well in last month’s Grand Swiss at Riga while Javokhir Sindarov, 16, finished in eighth place in the blitz at Warsaw ahead of many of the world elite. Long ago the old USSR set the standard for young talent with a golden generation including David Bronstein, Tigran Petrosian, Ewfim Geller and Mark Taimanov. England in the 1970s followed the Soviet model with Jon Speelman, Nigel Short, Michael Adams and later Luke McShane, Gawain Jones and David Howell. India and the US are doing best now with super-squads,but Uzbekistan is showing what can be achieved even by a small nation with the right approach to developing an elite. Fide has announced that the eight-player 2022 Candidates will be staged in Madrid in June-July 2022, with patronage from the Scheinberg family, who have previously backed opens in the Isle of Man and whose fortune comes from the sale of PokerStars for nearly $5bn. So far the qualifiers are Nepomniachtchi (loser of the 2021 title match), Caruana and Firouzja (Riga Grand Swiss), Sergey Karjakin and Jan-Krzysztof Duda (World Cup), Teimour Radjabov (Fide nominee), with the remaining two to come from the Fide Grand Prix at Berlin and Belgrade in February-March 2022. The Candidates and its winner have become even more significant than usual after Carlsen’s announcement that he will only defend his title if the challenger is from the new generation, so raising the stakes for the top two Candidates who could end up playing between them for the supreme crown. 3796: 1 Rc1! Qxa6 2 Rxc4! bxc4 3 Qh3! and White makes a second queen. The trap is 1 Rd8?? Qxa6 2 c8=Q Qa1+ 3 Kg2 Qf1 mate.Welcome to the end of 2021 and the beginning of Five Great Reads, a weekday wrap of great summer writing to get your day going, or at least perk it up a bit. They’re chosen by me, Alyx Gorman, a person who’s about to find out whether very small puppies enjoy very big fireworks. If you’re not reading this as an email, and would like that to change on Monday, you can sign up to do so in the box below. If you are reading this in an email, the box will not appear. Magic! As Australia faced another day of record infections, national cabinet met to redraw Australia’s Covid rules, including changing the definition of a close contact. And if you’re wondering why we don’t have free rapid antigen tests in Australia, it’s very hard to get a straight answer. Scott Morrison said it was down to industry concerns, but the industries concerned deny lobbying about it. Follow Australia’s Covid developments today live right here. In non-Covid news, speculation is mounting that socialite turned convicted sex trafficker Ghislaine Maxwell may try to cut a deal by naming names in a broader investigation of her ex-boyfriend Jeffery Epstein’s high society circle. And in case you missed it amid all the Covid yesterday, the front of Canberra’s Old Parliament House was set alight by protesters for the second time in as many weeks. The Aboriginal Tent Embassy has released a statement condemning the destruction. Now, on to the reads. 1. The dramatic double life of Ghislaine Maxwell Court testimony during Maxwell’s trial painted an “intimate” portrait of a woman born to wealth and drawn to power. Victoria Bekiempis tells the story of her entry into Epstein’s orbit and the luxury and horror that followed. Notable quote: “These girls were just a means to support her lifestyle,” prosecutor Lara Pomerantz said in her opening. “A way for the defendant to make sure that Epstein – who demanded constant sexual gratification from young girls – remained satisfied so that the defendant could stay in the lifestyle to which she was accustomed.” A word of warning: As the quote above suggests, this story contains descriptions of sexual abuse, so stay away if that isn’t something you’re up for today (or ever). Bonus read: Intrigued by the court sketch above? J Oliver Conroy interviewed the court artist who sketched Maxwell sketching her back, Jane Rosenberg. Over more than 40 years as a court artist, she’s witnessed many such strange and extraordinary moments. 2. What has the pandemic done to uni life? Like all industries, higher education changed in the pandemic – but some of those changes could be forever, Wing Kuang discovers. Notable quote: “I think universities are becoming much more aware that there’s online learning, and then there’s good online learning,” says Glenn C Savage, an associate professor of education policy at the University of Western Australia. “And they’re very different things.” How long will it take me to read? About three minutes 3. “The B&amp;B owner told me a horrifying home truth” Fay Schopen’s story of a romantic winter mini-break gone awry is the Holiday meets the Shining – with a bit of the Ice Storm thrown in. Notable quote: “I should have been alerted to potential trouble ahead when reports of snow and ice storms in the region started coming in,” Schopen writes. “When I phoned the B&amp;B to confirm we would still be coming, they seemed surprised and told us everyone else had cancelled. Being English, this didn’t occur to me. But as I now know, American weather is different.” 4. Australia’s best TV of 2021 Our critic Luke Buckmaster names his top 10 local shows of the year. Is one of them MasterChef? No. What about The Block? Also no. The Bachelorette? Nope. So no reality TV? Not a whiff. Well, there are some stunning docos in there, including an experimental art-meets-science project; but for the most part it’s all biting satire and scripted drama. 5. Live vicariously this New Year’s Eve By reading musician Banoffee’s story of a truly wild beach party, as told to Michael Sun. Notable quote: “We formed a conga line, all dancing down the street, down the steep little cliff path towards the beach, where we were met by a surprise.” How long will it take me to read? A minute. You’re here for a good time, not a long time.How Manchester United needed this victory. It derived from one of their games in hand and moves them to 31 points, four behind Arsenal in the final Champions League berth, and was as emphatic as any display so far under Ralf Rangnick. This does not mean, however, that all is tickety-boo with their play. The win came against a Burnley side who, due to four matches being postponed because of Covid, last played on 12 December and whose sole league victory, over Brentford, came on 30 October. Still absent is an overriding structure that can allow United to govern a game. Under Rangnick, they remain a side of moments: tonight it was enough to claim the three points but this lack of continuity should trouble their caretaker manager, who pointed afterwards to shakiness without the ball. Yet on an evening when a huge banner celebrating Sir Alex Ferguson’s 80th birthday on New Year’s Eve was unfurled in the Stretford End, Scott McTominay was in blistering form, scoring a superb opener, creating Cristiano Ronaldo’s goal and performing like a United midfielder should: as a force of nature. Can he do it week-in and out? Because this is the challenge facing the 25-year-old. “I was struggling this morning to play with my right foot but I pulled through it, I am fine,” McTominay said. “We are all learning and adapting [under the manager]. We play for Man United, and we need to get results.” Rangnick made six changes from Monday’s dire 1-1 at Newcastle – to freshen the side, he said – while Burnley’s covid travails claimed Josh Brownhill, Nick Pope, Jay Rodriguez and Kevin Long as its latest victims. Sean Dyche was also without the injured Ashley Barnes, Maxwel Cornet and Connor Roberts. This meant a first Premier League appearance since June 2020 for goalkeeper Wayne Hennessey and Aaron Lennon broke a three-month stretch without a start. Anything less than a home victory would cause scrutiny of the Rangnick project, five matches in. But what the 63-year-old saw initially concerned him as United allowed Burnley to run along their left and, when Matthew Lowton crossed from the other flank, they were thankful Chris Wood’s header was wild. Also off target was Ronaldo’s shot via a Luke Shaw through ball that saw the forward spoon over. But Ronaldo turned provider to open the scoring. Mason Greenwood cannoned the ball off a defender before pulling it back to Ronaldo whose touch was designed to allow him to let fly. Instead, McTominay was there to fire in, to Hennessey’s left, for a first United goal this season. Joy mixed with relief followed. But the play was fractured, pell-mell. What United needed was control but Burnley were defiant. Dwight McNeil and Johann Gudmundsson were driving in from the flanks and causing Aaron Wan-Bissaka to make vital blocks. Shaw, though, was in resurgent form, one barnstorming run ending with his shot smacking the side-netting. United soon scored again. Jadon Sancho veered in from the left and took aim but Ben Mee stuck out a toe and redirected the ball in for an own goal. The hosts had become rampant. McTominay scattered defenders in a run that finished with a clever ball to Ronaldo. His silky feet fashioned an effort but the shot was deflected. By 35 minutes it was 3-0, the excellent McTominay blazing a shot at Hennessey, who tipped the ball on to his left post, only for Ronaldo to tap in. This should have been contest over. But Harry Maguire proved a liability, his passiveness allowing Lennon to run through the defence and unload past David de Gea and into the corner. Dyche could use this as fuel for his interval chat. Burnley came out and tried feeding left-back Charlie Taylor along his corridor but Wan-Bissaka had his measure. Soon, the United right-back was running decoy, allowing Greenwood to serve the ball on to Ronaldo’s head, although his attempt was disappointing. A flowing sequence that featured another Shaw burst had Ronaldo dummying a pass, Cavani helping the ball on and Greenwood shooting. Hennessey repelled the effort. This passage of play continued the pattern of the match. Burnley were existing off scraps, United were doing what they should: dominating an inferior, severely depleted opponent. Yet their play meandered, De Gea’s 70-yard hack that went straight out of play illustrative of this. Leadership was required from Maguire or one of the de facto captains – Ronaldo, Edinson Cavani, McTominay or Shaw – to gee up the troops and get them moving in high gear again. Instead, Lennon again drove forward, Eric Bailly having to usher the ball out for a corner. United broke from this, Greenwood relaying to Sancho who played the ball to Ronaldo. His pass went back to McTominay who warmed Hennessey’s fingers again, firing in a 20-yard shot that was pushed on to the bar. With the score at 3-1 Burnley retained a sniff but this was dependent on them suddenly developing a killer edge. It was not to be, though James Tarkowski had an added-time chance for a consolation. While Raphaël Varane replaced the injured Bailly, there was scant alarm for a side who welcome Wolves on Monday. Again, only victory is enough.That’s it for tonight. I’ll leave with Jamie Jackson’s match report. On behalf of all the liveblog writers, thanks for your emails and company throughout the year. See you in 2022! Scott McTominay’s post-match thoughts “The first-half performance was good but we were still a bit flat in the second half for whatever reason. The game at Newcastle was difficult so we had to bounce back. The manager said that we set a record for the most amount of turnovers in the league for a long time, so that message was clear – keep the ball better, more forward passes and everything else that the manager wants. “We had more energy but goals help with that – if we’d banged in two or three against Newcastle in the first half, the whole team would have had more energy. We haven’t been good enough all season and it’s about time we started stepping up. The manager’s so demanding - his coaching staff as well - that we have to step up, there’s no other choice. You play for Man United, it’s the only way. “I was struggling to play today – I had a problem with my right foot after Newcastle, but it turned out all right. [On the criticism of the team’s body language at St James’ Park] I wouldn’t say [it was fair]. I felt that off the ball against Newcastle we weren’t as bad as everyone has been saying. [Negative] body language is one thing and the manager has completely cut that out. He said he wants no more, and that’s final.” Cristiano Ronaldo gets an assist for McTominay’s goal, even though all he wanted to do was set himself up for a shot. But McTominay doesn’t get one for the sizzling shot that ultimately led to the third goal. That doesn’t seem right, and there’s a case for making the awarding of assists more subjective. “That ‘non-event’ second half was the kind of game-management Reds have been craving for over ten years,” says Paul Shay. Fair point. It was Covid-hit Burnley at home, mind. But yes, I think Ralf Rangnick will be reasonably pleased with how they played, and he’ll be delighted with Scott McTominay’s performance. All the excitement was in the first half. The Man of the Match Scott McTominay gave United an early lead with an impatient shot from the edge of the area. Jadon Sancho’s off-target shot was poked into his own net by Ben Mee and Cristiano Ronaldo gobbled up the rebound after Wayne Hennessey pushed a sizzler from McTominay onto the post. The impressive Aaron Lennon got one back for Burnley shortly before half-time but they never seriously looked like pegging United back. The second half was a bit of a non-event. Peep peep! Manchester United move above Spurs and into sixth after a comfortablish victory over Burnley. 90+3 min de Gea makes a comfortable save from Tarkowski, who muscled Maguire aside to win a high, hanging free-kick from the halfway line. Having beaten Maguire to the ball, he should have done better. 90+2 min A late change for United: Fred replaces Cristiano Ronaldo, who made the first goal (sort of) and scored the third. 90+1 min Three minutes of added time. 90 min At the other end, Ronaldo volleys into the side netting from an absurd angle. 90 min Pieters misses a decent chance, fresh-airing a shot with his right foot after the ball ricocheted across the United area. 89 min Westwood’s deep corner is headed wide from a few yards by Tarkowski at the far post. As with Mee’s chance earlier in the half, he jumped a bit early, though he probably feels he had to jump before everyone else to have any chance of winning the header. 87 min An extraordinary curling pass from Westwood in the inside-right channel - the sort De Bruyne and Alexander-Arnold have mastered - just evades the stretching Vydra at the far post. 86 min Man Utd’s next game is at home to Wolves on Monday. (Today is Thursday, since you asked.) Burnley go to Leeds on Sunday. 84 min Another Burnley change - Erik Pieters is on for Dwight McNeil. 84 min A snap volley from Shaw, on the edge of the D, flies over the bar. 83 min I’ll wake you up when the second half starts. 80 min Another Manchester United change: Diogo Dalot replaces Mason Greenwood. That’s a slight surprise, as I assumed he would replace Aaron Wan-Bissaka rather than play in front of him. 79 min Ronaldo hammers the free-kick into the wall, flooring Tarkowski in the process. 78 min Stephens is penalised, probably harshly, for a challenge on McTominay 22 yards from goal. Ronaldo is over the free-kick. 76 min “That’s the thing with Scott McT,” says Adam Roberts. “Just when you begin to wonder if he’s worth the fuss, he turns in a storming performance. This is the view from my bedroom for the week, by the way. Happy New Year.” For reasons too boring to explain, I’m not able to upload Adam’s pic. But it’s basically this. 75 min Cavani is fuming when he does get to his feet. He has words with Mee and then turns his attention to Sean Dyche on the touchline. 74 min Cavani is down holding his face after an aerial challenge with Mee. There wasn’t much in it; I think he was caught by a stray arm. 74 min A change for Burnley: Matej Vydra replaces Aaron Lennon, who played really well in the No10 role. 70 min Hennessey makes a spectacular save with his face from Cavani. The flag went up afterwards, though replays showed it was very tight so a goal might have stood. It was a lovely move, too - Sancho’s deep cross found Ronaldo, who steered it back towards Cavani eight yards out. He twisted his body to ram the bouncing ball towards goal, and Hennessey’s coupon did the rest. 69 min There hasn’t been a huge amount of pressing from United tonight, certainly not as much as in their last home Premier League game against Crystal Palace. 67 min Westwood’s deep, inswinging corner is headed over by Mee at the far post. He mistimed his jump, I think, and was on the way down by the time he made contact with the ball. 67 min The excellent Lennon robs McTominay and plays the ball out to McNeil, whose cross is put behind by Wan-Bissaka. A Burnley goal now would enliven the evening. 65 min There’s a break in play while the luckless Eric Bailly receives treatment. It doesn’t seem too bad but he’s going off nonetheless. Raphael Varane replaces him. 63 min They don’t and United break. Sancho is held up on the edge of the Burnley area, but Ronaldo collects the ball and lays it back from McTominay. He curls another sizzling long-range shot that is fingertipped over the bar by the flying Hennessey. That’s another seriously good save. Oh and also, Scott McTominay appears to have become Arie Haan for the night. 63 min Lennon runs at Bailly in the area and wins a corner. Replays suggests Bailly didn’t touch the ball, so we’ll have some fun and games if Burnley’s score from the corner. 61 min It’s been a slow, low-key second half, as if both teams are unconsciously saving some energy for their upcoming games. 60 min “Evening Rob,” says Stephen Carr. “I’m really enjoying the debate on what formation best suits a player who doesn’t want to be at a club that doesn’t even have a permanent manager and the stand in manager probably doesn’t want said player there anyway.” Arf. Modern football/life in a nutshell. 58 min A change for Burnley: Dale Stephens replaces Jack Cork in midfield. 57 min Wood’s looping header is comfortably saved just under the bar by de Gea. 55 min On the touchline, Ralf Rangnick doesn’t look entirely thrilled. United have been more ruthless than brilliant, but I suppose that beats the muck they served up the other night. 52 min Ronaldo almost puts Sancho through with an improvised chest pass. He got slightly too much on it, which allowed Mee to come across and clear. 50 min A Greenwood rasper is pushed away two-handed by Hennessey, a decent but ultimately comfortable save. 49 min Greenwood’s inswinging cross is headed wide by Ronaldo ahead of the near post. Wasn’t much of a chance. 49 min Nothing to report in the first few minutes of the second half. 46 min Peep peep! Burnley begin the second half. Parish notes The second goal has officially been credited as a Ben Mee oh gee. Half-time reading “Per the Pogba question, I think United’s current squad seems best suited to 4-3-3 to allow all the quick forwards to rotate and the left/right center-mids to be more/less attacking depending on the opposition…” says Mark Childs. “Obviously, we’d need a good CDM to hold the midfielder together but we need that anyway.” We’re still entertaining Pogba as a credible option, are we? I’m not sure about that system, not if two of the three are preominantly attacking players. It works for City, but they aren’t comparable, and Liverpool have more blue-collar workers in ther midfield. I do like 4-3-3 as a system if you have the right players; I just don’t see how you can play it with these players, particularly Bruno Fernandes. Peep peep! Manchester United are on course for their third win in four league games under Ralf Rangnick after an exciting first half. The star was Scott McTominay, who scored the first and unwittingly made the third for Cristiano Ronaldo. Burnley have looked dangerous going forward, but it’s a long way back from there. 45+2 min Greenwood drags a shot wide of the near post after beating Lennon with a stylish stepover. 45 min Two added minutes. 43 min The scoreline is a bit harsh on Burnley, who have contributed plenty to an exciting half. 42 min Greenwood runs at Lowton on the left and stands up a good cross that is headed over at the far post by Ronaldo. It was no more than a half chance, at least for normal people. 41 min Since you asked, Aaron Lennon and Cristiano Ronaldo first played agianst each other on 18 October 2003. 40 min Incidentally, here’s that Paul Jones save I was talking about (1m20s in) Lennon picked Bailly’s pocket 40 yards out and went straight for goal. He ran at the backpedalling Maguire, into the area, and then threaded a gentle low shot that beat the sprawling de Gea and sneaked into the bottom corner. Aaron Lennon gets one back for Burnley! McTominay, 20 yards out, flashed a curling shot that was quite brilliantly pushed onto the post by Hennessey. The ball rebounded to Ronaldo, who shoved it nonchantly into the empty net with the outside of his right foot. Ronaldo gets his goal, and poor Wayne Hennessey joins the Paul Jones Society of futile goalkeeping brilliance at Old Trafford. 34 min At the other end Wood has a shot blocked by Bailly after a wrestling match with Maguire. Sean Dyche is asking the fourth official why serial shirt-grabber Maguire was allowed to partially disrobe Wood in the penalty area. 33 min Greenwood’s long-range curler is comfortably saved by Hennessey, falling to his left. 33 min “Luke Shaw certainly is playing like the 78th-best player in the word,” hoots Matt Dony. 78th-best male player, Matthew. 30 min: Another chance for Ronaldo! McTominay muscled Cork and another Burnley player off the ball in midfield, surged forward and slid an angled pass to Ronaldo just inside the area. Ronaldo’s first touch left the ball behind, and by the time he was able to shoot there were enough Burnley defenders around to block it. 29 min “Hi Rob,” says Ruth Purdue. “Do you think Pogba will suit this formation if the manager sticks with it? He is the best passer in the team, maybe even the league (apart from Kevin). Although he is leaving in the summer.” As Ralf Rangnick’s favourite word is ‘intensity’, I can’t imagine Pogba is high on his list of dream midfielders. I suppose Pogba might do well as the left-sided No10, but there’s plenty of competition for that place. Actually, that’s probably a Ben Mee own goal - Sancho’s shot took a slight but decisive deflection off his outstretched right foot. The goal came from a Burnley mistake, when Lowton and McNeil tackled each other 35 yards from goal. Shaw picked up the loose ball and found Sancho on the left. He cut inside, shifted the ball with quick feet and slid a low shot towards the far corner. It would probably have gone wide but for Mee’s touch. That said, the classy way that Sancho moved the ball away from Tarkowski and shot in the same movement was straight from his Dortmund showreel. Jadon Sancho makes it two! 25 min The resulting corner leads to a bit of a scramble, during which Cavani’s snapshot is blocked. 24 min Greenwood pings a cross-shot that is kicked behind by Mee at the near post. 22 min Matic fouls Gudmundsson near the corner flag on the left. de Gea comes for the free-kick and gets nowhere near it, but the unsighted Wood (I think) can only head the ball straight up in the air. It drops onto the head of a United defender, who does the necessary. 20 min: Just wide by Shaw! This is the Luke Shaw of last season. He charges over the halfway line, uses Greenwood by not using him and runs all the way to the edge of the area before cutting across a drive that ripples the side netting. 19 min Jon Champion, the Amazon commentator, confirms that Nick Pope and Jay Rodriguez have Covid. 18 min United’s shape is interesting. I’d still describe it as 4-2-2-2, but the hexagon is more squashed then usual. Sancho in particular is staying wide a lot of the time. 17 min Not much has happened in the last few minutes. The game still feels very open, though, and Burnley are playing some good stuff. 13 min “Ah, the mystery of van de Beek,” says Mary Waltz. “Everyone assumed that Ole was the stumbling block to his career. New manager, different formation, still no van de Beek. Maybe he is bad in training.” What makes you so sure he gets a game in training? 10 min At the other end, Gudmundsson’s stinging volley hits Wan-Bissaka. Burnley really have come to play. Greenwood cut inside from the right and had a shot blocked. He collected the ball near the byline and played it back to Ronaldo on the edge of the area. Ronaldo shifted the ball infield, onto his left foot, with a view to shooting. It didn’t come to that, though, because McTominay ran onto the ball and sidefooted a first-time shot past Hennessey. A goal was coming at one end or another, and Scott McTominay has scored it. 6 min: Ronaldo misses a sitter! Well I never. Shaw created the chance with a terrific long pass that put Ronaldo through on goal. He controlled an awkward bouncing ball superbly with his head but then sidefooted a half-volley over the bar from just inside the area. 5 min Burnley have made a really good start. Lennon leads a break and finds Wood, who flashes a curler just wide from the edge of the area. It wouldn’t have counted as Wood was offside, but it was another promising counter-attack. Incidentally, McNeil has started on the right, with Gudmundsson on the left. 4 min A terrific cross from Lowton is headed wide by the diving Wood, eight yards from goal at the far post. That was a pretty good chance. 3 min United have started with Sancho and Greenwood playing wide, rather than as No10s. Is that ... 4-4-2? 2 min Tacticswatch: Burnley are playing 4-4-1-1, with Lennon buzzing behind Chris Wood. 1 min Peep peep! Manchester United kick off from right to left. Sir Alex Ferguson, who turns 80 tomorrow, is in the house. He looks quite dapper, too, with a flat cap atop his noggin. In other news “I think the Dropzone Trilogy are headlining a rave in Bristol this weekend,” says Edan Tal. “Perhaps supported by The J-Rod/Mee Collective.” I thought they were called the Meekowski Massive (feat J-Rod)? van de Beek has started two Premier League games in 2021, both when the entire first XI was rested. His marginalisation, first under Solskjaer and now Rangnick, is one the unsolved mysteries of the year. The footballer who died twice. Ralf Rangnick makes six changes from the 1-1 draw at Newcastle. Aaron Wan-Bissaka, Luke Shaw, Eric Bailly, Nemanja Matic, Jadon Sancho and Edinson Cavani replace Diogo Dalot, Alex Telles, Raphael Varane, Fred Fred, Bruno Fernandes and Marcus Rashford. They’re all on the bench apart from Fernandes, who is suspended. Sean Dyche makes one two changes from that 0-0 draw with West Ham back in the day. Aaron Lennon and Wayne Hennessey replace Jay Rodriguez and Nick Pope, who are not in the squad. In fact Burnley have only named seven substitutes. We don’t know yet whether Lennon will play up front or wide in a five-man midfield. Hennessey will definitely play in goal. Manchester United (4-2-2-2) de Gea; Wan-Bissaka, Bailly, Maguire, Shaw; McTominay, Matic; Greenwood, Sancho; Cavani, Ronaldo. Substitutes: Henderson, Varane, Dalot, Telles, Lingard, Fred, van de Beek, Rashford, Elanga. Burnley (4-4-2) Hennessey; Lowton, Tarkowski, Mee, Taylor; Gudmundsson, Cork, Westwood, McNeil; Lennon, Wood. Substitutes: Norris, Collins, Bardsley, Pieters, Stephens, Thomas, Vydra. Referee Jon Moss. Hello and welcome to live coverage of Manchester United v Burnley at Old Trafford. It’s the final part of what nobody is calling the Dropzone Trilogy. United struggled to beat 20th-placed Norwich before Christmas, really struggled to draw against 19th-placed Newcastle on Monday, and I won’t insult your intelligence by telling you where Burnley are in the league. We’re hardwired to perceive Manchester United v Burnley as a home banker. It isn’t, not the way United are playing, and it hasn’t been for a while. Burnley have drawn three and won one of their last five games at Old Trafford. Even when they lost 3-1 on Super League Day in April, they were level after 83 minutes. United and Burnley have been more affected than most by Covid cancellations. United have played only once in the last two and a half weeks; Burnley haven’t played at all. This is their first match since their 0-0 draw at home to West Ham on 12 December, and they have at least two games in hand on all the teams above them. A win tonight would move them above Watford and into 17th. Kick off 8.15pm.Sebastian Coe has doubled down on his insistence that boycotting the Beijing Winter Olympics over China’s human rights record and treatment of the tennis star Peng Shuai would be a mistake, and says that dialogue and relationships are a better way of “flicking the dial” politically and socially. In his strongest intervention yet, the head of World Athletics and senior IOC member said that sporting boycotts were “historically illiterate and intellectually dishonest” and described the political boycott announced by the US, UK and other western countries as “frankly meaningless”. Human rights groups have accused China of forcibly interning more than a million Uyghurs in re-education camps in Xinjiang, submitting them to forced sterilisations and intentionally destroying their culture, as well as destroying democracy in Hong Kong. That view is supported by the Biden administration, which earlier this month confirmed it would not send diplomats to the Winter Games due to “ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity in Xinjiang and other human rights abuses”. However, Coe insisted that a “balance” needed to be struck when it came to human rights and countries like China. He rejected claims that such a stance was ignoring the situation that the Uyghurs and others faced. “I’m not insouciant or cavalier about human rights, I take them very seriously,” he said. “But we have to be realistic, when we take our events around the world there are going to be challenges: culturally, politically, socially. I guess my fallacy position on this is always, in an imperfect world, sport is the one continuum that can actually create some stability. I’ve witnessed time after time the impact that sport has had in flicking that dial, socially, politically, economically.” When asked about boycotts, Coe, who led the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games Organising Committee, was blunt. “Boycotts on balance are historically illiterate and intellectually dishonest,” he said. “A political boycott is, frankly, meaningless. And in a world where I actually think discussion and relationships are important, rarely do I see isolation bearing fruit. “But that’s not to be an apologist for countries that do not conform to the basic standards around human rights. I’ve never witnessed sport leaving any country in worse shape than when it’s been there. The impact across the board can be, on many occasions, quite profound.” Last month the WTA suspended tennis tournaments in China due to concerns over Peng’s safety, but Coe defended World Athletics’ plans to double the number of Diamond League events in China to two next summer. “It’s for each sport to decide its own approach,” said Coe. “It’s not an approach we would take in World Athletics and I don’t think over the long haul it is one that actually achieves a great deal. There are always unintended consequences. And at the end of the day, the people that most suffer in all that are the athletes. “All athletes should be free to voice their concerns and they should be free to without fear of censure and they should be able to travel freely,” he said. “That is an important right. But we’re talking about extrapolating from that into boycotting a sporting event, and I think there has to be proportionality here, and I think there has to be balance.” Meanwhile Coe confirmed that the Athletics Integrity Unit would be stepping up its safeguarding efforts in the sport. It comes after the Guardian revealed that the top sprint coach Rana Reider is being investigated by the US Center for Safesport after multiple complaints of sexual misconduct were made against him. UK Sport is also looking into whether UK Athletics properly handled an allegation involving Reider and an 18-year-old sprinter when it was made in 2014. While Coe would not comment specifically on that case, he accepted that athletics had to do more to make the sport safe. “I don’t know what is taking place within UKA,” he said. “I’m sure they would want themselves to look at what happened and they will need to go back through that particular pathology. But one of the things that came out of our congress was to extend the mandate of the AIU. It can look more broadly at some of these safeguarding issues. “It can’t become the world’s policeman on this, but I think it will take a far greater interest in those kinds of issues. During the convention we had Charlie Webster tell her story, and I can tell you that within hours of that, both World Athletics and the AIU were contacted by federations who said they couldn’t sit any longer and watch certain individuals just getting jobs in the system knowing what they knew. It was as if their conscience got pricked on this. “If we are all being honest about it there are red flags that sometimes get ignored, and too often a problem is swept away from one federation and unwittingly ends up in another federation. It’s really important we are able to share that kind of information in federations wherever they occur, because there are too many of them.”Joe Biden and Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin have exchanged warnings over the crisis in Ukraine during a 50-minute phone call that did little to lower the political temperature, according to their governments. Russia has alarmed the US and its allies by massing tens of thousands of troops near its border with Ukraine over the past two months. This follows its seizure of Ukraine’s Crimea peninsula in 2014 and its backing of separatists in eastern Ukraine. Thursday’s talks, requested by Putin, were the leaders’ second conversation this month but, the White House said, consisted of both men restating their positions – including Biden warning of severe consequences if Putin decides to invade. “President Biden urged Russia to de-escalate tensions with Ukraine,” said Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, in a statement. “He made clear that the United States and its allies and partners will respond decisively if Russia further invades Ukraine.” In a conference call with reporters, a senior administration official added that Biden had laid out “two paths”: one of diplomacy and deescalation, the other of deterrence “including serious costs and consequences” such as economic sanctions, strengthening Nato’s force posture and military assistance to Ukraine. The Kremlin, meanwhile, insisted that Putin had used the call to issue a threat of his own, telling Biden that new sanctions could totally rupture ties between Russia and the US and represent a colossal mistake. Yuri Ushakov, Putin’s foreign policy adviser, was quoted by the Reuters news agency as saying: “Our president immediately responded that if the west decides in this or other circumstances to impose these unprecedented sanctions which have been mentioned then that could lead to a complete breakdown in ties between our countries and cause the most serious damage to relations between Russia and the west.” Ushakov added: “Our president also mentioned that it would be a mistake that our descendants would see as a huge error.” Biden, who is spending the week in his home state of Delaware, spoke to Putin from his home near Wilmington. The White House distributed a picture of the president speaking to the Russian leader from a desk lined with family photos. The call came ahead of a US-Russia security meeting in Geneva on 9 and 10 January, followed by a Russia-Nato session on 12 January, and a broader conference including Moscow, Washington and other European countries on 13 January. In the media conference call, a White House official described the conversation as “serious and substantive” but focused on setting the tone and tenor for the diplomatic engagements to come rather than breaking new ground. The official also acknowledged that Putin offered little clarity as to whether he plans to invade or back down. “We’re not going to draw conclusions and there were certainly no declarations as to intentions from this conversation. “But regardless, our focus is really on actions and on indicators, not on words at this point, so we’re going to continue to monitor very closely the movement and build-up of Russian forces on the Ukraine border and prepare ourselves for whatever decision ultimately is made by the Russian president.” Putin, who held a video call with Biden on 7 December, has compared the current tensions to the cold-war era Cuban missile crisis in 1962. He denies planning to attack Ukraine and insists that Russia has the right to move its troops on its own soil. Moscow has called for legally binding guarantees that Nato will not expand further eastwards and certain offensive weapons will not be deployed to Ukraine or other neighbouring countries. Washington regards some of the demands as non-starters. Antony Blinken, the US secretary of state, spoke on Wednesday with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy. State department spokesperson Ned Price said Blinken “reiterated the United States’ unwavering support for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity in the face of Russia’s military buildup on Ukraine’s borders”.Ralf Rangnick has revealed he warned his players about their body language following Monday’s insipid draw at Newcastle and was satisfied with the response as Manchester United saw off Burnley 3-1. United drew criticism for visible shows of petulance and a lack of togetherness during the 1-1 result at St James’ Park. The interim manager was clear this had to stop. “In team sports it is always important you are convinced about what you are doing,” said Rangnick. “At Newcastle it was a difficult game for us, we were 1-0 down after seven minutes. They did well, we didn’t play well, especially in the first half. Therefore the reaction to what is happening on the pitch is the question. How do we react to this? Do we fight back, show them we are a team that believes in themselves, or do we shake our heads and wave our arms and help the other team and damage our own team? “For me it was clear to tell them it is important we work and behave as a team and don’t show these kinds of side-effects on the pitch.” Scott McTominay, who scored Thursday’s opener against Burnley and impressed throughout, admitted Rangnick was right to offer the warning. “Body language is one thing and the manager has come in and said he wants to cut that out, so that is final. We have taken it on board,” said the midfielder. A further strike from Cristiano Ronaldo plus Ben Mee’s own goal were answered only by Aaron Lennon, all goals coming before the break. This was Rangnick’s fifth game in charge and he praised his side’s attack. “I would say yes [our best display],” he said. “But whenever the ball was in our half there was still some space for improvement [defensively] but offensively I agree that was our best performance.” McTominay had been a doubt due to a leg problem. “We only decided this afternoon at two o’clock that he would play as he had some problems with the ankle contusion he suffered at Newcastle,” said Rangnick. “So it was good to have him available and in the team.” Jorge Mendes, Ronaldo’s agent, claimed the forward is content at United, following rumours of unrest. “Cristiano Ronaldo is very happy at Manchester United,” he told Sky Sports. “He’s going to continue with his solid, great performances as always in his career. It’s going to be a great season for him, I’m sure”.