Almost 16,000 children in the UK could be exposed to domestic abuse this Christmas, a leading research charity has estimated, calling on ministers to commit to funding specialist support services in the new year. The tragic cases of Arthur Labinjo-Hughes and Star Hobson, two young children murdered in their homes, have recently cast a spotlight on the risks of domestic abuse to children. The Early Intervention Foundation (EIF), a charity that advocates effective early intervention to improve the lives of children, said the Christmas period could be particularly stressful for families, which may lead to more domestic abuse. It is estimated that 3.2% of under-11s and 2.5% of 11- to 17-year-olds are exposed to domestic violence, which EIF said equated to 15,948 over the two-week festive period, which would be a rise from 15,006 the previous Christmas. The Home Office is expected to publish a domestic abuse strategy in 2022, after the Domestic Abuse Act received royal assent this year. Dr Jo Casebourne, the chief executive of the EIF, said: “Given the numbers of children affected by domestic abuse, it is vital that we fully understand how best to help them. “The domestic abuse strategy must focus on improving services for child victims of domestic abuse. There are longstanding gaps in provision for families, including in relation to the availability of prevention services and long-term therapeutic support, support for babies and very young children and culturally specific interventions for minority groups. “That’s why we are calling on safeguarding minister Rachel Maclean to ensure that the domestic abuse strategy includes a commitment to fund and evaluate the most promising support, in order to build crucial evidence of what works for families affected by domestic abuse.” Early in December, the case of six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes shocked the country. The boy was subjected to a sadistic campaign of cruelty by his stepmother and father. He was physically assaulted, poisoned with salt and forced to stand in isolation for up to 14 hours a day in the months leading up to his death. Emma Tustin, 32, was sentenced to life with a minimum of 29 years for the murder of Arthur, while his father, 29-year-old Thomas Hughes, was given 21 years in prison for manslaughter. The national Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel announced it would examine the circumstances leading up to Arthur’s death. Findings from a report on the death of 16-month-old Star Hobson will also feed into the national review. Star suffered weeks of “neglect, cruelty and injury” from her mother’s partner, 28-year-old Savannah Brockhill. The toddler died of cardiac arrest after being punched or kicked by Brockhill in September 2020 using “massive force” on a par associated with “a road traffic accident”. Brockhill was jailed for life with a minimum term of 25 years, while Star’s mother, Frankie Smith, was jailed for eight years after she was found guilty of causing or allowing the toddler’s death but cleared of murder and manslaughter charges. The EIF said children who had experienced domestic abuse were significantly more likely to experience abuse in their own adult relationships, to misuse drugs or alcohol, and to have lower levels of wellbeing. In a report earlier this year, the charity identified a significant lack of evidence on what support works to effectively help children who have experienced, or who are at risk of experiencing, domestic abuse. The safeguarding minister, Maclean, said: “Nobody should feel unsafe in their own home and we are determined to ensure all victims of domestic abuse, including children, get the support they need. “That is why this year we are providing over £3m to specialist services for children experiencing domestic abuse which is enabling a range of therapeutic support and early intervention schemes for children impacted by this devastating crime. “The new Domestic Abuse Act is fundamentally transforming our response as it recognises children as victims of domestic abuse in their own right and our upcoming domestic abuse strategy will set out our plan to tackle all forms of this crime, including that experienced by children, in due course.”A vision document on a strategy for women’s health in England will be published by the Department of Health and Social Care on Thursday after nearly 100,000 women came forward to share their healthcare experiences. The document will set out initial government commitments on women’s health, recognising that system-wide changes are needed to tackle “decades of gender health inequality”. The final plan – the Women’s Health Strategy – will be published in the spring. The Women’s Health Strategy is expected to include a focus on six key areas, the Guardian has learned. These “priority areas” relate to specific conditions or areas of health where the public consultation highlighted particular issues. Menstrual health and gynaecological conditions In the consultation, menstrual health was the topic most chosen by respondents aged 16-17 for inclusion in the Women’s Health Strategy, and gynaecological conditions was the No 1 topic selected by those aged 18-29. Women said they “persistently needed to advocate for themselves” and to push for further investigation in order to secure a diagnosis, speaking to doctors on multiple occasions over many months or years for conditions such as endometriosis. These delays often had wider ramifications for their health and quality of life. Fertility, pregnancy, pregnancy loss and postnatal support Fertility, pregnancy, pregnancy loss and postnatal support was the most cited topic for women aged 30-39. Responses covered a wide range of issues, including contraception, preconception health, fertility and infertility, pregnancy loss and stillbirth, support for expectant and new mothers and their partners, pelvic floor health, and patient experience and safety. Information was another key theme, with calls for more information on the causes of infertility, the likelihood of a successful pregnancy at a later age, information relating to women’s health before pregnancy, and the realistic success rates of fertility treatments. Another key issue raised was miscarriage and pregnancy loss. The menopause The menopause was the most selected topic for women aged 40-59. Only 9% of respondents felt that they had enough information on the menopause. Another important theme was access to treatment, with women reporting that symptoms were not taken seriously or recognised as the menopause, and that there were difficulties in accessing HRT, with some GPs reluctant to prescribe it. Healthy ageing and long-term conditions Healthy ageing was the top topic for women aged 60 and over. Women also said that they would like the Women’s Health Strategy to cover long-term conditions such as musculoskeletal conditions, heart disease and stroke. There was also a demand for action on specific conditions that are more prevalent in women or where there are disparities in access to service or outcomes, such as osteoporosis. Some responses also said health in the workplace could be a particular challenge for older women, who may experience menopause symptoms, and who may have caring responsibilities. Mental health Mental health was in the top five most popular topics selected by women for inclusion in the Women’s Health Strategy, and was consistent across every age group. Overall, 65% of women felt comfortable talking to friends about mental health conditions. But the issue was commonly cited when women were asked to give an example of an area in which they felt that they had not been listened to by a healthcare professional. Women flagged that they would like to see improved access to mental health services, and that they had struggled to access mental health services and support during the pandemic. Some also said that better mental health support in the workplace would help them to reach their full potential. The health impact of violence against women and girls Women told the consultation that the effects of domestic abuse and violence on women’s health were wide ranging and extensive, and had a long-term effect on their physical and mental health. There was a call for health settings to be a trusted environment that provided a primary way for victims and survivors to access support. In the survey, only 9% of respondents felt that they had enough information about specialist NHS services such as female genital mutilation clinics or sexual assault referral areas.Ministers are concerned about women’s health, they have declared today. Many women who have been shouting about glaring health inequalities for far too long may be forgiven for saying under their breaths: about bloody time. In many countries men face greater health risks, but not in the UK. A study from Manual, a wellbeing platform for men, has found the UK has the largest female health gap among G20 countries and the 12th largest globally. Research published by the House of Lords earlier this year pointed out that study after study showed poorer outcomes for women. In 2016, researchers at University College London found that women with dementia received worse medical treatment than men with the condition, made fewer visits to the GP, received less health monitoring and took more potentially harmful medication. Women, in particular young women, are also more likely to experience common mental health conditions than men, despite the fact that men account for about three-quarters of deaths registered as suicide. The inequalities start well before women make it to their doctor’s surgery. Women are routinely underrepresented in clinical trials, and medical research proposed by women, for women, is not allotted the same funding as medical research proposed by men, for, you guessed it, men. Tireless work by the campaigner and writer Caroline Criado Perez demonstrates that, as she states in her book Invisible Women: Exposing Data Bias in a World Designed for Men, healthcare is “systematically discriminating against women, leaving them chronically misunderstood, mistreated and misdiagnosed”. Sexism is still rampant in healthcare, not least among staff. Despite the fact the NHS workforce is dominated by women, men working in NHS trusts are still paid more than their female peers. It permeates the system, from women’s pain being dismissed by their GPs, to women struggling to get the menopause drugs they need on the NHS. The consequences can be catastrophic. In June 2020 a government inquiry found that an arrogant culture in which serious medical complications were dismissed as “women’s problems” contributed to a string of healthcare scandals over several decades. A recognition today by the women’s health minister Maria Caufield that there were “shocking” cases among the 100,000 women who answered a government consultation is welcome, as is the announcement that there will be a women’s health ambassador. The creation of a menopause taskforce rides a wave of greater understanding of a condition that affects half the population but was, until very recently, taboo. And it is good to see that campaigners’ calls to ban hymen restoration surgery have finally been heeded after the government earlier promised to ban virginity testing. But gender inequality in healthcare runs deep. Recognising, as the government has today, that system-wide changes are needed to tackle “decades of gender health inequality” is a vital first step yet, as Criado-Perez has said, women have been considered less important in healthcare as far back as Ancient Greece. This spring’s Women’s Health Strategy will need to have a lot more meat, in particular a commitment to sex-disaggregated data within a healthcare system still providing PPE designed for men to many of its staff – and years of sustained funding if that is to be reversed.Children in the UK will be the first in Europe to receive a life-changing treatment for peanut allergies, after NHS England secured a deal for a drug that decreases the severity of symptoms including anaphylaxis. The oral treatment, Palforzia, will be available to up to 600 children aged four to 17 the first year and 2,000 the following year. The news will help affected families as they navigate anxiety over everyday events like mealtimes, birthday parties and eating out, and carry adrenaline injections to treat anaphylaxis, a severe, potentially life-threatening allergic reaction. About one in 50 UK children suffer from peanut allergies. The treatment stems from from two large peanut allergy clinical trials – the Palisade and Artemis studies – which the Evelina London children’s hospital took part in. Sophie Pratt, whose nine-year-old daughter, Emily, took part in the trial, told PA Media it “had changed our whole family’s lives”. “The treatment we received has meant that Emily is free from limits and the fear that the tiniest mistake could put her life at risk, and it has removed all the tension and worry that the simple act of eating loomed over us every day,” she said Since the trial, Emily had been able to attend parties with confidence, feed animals at the zoo and take her first holiday to New York, Pratt said. The change “was particularly noticeable at special occasions like birthdays, Christmas and on holidays where there are often special foods like cakes, ice cream and treats that invariably had warnings, ‘may contain peanuts’ or menus not in English,” Pratt added. An Imperial College London study found that, of the 187 people who died from anaphylaxis in the UK from 1992 to 2018, at least 86, or 46%, suffered from peanut or other nut allergies. In the Artemis study, six in 10 children were able to eat a dose of peanut protein of 1,000mg – well above the accidental exposure amount – by the end of the trial, whereas previously they had reacted to 10mg. Stephen Powis, national medical director of NHS England, said the treatment would “reduce the fear and anxiety for patients and their families who may have been living with this allergy for years. “This pioneering treatment can be life-changing for patients and their families and, thanks to the deal the NHS has struck, people here will be the first in Europe to benefit,” he said. Powis added that families should be able to “enjoy meals out or holidays abroad together without worrying about an allergic reaction that could land them in hospital or worse”. Former Liberal Democrat leader Jo Swinson, who has a nut allergy, had to be injected with adrenaline at Glasgow’s Southern General hospital in 2013 after eating a biscuit containing nuts. “It was a very scary experience,” she said. George du Toit, children’s allergy consultant at Evelina London and senior investigator on the UK trials, said Palforzia’s approval was a “significant step forward” and would “protect against accidental exposure to peanuts”.Ministers have pledged to “reset the dial” on women’s health to tackle decades of gender inequality in England, with plans to appoint a women’s health tsar, eradicate medical taboos, boost menopause support and ban harmful “virginity repair” operations. The Department of Health and Social Care will publish its Vision for Women’s Health strategy today after 100,000 women came forward to share their healthcare concerns. Maria Caulfield, the minister for women’s health, described some of their experiences as “shocking”. The vision document will set out initial government commitments on women’s health, recognising that “systemwide changes” are needed to tackle “decades of gender health inequality”. The final plan – the Women’s Health Strategy – will be published in spring 2022. On Wednesday night, ministers pledged to introduce legislation criminalising hymenoplasty or any procedure to rebuild or repair the hymen. Such surgery creates scar tissue so that a woman will bleed the next time she has intercourse, making it appear she has never had sex. Young women can be forced to prove they are “pure” on their wedding night. Doctors have called for a ban on the surgery for years, saying it can never be justified on health grounds and is harmful. Separately, the government will appoint a women’s health ambassador to raise the profile of key issues and boost awareness of taboo topics. Ministers will also establish a UK-wide menopause taskforce to investigate how women going through the menopause can be better supported. The cost of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) prescriptions will also be cut by implementing longer prescribing cycles so women will need fewer prescriptions and therefore pay less. The consultation provided “stark and sobering insights” into women’s experiences of health and care and highlighted entrenched problems within the NHS, officials said. Eight in 10 women said they felt they were not listened to by healthcare professionals, and there was a feeling that services for specialities or conditions that only affect women were of “lower priority” compared to other health services. Ministers are also considering compulsory training for GPs on women’s health after the idea was raised by women who came forward. The vision document said: “We also heard about a lack of awareness amongst some GPs of the causes of infertility, miscarriages and their relationship with infertility, and the reasons for in vitro fertilisation (IVF) failure.” Many women also felt that damaging taboos and stigmas in women’s health prevented them from seeking help, and over half of respondents said they felt uncomfortable talking about health issues with their workplace. “The responses from the call for evidence were in many ways as expected, particularly with regards to women’s priorities, but in some places the revelations were shocking,” said Caulfield, who worked as a nurse before entering politics and returned to the frontline during the Covid pandemic. “It is not right that over three-quarters of women feel the healthcare service has not listened,” she added. “This must be addressed. Many of the issues raised require long-term systemwide changes, but we must start somewhere. I am proud to publish our vision for women’s health. It is the first step to realising our ambition of a healthcare system which supports women’s needs throughout their lives.” The vision document says all women should “feel comfortable talking about their health” and “no longer face taboos when they do”. They should have access to “high-quality information and education from childhood through to adulthood, in school and beyond”. Actor Mika Simmons, the host of The Happy Vagina podcast and the co-chair of the Ginsburg Women’s Health Board, said: “Women’s healthcare has been sidelined for far too long and a seismic shift now needs to happen to correct the historical lack of efficient care. I look forward to seeing changes made, at government level, to ensure women receive better support with our reproductive, gynaecological and sexual wellbeing.” Prof Geeta Nargund, an NHS consultant and medical director at Create Fertility, said there must also be a renewed focus on health conditions affecting black, Asian and minority ethnic women, “who have historically struggled to access support”. She added: “The results of this consultation are only the beginning, and we must work together to support our NHS and healthcare system to deliver the best service possible for all women.” The campaigner Nimco Ali said urgent action was needed “to address the gender health gap” and welcomed the response to the consultation. “We have already seen progress in so many areas but this data will ensure future policy is delivered where it is most needed and will be most effective.” Dr Edward Morris, the president of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, said he welcomed the decision to ban hymenoplasty after a ban on virginity testing earlier this year. “Neither have any place in the medical world,” he said. “Women deserve to have ownership over their own sexual and reproductive health.” This decision came after a recommendation from an independent expert panel, as the process is intrinsically linked to virginity testing and reinforces outdated attitudes towards a woman’s sexuality. Morris added: “We are very concerned that women in vulnerable and desperate situations are being coerced or pressured into having these procedures to prove that they are a virgin. The ban of both of these procedures will help to eradicate harmful beliefs which place false value on a person’s virginity.”Nurses, care home staff and police officers working on Christmas Day will be thousands of pounds worse off than they were a decade ago as a result of wages failing to keep pace with prices, Trades Union Congress analysis has shown. Urging the government to raise the minimum wage to £10 an hour, the TUC said the key workers expected to keep Britain going on 25 December had taken real pay cuts since 2010. Police sergeants and constables have had the biggest reduction, with inflation-adjusted pay £5,595 a year lower than a decade ago. Nurses have had an effective wage cut of £2,715 and local authority care workers a cut of £1,661, the report found. A chef would be earning £1,050 more a year this Christmas had pay kept pace with price rises, while a waiter would be £859 better off, the TUC said. The coming year is expected to bring a fresh squeeze on living standards. Annual inflation is running at 5.1% and expected by the Bank of England to peak at about 6% in the spring. Meanwhile, earnings including bonuses in the three months to October were up 4.9% on the same period in 2020. Frances O’Grady, the TUC’s general secretary, said: “Many of the key workers who are bracing themselves for another surge of Covid cases are earning less in real terms than they were a decade ago. That is not right. “While many of us are tucking into the turkey, thousands of key workers will be hard at work on the front line, many of them dealing with staff shortages as a result of the Omicron variant. But their pay awards are falling way short of what they should be, especially in a cost-of-living crisis. “The pandemic must be a turning point; 2022 should be the year that the government finally gets wages rising across the UK. They can start by giving our public service workers a proper pay rise, and by raising the minimum wage to £10 an hour.” The national minimum wage is £8.91 an hour and will rise to £9.50 an hour in April.The Omicron variant of Covid-19 is now the dominant variant in England, South Africa and probably in the US, according to estimates from the Centers for Disease Control. So do we know how many of Australia’s latest cases are due to Omicron, and if it’s the dominant variant in the country yet? The short answer is that it may be but this comes with a lot of caveats. First, some background on how we detect Omicron and other variants. The Omicron variant shares a characteristic mutation with another, older variant of concern called Alpha. Both variants have a mutation in the “S gene”, which means they show up differently to other coronavirus variants when using one of the common PCR tests used to check for Covid-19. This means that we can use the absence of the S gene, called “S gene dropout” or “S gene target failure” as a proxy for tracking the rise of the Omicron variant. Some countries, such as the UK, have used this information to estimate the prevalence of Omicron over time. But only full genome sequencing can conclusively identify the variant – this means the whole genome of the virus is identified, rather than the presence of small, specific parts of the genome used in PCR. Australia doesn’t publish S gene dropout numbers but most positive cases undergo sequencing. As at June 2021 at least 58% of cases had been sequenced. Some information on variants of concern is then published by the communicable diseases genomics network. As of its update on 20 December, 386 Omicron cases had been identified, most in New South Wales. Unfortunately this data only includes totals for the whole pandemic, so it can’t be used to show the proportion of Delta or Omicron. Most of the Australian sequence data is shared internationally with a group called GISAID, a collaboration of scientists from around the world pooling Covid-19 genomic information to aid research and health responses. Thanks to another group of scientists who run the NextStrain and CoVariants websites that analyse the GISAID data, we can see the change in the proportion of variants of concern over time. Before we take a look at the numbers, there are some important caveats. This sequencing data represents a sample of the overall Covid-19 case population, and there is a lag between when a case is identified and when the sequence data is published. This means the latest time points are incomplete. Dr Norelle Sherry is a scientist at the Doherty Institute and physician at the Austin hospital who is involved with genomic sequencing for pathogen surveillance. She says there is also some variation in sequencing strategies between jurisdictions. “For example, Victoria and NSW are both sub-sampling a portion of the positive cases due to the high case numbers,” she says. “There may be some biases in the sampling, particularly recently, as samples are screened with PCR tests, and possible Omicron samples (such as S-gene target failures or dropouts) are prioritised for sequencing, so current sequences may not reflect the true underlying population.” On 19 December NSW Health announced it would be undertaking genomic sequencing for the Omicron variant only in circumstances where it would make a clinical difference to the care of a patient. With all that in mind, the latest data shows Omicron accounted for 45 out of 58 cases that have been sequenced and published since 13 December, or 78%. To put the total number of sequenced cases into perspective, and emphasising that the figures are only a small fraction of total cases, here is the same data but showing the total numbers, rather than percentages. This data will change as more cases are added to the database, and it may be that Omicron cases will still be outnumbered by Delta for the next few weeks. But scientists expect Omicron to become the dominant variantv in Australia. Assoc Prof Stuart Turville, a virologist at the Kirby Institute, says: “Even among vaccinated populations it is likely that Omicron will take over as the dominant variant. We should expect to see significant community spread. “Day by day we’ll know more, but for now, people should follow government advice on boosters, social distance, wear masks where appropriate and follow the public health orders.” NSW health authorities have already said they believe Omicron “likely accounts for the majority” of recent cases.The three-time BDO world champion Glen Durrant fell at the first hurdle at the PDC world championship on Wednesday, the No 24 seed slipping to a 3-0 defeat against Ireland’s William O’Connor. Durrant, who won the BDO title in 2017, 2018 and 2019 and was the 2020 Premier League champion, has been struggling with his action – “Like a golfer having the yips,” he told the Guardian in an interview this week – and came into the match on the back of 27 defeats in his last 28 matches stretching back to March. But there was to be no miracle turnaround in form at Alexandra Palace, Durrant winning just one leg and averaging 80.45 in a second-round defeat. O’Connor advances to the third round, where he will face the No 9 seed Michael Smith. Elsewhere in the afternoon session, the No 13 seed Joe Cullen produced a rousing comeback from 2-1 down to beat the dangerous Jim Williams 3-2. “To have the crowd behind me is great. I’m just happy to win to be honest. Jim played well to get in front and I did well to come back,” said Cullen, who won in front of fans at the Ally Pally for the first time since 2017. “My record here is terrible so to play that well and to win in front of that brilliant crowd means everything to me. If I’m honest I think I might have lost that game a few years ago but I’m a little more experienced now and that’s why I came back to win.” There were 3-0 whitewash wins for the No 15 seed Ryan Searle against William Borland, who had produced a nine-dart finish to win his first-round match, and Luke Humphries against Rowby-John Rodriguez of Austria. The evening session opens with the No 10 seed Nathan Aspinall taking on Joe Murnan, before the Dutchman Dirk van Duijvenbode plays Russia’s Boris Koltsov. Steve Beaton takes on Kim Huybrechts before Australia’s Simon Whitlock faces Martijn Kleermaker in the final game of the day.Thank you for joining us on the blog today. We will be closing this live feed down but please follow along on our new blog here. Covid infections among five- to 11-year-olds are three times more prevalent than in the general population of England, a government-backed study has found. An estimated 4.47% of primary school-aged children had the virus within the period of the study in contrast with 1.41% across the country overall, according to the research. React-1, a joint study by Imperial College London and Ipsos Mori, analysed data from 97,000 volunteers in England to examine national Covid-19 levels between 23 November and 14 December. It predicted that the rapidly spreading Omicron variant will become the dominant strain across the country more than three times faster than Delta overtook Alpha. However, the speed of the vaccine rollout to secondary school-aged children and the booster rollout among adults may have helped to curb infection rates among other age groups, researchers said. Read the full story here. The White House has warned that the Pfizer Covid-19 pill will not be widely available for months, the Financial Times is reporting. The complex nature of the drug reportedly means it will take more than half a year to make the 10 million courses that are on order. We will have more on this story as it develops. Hello it’s Samantha Lock reporting to you from Sydney as I take over the Covid blog from my colleague Jem Bartholomew, who was reporting to you from London. As usual, let’s start with some numbers out of Australia. The nation’s most populous state of NSW saw cases soar to 5,715 new infections with one death while Victoria reported 2,005 cases and 10 deaths. Tasmania’s numbers are also in. There have been 26 new Covid cases reported - a record high for the state. Queensland recorded 369 new cases. Prime minister Scott Morrison has insisted it’s not necessary for the states to introduce mask mandates in response to a rapid rise in Covid-19 cases, despite health advice recommending they be compulsory in indoor settings. Here’s a round-up of Wednesday’s global developments on Covid and Omicron: Early UK data suggests the risk of a hospital stay is 40% lower with Omicron than Delta, according to a study by Imperial College London. Another study from South Africa also appeared to suggest a lessened severity from the highly-transmissible variant. The UK logged 100,000 new Covid infections for the first time since the pandemic began, with Northern Ireland and Wales announcing new restrictions. Canada will expand support to people and business over Omicron restrictions, after provinces Ontario, Quebec and British Columbia announced new restrictions to push back the virus. Health regulators in the United States issued an emergency use authorisation for a pill made by Pfizer that can be used to treat Covid at home. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director-general of the World Health Organization, said booster programmes in wealthy nations are likely to prolong the pandemic as much of the world’s population remains unvaccinated. France reported 84,272 new cases ad health minister Olivier Véran warned the country could soon have around 100,000 infections a day. Belgian concert halls, cinemas and other entertainment venues will close because of the surging variant, the government announced. In Spain, face masks will once again be compulsory at all times outdoors even when a distance of 1.5m from other people can be maintained, the country’s prime minister Pedro Sánchez said. Germany’s new health minister Karl Lauterbach suggested a fourth Covid-19 vaccine dose would be required in order to protect against Omicron. Israel is set to become the first country in the world to offer a fourth dose of Covid vaccines, to over 60s and healthcare workers, in an effort to protect against the Omicron variant. Ukraine said it expects a new wave of cases to begin in February, just weeks after its last wave spiked. In the US, California’s governor Gavin Newsom said healthcare workers in “high-risk congregate settings” will require a Covid vaccine booster by 1 February. Denmark will tighten restrictions in schools from 5 January, with pupils and staff taking two weekly tests, teachers and parents urged to wear face masks (except in class) and contact reduced between students. That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew in London, and I’m handing over to my colleague Samantha Lock in Australia. I’ll be back tomorrow. Do get in touch by email or on Twitter with tips and stories for then. How is the Omicron wave impacting UK cities? As with other waves, it appears the public have started to take action ahead of any potential tougher government restrictions. Data from the retail intelligence firm Springboard on Wednesday showed a 17.3% drop in footfall in central London compared with the same day last week, and regional cities have recorded a 3.4% drop. My colleague Alexandra Topping has this report: The busy streets of central London are normally no place for the faint-hearted in the run-up to Christmas. Shoppers jostle with increasing urgency to secure last-minute gifts while revellers spill out from bars and restaurants to celebrate their final days in the office. But this is far from a normal Christmas. Shoppers and tourists have stayed away from the capital in large numbers, data – and haunting pictures – reveal. Images of near-empty streets in citiessuch as Manchester and Edinburgh tell a tale of shoppers and tourists alike staying away from city centres over fears about the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant and a mass return to working from home. Andrew Lloyd Webber has closed Cinderella until next year, and productions of Hamilton and The Lion King have been pulled. Elizabeth Stokoe, professor of social interaction at Loughborough University, told me this has characterised UK prime minister Boris Johnson’s approach throughout the pandemic, with polling showing the public generally ahead of the government over restrictions. Johnson has in the past imposed restrictions only after, she said, it became clear the public supported them. “If the public are the motorway traffic, going in one direction, Johnson just joins from the side – but he’s not directing the traffic,” Stokoe said. Read The Guardian’s full report here. In the US, the flu virus, which all but disappeared in 2020, is circulating agan, according to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. About 2,500 positive flu infections were reported the week ending 11 December, back to pre-Covid levels. That could cause problems alongside the surging Omicron wave, epidemiologists warned the New York Times, amid worries whether health systems can keep up with two respiratory viruses. “We have seen how surges in Covid-19 infections can overwhelm hospitals, and influenza infections could further stress health care systems,” CDC epidemiologist Sonja Olsen said. “If both viruses continue to circulate and increase in activity, the situation could get worse.” The Times has the full report here. Russia reported 25,264 new Covid infections on Wednesday, the Moscow Times reports, a 16% decrease on the 30,228 new cases logged on Wednesday two weeks ago. Russia saw its recent wave spike in early November, when daily case rates nudged close to 40,000, and in recent weeks has seen a receding epidemic. But death rates remain high. 1,020 people died from Covid-related causes on Wednesday, down 11% on the 1,149 on Wednesday two weeks ago. But with the Sputnik V vaccine proving little effective against the Omicron variant in an early study – research Russia rejects – there are worries of a resurgent wave. Health authorities said there had been 41 cases of Omicron detected so far on Tuesday. In the US, Anthony Fauci, chief medical adviser to the president, said on Wednesday that large gatherings of over 40 people during the holiday season are unsafe, even if you’re vaccinated and boosted. “There are many of these parties that have 30, 40, 50 people in which you do not know the vaccination status of individuals. Those are the kind of functions in the context of Omicron that you do not want to go to,” Fauci said at a White House briefing. Denmark will tighten restrictions in schools, with pupils and staff taking two weekly tests, staff and parents urged to wear facemasks and contact reduced between students in efforts to roadblock Omicron. The new restrictions will begin when students return on 5 January, the education minister, Pernille Rosenkrantz-Theil, said, as reported by the Copenhagen Post. Teachers will be exempt from wearing masks in classrooms. It comes after schools continue to drive infections. The Post reported that recently, almost 2,500 out of every 100,000 school kids aged six to 11 were infected, twice as many as any other age group. Denmark has seen cases surge in recent weeks: 13,057 Covid infections were detected on Tuesday, a 106% climb on the 6,324 positive tests on Tuesday two weeks ago. Canada will expand support for people and businesses hit by the Omicron wave. “We are in for some even tougher times ahead. That is true and that is really hard,” finance minister Chrystia Freeland said on Wednesday. She announced Ottawa would temporarily expand programs on the cost of rent and wages until 22 February. It followed restrictions announced earlier by provinces Ontario, Quebec and British Columbia to try and push back the virus. Prime minister Justin Trudeau said at a government briefing three of his staff, plus three security detail workers, have Covid. Canada reported 11,300 new cases in the past 24 hours, a 220% increase on the 3,529 new infections on Wednesday two weeks ago. Oleksiy Danilov, Ukraine’s secretary of the national security and defense council, said the country expects a new wave to take off in February, local media Ukrinform reports. “As of today, the situation is under control. The ongoing fourth wave declines now, we are following it. We expect the next wave to start on February 10 - 15. It all depends on vaccination pace,” Danilov said. Ukraine experienced spiking cases in late-October and early-November, with daily infections sometimes hitting 27,000. But in recent weeks the epidemic has receded. Ukraine reported 6,363 Covid cases in the past 24 hours, Ukrinform reported, a 36% decline on the 9,895 new cases on Wednesday two weeks ago. A further 301 people died from Covid-related causes on Wednesday, down 37% from 480 people on Wednesday two weeks ago. In the US, California’s governor Gavin Newsom said healthcare workers in “high-risk congregate settings” will require a Covid vaccine booster by 1 February, in signs booster shots are being integrated into existing mandates as data emerges three doses are required for protection against Omicron. A previous mandate for Californian healthcare workers to be vaccinated came on 30 September. (Workers can apply for a religious of medical exemption.) According to the state’s data, 70.4% of people statewide are double-vaccinated and 42.4% of people are boosted. Healthcare workers not yet boosted must submit to two Covid test a week ahead of 1 February, Newsom said. People who test positive with the Omicron variant are on average 15% less likely than Delta cases to attend hospital and have a 40% lower risk of being hospitalised for a night or more, UK data suggests. The Imperial College outbreak modelling team led by Prof Neil Ferguson analysed hospitalisations and vaccine records among all PCR-confirmed Covid cases in England between 1 and 14 December. In a report published on Wednesday, the scientists found that any attendance at hospital was a fifth to a quarter lower with Omicron versus Delta cases, and between 40% and 45% lower when the visit resulted in being admitted for at least one day. My colleague Ian Sample will have a longer report on this shortly. Here are the UK’s record-breaking Covid case numbers – jumping over 100,000 for the first time – in context. This is Jem Bartholomew in London taking charge of the international blog for the next few hours. Do get in touch with tips and stories, it’s always great to hear from readers. Email me here. Message me on Twitter here. Here’s a quick roundup of what’s been happening so far: Health regulators in the United States issued an emergency use authorisation for a pill made by Pfizer that can be used to treat Covid-19 at home. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) said the pill, sold under the brand name Paxlovid, could be used to treat mild-to-moderate Covid-19 in adults and children 12 years and older, so long as they have tested positive for the virus and are at high risk of severe Covid symptoms. The UK recorded 106,122 new Covid cases on Wednesday, the highest daily figure since the beginning of the pandemic and the first time cases have passed 100,000. Government figures showed a further 140 deaths were also reported, bringing the total to 147,573. The Pfizer/BioNTech coronavirus vaccine has been approved for use in vulnerable primary school children in the UK, following a recommendation by the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation. A maximum of six people will be allowed to meet in pubs, cinemas and restaurants in Wales from 6am on 26 December, the first minister has announced. The two-metre social distancing rules will also return in public places and outdoor events will be limited to 50, and 30 indoors. Nightclubs in Northern Ireland will close on Boxing Day. South Africa has reported data on Covid cases driven by the Omicron variant that appears to give added impetus to claims the country is experiencing a lower severity of disease. “In South Africa, this is the epidemiology: Omicron is behaving in a way that is less severe,” said one of the authors of the study. France reported 84,272 new coronavirus cases today, close to the daily record of just less than 87,000 in November 2020. French health minister Olivier Véran warned the country could soon have around 100,000 new Covid cases a day, but said no new restrictions were on the table for now. Concert halls, cinemas and other entertainment venues in Belgium will close because of the surging variant, the government announced. From Sunday, no indoor activities will be allowed except for museum visits, exercise, weddings or funerals and sports fans will not be allowed into stadiums. In Spain, face masks will once again be compulsory at all times outdoors even when a distance of 1.5m from other people can be maintained, the country’s prime minister Pedro Sánchez said. The announcement comes a day after Spain recorded its highest daily case numbers since the pandemic began. Germany’s new health minister Karl Lauterbach suggested a fourth Covid-19 vaccine dose would be required in order to protect against Omicron. He said the new variant will become the dominant strain within three weeks and the country has ordered 80m doses of Omicron-specific vaccine for delivery in April or May. Israel is set to become the first country in the world to offer a fourth dose of Covid-19 vaccines in an effort to protect against the Omicron variant. People over the age of 60 and healthcare workers will be eligible for a second booster shot, the prime minister, Naftali Bennett, said. The head of the World Health Organization (WHO) said the world will have enough doses of Covid vaccines in the first quarter of 2022 to inoculate all of the global adult population – if western countries do not hoard those vaccines to use in blanket booster programme. Separately, a WHO official said it is too soon to say whether the new variant is more transmissible than the Delta variant. “We do have some data suggesting that rates of hospitalisation are lower,” said WHO’s technical lead on Covid-19, Maria van Kerkhove, but she warned against drawing conclusions from early data because “we have not seen this variant circulate long enough in populations around the world”. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, for today as I hand over the blog to my colleague Jem Bartholomew, who will continue to bring you the latest coronavirus news from around the world. France reported 84,272 new cases, coming close to its all-time high of almost 87,000 cases in November 2020. The latest figure marks the biggest one-day increase on record and the country’s second-highest this year. Earlier today, France’s health minister Olivier Véran warned the country could soon have around 100,000 new Covid cases a day. He said no new restrictions were on the table for now, although nothing could be ruled out. US President Joe Biden has tested negative for Covid-19, days after he was in contact with a White House aide who later tested positive for the virus. The White House announced the results after Biden told reporters hours earlier that he had received a PCR test but was waiting on results. On Monday, the White House said a “mid-level staff member” who tested positive on Monday had spent about 30 minutes “in proximity to the president” on Air Force One as Biden flew from South Carolina to Pennsylvania on Friday. The staffer, who is fully vaccinated and boosted, had tested negative before getting on the plane and did not experience symptoms until Sunday, according to White House press secretary Jen Psaki. Here’s more on the US Food and Drug Administration’s authorisation of Pfizer’s antiviral Covid-19 pill, which will be sold under the brand name Paxlovid. The agency authorised the oral drug – the first at-home treatment for Covid – for the treatment of high-risk adult patients and pediatric patients at least 12 years of age with Covid-19 outside of the hospital. The drugmaker said it was ready to start immediately delivery in the United States and raised its production projections to 120m courses of treatment from 80m in 2022. The US government’s contract for 10 million courses of the Pfizer drug is priced at $530 per course. Data from Pfizer’s clinical trial showed its two-drug antiviral regimen was 90% effective in preventing hospitalisations and deaths in patients at high risk of severe illness. Recent data suggests it retains its effectiveness against the Omicron variant. The pills are meant to be taken every 12 hours for five days beginning shortly after the onset of symptoms. Concert halls, cinemas and other entertainment venues in Belgium will close from this weekend because of the surging Omicron variant, the government has announced. From Sunday, sports fans will not be allowed into stadiums and indoor venues and groups entering a shop will be limited to two adults. No indoor activities will be allowed except for museum visits, exercise, weddings or funerals. Bars and restaurants will be allowed to remain open until 11pm, under curtailed hours imposed since the start of the month. Prime Minister Alexander De Croo said although overall Covid infections were down 60% from three weeks ago, worryingly three out of 10 positive tests were now of the Omicron variant. “We have to be more careful than ever in this period where there are many uncertainties,” he said. He did not rule out stricter restrictions being brought in if the increase in Omicron cases led to more hospitalisations. The world will have enough doses of Covid vaccines early next year to inoculate all of the global adult population – if western countries do not hoard those vaccines to use in blanket booster programmes, the head of the World Health Organization has said. Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said on Wednesday there would be sufficient supplies of vaccine in global circulation in the first quarter of 2022. “Blanket booster programmes are likely to prolong the Covid-19 pandemic, rather than ending it, by diverting supply to countries that already have high levels of vaccination coverage, giving the virus more opportunity to spread and mutate,” Tedros said, adding: “No country can boost its way out of the pandemic.” His remarks follow predictions by officials with the WHO’s Africa region earlier this month that African countries should receive almost a billion doses within the same timeframe. Read the full article here: Face masks will once again be compulsory at all times outdoors in Spain, the country’s prime minister Pedro Sánchez announced. People will be required to wear a face mask outdoors even when a distance of 1.5m from other people can be maintained. Sánchez is due to hold a cabinet meeting tomorrow to approve the decree, the Spanish government said in a statement. It is not known yet when the rule will come into effect. The announcement comes a day after Spain recorded its highest daily case numbers since the pandemic began. Health regulators in the United States have cleared use of a Covid-19 pill from Pfizer, the first drug that newly-infected patients can now take at home to stay out of the hospital. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has issued an emergency use authorisation for Pfizer’s Paxlovid for the treatment of mild-to-moderate coronavirus disease in adults and patients aged 12 or older. Paxlovid is available by prescription only and should be initiated as soon as possible after diagnosis and within five days of symptom onset. A World Health Organization (WHO) official has said it is too soon to say whether the new variant is more transmissible than the Delta variant, almost a month after South Africa first raised the alarm about its emergence. “We do have some data suggesting that rates of hospitalisation are lower,” WHO’s technical lead on Covid-19, Maria van Kerkhove, said. But she warned against drawing conclusions from early data because “we have not seen this variant circulate long enough in populations around the world, certainly in vulnerable populations”. She said the data on the new variant was still “messy” as countries reported its arrival and spread. Italy has recorded 36,293 new cases, compared with 30,798 the previous day, the health ministry said. A further 146 deaths were also reported, taking the total to 136,077. It is the second-highest death toll in Europe after Britain and ninth-highest in the world. The number of patients in hospital with Covid – not including those in intensive care – stood at 8,544 on Wednesday, up from 8,381 a day earlier. The total number of intensive care patients fell to 1,010 from a previous 1,012. Here’s a little more on those latest UK figures. The new daily total is 106,122, which is more than 13,000 higher than the previous record - 93,045 on Friday last week. The total number of new cases over the past week is up 58.9% on the total for the previous week. As I mentioned in the previous post, case numbers are only comparable since mass testing began in May and June last year. Experts have said there are likely to be hundreds of thousands of infections per day, with many being missed. Compared with the previous week, the number of daily deaths has decreased by 2.7% in the last seven days. As of yesterday, a total of 8,008 people were in hospital with Covid. This is the highest number since 22 November and up 4% on a week earlier – but still a long way off the 39,254 hospitalisations recorded on 18 January. The UK recorded 106,122 new Covid cases on Wednesday, the highest daily figure since the beginning of the pandemic and the first time cases have passed 100,000. (Comparisons are only appropriate with the second and third waves, because there was very little testing during the first wave, which kept recorded cases very low.) Government figures showed a further 140 deaths were also reported, bringing the total to 147,573. Children between the ages of five and 11 in Finland will be eligible to receive a Covid vaccine, health officials said. Until now only children in vulnerable groups have been able to receive the jab. Earlier this month, the Finnish Health Institute recommended that children aged five and over should be vaccinated against Covid if they or someone in their household were at high risk of severe infection. The move comes alongside new restrictions to curb Christmas drinking and tighten border controls. Bars will stop serving alcohol at 9pm on Christmas Eve, followed by a three-week alcohol sales ban past 5pm in bars and restaurants from 28 December. Unvaccinated people in Kenya will be banned from public places, the health ministry said, despite a court order last week against the measures. People will now have to show proof of vaccination to use public transport or enter government offices. Senior health ministry official Mercy Mwangangi said: In public places, all persons must show proof of vaccination for admission for example into national parks, game reserves, hotels, bars as well as use of public transport. In the event of non-compliance, action shall be taken, which may include the withdrawal of the licence of the institution. The proportion of Kenyans with a positive test result has soared recently, from 1% in early December to almost 30% now. Israel is set to become the first country in the world to offer a fourth dose of Covid-19 vaccines in an effort to protect against the new Omicron variant. People over the age of 60 and healthcare workers will be eligible for a second booster shot, the prime minister, Naftali Bennett, said on Tuesday night, following a recommendation made by Israel’s panel of pandemic experts. The rollout, aimed at people who had a third shot at least four months ago, is pending approval by the health ministry, but is expected to go ahead in the next few days. “The citizens of Israel were the first in the world to receive the third dose of the Covid-19 vaccine and we are continuing to pioneer with the fourth dose as well,” Bennett said in remarks relayed by his office, calling on those who meet the criteria to “go and get vaccinated”. A year ago, Israel embarked on a world-leading vaccination campaign thanks to a special deal with drugmakers Pfizer/BioNTech, in which the country received early supplies in exchange for sharing health data on the vaccines’ impact. Since then, however, progress has slowed: only about 63% of the 9.3 million-strong population has received two doses, partly owing to the fact that the population skews young, and due to high levels of vaccine hesitancy within the ultra-Orthadox and Arab communities. Read the full article here: A record 968,665 booster and third doses of Covid-19 vaccine were reported in the UK yesterday, latest figures show. The previous record was 940,606 doses on Saturday. More than 30.8m booster and third doses have been delivered in the UK, with 6.1m in the past seven days. Germany’s new health minister Karl Lauterbach suggested a fourth Covid-19 vaccine dose would be required in order to protect against the Omicron variant. In a news conference this afternoon, Lauterbach said Omicron will become the dominant strain in Germany within three weeks and the country has ordered 80m doses of Omicron-specific vaccine for delivery in April or May. “An offensive booster campaign is our most important building block in the fight against Omicron,” he said. “The level of protection against severe Covid-19 symptoms after a booster shot is very high. I would estimate it goes well over 90%.” Germany reported 45,659 new coronavirus cases on Wednesday, 5,642 fewer than a week ago, while the death toll rose by 510. A third dose of a Pfizer or Moderna vaccine offers a “significant increase” in protection against the Omicron variant in elderly people, according to a new Danish study. Researchers at Denmark’s top infectious disease authority, Statens Serum Institut (SSI), investigated the effectiveness of vaccines that use mRNA technology against the Delta and Omicron variants. The study, which has not yet been peer-reviewed, analysed data from 3 million Danes gathered between 20 November and 12 December. Among those who recently had their second vaccine dose, effectiveness against Omicron was measured at 55.2% for Pfizer and 36.7% for Moderna, compared with unvaccinated people. That protection was found to quickly wane over the course of five months. However, a third dose of Pfizer’s vaccine restored protection to 54.6% in people aged 60 or older who had been inoculated 14 to 44 days earlier, compared with those with only two doses. “In light of the exponential rise in Omicron cases, these findings highlight the need for massive rollout of vaccinations and booster vaccinations,” the researchers said. France has cancelled its order for a Covid-19 antiviral drug produced by Merck, citing disappointing trial data. French health minister Olivier Véran said he hopes instead to receive Pfizer’s competing drug, Paxlovid, before the end of January. France had placed an early order for 50,000 doses of the drug molnupiravir developed by Merck and Ridgeback Biotherapeutics. Véran’s comments mark the first time a country has publicly said it has cancelled an order for the Merck treatment after the company released data in late November suggesting its drug was markedly less effective than previously thought. The drugmaker said its pill showed a 30% reduction in hospitalisations and deaths. In comparison, Pfizer’s Paxlovid has shown near 90% efficacy in preventing Covid hospitalisations and deaths in high-risk patients. Germany’s health minister Karl Lauterbach told Reuters that a “binding order” had already been placed for Merck’s antiviral treatment. The European Medicines Agency is expected to decide whether to approve the Merck and Pfizer pills in the new year. Denmark has scrapped extraordinary travel restrictions for ten countries in southern Africa, after authorities said they did not contribute to controlling the epidemic. The countries, which are now only encompassed by general travel restrictions, are South Africa, Lesotho, Eswatini (Swaziland), Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Namibia, Angola, Malawi and Zambia, the country’s health ministry said. Travellers from these countries still need to get tested and enter isolation upon entry to Denmark. South Africa has reported data on Covid cases driven by the Omicron variant that appears to give added impetus to claims the country is experiencing a lower severity of disease. “In South Africa, this is the epidemiology: Omicron is behaving in a way that is less severe,” said Prof Cheryl Cohen, of the country’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD), one of the authors of the study. “Compellingly, together our data really suggest a positive story of a reduced severity of Omicron compared to other variants,” she said during a news conference by a group of NICD scientists on Wednesday. Scientists, however, cautioned that the reasons less severe cases were being seen was not fully understood and that South Africa’s experience – with a young population – might not translate into how other countries experience Omicron. In South Africa, the median age is 27.6 years in comparison with the UK, where it is 40.5, and Italy – hard hit by the first wave of the pandemic – where it is 47.3. Read the full article here: Authorities in Turkey have approved emergency use of its domestically developed Covid vaccine, Turkovac, the country’s health minister, Fahrettin Koca, said. Speaking at the vaccine’s production facility in the south-eastern province of Sanlirufa, he said public hospitals would begin using the jab from next weekend. Turkey began developing Turkovac this year, but the launch date for the vaccine has been beset by delays. President Tayyip Erdogan has said the vaccine will be made available globally. UK government advisers have decided against recommending that all five- to 11-year-olds be offered the Covid vaccine, with only the most vulnerable children expected to be eligible immediately, the Guardian understands. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) is expected to recommend a limited rollout to clinically vulnerable children on Wednesday, stopping short of suggesting that all primary age children should be vaccinated. Ministers have been keenly awaiting the advice on primary age vaccinations, with large numbers of children absent throughout the autumn term as the Delta and then Omicron waves spread through the unvaccinated population. Read the full article here: Families in Spain will be able to celebrate Christmas together despite the rise in Covid cases, the country’s prime minister Pedro Sánchez has confirmed. The Spanish health ministry reported a record 49,823 cases on Tuesday, with 94 further deaths, though hospitalisations and intensive-care numbers remain fairly low compared to previous waves. Addressing parliament today, Sanchez said: Parents and mothers, grandfathers and grandmothers will be able to come together with their children and grandchildren. Omicron accounts for some 47% of total infections, according to data released yesterday. NHS leaders in England have reportedly been told to make plans for temporary “field hospitals” in hospital car parks in preparation for the expected surge of Covid patients over the next five weeks. Health Service Journal reports NHS England held a series of calls on Tuesday during which they asked local leaders to review the capacity of their mortuaries. Leaders were also asked to identify hard standing areas where temporary “field hospitals” could potentially be erected, which would effectively be large “tents” with a capacity for around 100 patients, according to one source. Italy’s prime minister, Mario Draghi, has said the government is preparing new Covid restrictions, including the return to mandatory mask-wearing outdoors and the use of more protective FFP2 masks indoors. Key officials are set to meet on Thursday to discuss potential measures, including making vaccinations mandatory for more categories of workers, he said. The Italian government has already made jabs obligatory for health care workers, teachers, law enforcement officers and the military. A maximum of six people will be allowed to meet in pubs, cinemas and restaurants in Wales from 6am on 26 December, the first minister has announced. Licensed premises will have to offer table service only, face masks will have to be worn and contact tracing details collected. Mark Drakeford said the 2-metre social distancing rules will also return in public places and outdoor events will be limited to 50, and 30 indoors. He said: We are facing a very serious situation in Wales. A wave of infections caused by the new, fast-moving and very-infectious omicron variant is headed our way. This new form of coronavirus could infect large numbers of people in Wales, disrupting daily lives and businesses and could cause an increase in the number of people who need hospital care in the coming weeks. We will do everything we can to protect people’s health and livelihoods in Wales – this means taking early action to try and control its spread. The Quebec government is reportedly considering asking hospital workers with asymptomatic Covid-19 to stay on the job. The Globe and Mail quotes a source as saying the idea was floated last Friday at a meeting between unions representing health care workers and the assistant deputy minister of health, Vincent Lehouillier. In an interview, a senior health official confirmed the government is looking into assigning Covid-19 positive staffers who are not feeling sick to treat patients who have already been exposed to the virus. Canada’s second-most populous province announced a series of partial lockdown measures after cases doubled in less than a week. Bars, casinos, cinemas, gyms and performance venues have been closed since Monday and restaurants can be open only between 5am and 10pm. Sports performances must be held behind closed doors and schools have closed with a return to in-person classes scheduled for 10 January. The World Health Organization’s eastern Mediterranean chief has warned that there could be more than 17 million cases in the 22 countries in the region and more than 314,000 deaths by the end of the year. Speaking at a WHO virtual briefing, Dr Ahmed Al-Mandhari said: The arrival of Delta and Omicron during 2021 made it clear that Covid-19 is far from over. Covid will continue to evolve; simply because the virus continues to mutate. This is what viruses do: they change as they circulate. Fourteen countries in the eastern Mediterranean region have already reported cases of Omicron, he said, adding: The holiday season is upon us. These times must remain happy times. Yet, the failure to apply the established public health and social measures could cause alarming surges in the number of Covid-19 cases and related deaths. Hello from London. I’m Léonie Chao-Fong, taking over from Tom Ambrose to bring you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic. In northern China, the city of Xi’an has ordered its 13 million residents to stay home in a strict lockdown. From midnight on Thursday, all households may only “send one household member outside once every two days to purchase necessities”, Agence France-Presse reports. Everyone else must remain indoors except in the case of an emergency. Xi’an reported 52 new cases today, bringing the total to 143 since December 9. The latest orders came a day after the city began testing all of its 13 million residents. China is fighting local outbreaks in several cities, including key industrial hubs in the east and south. Authorities are determined to quash fresh outbreaks ahead of the Beijing Winter Olympics in February. The southern city of Dongxing on Tuesday ordered its 200,000 residents to stay at home and halted public transport after one single local case was detected. Here is a round-up of the top Covid news stories so far today: France could soon have around 100,000 new Covid cases a day, health minister Olivier Véran said on Wednesday, up from around 70,000 as the country battles a fifth wave of the epidemic. Israel is to offer a fourth dose of a Covid vaccine to people older than 60 or with compromised immune systems, and to health workers, as part of a drive to ramp up the shots and outpace the spread of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus. AstraZeneca has said it is working with Oxford University to produce a vaccine for the Omicron variant. “Together with Oxford University, we have taken preliminary steps in producing an Omicron variant vaccine, in case it is needed and will be informed by emerging data,” a spokesperson for the company said in a statement on Tuesday. German health experts have said that new coronavirus curbs probably did not go far enough to keep the Omicron variant in check, as the country’s health minister said he had not ruled out a full lockdown if cases spiked. The World Health Organization’s European chief has warned countries to brace for a “significant surge” in cases as Omicron spreads across the continent. South Africa’s noticeable drop in new Covid cases in recent days may signal that the country’s dramatic Omicron-driven surge has passed its peak, medical experts say. In the UK, there are 129 people in hospital with the Omicron variant of the coronavirus and so far 14 people have died, junior health minister Gillian Keegan told Sky News on Wednesday. Suspected Covid outbreaks in hospitals across the UK have doubled in a week, official figures reveal – though the number of people admitted to wards with the virus is falling across much of England. More than 167,000 children are believed to have lost parents or caregivers to Covid during the pandemic – roughly one in every 450 young people in the US under age 18. Poland reported 775 Covid-related deaths on Friday, the highest daily number in the fourth wave of the coronavirus pandemic, the data from the health ministry showed. Britain has signed contracts to buy a further 4.25m courses of antivirals for its health service to help combat the new Omicron variant of coronavirus, it said on Wednesday. Japan has confirmed its first known local transmissions of the new Omicron variant of the coronavirus in Osaka, a sign it is already making its way in the country. In Australia, Scott Morrison insists it’s not necessary for the states to introduce mask mandates in response to a rapid rise in Covid-19 cases, despite health advice recommending they be compulsory in indoor settings. The US recorded the lowest rate of population growth in its history in the first year of the coronavirus pandemic, according to the US Census Bureau. Hundreds of small business owners rallied in South Korea’s capital on Wednesday, calling for the end of a curfew and tough coronavirus restrictions on restaurants, cafes, gyms and other facilities. Finland will significantly scale up Covid restrictions on the hospitality industry from Christmas Eve with restaurants to stop serving alcohol by 9pm and close their doors by 10pm. Singapore will freeze the sale of tickets for arriving flights and buses under its quarantine-free travel programme for four weeks from Thursday. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, for today as I hand over the blog to my colleague Léonie Chao-Fong, who will continue to bring you the latest coronavirus news from around the world. Goodbye. The Philippines has halved the wait for a booster dose of Covid vaccine to three months in its battle with the more infectious Omicron variant. From Wednesday, adults can receive a booster dose at least three months after receiving the second jab of a two-dose vaccine, compared with six months earlier, acting presidential spokesperson Karlo Nograles said. Single-dose vaccine recipients are eligible for a booster after two months, he told a regular news conference. German health experts have said that new coronavirus curbs probably did not go far enough to keep the Omicron variant in check, as the country’s health minister said he had not ruled out a full lockdown if cases spiked. The measures, decided on Tuesday, include limits on private gatherings, closing clubs and discos and banning spectators at football matches and are set to be introduced from 28 December, Reuters reported. Janosch Dahmen, health expert for junior coalition partners the Greens, said they were a step in the right direction. “But they probably won’t be able to curb the danger that Omicron represents,” he told broadcaster Deutschlandfunk. German Hospital Federation chairman Gerald Gass called the measures “necessary, but possibly not sufficient” in comments to the Funke media group. Germany reported 45,659 new coronavirus cases on Wednesday, close to recent peaks, as the death toll rose by 510, and both men said the government should be ready to toughen the curbs if the epidemic worsened. More than 167,000 children are believed to have lost parents or caregivers to Covid during the pandemic – roughly one in every 450 young people in the US under age 18. The count updates the October estimate that 140,000 minors had lost caregiving adults to the virus, and is four times more than a springtime tally that found nearly 40,000 children had experienced such loss. In a 9 December report titled Hidden Pain, researchers from the COVID Collaborative and Social Policy Analytics published the new total, which they derived by combining coronavirus death numbers with household-level data from the 2019 American Community Survey. The death toll further underscores the daunting task facing schools as they seek to help students recover not just academically, but also emotionally, from a pandemic that has already stretched 22 months and claimed more than 800,000 American lives. Hundreds of small business owners rallied in South Korea’s capital on Wednesday, calling for the end of a curfew and tough coronavirus restrictions on restaurants, cafes, gyms and other facilities. The protesters chanted “Guarantee the right to live!” and “Scrap restrictions on business operations!” during the rally in Seoul. Under current social distancing guidelines, up to 299 people are allowed to join rallies but all must be fully vaccinated. On Saturday, South Korea reimposed its toughest social distancing rules to try to control a record-breaking surge of the coronavirus. Most new cases in South Korea are still the delta variant, but health officials say the new Omicron variant could become the dominant strain in a few months. The restored curbs include a ban on private gatherings of five or more people, a 9pm curfew for restaurants, coffee shops and karaoke venues, and required proof of vaccination for entry to restaurants and other businesses. Britain has signed contracts to buy a further 4.25m courses of antivirals for its health service to help combat the new Omicron variant of coronavirus, it said on Wednesday. Antivirals are treatments used to either treat those who are infected with a virus or sometimes protect exposed individuals from becoming infected. The government said the two new contracts are for 1.75m courses of Merck Sharp and Dohme’s (MSD) molnupiravir and 2.5m additional courses of PF-07321332/ritonavir from Pfizer which will be available from early next year. Poland reported 775 Covid-related deaths on Friday, the highest daily number in the fourth wave of the coronavirus pandemic, the data from the health ministry showed. Poland has been dealing with persistently high daily case numbers in a fourth wave that has forced authorities to tighten restrictions. On Friday Poland reported 18,021 new coronavirus cases. Israel is to offer a fourth dose of a Covid vaccine to people older than 60 or with compromised immune systems, and to health workers, as part of a drive to ramp up the shots and outpace the spread of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus. A health ministry expert panel – whose findings have yet to be implemented – recommended on Tuesday that those eligible receive the fourth shot at least four months after receiving their third. Prime minister Naftali Bennett, who has sought to drum up higher Israeli turnout for vaccines, welcomed the panel’s statement as “great news that will help us overcome the Omicron wave that is spreading around the world”. The panel further recommended that the time allotted between second and third shots be reduced to three months from five. Such measures would be “part of the preparation for the fifth wave” of the pandemic, said the panel’s statement, which did not present specific data behind the recommendations. Japan has confirmed its first known local transmissions of the new Omicron variant of the coronavirus in Osaka, a sign it is already making its way in the country. The family of three in Osaka had no record of travelling overseas and their infections could not be traced, Osaka governor Hirofumi Yoshimura said. The three are the first known cases of community transmission of the highly infectious variant in Japan, Yoshimura said. “I believe they only happened to be detected and we must take steps on the assumption that there already are other cases of community transmission,” he said. Yoshimura said restrictions on eateries in Osaka will remain in place, including a limit of four people per table for a maximum of two hours, to minimise risks during the holiday season, when coronavirus infections surged last year. About 80 previous omicron cases have been identified in Japan, but all involved people who tested positive upon entry at airports or those linked to them, government officials have said. Nurses have pleaded with the public to get vaccinated and boosted over Christmas to ease the strain on the NHS. Staff at King’s College Hospital in south-east London said while social distancing and wearing masks was important, getting both jabs as well as boosters was the “best thing” that people can do to prevent themselves from getting Omicron. Nicky Barlow, 30, a critical care sister who works in the Covid intensive care unit at King’s, said they have found patients being admitted to hospital with Covid are younger than before. She told the PA Media news agency: We are very stretched from a nursing point of view, we’ve had lots of sickness due to Covid positive cases and contacts. The nurses are all very tired because they’re all having to take on a lot more responsibility than they normally would due to the stretched staffing. We’re seeing the majority of patients that are coming in with Covid are not vaccinated and they’re also younger as well this time around. Outlining what can be done to ease the stress on them, she added: “The majority of Covid patients that are coming in aren’t vaccinated. “All the patients that have had their vaccine seem to have not as bad symptoms. I would [say] get vaccinated. I’ve been vaccinated, I’ve had my booster, I would encourage all the staff to have their boosters. I think that’s the best thing that we could do. “Wearing masks and social distancing is helpful too.” Dr Laura Jane Smith, 39, is a respiratory consultant in one of the hospital’s two wards for Covid patients. She told PA Media: There’s only so much that people can do, but the things that really make a difference is looking after themselves and really thinking hard about getting their vaccinations. What we’re seeing is that they [the vaccines] do make a huge difference to the severity of disease. People might still have some hesitancy and I just advise them to try and make sure they’re getting really good information from trusted sources and just rethink to try and protect themselves and their loved ones. We all treat everyone the same, unvaccinated, vaccinated or whatever, but we see what a difference it makes, and so we really hope that people could reconsider that decision. South Africa’s noticeable drop in new Covid cases in recent days may signal that the country’s dramatic Omicron-driven surge has passed its peak, medical experts say. Daily virus case counts are notoriously unreliable, as they can be affected by uneven testing, reporting delays and other fluctuations. But they are offering one hint — far from conclusive yet — that omicron infections may recede quickly after a ferocious spike. The Reuters news agency reported: South Africa has been at the forefront of the omicron wave and the world is watching for any signs of how it may play out there to try to understand what may be in store. After hitting a high of nearly 27,000 new cases nationwide on Thursday, the numbers dropped to about 15,424 on Tuesday. In Gauteng province — South Africa’s most populous with 16 million people, including the largest city, Johannesburg, and the capital, Pretoria — the decrease started earlier and has continued. “The drop in new cases nationally combined with the sustained drop in new cases seen here in Gauteng province, which for weeks has been the center of this wave, indicates that we are past the peak,” Marta Nunes, senior researcher at the Vaccines and Infectious Diseases Analytics department of the University of Witwatersrand, told The Associated Press. “It was a short wave ... and the good news is that it was not very severe in terms of hospitalizations and deaths,” she said. It is “not unexpected in epidemiology that a very steep increase, like what we saw in November, is followed by a steep decrease.” France could soon have around 100,000 new Covid cases a day, health minister Olivier Veran said on Wednesday, up from around 70,000 currently as the country battles a fifth wave of the epidemic. The Omicron variant will be the dominant strain of Covid in France by early January, Veran told BFM TV . Veran said no new restrictions were on the table for now, although nothing could be ruled out, with authorities hoping an increase in the numbers of people having vaccinations will allow them to keep the virus in check. On 21 December, France registered a further 210 Covid deaths in hospitals in the last 24 hours, while it also recorded 72,832 new Covid cases. The country’s death toll stands at 122,931, according to Johns Hopkins University. In the UK, there are 129 people in hospital with the Omicron variant of the coronavirus and so far 14 people have died, junior health minister Gillian Keegan told Sky News on Wednesday. She also said the UK government would not hesitate to bring in further Covid restrictions if the data showed it was necessary. Prime minister Boris Johnson said on Tuesday that he would not introduce new restrictions in England before Christmas, but the situation remained extremely difficult and the government might need to act afterwards. In Australia, Scott Morrison insists it’s not necessary for the states to introduce mask mandates in response to a rapid rise in Covid-19 cases, despite health advice recommending they be compulsory in indoor settings. Speaking after a national cabinet meeting on Wednesday, the prime minister instead said it was “highly recommended” to wear masks indoors, urging Australians to use common sense and to reduce their risk of spreading Covid to their loved ones over Christmas. Health advice circulated to state and territory leaders late last week made the case for mandating masks in all indoor settings, including retail, entertainment facilities, and hospitality when not eating and drinking. The US recorded the lowest rate of population growth in its history in the first year of the coronavirus pandemic, according to the US Census Bureau. The year from July 2020 to July 2021 was also the first time since 1937 that the population of the US grew by fewer than 1 million. Only 392,665 people were added to the count, growth of barely 0.1%. The figures released on Tuesday would appear to indicate that although tens of millions of Americans were forced to quarantine at home in the early months of the pandemic, there was no consequential rise in the birthrate. If anything, analysts say, the numbers were far lower than anticipated, even though the tally of births in the US has dropped every year since 2008, with the exception of 2014. “I was expecting low growth but nothing this low,” William Frey, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution metropolitan policy programme, told the Associated Press. Hello. Tom Ambrose here to bring you all the latest Covid headlines over the next few hours. Let’s start with the news that in the UK, Boris Johnson has been accused of “dithering” and missing the opportunity to take action against Covid ahead of Christmas. Labour’s shadow work and pensions secretary Jonathan Ashworth accused the prime minister of “kicking the can down the road”. Speaking to ITV’s Good Morning Britain programme, Ashworth said Johnson “can’t show the leadership the country demands and deserves because he’s trapped between his Tory backbenchers, who have had enough of him and are now pushing him around all over the place, and he’s trapped between them and the scientific advice he’s receiving. “Now, look, nobody wants to see lockdowns and restrictions over Christmas. Christmas is a time for families, it’s a time for joy, it’s a time for coming together. “Indeed, because of Boris Johnson’s dither anyway, he’s missed that window of opportunity to do anything in the run-up, I mean, about Christmas. “On the other hand, we’re all anticipating some form of restrictions post-Christmas, so Johnson is kicking the can down the road if you like. “But I think people just need to know where they stand. We need a bit of certainty, we need to know what he’s anticipating for the future, and I think he should outline that plan.” Here is a snapshot of the Covid situation unfolding across Asia. South Korea is struggling to contain a surge in Covid cases, reporting 7,456 infections on Wednesday and a record number of people with serious symptoms. The number of critically ill patients rose to a new high of 1,063 according to the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency. The country now requires citizens over 18 to present a quarantine pass, proof of Covid vaccination or negative PCR test to access indoor sports events, cinemas and concert halls. Gatherings are limited to no more than four people and restaurants, cafes and bars are to close by 9pm. Neighbouring Japan is recording comparatively few daily cases but has decided to extend strict border controls which stipulate only citizens and foreign residents are permitted to enter, and they must quarantine in government-designated facilities. Thailand reported 2,532 new coronavirus cases and 31 deaths on Wednesday, according to the ministry of health. It will reinstate mandatory Covid quarantine for foreign visitors and scrap a quarantine waiver from Tuesday. China is fighting local outbreaks in several cities, including key industrial hubs in the east and south. Authorities are determined to quash fresh outbreaks ahead of the Beijing Winter Olympics in February. Covid cases remain relatively low with China’s health authority reporting 77 new confirmed cases on Tuesday, down from 81 a day earlier. The Philippines has halved the waiting time for a Covid-19 vaccine booster to three months after a second vaccination, in an attempt to prevent the spread of the Omicron variant. Covid-19 cases have fallen to an average of 378 a day in December, from a peak of 18,579 daily in September. Suspected Covid outbreaks in hospitals across the UK have doubled in a week, official figures reveal – though the number of people admitted to wards with the virus is falling across much of England. As parts of the NHS battle to cope with a surge in infected staff and patients, UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) data show there were 66 acute respiratory infection incidents in UK hospitals in the seven days to 16 December. Coronavirus was confirmed in most of these incidents, according to a UKHSA document reviewed, by the Guardian. It represents a doubling in outbreaks compared with the previous week (33) and is the highest total recorded since the third week of January 2020. Most of the outbreaks happened in London, with 28 recorded in the last week, almost half of all those in England (62). Nine were recorded in West Midlands hospitals, six in the east of England and five in the east Midlands. Read the full story from the Guardian’s health editor, Andrew Gregory, here. Hello, it’s Samantha Lock with you on the blog as we run through all the latest Covid headlines from around the world. As the World Health Organization’s European chief, Dr Hans Kluge, warned that Omicron will dominate throughout the European region, leaders across the region have rushed to reimpose restrictions. Germany announced a string of new measures that are to take effect from 28 December “at the latest”, in a bid to get a rampant surge in new infections under control. Chancellor Olaf Scholz warned that the fifth wave was just around the corner. Portugal will follow suit and order nightclubs and bars to shut their doors while people will be urged to work from home from 26 December to at least 9 January. Outdoor gatherings will be limited to 10 people per group on New Year’s Eve. Finland will also significantly scale up Covid restrictions on the hospitality industry from Christmas Eve with restaurants to stop serving alcohol by 9pm and to close their doors by 10pm. In Sweden, bars, cafes and restaurants will only be able to serve seated guests from Wednesday, and people are being urged to work from home. In more hopeful news, AstraZeneca has said it is working with Oxford University to produce a vaccine for the Omicron variant. “Together with Oxford University, we have taken preliminary steps in producing an Omicron variant vaccine, in case it is needed and will be informed by emerging data,” a spokesperson for the company said in a statement on Tuesday. Here’s a quick run-down on what you may have missed: The World Health Organization’s European chief has warned countries to brace for a “significant surge” in cases as Omicron spreads across the continent. Israelis over the age of 60 and medical teams will be eligible for a fourth Covid vaccination, prime minister Naftali Bennett announced. UK prime minister Boris Johnson has confirmed no further Covid restrictions will be put in place in England before Christmas however curbs could be imposed after 25 December. Western Australia will become the first Australian state to mandate vaccine booster shots. Singapore will freeze the sale of tickets for arriving flights and buses under its quarantine-free travel programme for four weeks from Thursday. New York City mayor Bill de Blasio vows there will be “no more shutdowns” in America’s most populous city. Finland will significantly scale up Covid restrictions on the hospitality industry from Christmas Eve with restaurants to stop serving alcohol by 9pm and close their doors by 10pm. England is cutting Covid self-isolation to seven days with a negative test. Half a billion at-home coronavirus tests will be sent free to the American public in the fight against Omicron, Joe Biden announced on Tuesday. The Canadian Pacific Coast province of British Columbia is closing bars, nightclubs and gyms amid concerns over the Omicron variant. Speaking of Australia, here is a quick visual run-down of the Covid situation across the country. Over in Australia, Western Australia will become the first Australian state to mandate vaccine booster shots. Premier Mark McGowan just announced that more than one million workers will now have to get booster shots under an expanded mandate. It is the first time boosters have been mandated. Specifically in relation to third doses. A third dose of the Covid-19 vaccine will now be mandatory for all eligible workers in industries covered by a vaccine mandate. Under the mandate workers will now be called to have a third dose within one month of becoming eligible. Currently more than 266,000 people are eligible for a third dose. And so far 89,900 people have received their dose. Everyone is strongly urged to receive a third dose when eligible, even if they’re not covered by this policy.” Singapore will freeze the sale of tickets for arriving flights and buses under its quarantine-free travel programme for four weeks from Thursday, the government said, citing the risk from the fast-spreading Omicron Covid-19 variant, Reuters reports. Under the vaccinated travel lane (VTL) programme, Singapore allows quarantine-free entry for fully vaccinated travellers arriving from certain countries on designated flights or buses. The travellers have to undergo regular testing. About two dozen countries are listed in the programme including Australia, India, Malaysia, Britain and the United States. However, no new tickets will be issued for people hoping to arrive from any of those countries from Thursday to Jan. 20, the government said on Wednesday. The health ministry said in a statement: Our border measures will help to buy us time to study and understand the Omicron variant, and to strengthen our defences, including enhancing our healthcare capacity, and getting more people vaccinated and boosted.” The government said it would also reduce the VTL quotas and ticket sales for travel after 20 January. For flights, the total number of VTL tickets would be capped at 50% of the previously allocated quota. Travellers already holding tickets on VTL flights or buses and who meet all other requirements can still travel under the programme. The government also urged people arriving in Singapore to minimise their social interactions, avoid large gatherings and eating out for seven days even if their tests, which they have to take every day for the week, are negative. New York City mayor Bill de Blasio vows there will be “no more shutdowns” in America’s most populous city. The Democrat said Tuesday that New York can’t see schools and businesses close again like they did when Covid-19 first hit. De Blasio faced questions about whether he would reinstate closures as the Omicron variant surges in the city. At a virtual news conference on Tuesday, he said: Adamantly I feel this: No more shutdowns. We’ve been through them,” de Blasio said at a virtual news conference Tuesday. They were devastating. We can’t go through it again.” It is still undecided whether the city’s annual New Year’s Eve celebration in Times Square will continue as planned. The event was small and socially distanced last year but de Blasio had hoped to hold it this year at “full strength.” De Blasio’s successor Eric Adams annoucened he would be postponing his inauguration ceremony, scheduled for 1 January indoors at Brooklyn’s Kings Theatre. Researchers in Melbourne, Australia, have turned one of the world’s most-used blood-thinning drugs into a nasal spray which they hope could prevent Covid-19 transmission. Northern Health medical divisional director Don Campbell and researchers at Melbourne, Monash and Oxford Universities found that heparin can block the transmission of Covid-19 and prevent infection. The nasal spray, which has so far received $4.2m from the Victorian government to undergo clinical trials, coats the nose but does not go down into the lungs. Professor Campbell told ABC news: It won’t matter if a new variant comes along, this drug will block that protein from infecting the cells. I’m very confident that we can demonstrate that it will work, and people will be using this before they go to the shops and before they go to school.” Over the next six months, 340 Victorian households will be given the heparin nasal spray or a placebo, within hours of their household contact testing positive, to reduce transmission. “When [Covid] first gets into the nose it binds to a molecule called heparan and if it mutates that binding site it can’t bind,” he said. “Heparin is so close in structure to heparan that it binds on and paralyses the virus, so it stops it infecting and also stops it spreading to others,” professor Campbell added. Masks in Japan might be in oversupply but McDonald’s fries certainly are not. A new kind of chip shortage has hit Japanese supply chains, with McDonald’s forced to ration fries as Covid-19 and floods in Canada squeeze potato imports. McDonald’s Japan said it would only sell small-sized french fries for a week from Friday to avoid shortages. Due to large-scale flooding near the Port of Vancouver … and the global supply chain crunch caused by the coronavirus pandemic, there are delays in the supply of potatoes.” The company said it had taken the measure to ensure that customers could still order fries, even though the “stable procurement of resource materials” was proving difficult. Read the full story here. Some interesting news from Japan has just emerged. Prime minister Fumio Kishida has said 80 million unused “Abenomasks” will be thrown away after criticism that it was costing ¥600 million ($5.2m or £4m to keep them in storage. The government also found that 11 million of the masks were “defective” after inspections that cost more than ¥2 billion. “I have instructed (officials) to dispose of the government’s stock of cloth masks by the end of the current fiscal year (through March) after distributing them to those in need,” Kishida told a press conference. “Worries about mask shortages have been completely eliminated due to a recovery in manufacturing and supply, and the intended purpose (of the cloth masks) has been achieved,” the premier said. Kishida also said that Japan will continue to ban foreigners (apart from residents) entering the country “for the time being” to prevent the spread of the Omicron variant. Finland will significantly scale up Covid restrictions on the hospitality industry from Christmas Eve. Prime minister Sanna Marin said restaurants will be required to stop serving alcohol by 9pm and close their doors by 10pm as of Christmas Eve during a press briefing on Tuesday night. “We must take this situation seriously and react accordingly,” Marin said. The restrictions will be further tightened from 28 December with restaurants to stop drinking at 5pm with doors closing at 6pm. The restrictions will be in effect for three weeks. The government will begin preparing a support package to compensate hospitality businesses affected by the restrictions, Marin said. Health chiefs announced over 23,000 new coronavirus infections in the past two weeks, an all-time record in the Nordic nation of 5.5 million people. EU citizens arriving at the Finnish border will be required to show a negative Covid test under the new rules. Further details on the restrictions are set to be announced on Wednesday. China has reported 77 new confirmed coronavirus cases for Tuesday 21 December, down from 81 a day earlier, its health authority said on Wednesday. Of the new infections, 57 were locally transmitted, according to a statement by the National Health Commission, unchanged from a day earlier. Most of the new local cases were in the northwestern province of Shaanxi. China reported 19 new asymptomatic cases, which it classifies separately from confirmed cases, also unchanged from a day earlier. There were no new deaths, leaving the death toll at 4,636. If you missed the story we reported earlier on England cutting Covid self-isolation to seven days with a negative test here’s a quick run-down. From Tuesday, new guidance will enable the 10-day self-isolation period for vaccinated people in England who have tested positive for coronavirus to be reduced by three days if they get the all-clear from lateral flow tests. People who receive negative results from tests taken 24 hours apart on day six and day seven of their self-isolation period will no longer have to self-isolate for the full 10 days, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said. Those who leave self-isolation on or after day seven are “strongly advised” to limit close contact with other people in crowded or poorly ventilated spaces, work from home and minimise contact with anyone who is at higher risk of severe illness if infected with Covid-19, the agency added. There is no change to the guidance for unvaccinated positive cases, or unvaccinated contacts of positive cases, who are still required to self-isolate for the 10 full days after their date of exposure to the virus. Read the full story from the Guardian’s health editor, Andrew Gregory, here. Half a billion at-home coronavirus tests will be sent free to the American public in the fight against Omicron, Joe Biden announced on Tuesday, while pushing back against resistance to vaccine mandates by saying they are intended “not to control your life, but to save your life”. The move is part of a renewed White House effort that includes the Pentagon calling up 1,000 troops to deploy to hard-hit hospitals and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (Fema) working to expand medical capacity. But as Covid-19 once again rages across America via the new Omicron variant, the president, speaking from the White House, did not discourage Christmas gatherings, impose vaccine mandates for domestic air travel or seek a new round of lockdowns. “I know some Americans are wondering if you can safely celebrate the holidays with your family and friends – the answer is yes, you can, if you and those you celebrate with are vaccinated, particularly if you’ve gotten your booster shot,” Biden said. Read the full story from our Washington correspondent, David Smith, here. The Canadian Pacific Coast province of British Columbia is closing bars, nightclubs and gyms amid concerns over the Omicron variant. Starting at 11:59pm on Wednesday 22 December, bars, nightclubs, gyms, fitness centres and dance studios will close, and all seated events will be reduced to 50% capacity. Indoor gatherings, including weddings, are also being cancelled, the Associated Press reports. The new public health measures will be in place until the end of the day Tuesday, 18 January. Provincial health officer Dr Bonnie Henry said Tuesday the risk posed by Omicron is “fundamentally different” than other variants and it more easily infects those who are vaccinated or have had Covid-19. She said the province is seeing “explosive outbreaks,” with a large number of people being exposed at the same time. There’s also been a spike in cases among those aged 18 to 35. The French-speaking province of Quebec announced Monday that it is closing bars, cinemas, gyms and spas because of a record number of coronavirus cases. The World Health Organization’s European chief has warned countries to brace for a “significant surge” in cases as Omicron spreads across the continent. Speaking at a press conference in Vienna, Dr Hans Kluge said Omicron is now the dominant variant in a number of European countries, including the UK, Denmark and Portugal. He said: We can see another storm coming. Within weeks, omicron will dominate in more countries of the region, pushing already stretched health systems further to the brink. Last week, 27,000 people died from Covid in the region and an additional 2.6m cases were reported, he said. Although these cases include all variants, he noted this figure is 40% higher than during the same period last year. He added: The sheer volume of new Covid-19 infections could lead to more hospitalisations and widespread disruption to health systems and other critical services. Governments and authorities need to prepare our response systems for a significant surge. Read the full story here. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog bringing you all the latest Covid developments from across the world. Let’s start with the news that Israelis over the age of 60 and medical teams will be eligible for a fourth Covid vaccination to protect against the fast-spreading omicron variant, prime minister Naftali Bennett announced. “The citizens of Israel were the first in the world to receive the third dose of the Covid-19 vaccine and we are continuing to pioneer with the fourth dose as well,” he said on Tuesday, calling on those who meet the criteria to “go and get vaccinated.” Bennett’s remarks came after a meeting of the country’s ministerial coronavirus cabinet which convened amid growing concern over the spread of the Omicron variant. The World Health Organization’s European chief has warned countries to brace for a “significant surge” in cases as Omicron spreads across the continent. Dr Hans Kluge said Omicron is now the dominant variant in a number of European countries, including the UK, Denmark and Portugal. “We can see another storm coming,” said Kluge. “Within weeks, Omicron will dominate in more countries of the region, pushing already stretched health systems further to the brink.” UK prime minister Boris Johnson has confirmed no further Covid restrictions will be put in place in England before Christmas however curbs could be imposed after 25 December. Edinburgh’s annual Hogmanay street party has been cancelled, while in Wales employees face £60 fines for failing to work from home as governments tightened rules to limit the spread of the Omicron variant. The Scottish and Welsh governments also imposed limits on sporting events from Boxing Day. People over the age of 60 in Israel will be eligible for a fourth Covid vaccination, the country’s prime minister, Naftali Bennett, announced. His remarks came the country recorded its first death from the Omicron variant. The next mayor of New York City, Eric Adams, said on Tuesday he would postpone his inauguration ceremony, which was set for 1 January, due to the rise in cases of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. He did so shortly after the current mayor, Bill de Blasio, announced that residents who get a Covid-19 booster shot by the end of the year will receive $100. Germany has announced a string of new measures that are to take effect from 28 December “at the latest”, in a bid to get a rampant surge in new infections under control. Chancellor Olaf Scholz said the fourth wave of infections was now under control, but warned that the fifth wave was just around the corner. Portugal’s government ordered nightclubs and bars to shut doors and told people to work from home from 26 December to at least 9 January to control the spread of Covid-19 over the holiday period. A negative coronavirus test will also be required to stay at Portuguese hotels and outdoor gatherings will be limited to 10 people per group on New Year’s Eve. The archbishop of Canterbury has said that people will have felt “sorrow and sadness” seeing the photograph of Downing Street staff drinking together last May because it will have reminded them of what they sacrificed. In an interview, Justin Welby hinted at his disapproval over the gathering, saying that leadership involved setting an example. A bailout package worth about £1bn for businesses losing trade because of the Omicron surge was announced by the UK’s chancellor, Rishi Sunak. The funding will primarily help firms in the leisure and hospitality sectors, and follows concerns that they have faced cancelled bookings.Pressed about US testing shortages amid the omicron surge, Biden conceded in an interview that “nothing’s been good enough”. In an interview with ABC’s David Muir on Wednesday, the president signaled that the country was in a better shape now than last Christmas but said he wished he had ordered free at-home tests earlier than this week. A surging demand for tests, driven by the new variant and the winter holidays, has led to long lines and shortages around the country. Meanwhile, hospitals in many parts of the US are once again strained or struggling as Covid patients crowd emergency rooms and intensive care units. “We’re nearly two years into the pandemic and a year into your presidency. Empty shelves and no test kits in some places, three days before Christmas … is that good enough?” asked Muir. “No, nothing’s been good enough,” said Biden. “I wish I had thought about ordering” the 500m at-home tests two months ago, the president later added. The interview comes on the heels of Biden’s announcement of a plan to send half a billion at-home coronavirus test kits to Americans. The president has also instructed the Federal Emergency Management Agency to assess and expand hospital bed capacity in anticipation of a winter surge. However, the president reiterated that he would not be requiring travelers to be vaccinated before getting on flights to the US, nor was he considering vaccine requirements for domestic air travelers. As he did at the White House on Tuesday, the president emphasized that 200 million residents have already been vaccinated. Early studies suggest that vaccinated people will need a booster shot to avoid contracting the Omicron variant. The White House also announced on Wednesday that it was purchasing more treatments, seeking to double the supply of sotrovimab, a monoclonal antibody treatment. The administration is also procuring half a million doses of AstraZeneca’s newly authorized drug to prevent Covid in people with weakened immune systems. The Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday also authorized Pfizer’s antiviral pills for Covid. “Last Christmas, we were in a situation where we had significantly fewer vaccinated -- people vaccinated, emergency rooms were filled. You had serious backups in hospitals that were causing great difficulties,” Biden said in the interview. The president himself was exposed to the virus; the White House announced Monday that a staffer who traveled aboard Air Force One with the president had tested positive. However, Biden tested negative for the virus on Wednesday. Kamala Harris was also exposed. The White House said on Wednesday that a staffer who was in close contact with her this week tested positive. The vice-president has tested negative so far. Biden told ABC that if he is “in good health” he would run for president again, especially in a rematch against Donald Trump. “Why would I not run against Donald Trump for the nominee?” the president said. “That’ll increase the prospect of running.”The epidemic of indecision and timidity pouring out of the offices of premiers and the prime minister has turned Christmas into a game of chance for thousands of Australian families. The comforting seasonal traditions of visiting relatives or having them over for gifts and good food are being disrupted by the will-they-or-won’t-they factor. Will the Queensland/New South Wales border stay open? Why won’t governments reintroduce compulsory precautions against the further spread of Covid-19? The loss of seasonal certainty is deeply felt in most communities. But an even broader concern is the absence of firm management of this health crisis by some governments at the state and federal levels. There has been an abdication of responsibility by those governments as they anxiously tend to their political base rather than the wider good. And this has been accompanied – in what history surely will record as a moment of brilliant public administration comedy – by demands that individual Australians take personal responsibility for virus outbreaks. The expanding notion that no government is good government is a debate topic, not a response to a crisis. And it is easily converted into camouflage for incompetence. Government leaders in various jurisdictions are offering what they see as gallant resistance to unpopular measures to contain viral spread. Their gallantry has bred chaos as Omicron sweeps through communities. It’s not a surrender to Covid but to the politics of the pandemic, a kowtowing to the incoherent mob claiming their freedoms are being co-opted by health experts. There are also the more justifiable concerns of business, particularly small business, which has been pushed to the limits of survival in some instances by the fight against the disease. Of secondary consideration for some of these folk is the fact their customers can’t buy goods and services while in an ICU ward. The examples of government defying global precedent on fighting Covid are stark. In NSW, premier Dominic Perrottet has spent much of the past two months telling his voters what he will not do — a strange positioning for a government ostensibly dedicated to getting things done. On Thursday however he reintroduced mandatory QR code check-ins in hospitality and retail venues and later the same day he announced that masks will be mandated in indoor settings. On Thursday NSW reported more than 5,700 Covid cases, and the queues to be tested are being matched in scale by the number of hospitalisations. The number of hospitalised Covid patients rose from 302 to 347 in 24 hours. It is not that Australia has had a unique history with the virus, much as we might strut boastfully as we highlight our vaccination rates. Denmark had a splendid vaccination rate as well but is now back to closing public gathering places, from zoos to cinemas, in desperate attempts to forestall an Omicron takeover. Tolerating Covid has not worked elsewhere. Doing little or nothing is a deadly strategy. It’s a throwback to March 2020 when prime minister Scott Morrison declared – on Friday 13 – he was going to an NRL game the next day immediately after the announcement of advice to restrict large gatherings commencing the next Monday. One gets a measure of Morrison’s grasp of the emergency and his political priority from his later justification for the proposed outing, which he then cancelled: “The game wasn’t that great to watch but you have got to be loyal to your team. Always.” The emerging Australian commitment to inaction was road-tested by Britain’s Boris Johnson and arguably was a disaster. Tougher restrictions are now in place in Britain as Johnson pays a political price for past laxity and hypocrisy. Downing Street is being portrayed in leaks as being party central while Britons elsewhere were ordered to isolate. The widespread condemnation of lockdowns has also had its fans in other countries – until this latest wave of infections. Lockdowns are now in place in the Netherlands and are being considered essential elsewhere. Apparently the need for booster shots came as a surprise to those in Australia in charge of distributing them, despite the rest of the world having talked through the issue for several weeks. Israel is now considering a second booster shot – a fourth vaccination, while many Australians have been frustrated by supply and distribution issues in getting their third. An attempt to placate the frustration came with assurances that there were plenty of doses in stock and about to be delivered. One epidemiologist replied the vaccines had to be in arms, not trucks. The Covid pandemic is a major health emergency which is eroding faith in elected representatives, but less so in those states who have stood firm on unpopular measures. The flinching by government has added to chaos and, more importantly, to the likelihood thousands more Australians will be incapacitated, or even killed, by the virus. • Malcolm Farr is a political journalist • This article was updated on 23 December following the announcement of the NSW indoor mask mandateThe Victorian government has taken a swipe at Scott Morrison and Dominic Perrottet for failing to act on health advice recommending the introduction of mask mandates. Victoria’s acting premier, James Merlino, has announced that from 11.59pm Thursday masks will become mandatory in all indoor venues outside the home, for those eight years and over across the state. Mask mandates are now in place in Victoria, Queensland, the ACT, Tasmania, parts of the Northern Territory and certain high-risk settings in South Australia. Merlino also said face masks would be required at all major events with more than 30,000 patrons. “This is a sensible response which will allow businesses to stay open, bars and restaurants to continue to stay open and major events to go ahead,” Merlino said. “Masks are a cheap and effective way to maintain the health of the community – it’s something public health experts have been calling for.” Victoria’s chief health officer, Brett Sutton, said he had acted in accordance with the advice received by the federal government from the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC). “Masks will help keep businesses open and they massively reduce the risk of transmission,” Sutton said. “The modelling that the commonwealth received from AHPPC tells us that the risks of not acting far outweigh the risks of acting. So the modelling also tells us that people wearing masks will significantly reduce the pressure on our hospitals and keep people safe.” The prime minister has stopped short of calling for a national mask mandate over the Christmas period, despite health advice to make them compulsory indoors. The NSW premier has also resisted calls to introduce indoor mask mandates. Medical bodies, including the Australian Medical Association and Professional Pharmacists Australia, had urged national cabinet to reinstate some public health measures, including masks indoors. Merlino said further lockdowns were not on the table because Victoria was in a strong position due to its high rates of vaccination. The government will pour an extra $31m into helping the commonwealth booster program while awaiting advice on reducing the third dose interval from the expert immunisation panel. Wednesday’s national cabinet meeting heard advice from federal health officials that “highly recommended” wearing masks indoors and other places where social distancing was difficult. But the nation’s chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, said it was up to states and territories as to whether they would achieve that through mandates. Morrison said mask-wearing was a personal choice. “Wear a mask in an indoor setting. You don’t need to be forced to do it,” he said. “There’s no confusion about it, just wear one. “Think of Christmas Day when you’re going to see elderly relatives and wear a mask – it’s pretty simple.” Victoria recorded 2,005 new Covid cases and 10 deaths on Thursday, the first time the state’s daily count has been above 2,000 since late October. There was a jump in case numbers across the eastern states, with NSW recording 5,715. Queensland’s daily Covid numbers also jumped substantially with 369 new infections recorded, up from 186 the previous day. The jump in numbers came as Queensland’s premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, flagged changes to the state’s regime for travellers arriving from interstate hotspots, but not in time for Christmas. Currently, those wanting to come to Queensland must get a negative PCR test result in the 72 hours before arriving, but waiting times at testing clinics around the country are very long. “We had a great national cabinet meeting yesterday, we’re talking about those rapid tests … we’re looking at bringing those in on the first of January,” Palaszczuk said on the Gold Coast on Thursday. Arrivals from NSW, Victoria and the ACT are increasing by “about 30,000” a day”, she said. The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said it was a matter for states and territories to introduce mask mandates. “We’re encouraging people, as a result of the advice to national cabinet, to use masks in indoor settings,” he said. “It’s a matter for states and territories. But states and territories with their public health orders, whether it’s the QR codes in New South Wales, the masks in Victoria, have responded well. And I think it’s important for me to acknowledge that. “And where national cabinet has led to a positive approach with regards to what are called public health and social measures, or basically the way in which people interact with each other, so they’re safer, but they’re still able to get on with their lives, I think that’s a very important show that national cabinet is delivering safer outcomes, but without constraining people’s lives.” Meanwhile, residents of Perth and the Peel region in WA will be required to wear face masks at indoor venues during the Christmas period after an unvaccinated French backpacker who attended more than a dozen venues tested positive to Covid. The mask requirement will apply to all public indoor venues, including shopping centres and on public transport, from 6pm on Thursday until at least 6am on 28 December. It will not apply to home settings including family Christmas Day gatherings or during vigorous outdoor exercise. High-risk large public events including music festivals will be cancelled and all nightclubs closed, with dancing banned except for during weddings. But the premier, Mark McGowan, said the state’s high level of vaccination meant Perth and Peel would not go into lockdown as occurred during previous outbreaks. With Australian Associated PressA New Zealand cat with a reputation as a talented thief has taken his habit to new lows by bringing home drugs and a pair of lacy black knickers, according to his owners. Keith’s crime wave started three years ago, when he began stealing bras from nearby clothes lines and bringing home live eels from the local Heathcote river in Christchurch. But his ambitions have grown. According to owners Ginny and David Rumbold, in recent weeks the five-year-old black cat has brought home a bong and a ziploc bag containing unidentified white powder. He also left a pair of knickers on the back fence. “I suggested to him diamonds and cash would be better,” Ginny Rumbold told news website Stuff, which first reported Keith’s criminal tendencies. “But that hasn’t happened so far.” The Rumbolds have resorted to filling two plastic boxes outside their front gate with their cat’s ill-gotten gains so that neighbours can swing by to retrieve them. But returning the goods has proven to be little deterrent to Keith, who has a habit of repeatedly stealing the same items. A particular favourite are the steel-toed boots of a local tradesperson. Despite the man weighing down his shoes with fluorescent green 2.5 kilogram weights, Keith still manages to haul them home unseen – one shoe at a time. Ginny Rumbold said locals were more amused than annoyed by the cat’s kleptomania. But his recent finds have brought Keith to the attention of local authorities. According to a police spokesperson, “Of particular concern is Keith’s latest find – an implement used to smoke cannabis. We’ll be seizing the implement and speaking to Keith about where he’s acquired it from.”For weeks, Hoang Thi Quynh* worked and slept inside a garment factory in Tien Giang province, in southern Vietnam. She would start her shift at 7.15am and then, after a day spent sewing sportswear garments, enter an empty hall of the factory complex and settle down for the night. Each worker had a tent, set one or two metres apart, containing a foil mat, pillow, blanket and a box to store their belongings. No workers were permitted to meet anyone from outside the factory; even speaking to a visitor over the gates was forbidden. A Covid wave that spread across the industrial areas of Vietnam earlier this year placed intense pressure on the country’s manufacturing sector – just as factories were churning out products destined for shops ahead of Christmas. Vietnam is one of Asia’s key manufacturing hubs and produces goods for some of the biggest Western brands in tech, garments and sportswear. News reports about the outbreak warned of delays in the delivery of iPhone 13s, and disruption in the supply of everything from Toyota cars to Ikea curtains. “Vietnam probably does a third of all apparel production [for the US],” said Jana Gold, a Senior Director with Alvarez &amp; Marsal Consumer and Retail Group in Washington. “Of all countries to get hit with Covid, it really impacted the industry,” she said. Many factories asked workers to stay on site to comply with government rules designed to minimise infections – a policy that has since been dropped, including by Quynh’s workplace, which allowed her to commute from home again by November. But production still has not returned to normal; analysts predict it won’t do so until the end of the first quarter of 2022. In the run up to Christmas, retailers scrambled to prioritise which products were most needed by shops. Some continued shipping as late as mid-November, and even chartered planes to get garments to high streets on time. The real crisis, though, has been felt by the workers – many of them internal migrants – who power the country’s factories. In July, when Covid cases escalated, a severe lockdown was imposed across industrial areas, banning people from leaving their homes, even to buy food. Hundreds of thousands of workers moved into factories through an arrangement known as “three-on-site”, where workers sleep, work and eat in their factory. By October, roughly 300,000 workers were doing so in Binh Duong province alone. For workers whose factories closed down during lockdown, there was no alternative but to stay in their rental rooms, in limbo. They were unable to earn a living, yet prevented from returning home to their families. Workers had little available cash to cope with the ordeal, said Nguyen Phuong Tu, visiting research fellow at Adelaide University who specialises in factory workers’ labour rights. “Most will try to remit savings back to their family members in their hometown, so the savings they have for themselves are not really much,” she said. Though some government support was available, it was nowhere near enough. When movement restrictions were lifted at the beginning of October, many workers decided they had enough, and left industrial areas en masse. Motorbikes, strapped with plastic bags bursting with belongings, flooded the streets. As many as 90,000 fled Ho Chi Minh City for their home provinces on the first weekend alone, according to state media. Tran Thi Lan* was one of a reported 300,000 people who left Binh Duong, part of the garment manufacturing hub in the south. Her area was at the centre of a Covid outbreak, and she spent four months in lockdown. Eventually, she caught Covid herself. “I knew that it would be my turn to get infected. Every two weeks people got tested and the infected rooms got closer,” she said, shortly after she returned home. Normally she earns a basic monthly salary of about VND4.8m (154.56 GBP), making trainers. She would get an additional VND20,000 (64p) per hour of overtime and VND300,000 (9.66 GBP) more as a food stipend. It wasn’t much, she said, considering how exhausting the work was. Her company, which suspended operations during the lockdown, gave her no support, she said. Instead, she relied on charity food packages. She received VND800,000 (25.76 GBP) from a relief fund, and her landlord helped by halving her rent. The crisis has underlined the vulnerability of migrant workers’ lives, and the need for better government protection, Tu said. Their jobs are both low-pay and precarious. In the past, foreign-owned companies have been known to simply close down without paying workers’ wages or social insurance benefits. Access to public services is also tied to a person’s registered address in their home province, which means they’re unable to access key services such as healthcare, childcare or children’s education while working away in the industrial areas. “I think the economic importance of these workers has been undervalued,” she said. “Even though we know Vietnam continues to attract foreign investment based on the attractiveness of low cost and abundant labour supply.” Factories now face significant labour shortages because so many workers have left. Many are expected to stay home with their families at least until the Lunar New Year holiday. Gold estimates that, of the vendors she works with, 60-70% of workers are back working. “In normal times [they] might be able to manage, but with the increase in demand right now it’s just compounding the issue,” she said. There are also continued, sporadic Covid outbreaks, which lead to temporary shutdowns. On top of this, manufacturers and brands face continued disruption to the supply of raw materials and to shipping. Mohamed Faiz Nagutha, ASEAN Economist at Bank of America Securities in Singapore, said it is unlikely that production will return to normal levels until the end of the first quarter of 2022. “If you’re talking about actually catching up back to where, in a hypothetical world, production would have been - that will take much longer,” Nagutha added. The crisis has prompted some retailers to rethink how they balance having an efficient supply chain, and one that is less precarious, said Gold. Others are adopting a more selective approach to buying goods, and doing fewer promotions that require products to be sold in far greater numbers to make the same amount of revenue. Tu is skeptical of whether the current crisis will bring greater rights for workers, however. Some bosses have offered higher pay to entice workers back to factories, but these perks are likely temporary, she said, adding concrete policy change by local government that’s needed. “I would be cautious about saying the bargaining power of the workers has increased in this particular period of time,” she added. Instead, she fears the pressures on those workers who remain in the industrial areas could be amplified, as they face the mammoth task of overcoming months of delayed production. The government has proposed lifting the annual overtime cap from 200 hours to 300 hours to boost the sector’s recovery from Covid. For the moment, many workers have voted with their feet. “When I was stuck inside the rental room, I was really scared of being infected, and that it might affect my health in the long run,” said Lan. “Along with it, my cash running out. I was frightened of the idea that I may not be able to meet my family again.” * Some names have been changedThe saga of Nord Stream 2, the gas pipeline between Russia and Germany running along the Baltic seabed, has been stuck so long it has been likened to a suitcase at an airport without a handle – impossible to abandon, and impossible to carry forward. Most of the original cast of characters – Jean-Claude Juncker, Angela Merkel, Matteo Renzi, David Cameron, Petro Poroshenko – have left the political stage. Only one politician has survived the entire story: Vladimir Putin, the Russian President, and the master of divide and rule. First announced in 2015, the $11bn (£8.3bn) pipeline owned by Russia’s state-backed energy giant Gazprom has been built to carry gas from western Siberia, doubling the existing capacity of the Nord Stream 1 pipeline and keeping 26m German homes warm at an affordable price. But the one thing this pipeline is not, as lamely claimed by the former German chancellor Merkel, is a purely commercial project. It has vast geostrategic consequence, with every inch of pipe a pitched political and legal battle. Indeed few engineering projects have thrown up so many issues: the restoration of the post-Soviet empire, the climate crisis, American bullying of Europe, Germany’s emotional embrace of Russia, the legal powers of the European Commission, corporate lobbying, energy forecasting, and Gazprom’s monopolistic model. Its fiercest critics have described it as a modern day betrayal on the scale of the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact of 1939. By handing Putin such potential leverage over European energy security, it is argued, the 1,200 km pipeline leaves Free Europe at his mercy. If Putin wants a new Yalta, a new border settlement with Europe, then gas, and Europe’s dependence on Russian reserves, has become a means to achieve it. Nord Stream 2’s critics say it isn’t so much about creating additional capacity as it is about supplanting the main existing path for Russian gas to Europe, which runs through Ukraine. Others say this is hyperbole, and Russia would find that if it used gas as a geopolitical weapon that Europe has many alternative sources. The pipeline’s construction was completed in September after many postponements and legal hurdles straddled. But the Gazprom board is now waiting for final legal permission from German regulators to start sending gas down the pipeline to grateful German consumers. That permission has become the subject of early infighting within the new German coalition, made all the more intense by Putin’s threats to Ukraine’s sovereignty. Such are the shifting balance of forces, it is just conceivable, if unlikely, that at the last moment the project will be blocked for good, leaving Gazprom and its five European co-investors with a gleaming white elephant at the bottom of the Baltic seabed, a child of a different era, a reproach to Putin’s imperial overreach. If so, it will be a great victory for Ukrainian independence. Ever since the pipeline was proposed, only one year after the invasion of Ukraine by Putin, Kyiv has ferociously lobbied against the idea. Ukraine fears that by bypassing its own leaky gas route from Russia to Europe, the new pipeline – part of a wider Russian strategy to cut links with post-Soviet Republics – will deprive it of badly needed transit fees, the equivalent of 4% of its GDP. Kyiv has also argued that the pipeline will increase Russia’s control and share of the European gas market and therefore give Putin a chance to put his boot on the windpipe of Europe. The pipeline has an annual capacity of 55bn cubic metres – more than half of the 95bn cubic metres of gas Germans consumed through 2019. Ukraine found ready allies for its cause in Poland, the Baltic States, belatedly Italy, the UK and, critically, the European Commission. They have all pointed to the Russian gas standoffs of 2006 and January 2009, and to Putin’s recent threats to Moldova, to argue Russia will show no compunction about turning the gas taps off to secure geostrategic advantage. Kyiv’s lobbying led in December 2019 to the introduction of US sanctions under the Protecting Europe’s Energy Security Act (PEESA). It meant construction on the pipeline was suspended for a year and a half, as the Swiss-owned contractor laying the pipeline backed off. Such was the German government’s concern that in a private letter of 7 August 2020 Olaf Scholz, then finance minister and now German chancellor, proposed to the then US Treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin, that Germany would fund the construction of two liquid natural gas terminals in Germany with as much as €1bn (£856m) in exchange for the US ending its hindrance of Nord Stream. The US has long lobbied for more LNG exports to Germany. Donald Trump rejected the German offer, telling Merkel she had to stop feeding the beast. At a Nato summit in 2018 he complained: “Germany will have almost 70% of their country controlled by Russia with natural gas. You tell me, is that appropriate? We’re supposed to be guarding against Russia and Germany goes out and pays billions and billions of dollars a year to Russia.” Initially the Biden administration’s approach was one of continuity, copying the firm line adopted by Trump and urging Europe not to make itself vulnerable to Russian energy blackmail. But by May, the line had softened. German diplomacy was at work. On 19 May Antony Blinken, the US secretary of state, waived sanctions on Nord Stream’s chief executive, Matthias Warnig, chair of Nord Stream 2 and a close friend of Putin, explaining he wanted to give time for diplomacy to work. By 7 June Blinken said the pipeline was a fait accompli, and on 21 July, a week after meeting Merkel at the White House, Biden lifted sanctions altogether in a farewell gift to her. Complaining he had been stabbed in the back – not the first US ally to make this point about Biden – Ukraine president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said Ukraine had been carved out of the decision making process, something the US contests. Under the agreement Merkel had reached with Biden, Germany promised to push to extend a Russian-Ukrainian gas transit agreement for 10 years as well as contribute $175m to a new green fund for Ukraine to improve its energy independence with renewables. “Should Russia attempt to use energy as a weapon or commit further aggressive acts against Ukraine”, the statement also read, “Germany will take action at the national level and press for effective measures at the European level, including sanctions, to limit Russian export capabilities to Europe in the energy sector, including gas”. Merkel said these assurances applied not just to her administration, but to her successor’s. Amos Hochstein, Biden’s senior adviser for global energy security, later justified Biden’s pragmatism, saying: “The idea of reaching the joint statement with Germany was recognising the reality of the completion of the pipeline itself, understanding that aggressive action by the United States would probably not have changed the outcome and perhaps only would have delayed it. So looking at reality, understanding it, and fashioning something with an arrangement with Germany that would allow us to continue to defend the significant interests that Europe has, that the United States have, to defend the security of Ukraine while addressing and mitigating the bad effects and the threats that Nord Stream 2 could pose”. This judgment has been repeatedly questioned, including in the UK. Biden decided to give the pipeline his reluctant blessing this spring, precisely at a time when Putin had first started to mass troops on the border of Ukraine. He also gave the go-ahead just as the German Green party, adamantly opposed to the pipeline and determined to take Germany in a new foreign policy direction, had climbed in the polls to become the largest party ahead of the September election. It was an odd time for Washington to send a defeatist signal to Annalena Baerbock, the Green party leader, and she did not hold back in criticising Biden’s decision as one that would divide Europe. Biden had also done little to square off angry Republican Senators that support sanctions on Gazprom as a national security necessity. Senator Ted Cruz, the Texas Republican who authored the bill mandating US sanctions on the pipeline project, rejected Biden’s logic. “It was 95% complete in December of 2019 when we passed the sanctions, and we stopped it. And a 95% complete pipeline is 0% complete. And we saw, for a year, it remained a hunk of metal at the bottom of the ocean until Biden got elected”. By way of reprisal, Cruz sent letters to German firms working on the project threatening sanctions that will destroy their companies. He also issued a blanket hold on all of Biden’s nominations for senior state department posts, hobbling US diplomacy. The move put more than nearly 30 nominees in limbo, leaving many countries without confirmed US ambassadors. The standoff only ended when Cruz was promised a Senate vote on reimposing sanctions by mid-January. Cruz will need 60 votes in favour. Biden’s calculation was understandable. He wanted to mend fences with Germany, and seek its support over China. In the process he knew he would be upsetting Ukraine, but, as he showed with Aukus – the Indo-Pacific security pact that excluded the French – Biden’s national security team is quite willing to disoblige allies in the interests of focusing on the great strategic competitor, China. The German Greens were also deeply disappointed the state department had swallowed the German diplomat’s argument that the pipeline was unstoppable. Yes, Gazprom was almost within touching distance of the finishing tape, but there were still significant regulatory hurdles ahead within Germany and the EU. But since then, Merkel’s carefully constructed equilibrium has been disturbed by three events: skyrocketing gas prices in Europe, fuelled by booming demand in Asia; the renewed massing of Russian troops on the border with Ukraine; and the arrival of Greens in the coalition government. Nord Stream 2 is back in the cross hairs. Scholz, now German chancellor, remains a supporter of the project, but he, Biden and the G7 leaders, in search of ways to deter Putin, have united in saying any invasion of Ukraine will lead to its suspension, not cancellation. That is hardly controversial. The real question is whether the Greens, ironically aligned with the US Republicans, can kill the project altogether. To do this will require a dramatic challenge to the way Germany views Russia. In his book Germany’s Russia Problem, John Lough, Chatham House fellow, has studied how Germany’s emotional connection with Russian society and culture has contributed to a German willingness to misread the direction in which Russia has been heading. Speaking at Chatham House recently he argued “a strange combination of emotions is at play – an historic fear of Russia, a sense of guilt for the crimes of the Nazis, a gratitude to Moscow for permitting German unification to happen when it did and with such speed, and a large measure of sentimentality based on a liking of Russian culture. Then there was an economic logic – historically Germany has had the technology and Russia the resources, and that creates some sort of natural complementarity between the two countries. Finally there is a widely held perception that Ostpolitik [the normalisation of relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and Eastern Europe] from the late 1960s and 70s brought an end to the cold war. By relaxing tensions, building contacts, trading more, somehow in the end Russia will be a rational actor”. There is an almost religious belief that since Russia needs markets and Germany needs Russian gas, the mutual dependence will ensure stability. Lough argues Germany finds it very difficult to accept that Russia has been steadily moving in an authoritarian direction. “To do so you would have to shift policy and recognise you are dealing with a much more difficult partner”. Indeed Merkel’s instinct, according to her long term chief foreign policy adviser Christoph Heusgen in Der Spiegel, was always to keep in mind what was tolerable to Russia. For that reason she opposed the Nato action plan for Ukraine, the provision of offensive weapons and continued to argue Nord Stream did not threaten Europe’s energy security. That mindset, according to Ralph Fücks, director of the German Centre for Liberal Modernity and close to the Greens, comes close to providing Russia with a veto power. But with Baerbock installed in the foreign ministry, and Robert Habeck, her ally, in the giant climate change department, he argues a new generation of powerful voices opposed to the decades long dominance of the so-called Russlandversteher have come to the fore. To win the Greens have to take on their senior coalition partners, the SPD. Gerhard Schröder, the 77-year-old former German SPD chancellor, is chair of Nordstream’s shareholders committee, a post he took up within weeks of leaving public office. Schröder’s defence of the project is unconditional. Asked, for instance, about the relationship between the pipeline, something he describes as a European project, and the poisoning of the Russian dissident Alexei Navalny, he said: “One has nothing to do with the other,” adding nothing had been scientifically proven about the poisoning. Not surprisingly, Navalny describes Schröder as “Putin’s errand boy”. He points out the true beneficiaries of Nord Stream 2 will not just be morally corrupt Germans, but US-sanctioned Russian oligarchs. Schröder’s advocacy of the project is wholly typical of SPD opinion. For many years Trump’s bullying of Germany made this an easy argument to run inside a party determined to defend German sovereignty. It provided a shield for those in the SDP who defended closer relations with Russia on the basis of Wandel durch Handel, change through trade. Frank-Walter Steinmeier, the German president, for instance, defends the project by citing Henry Kissinger’s dictum that good diplomats look for points of contact in foreign policy “in order to transform a bad present into a better future”. “Both sides have to think about whether this bridge can be demolished completely and without replacement,” he recently said. “I think breaking bridges is not a sign of strength. How are we supposed to influence a situation that we perceive as unacceptable, when we cut the last connections?” The former German foreign minister Heiko Maas, also from the SPD, presented the pipeline as a means of staying in touch with Russia. A “strategy of burned bridges”, he said, is not only wrong but also dangerous, since this would push Russia into close economic and military cooperation with China. Sometimes this approach tips into outright appeasement. The former Brandenburg state premier Matthias Platzeck, a Social Democrat, landed in hot water in 2014 when he said “the annexation of Crimea must be retroactively arranged under international law so that it’s acceptable for everyone”. Platzeck was also chair of the German-Russian Forum business lobby. But the greatest enthusiast has been Manuela Schwesig, the prime minister of Mecklenburg-West Pomerania, who has repeatedly clashed with the Greens. In her state, the seaport of Mukran, in the very north-east of Rügen, has been a big works hub for the pipeline. She has been a leading advocate, celebrates Russia Day every year and even set up a foundation to protect firms from US sanctions, which bears the title Foundation for Climate and Environmental Protection. Schwesig’s personal popularity has not been dented by this support for the pipeline. “If we want to get out of nuclear energy and coal power, we need gas at least for a transitional period,” she has said. So to win Baerbock not only has to take on her coalition partners, but also win an argument with the German public, many of whom agree with Scheswig and are sceptical that the country can afford to wean itself off nuclear power, coal and gas all at the same time. But Bearbeck has influential allies among energy forecasters. Dirk Messner, head of Germany’s environment agency UBA, in August said NS2 could soon be outdated for climate policy reasons. “Nord Stream 2 could quickly become something of a dinosaur among energy projects, because we want to have [net] zero emissions by 2045”. Baerbock’s most important potential ally is the European Commission and the law. For years the commission and Gazprom have been at odds. The Russian company has tried to avoid the EU’s regulatory net by arguing that a 2019 energy directive did not apply to the pipeline. Gazprom failed, and now the German regulator along with the EU will take six months to decide if the pipeline meets EU law. Other companies have been given permission to make their case to the German regulator, including Ukraine’s gas grid operator GTSOU and Poland PGNiG. A whole series of EU regulatory requirements on third-party access, ownership unbundling and tariff transparency come into play. The unbundling requires pipeline owners to be different from the suppliers of the gas flowing in the pipes, something Gazprom opposes. “It is clear that European energy law also applies to this project, the separation of trade and transport is clearly specified,” said Sven Giegold, Germany’s new influential state secretary for economic affairs in the ministry of climate change. In a land where the rule of law matters, Habeck also sees a way to kill the project: “The aim of the laws is to prevent monopolies and dependencies. The network and operations must be separate for this pipeline as well, and that is not the case. There was a lot of political pressure under the last federal government to approve Nord Stream 2. Even so, it is not in operation. The Federal Network Agency will check the documents in accordance with the law – as it should do”. Benjamin L Schmitt, a former US state department energy official and senior fellow at the Center for European Policy Analysis, said Gazprom had not been cashing in by providing additional volumes through the Belarus, Poland or Ukrainian route, in a possible bid to strong-arm the regulator. “They have ample pipeline capacity that they could be using right now, but they are not. They have not broken their contracts, but nor have they followed normal market dynamics by booking additional capacity.” A mother of all legal battles awaits, and in the meantime, the suitcase without the handle awaits its fate. • This article was amended on 23 December 2021 to describe the port of Mukran as a works hub rather than the point of landfall for the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline. It was further amended on 24 December 2021 to include the full name and role of Benjamin L Schmitt, not Schmidt as it was spelt in an earlier version.Up to 13 million people have been placed into lockdown in the city of Xi’an in China, as authorities move to clamp down on the community spread of Covid-19 after 127 infections were found in a second round of mass testing. The snap lockdown on Thursday comes little over a month before Beijing is set to host the Winter Olympics. All residents in Xi’an are barred from leaving their houses except to buy living necessities every other day or for emergencies, while travel to and from the city is suspended save for in exceptional circumstances requiring official approval. All non-essential businesses have also been closed. Authorities issued an order late on Wednesday, according to the state news agency Xinhua. The vice-premier, Sun Chunlan, has travelled to the region to oversee implementation of the lockdown. Infections had spread to 14 districts in Xi’an – home to the world-famous Terracotta Warriors - as of Wednesday. Community infections in the capital of Shaanxi province grew after an initial case was detected at a local university. Health workers began a third round of mass testing on Thursday. State media has not reported what the variant of the infections in Xi’an is. The lockdown measures are some of the most severe since China locked down 11 million residents in Wuhan in early 2020, where the Covid-19 virus was first detected. China reported 71 local cases on Thursday, 63 of which were in Xi’an. The lockdown has separated family members with no notice. Some social media users expressed fears and concerns for family members caught in the locked-down region. “I haven’t been afraid of the epidemic for so long, but this time is different because my child is still in Xi’an,” one Weibo user wrote. The sudden announcement set off scenes of panic-buying in the city ahead of lockdown at midnight on Thursday, according to the Associated Press. The announcement on Wednesday gave no indication of how long the lockdown will last. The snap lockdown comes amid fears of growing infections nationwide after cases linked to Xi’an were detected in five other regions, including Beijing to the north and Guangdong to the south, according to state media reports. China, which is doggedly pursuing a “zero-Covid” approach to the virus, implements some of the world’s strictest measures in a bid to quell all infections, including strict travel restrictions, mass mandatory testing and obligatory quarantine for close contacts. It has placed tens of thousands of people into mandatory quarantine in recent months in response to new infections. The lockdown comes as China has reported cases of the Omicron variant in at least three provinces and weeks before the Beijing Winter Olympics are set to start on 4 February. China stepped up its quarantine measures and controls for port cities on Monday, with state media saying authorities are “confident” the spread of Omicron will remain under control. Other provinces, including the major port hub of Zhejiang, have also been battling a rise in infections in recent weeks.The day goes on as it begins: a wet flannel across the face that smells of mould, a mizzle, violet tinged, December’s dimmer-switch stuck on three, from what might have been dawn to what might become dusk. Beautiful. Looming from this foggy myopia is a tree. It is a field maple, Acer campestre, ancient, with a great knot of roots that shows how the field has eroded from weather and sheep scraping a shelter or seeking sanctuary. The root-knot, of Medusa’s petrified snakes, supports a single straight trunk, clear for about 6ft, then opening into an irregular-shaped canopy 20ft tall and almost as wide. The butter-yellow, five-lobed maple leaves have fallen and its winter nakedness is an intricate tracery of twigs bearing brown buds, raindrops and vivid daubs of lichen. It is a small tree compared with the ash and oaks, but probably older than them. This field maple is solitary, enigmatic, magnetic and sheltering. There’s something odd about its position in relation to earthworks under the sod that may belong to a field system from its monastic past or earlier. Nothing in this light gives away its age, identity or place, nothing feels tethered to this strangely floating land. A swan periscopes above pool reeds, redwings speak scratchily in an old ash, and in the hedge along the lane the brambling are restless. These birds burst from the kale patch like a feathered cannonball, spread into hazels, regroup in high trees, then dive back into the field when they’ve forgotten what it was that spooked them. But even the hair-trigger paranoia of the brambling is muted in this delicious murk. The feeling is that things are going on that the physical senses can’t detect, mysterious things. I received a Christmas card with a quote from Richard Wagamese’s novel Medicine Walk: “I sorta think you gotta let a mystery be a mystery for it to give you anything.” At 3.30pm, jackdaws start gathering to roost. In these solstice days of the guttering year, winter trees give off their own, beautiful mystery. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryIf you’ve noticed lots of posts on Twitter containing a bunch of coloured boxes, then you have come across the latest word game sweeping (portions of) the internet: a pleasant little brainteaser named Wordle. What is Wordle and how do I play? Simply put, Wordle is a free word-guessing game available online: guess the five-letter word in six tries or fewer. Wordle explains its rules in a handy pop-up the first time you load the game, but it’s all fairly straightforward: if the letter from your guess isn’t in the target word, that letter will turn grey. If is in the word but not in the right position, it’ll turn yellow. If it’s in the word and in the right place, it will turn a nice shade of green. You have six goes to get it right – and if you get it right in one go, that’s weird/basically impossible. There is only one puzzle available a day for everyone – sort of like a newspaper’s crossword or sudoku – so once you’ve finished the puzzle, you have to wait for the next. Sounds simple. Why is it so popular? Everyone is guessing the same word, and thus competing against each other each day – the reason it’s so popular is that you can easily share your results (the occasional bug notwithstanding): Above, you can see how many guesses I took, which letters I got wrong and right, and even reverse-engineer how I arrived at the answer. Crucially, the results are spoiler-free; it tells you how I went without actually giving the solution. It’s also a bit of a knowing in-joke for those already playing, while outsiders ask “what’s with all the box emoji?” It’s quick to play, easily shareable, and sparks conversations online about the solution – and how well everyone did. Who made it? Wordle is a project from Josh Wardle, an engineer at Reddit, who has (as Mark Serrels recalls for CNET) created some interesting experiments before – including the platform’s Button and Place. Wordle originally launched in mid-October, and only really started becoming popular last week after Wardle added the ability to share results. Now everyone is playing it – and you can have a go too.Eric Clapton has waived the legal costs that a German court ordered a 55-year-old woman to pay, over a single CD containing a bootleg copy of a 1980s concert she attempted to sell. The musician’s management has also issued a clarifying statement in response to widespread social media criticism over Clapton’s decision to take legal action in the first place, saying Clapton was not involved in the specifics of the case and she “is not the type of person Eric Clapton, or his record company, wish to target”. On 18 December, a Düsseldorf court ordered the woman to pay the legal fees of both parties, totalling £2,889, over the attempted sale of an illegal copy of a CD titled Eric Clapton – Live USA on eBay for €9.95. The woman told the court her late husband bought the disc at a department store in the 1980s. She said she was unaware she was committing copyright infringement by attempting to sell the CD, and the advertisement on eBay was only up for one day. But when Clapton’s German legal team informed the woman of the CD’s illegal status, she responded: “I object and ask you not to harass or contact me any further”, and “feel free to file a lawsuit if you insist on the demands”. Clapton’s lawyers filed for, and won, an injunction, which the woman unsuccessfully appealed. The David and Goliath battle, in which Goliath ultimately won, drew ire from some quarters against Clapton, 76, who was already courting controversy over his scepticism of Covid-19 vaccinations and criticism of lockdowns. On Thursday AEDT, Eric Clapton Management issued a public statement to address “widespread and often misleading press reports” about the German bootleg case. “Over the past decade a number of well-known recording companies and artists, including Clapton, have engaged German lawyers to pursue thousands of bootleg cases flouting the country’s copyright laws,” the statement said. “It is not the intention to target individuals selling isolated CDs from their own collection, but rather the active bootleggers manufacturing unauthorised copies for sale.” The statement emphasised that, in Clapton’s case, once it is established that an individual infringement has occurred and he has signed a declaration, he has no further involvement. “If following receipt of a ‘cease and desist’ letter the offending items are withdrawn, any costs would be minimal, or might be waived,” the statement went on to explain. “This case could have been disposed of quickly at minimal cost, but unfortunately in response to the German lawyers’ first standard letter, the individual’s reply included the line (translation): ‘Feel free to file a lawsuit if you insist on the demands’. This triggered the next step in the standard legal procedures, and the court then made the initial injunction order.” “Had she explained at the outset the full facts in a simple phone call or letter to the lawyers, any claim might have been waived, and costs avoided,” the statement said. Despite the judge urging the woman to withdraw, she proceeded with the appeal, which failed. She was ordered by the court to pay the costs of all parties. “When the full facts of this particular case came to light … Eric Clapton decided not to take any further action and does not intend to collect the costs awarded to him by the court,” the statement concluded. “Also, he hopes the individual will not herself incur any further costs.” Earlier this year, Clapton told Rolling Stone he suffered a severe reaction to the AstraZeneca jab and described the narrative surrounding the safety of the vaccine as “propaganda”. In August he released a song titled This Has Gotta Stop, widely believed to be a protest against the UK’s stringent lockdown laws during the height of the pandemic.The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, has backflipped on his “personal responsibility” approach to mask-wearing by reintroducing a mandate requiring them to be worn indoors while also reinstating social distancing measures in hospitality venues. The premier additionally announced a return to mandatory QR code check-ins at some retail venues. Perrott’s about-face on Thursday came as the state reported 5,715 new Covid cases and one death. There were 347 people in hospital with 45 in intensive care. Some 1,500 health workers are currently furloughed either because of Covid-induced illness or as a result of isolation orders. Perrottet loosened Covid restrictions on 15 December despite health experts suggesting it was a “no-brainer” to keep them in place due to the rapid spread of the highly contagious Omicron variant of coronavirus. On Thursday, the state’s chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, said the Omicron variant had displaced Delta as the predominant form of the virus, accounting for about 80% of cases currently in the state. She said the arrival of the strain in Australia “largely explains the steep rise in cases”. “The Delta case numbers did start to rise in mid-December, but we’re now seeing the Delta proportion of cases declining and that large uptick being accounted for by Omicron,” she said. Some 160,000 tests were performed in the 24 hours to 8pm on Wednesday night and the premier said it was placing enormous strain on the system. Some 20% of those tested were doing so because of inter-state border restrictions that require a negative Covid test before travel, he said. Thursday marked a significant shift in the government’s pandemic messaging, with Perrottet also conceding testing centres had been overwhelmed by demand. He called on people not to line up for a PCR test unless they had symptoms. “I do know there has been a fair bit of frustration out there. Many people waiting hours in queues, particularly as we come into Christmas,” he said. “We’re doing everything we can to alleviate that pressure. In addition to the PCR testing, if you’re unwell and those people from NSW ... if you aren’t feeling unwell, please do not get a PCR test.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The health minister, Brad Hazzard, said high testing numbers were “sucking the energy out of all the frontline pathology workers”. “I would ask everybody to listen very carefully to the message that if you don’t need to go – if you haven’t got symptoms or haven’t received a message telling you that you must have a PCR test – probably you don’t need to have a PCR test,” Hazzard said. Both Chant and Perrottet said early data from NSW supported suggestions from overseas that Omicron may result in less severe illness than previous strains of the virus. The chief health officer said the risk of hospitalisation appeared to be about “60% to 80% less than for Delta”. “But the issue is the increased transmissibility, leading to high case numbers, and the impact this is having on vulnerable settings, vulnerable people and critical workforces, such as our health and aged care workforce,” Chant said. Perrottet described the changes as “slight” and said they would have a short shelf-life. Both the mask mandate – which starts at midnight – and the one person per 2 sq metre rule – starting 27 December – would only remain in place until 27 January, the premier said. He also encouraged people to work from home where possible. “We’ve always said as we have moved through this that we will monitor the situation and the evidence in front of us,” the Liberal leader said. “We are in a strong position in our state, and the slight changes we have made as we move through until 27 January are modest but cautious, to make sure NSW gets through the holiday season.” The NSW government had been under increasing pressure to reintroduce the indoor mask mandate, particularly after the federal chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, advised masks “should be mandated in all indoor settings including retail, hospitality when not eating or drinking, and entertainment facilities”. Perrottet on Thursday refused to say when his own chief health officer had first advised the government to reintroduce the mandate – saying only that the government had conducted a “balancing act” between public health and the economy. The premier sought to attribute the change to an increasing number of health workers being subject to isolation orders or ill with Covid-19. That’s despite Hazzard having said that number was already 1,400 on Tuesday. “We just ask everybody to use personal responsibility [and] please be cautious as we move through this phase,” Perrottet said. The government has said it will investigate the possibility of providing free rapid antigen testing in a bid to stem the ballooning wait times at Covid-19 testing centres. Perrottet on Thursday continued to repeat his calls for people to also take “personal responsibility”. Along with the reintroduction of social distancing measures inside hospitality venues, the premier encouraged people “not to mingle” at indoor gatherings over the Christmas and New Year periods. Chant said: “We are introducing those density restrictions and hospitality settings and discouraging activities we know are associated with increased transmission: singing, dancing, things often associated with fun.” “At this time of year, we have to tell it as it is in terms of what are the things associated with risk, especially indoors,” she said. “Please take those activities outdoors – with lots of social distancing.” Prof Mary-Louise McLaws, a professor of epidemiology at the University of NSW and adviser to the World Health Organization, praised the plan to have asymptomatic casual contacts use free rapid antigen tests instead of adding to the state’s already overwhelmed PCR testing queue capacity. “I’m pleased authorities are starting to appreciate how RAT tests can be used as important public health tools … they cost a fraction of PCR tests to conduct.” McLaws suggested people using RATs when they were a casual contact of a case should wait until two days after their exposure to take their first test – to allow antigen levels to pick up. If the first RAT was negative, she advised no further tests until five days after exposure, by which point, if the virus was present, it would most likely register. “I’m not concerned that this is going to be problematic, in fact, it’s a very good use of technology when the system is overwhelmed. Particularly for people who don’t have symptoms, it’s a much better use of resources,” McLaws said. Prof Peter Collignon, an infectious diseases physician and microbiologist at the Australian National University, agreed the shift to RATs for asymptomatic casual contacts made sense, especially given current wait times. “We’re overwhelmed with the amount of testing right now because of border rules and Christmas … we’re not living in a zero-Covid world, so we have minimise the spread from the people most likely to have it,” he said.Vincenzo (Netflix) I know Squid Game is the K-drama that took the world by storm, but I found so much in the Korean Netflix show Vincenzo. It’s a surreal black comedy, with hyper-violence, bold twists, and a very flawed antihero lead. The characters are well-written, and it’s a great exploration into corporate corruption and capitalism – plus a memorable scene where a flock of pigeons takes aim at a hitman. Clara, 29, personal assistant, Kent What We Do in the Shadows, season three (BBC Two) In a year so often filled with devastating stories in the news, it was such a welcome relief to have this hilarious, bonkers vampire mockumentary to turn to on the gloomiest of days. What We Do in the Shadows is a delightfully ridiculous time. Dalton Valette, 25, business consultant, US Dopesick (Disney+) I still have two episodes to go, but wow! I was only recently aware of the opioid crisis in the US from watching shows like Justified. But to see how one company put profit over safety and created this crisis is shocking. Then there are the people behind the scenes trying to fight back. It’s a true eye-opener and a tragic tale with an amazing cast, screenplay and direction. David Gillson, 52, analyst, North Yorkshire Midnight Mass (Netflix) My family and friends are getting tired of me asking if they’ve seen Midnight Mass yet. Set on a small fishing village miles from modernity, Midnight Mass is what you get when you take Stephen King, Lost, Guillermo del Toro and Nietzsche, and put them in a blender. It’s full of creepiness, but the writing is top notch. Each character is well-rounded, so by the time things start to go crazy, you’re genuinely invested. Tom Stokes, 27, student, London Time (BBC One) Time is a gritty, sometimes shocking, but realistic portrayal of criminality, the prison regime and real human weaknesses. The acting, particularly by Sean Bean and Stephen Graham, is excellent. Unlike many serialised dramas these days, it kept to a small number of episodes, which kept the energy and momentum high. It left me emotionally exhausted – in a positive way. Kieran Gordon, 63, Wirral It’s a Sin (Channel 4) It’s a Sin should be compulsory viewing. This marvellous television series takes us back to the Aids crisis and gives us a special insight into the times as we follow its characters through terror, confusion and fun. Nobody could have done this better than Russell T Davies and the superb cast, and I want to thank them all. Heather, volunteer, Wales Succession, season three (Sky Atlantic) I wish I could illuminate a hidden gem that deserves more attention, but I kept returning to one show. Succession towers over most other TV in the quality of its writing, its acting and its world-building. While the show is tense almost to the point of aneurysm, it’s also funny: Roman’s text message indiscretion near the end of the series was just the sort of unexpected twist that made you cringe and laugh simultaneously. It’s impossible to mention every delight – even the theme tune is amazing. Graham, 41, researcher, Stockport Our Yorkshire Farm, season five (Channel 5) Our Yorkshire Farm follows a lovely family that works together in a beautiful but harsh area of the Yorkshire Dales. It is heartwarming to see the love and companionship through the whole range of ages, and inspiring to see the parents bringing up their large family whereby each of their children contributes with confidence, joy and happiness. The absence of materialism in their lives is a worthy object lesson to us all. Our nation should be proud of everything this programme shows us. Jerry Latham, 88, retired, Uttoxeter Young Royals (Netflix) Young Royals is a Swedish drama set in an elite boarding school. It has it all: love, intrigue, jealousy, death and betrayal all wrapped up in a coating of class divide, entitlement and privilege. It is utterly gripping and the cliffhangers could teach some UK writers a thing or two. Charles Webber, 58, artist, London Ghosts, series three (BBC One) The best discovery for me in 2021, a year that I desperately needed a smile and laughter, was the haunted house sitcom Ghosts. I found it on BBC iPlayer and I was completely charmed and amused. I watched both series one and two and gleefully discovered a third series in the autumn. I watch it over and over and it feels like an old friend. Katie Tunnicliffe, 61, Sheffield A House Through Time (BBC Two) It’s non-fiction all the way for me. My favourite was the latest of David Olusoga’s A House Through Time programmes. I think this is a work of quiet, but immense, genius. It’s history through the lens of ordinary people and ordinary places, using a single house as a brilliant storytelling device. As a provincial guy, it’s wonderful to see places outside London being explored. How they even find houses with such incredible back-stories must be worth a programme in its own right. Mat Jordan, IT project manager for the NHS, Sheffield Maid (Netflix) The best show I watched this year was the miniseries Maid. It is brutal at times, but balanced with heartfelt emotion. Margaret Qualley was fantastic in the lead role as a house cleaner who dreams of being a writer, but nearly outshone by her mother (played by her real-life mother Andie MacDowell). Jonathan, 39, attorney, New York, US Mare of Easttown (Sky Atlantic) The one series that blew me away was Mare of Easttown. Kate Winslet gives a career-defining performance as the moody and troubled cop Mare Sheehan, whose dedication to her job and the townsfolk she loves often leads her into further trouble. The plot twists and turns, so that you never guess what the truth was and how it will unfold. Intertwined with the dark drama are plenty of laughs to lighten the mood. Kevin Oxley, 59, head of technical services at the University of Hull, Sheffield The Outlaws (BBC One) The Outlaws is Stephen Merchant at his finest. Bristol has a special place in my heart. The accent, the cadence and the perversely acerbic humour bring back poignant memories of living in the West Country. I enjoyed the characters (a group of offenders on community service) for their faithful portrayal of all things personal and moral, without ignoring the costs those choices have on society at large. Anonymous, Malta Grayson Perry’s Art Club (Channel 4) Grayson Perry’s Art Club was my favourite show of 2021: it was a great mix of the inner workings of an artist and enthusiastic members of the public, with some moving stories and struggles. The exhibition was inspiring; something positive to aim for in these dark times. I love the way it encouraged us to get creative. Kitty, 59, student, ScarboroughTyphoon Rai has devastated the Philippines, killing at least 375 people, and causing damage in excess of $500m (£375m). The system developed on 13 December, tracked westwards across the Philippines on the 16th and 17th, before crossing the South China Sea on the 18th. Rai reached category 5 super typhoon strength twice. The first followed rapid intensification between 15 and 16 December, where maximum windspeeds increased from 75mph to 160mph. The second was across the South China Sea, becoming only the third storm on record to reach Category 5 strength across this region. A downslope windstorm event affected the Colorado Front Range on 15 December, with winds gusting in excess of 100mph. These winds are generated when strong synoptic-scale winds, a stable lower troposphere, and an unstable upper troposphere interact with mountains with steep leeward slopes. This interaction forces winds to be accelerated as they travel down the slope. Heavy snow struck the west coast of Japan on 17 and 18 December, with snowfall rates in excess of 10cm an hour affecting parts of Chūbu and Tōhoku. Strong northerly winds across the Sea of Japan generated heavy snow showers as cold air was carried across warm water, with snowfall rates increased as air was forced upwards by the country’s mountains.What if a statistic could speak its own truth? What if a stereotype could confound your expectations? A few weeks back, I was riffling through the local papers when a story jumped out. A schoolboy in Tottenham, north London, had just won an award as a Foyle Young Poet of the Year. At the bottom was printed his poem. Called Welcome to Tottenham, it brought the news from a society that is only a few miles from Westminster but might as well be a whole world away. When historians such as EP Thompson and Eric Hobsbawm took ordinary people’s lives and perspectives as their subjects, rather than stories of kings and generals, their work was labelled history from below. So let’s call this poem news from below, the headlines as if Liz Truss didn’t matter (imagine) and blue-on-blue combat was a soap playing on a far-off screen. The news, in other words, for the country in which most of us actually live. Welcome to Tottenham. Where we wake up to the smell of ‘Chick king’, Mixed with the odour of the corpse from the night before. Where we cover our blood stained streets with dried up gum, Where kids have holes in their last pairs of shoes, Where daddy left mummy and mummy’s left poor. Giovanni Rose wrote his poem in a few hours on a Covid-era Chromebook handed out by his school. The teenager didn’t need to make stuff up; he jotted down the world he’d been born into. In person, he’s neither swot nor class clown, just a kid who keeps his head down and never swears in front of grownups and talks softly in the same rubbery twang as most working-class youngsters in London today. And with the same unblinking clarity that marks his verse, he knows how strangers see him. A 17-year-old black boy, he has been stopped and searched by the police on his local high road and off Oxford Street, even once by armed officers when he was, irony of ironies, making a short film against knife crime. To policymakers, he’s a statistic; to ministers he’s a stereotype; and to the media, people like Giovanni are … what, exactly? Case studies, perhaps, to be allotted their 10-second clip on the evening news and then chucked away. But a democracy that can’t or won’t listen to outsiders such as him is not only missing out: it’s falling down on the job. A political class that hand-waves about “the youth” would be best advised to shut up and listen to them. And the thing about Giovanni, and all the others who get talked over in our politics, is that they don’t fit their cutouts. They are so much bigger. Giovanni knows wearing joggers and a hoodie gets him marked down as a thug – except they’re comfy, so he puts them on anyway. He grew up in one of the most deprived parts of England but he won’t let that define him either. His GCSEs were a string of 8s and 9s, and if his A-levels come in as predicted he should be off next September to study maths at a top university. Let me admit also to a personal interest. To go from Giovanni’s childhood, in the shadow of the Northumberland Park estate, and mine, right by Edmonton Green, takes a mere 10 minutes by bus but nearly three decades of history. I grew up under Thatcher; he’s got Johnson. He is black; I am brown. Our paths cross and abut each other. His landscape is mine, almost, but as foreign as time renders everything. And so, after meeting and speaking a few times, he agreed to show me how my old world looks to a teenage boy today. Where we ride around on stolen scooters, Where we can’t afford tuition so the streets are our tutors. His childhood home is in a street with a church-cum-foodbank but backs on to a drug house: a small terrace cottage out of which industrial quantities of drugs were sold. Every time police raided, the dealers would jump the fence into his backyard. Too young to know what was going on, Giovanni would panic that burglars were breaking in. “The last straw for my mum was when a dealer got Tasered by the police in my garden,” he recalls. “It’s kind of funny now. But at the same time, it’s not normal.” His secondary school has to help hundreds of kids growing up in abnormal circumstances prepare for a world that expects them to behave perfectly normally. “They come in with trauma, having faced violence or sexual abuse,” says Jan Balon, head of the London Academy of Excellence Tottenham. He has recruited what is essentially a mental health unit, which counsels just under 10% of the student body throughout the week. It costs, Balon admits, “a stupid amount of money” but the NHS services are too underfunded and overwhelmed to rely on. I love but I hate my home, I still listen to the voicemails of my dead peers in my phone One night when he was 14, Giovanni was woken by the sound of gunshots. Out of his bedroom window, he could see the aftermath of a drive-by. Seventeen-year-old Tanesha Melbourne-Blake had been killed in a hail of bullets. For years afterwards, the road was decorated with memorials to her. He was only 15 when a close friend went with a younger mate to try to retrieve a stolen £90 pair of trainers. The friend never came home. A 21-year-old man stabbed him 10 times. Not long before, he’d left Giovanni a voice note on Snapchat. “Just random, like ‘How are you, bro?’” Giovanni used to listen to it afterwards. “Because I missed him.” Giovanni came into a world where adults of all kinds could not be automatically trusted: not the local gangsters, nor the police. Nor others who purported to be in authority. He was born as the war in Iraq went from false triumph into naked disaster. He started at primary as the financial crisis turned into a global depression. The year after, austerity began. He was seven when Tottenham erupted over the police killing of Mark Duggan and his family home was a mile away from ground zero of the riots that would consume London and then England. And over the past couple of years, he’s been out of school for nearly six months, his wifi breaking amid remote lessons and pleading with his eight-year-old twin siblings not to disturb him during class. But with his own bedroom, he counts among his peers as lucky. We fight over streets we don’t own Knife crime’s on the rise because the beef can’t be left alone. Giovanni’s mum drilled him well, both in studies and on the streets: stick to the main roads, keep looking over your shoulder. He never just goes for a walk without a destination, always knows who’ll be there and when he should be back (roughly: he’s a teenager, after all). He lives in what Yvonne Kelly, a professor of lifecourse epidemiology at UCL, calls “a state of hyper-vigilance”. “Just constantly worrying who’s about to come up behind him means a high level of cortisol will be swilling around his system,” she says. “If that’s repeated day after day after day, it could make him physically ill.” And so psychological threat can turn into bodily damage. In a couple of weeks, Giovanni will sit his mock exams, having already faced tests that most of us will never know. And then … well, then he wants to get out of Tottenham, leave all this behind. His hero is the rapper Stormzy, “a rich black man who got out of the hood”. That’s his dream, and now it’s within reach. “A bit of me feels: ‘I made it out!’ I’m relieved I survived, but I miss this space. Most of my friends are here, most of my memories are here. Even the smell of the chicken shop.” While he’s revising for his A-levels, ask yourself two questions: how Great can Britain be, if a boy counts himself lucky just to survive here? And what is the value of a childhood home if you’re constantly taught you must leave it behind? Aditya Chakrabortty is a Guardian columnist and senior economics commentator Excerpts from Welcome to Tottenham quoted by kind permission of Giovanni RoseSurrounded by glittering Christmas lights, in between sips of red wine, my friend made me a very decent proposal. “My sperm,” he said. “You can have it if you like.” We’d been catching up over festive drinks and the topic of kids came up, as it does when you are in your 30s. My partner – now wife – and I had started thinking about having a family, I’d told my friend. We had two wombs and a bunch of eggs; we just needed to figure out the rest of the baby-making equation. So he offered to sort that bit out for us, no strings (or body appendages) attached. My wife and I thought about that offer a lot over the next few months. No offence to heterosexuals (some of my best friends are straight), but I don’t envy you most of the time. However, I am jealous of the fertile straight couples who don’t have to do anything more complicated than jump into bed when they decide they want kids. Instead of getting undressed, my wife and I went online. We researched, researched, researched. Should we go for a known donor such as my friend? Or would it be better to go to a sperm bank? There’s no right answer when it comes to this decision – it all depends on your individual circumstances. But in the end we decided that a sperm bank was less complicated. “Your sperm is off the hook,” I texted my friend, after we’d made our decision. Unfortunately, he was at work at the time and the message popped up on the computer screen he was showing his colleagues. “It’s not what you think,” he told them. Having decided to go via the sperm bank route, my wife and I spent much of that winter in New York curled up in front of the glow of the computer, trawling through donor profiles. While cosy nights scrolling through cryobanks may not be as sexy as old-fashioned conception, it was intimate in its own way. Donor profiles are incredibly detailed: you can access personal essays, childhood photos, medical histories, voice samples, personality tests, etc. Reading through all these profiles sparked long conversations about the things we found important, the sort of values we wanted our child to have. The donor who said his greatest ambition in life was to flip houses? Probably not a quality that can be passed on genetically but we discarded him anyway. The 9,987 donors who said their dream dinner-party guest was Elon Musk (I was amazed how many donors seemed obsessed with Musk) were also out. Again, I’m not sure a propensity to worship extremely irritating billionaires is a trait that can be passed on genetically but I wasn’t going to take any chances. As for the guys who said they were donating because they wanted to “spread their genes”? They were definitely out. Of course, we didn’t spend the entire time having deep conversations about whether values can be transmitted genetically and who our own ideal dinner-party guests would be. Some donors provide their adult photos and these started rather more superficial conversations. There was a lot of ooh-ing and ah-ing over cute baby photos and a lot of laughing over some of the answers in donor Q&amp;As. While shopping for sperm could have been a very transactional experience, the hours and hours we spent doing it actually brought us closer together. About three years and $10,000-worth of sperm later, my wife and I have a beautiful daughter. (To be clear: my wife was the one who did all the heavy pushing.) It may have been an unconventional route to parenthood but I wouldn’t change a single thing about it – any other route to parenthood, after all, wouldn’t have resulted in the daughter we have. She’s not half of two people: she’s fully herself. She may not share my genes but she has absolutely all of my heart. If there’s one thing I’ve learned after going through this process, it’s that love and family are about far more than biology or blood.Ghosts 8.30pm, BBC One In this seasonal special episode, Alison (Charlotte Ritchie) and Mike (Kiell Smith-Bynoe) are dreaming of a quiet Christmas by the fire, but an unexpected visitor who won’t leave puts a stop to that. Of course, it was always going to be a chaotic affair with their ghostly house guests in tow. Keep an eye out for Jennifer Saunders’s short but welcome cameo. Hollie Richardson Alan Carr’s Epic Gameshow Christmas Special 8pm, ITV Snowball cocktails at the ready for this festive gameshow romp. Carr revives The Price is Right for a nostalgic classic with a Christmas twist. Contestants hoping to win tonight are big personalities including Carole the nurse who, as Carr puts it: “Everybody at home is going to be rooting for.” HR Hansel and Gretel: After Ever After 8pm, Sky Max Sheridan Smith and David Walliams star in this atypical fairytale, following Hansel and Gretel after their escape from the gingerbread house. Walliams is also a co-writer, which explains some of the more adult humour – such as the villagers being just as worried about cancel culture as they are about the perils of a child-hungry witch. Henry Wong Not Going Out 10pm, BBC One A festive-themed episode of the longest-running sitcom on air (not, as assumed, prime minister’s questions). After Lucy announces she has tickets to see Jason Donovan in panto, a cheesed-off Lee falls asleep and dreams his entire life’s a pantomime: cue Lee as Buttons, Lucy as Cinders and Mr Especially for You himself as Prince Charming. Ali Catterall And Just Like That … 8pm, Sky Comedy As the SATC reboot continues, Carrie is navigating grief after that Big shock ending of the opening episode, with the help of Miranda, Charlotte and Stanford. And fans have hopefully just about got over the fact that writers dared to suggest Samantha would ever ghost her best pals (it’s not her style). Another double bill follows next Thursday. HR Agatha Raisin: Kissing Christmas Goodbye 10pm, Sky Max Ashley Jensen returns in the refreshingly silly crime romp. The glamorous sleuth is brightening up the dark December days with thoughts of her old flame James Lacey. But her plans to distract herself with the perfect Christmas are thwarted by the need to solve a mystery after a pesky poisoning in the village. Hannah Verdier15 Wildermyth A genuinely inventive tactical role-playing adventure that uses procedural generation to allow for player-created stories, all taking place in a fantasy world constructed from luscious papercraft set-pieces – like a digital board game. What we said: “A sumptuous virtual tabletop experience that plays like a tale told over a campfire, deep in the woods.” 14 Monster Hunter Rise An arcade-like new spin on Capcom’s long-running series about going out into the world with a giant sword or lance or bowgun and tracking down mythical creatures. This time, when the monsters team up on chaotic rampages, you feel more like prey than hunter. It’s a bit easier on the player than its big sibling, Monster Hunter World, a bit more playful, and as camp as ever. What we said: “It’s absurd, it’s theatrical, it’s inane, and it’s fun, a delightfully silly recalibration of a time-tested and powerfully absorbing adventure.” 13 Super Mario 3D World + Bowser’s Fury A well-timed return for the best multiplayer Mario adventure, less chaotic than its New Super Mario Bros stablemates and no less enjoyable. Every level is a one-off creative idea, done perfectly, then put aside to make way for the next surprise. Paired with Bowser’s Fury, a new and delightful compact Mario adventure starring a kaiju-sized Bowser and Cat Mario, this is an essential Switch game. What we said: “It is like a never-ending fountain of fun, combining the linear, discrete, themed levels of 2D Mario games with the joyous freedom of movement of 3D Mario.” 12 The Artful Escape As the nephew of a famous folk artist, you have to find your own true musical direction in this pretty, unusual game – and of course that direction is prog rock. This spacey rock opera, with flavours of Ziggy Stardust and psychedelic sci-fi, lets you bust out guitar solos to do everything from communicate with aliens to soar through the air. What we said: “Behind the shimmer, this is a touching tale of how to break free of the creative expectations of others.” 11 Resident Evil Village Set immediately after the critically acclaimed Resident Evil 7, Village transfers the action to eastern Europe, where troubled hero Ethan Winters must save his family from vampiric aristocrats and their monstrous followers. What we said: “A sublime puzzle box dripping in blood, gore and truly abysmal dialogue. I wouldn’t have it any other way.” 10 Halo Infinite After 20 years, Master Chief’s saga is beginning to feel like a tale as old as time, but there’s still something magical about this grand-scale space shooter. The multiplayer takes us back to a purer time of arenas and weapon spawns, where you can have fun without razor-sharp reflexes and fiddling with complex loadouts. If this is a swan song for the series, it’s a fitting one. What we said: Infinite’s star isn’t a character but Master Chief’s new grappling gun … This touch of Spider-Man points to Halo’s status as an undeclared slapstick comedy, its violence as wacky and infectious as its story is po-faced. 9 It Takes Two Taking elements of Toy Story and the Honey, I Shrunk the Kids franchise, this enchanting co-op game has a warring couple battling to reach their daughter when they are magically shrunk to the size of dolls. The allegory on marriage is a little mawkish, but the puzzles are brilliant. What we said: “A truly engaging family adventure that develops into a considerable challenge.” 8 Overboard! An ingenious crime adventure, in which faded screen idol Veronica Villensey kills her rich husband on board a luxury passenger ship and then spends the rest of the journey constructing an alibi. Instead of investigating the murder, the player helps to cover it up. What we said: “From its modest graphics, confined world and small cast, Overboard! conjures something that feels expansive and alive.” 7 Unpacking Who would have thought that a game about unpacking someone’s possessions as they move into a series of flats and homes throughout their life would be so utterly engrossing? But with its beautiful pixel art and clever narrative technique, Unpacking is exactly that. What we said: “This is a small game, but its meaning and intent are large. Like any domestic drama, it tells us as much about our own lives, tastes and experiences as it does about the characters we are bonding with.” 6 Forza Horizon 5 A road-trip holiday through Mexico in a variety of supercars, rally cars and any other shiny vehicle you can think of, is absolutely bursting with races, contests, stunt challenges and things to do. Forza Horizon 5 is undeniably a little bloated, but it offers such a cornucopia of driving fun that you’ll enjoy yourself no matter what you do. What we said: Like any great holiday, there is nothing to think about here except which thing to do next … there is no more fun way to drive virtual cars than this. 5 Hitman 3 Barcode-tattooed assassin Agent 47 returns with another set of enticingly open and multifaceted kill missions, travelling from English country estates to Argentinian wineries, donning costumes, experimenting with unlikely weapons and causing mirth, murder and mayhem wherever he goes. What we said: “The final part of the modern Hitman trilogy is a minor masterpiece, a treasure trove of unforgettable player-generated moments.” 4 Deathloop You’re an assassin embedded within a mysterious island community, living the same day over and over again, and your only hope of escape is to kill the sociopathic cult leaders responsible. Action game innovator Arkane Studios does it again. What we said: “If you didn’t think you needed a hyper-violent interactive version of Groundhog Day directed by John Woo in his prime, with sets stolen from the Moulin Rouge, you clearly haven’t played Deathloop.” 3 Ratchet &amp; Clank: Rift Apart This wonderful game about a lonely space-critter, his robot pal and their cross-dimensional twins is a PlayStation 5 showcase. There is beauty and astonishing detail everywhere you look, from Ratchet’s fur to the background animation and cute little aliens going about their business. It’s funny and family-friendly, like a fuzzy Star Wars, and the script brings just as many laughs as experimenting with bizarre, cartoonish weapons. What we said: “It’s hard to overstate how technically impressive Rift Apart is, and how much that contributed to the joy I felt playing it. This family-friendly action game might not do anything revolutionary with its structure or storytelling, but it does elevate the spectacle and fun to a new dimension.” 2 Psychonauts 2 The kind of run-and-jump adventure game that just doesn’t get made that often any more, starring a boy acrobat with psychic powers who delves into people’s minds to prod around in their motivations and neuroses. Psychonauts 2 is fun, unpredictable, surreal and effortlessly funny, a madcap assortment of strange and well-executed ideas. What we said: “I’ve rarely played anything that is so unashamedly itself. Each hour is different, each character distinct and memorable, each new psychic playground full of surprises.” 1 Returnal This eerie time-loop sci-fi game is one of the greatest and most darkly fascinating third-person shooters ever. Running, jumping and shooting your way around its desolately beautiful planet feels so good that you don’t even mind restarting from the beginning every time you’re killed by one of its ominous alien life-forms. It’s intimidating, and requires a lot of your time, but the rewards are great. A rare game that remains as intelligent and compelling as it first appears to be. What we said: “Forget about seeing the end. Once you do that, you can lose yourself in the near-infinite pleasure of the movement and combat, and the near-infinite mystery and creeping horror of Atropos. Every try is different, and yet also the same. But, with the right mindset, you can find meaning and pleasure in that instead of despair.”During the pandemic, the nations of the world set about energetically strengthening borders around themselves, and within themselves, as states restricted entry. During the early lockdowns, according to the UNHCR, 168 of the world’s 195 countries partially or entirely closed their borders. This hit refugees particularly hard. “Movement is vital for people who are in flight,” said Filippo Grandi, the head of UNHCR. “They save their lives, by running.” The virus knows no borders; it is the ultimate globalist. Covid-19 put an end to the idea that the 19th-century European nation state is the political arrangement we should all aspire to. The nation state is an outdated concept, and ill serves the present emergency. The rich countries have frozen immigration. But when people can’t move, they also can’t earn. Global remittances – money sent back to their families by people working abroad – which amount to four times all the foreign aid given by the rich countries to the poor ones – have gone down two years in a row. Poor countries will be poorer. The US immigration system basically froze, for undocumented immigrants as well as those who had already been given visas to enter the country, and for those fleeing war or climate-induced devastation. In 2020, immigrant visas dropped 45% from the previous year. The administration stoked fear of migrants as a disease-ridden horde. “We’ve got people being released at the border right now who’ve got Covid,” announced the Fox News host Jeanine Pirro. “They’ve got all kinds of diseases. They are being released into the United States.” Governments all around the world have used Covid as an excuse for delay or denial. Travel bans were wielded on political lines, while the pandemic provided fresh cover for xenophobes who wanted to demonise migrants. A Kuwaiti actor demanded that migrants (who constitute 70% of the Kuwaiti population) should be thrown into the desert to free up space in hospitals for native-born Kuwaitis. (When the actor’s words sparked condemnation on social media, she responded: “My words did not come out as I intended them to … I won’t throw them in the desert. But maybe something can be built in the desert, quickly and within days.”) South Africans attacked migrants from other parts of the continent. Colombia shut its border with Venezuela, cutting off a lifeline for hundreds of thousands of desperate people. As borders closed, the inequality of the world economic order was mirrored in the vaccine divide. Although research and manufacture were conducted worldwide, the delivery has not been equal. As of 15 December, 61% of Americans were fully vaccinated; 62% of Indians and 98% of Nigerians were not. I have never seen the world so divided, but I have also never seen the world so united. Never has foreign medical aid been so eminently an act of self-interest. As Grandi notes: “We’re not safe until everyone’s safe.” * * * Covid made government central again. The US economy was saved by government action: it sent out cheques to support its citizens. It was government that mobilised the drug companies, and funded them, to come up with vaccines. What we now know: you can’t fight a virus with private enterprise. It’s the supreme test of governance. The greatest lottery is the lottery of citizenship. If you’re lucky enough to be born in a country with a sound public health system and a functioning government, such as Taiwan or New Zealand, you’re golden. If you’re unlucky enough to be born in India, whose leaders lied about the extent of the contagion as well as its severity, you’re screwed. Governance is now a matter of life and death. Just as the world is beginning to accept the notion of “climate refugees”, could we imagine a new category of refugee: a person fleeing from bad, really bad, life-threateningly bad governance? In a time of global economic crisis, we need more migration, not less. Openness to immigration, and resistance to kneejerk populism, is one of the hallmarks of good governance. If we had truly open borders, world GDP would double. According to the Economist, we would be richer by $78tn a year. The west needs young and energetic migrant workers to revive its cities. The latest US census shows falling population figures. Over the past decade, the US grew at the second-slowest rate since its founding: there are more Americans over the age of 80 than under the age of two. People thought the Covid lockdowns would lead to a baby boom; instead, births in February 2021 were down 10% from the same period last year. What is the solution? It isn’t to provide incentives for Americans to make more babies, which would be catastrophic for the planet, since the US population, about 4% of the global total, is responsible for about 20% of all the planet’s energy consumption. It’s to make room for those who have already been born elsewhere. By 2030, one in five Americans will be of retirement age. The US is becoming a country of geezers; it won’t survive if it doesn’t have young (the average immigrant is 31, seven years younger than the median American age) and hard-working (immigrants participate in the labour force at higher rates than the native-born) workers paying the taxes so the retirees can enjoy their shuffleboard. Seniors should be in the forefront of demanding more immigration, out of pure self-interest. As we went into lockdown, it wasn’t the Mayflower descendants who kept the economy humming. Migrants are 14% of the US population, but 29% of doctors. Forty per cent of medical and life scientists – the ones who work on vaccines – are immigrants. More than half the doctorates given out in engineering and computer science in the US were earned by students not born in the country. The two scientists who invented the Pfizer vaccine are a Turkish couple who migrated to Germany. In the UK, 15% of NHS staff, praised for their performance during the pandemic, are immigrants. But these are not just doctors. The nurses and other hospital attendants – those who’ll empty your bedpans and bathe you when your family isn’t allowed to – are equally essential to our survival. About half of the 2.5 million farm hands in the US are undocumented immigrants, according to the US Department of Agriculture (USDA), though growers and labour contractors reckon the figure is closer to 75%. Unskilled migrants will stay and do the kind of work that you can’t do remotely. But our gain can be their loss: since the Taliban takeover, Afghanistan has lost an enormous number of the intellectuals, teachers, technocrats and other members of civil society that are more than ever necessary to keep the country running in the face of catastrophic drought and continuing civil strife. Freedom of movement doesn’t have to be in one direction, from the poor to the rich countries. Take the example of skilled immigrants. A Pakistani immigrant to the UK can learn medicine, and then go back every year to help out in a rural clinic – or move back altogether and run a hospital, as many doctors do. Governments that accept the need for immigration and mobility, enshrined in anti-discrimination laws, create a more open society that benefits all of us. More open borders lead to more open minds: open to flows of knowledge, different ways of thinking, worshipping, being. If we acknowledge that we need each other, it’s a lot easier to add more people to our already densely populated cities. * * * I love cities as much as I hate borders. But city-dwellers have suffered in the past year: stay-at-home orders and housing shortages have exacerbated problems that have existed for decades. I have three ideas to improve our cities, which were borne out by the experience of the pandemic: increase diversity and promote migration; give everyone access to a patch of nature; and create common spaces for communities to expand, engage and interact. Cities aren’t fixed. A vital city is also a mobile city. Movement can revive down-on-their-luck neighbourhoods with fresh money, talent and energy. You have no right to live for ever in your childhood home, but you do have the right to live somewhere in the city where you can make a new home for your child. A fair and just city should ensure this for every citizen. To those who said, “Can New York survive the pandemic?” I have two words in response: “Jaikishan Heights”, the south Asian way of pronouncing Jackson Heights, a neighbourhood in Queens. When my family first came to New York in 1977, we found a dangerous, bankrupt city. I got mugged twice when I was a teenager. Our car got stolen regularly. Jackson Heights was not glamorous or welcoming. When we were there, most of the south Asians in the neighbourhood were Indians, beneficiaries of the 1965 Immigration Act, which lifted racial quotas and encouraged family reunification. They were professionals: engineers, doctors. Now, it’s a much more diverse mix of south Asians: Bangladeshis, Nepalis, Tibetans, Bhutanese. They are shop owners, taxi drivers, garment factory workers. Very few of the Indians I knew when I was growing up here in the 70s are still in this neighbourhood. Now these streets are attracting people from all over. Diversity is actively essential to attract the kind of people that create wealth – and revive the city. Through the plague year, nature has been the only permitted escape: the parks, the hikes, the summer home for those who could afford it. Here is where garden allotments, like the ones I visited in Leipzig in Germany, need to be revived and expanded. The schrebergarten movement started in 1864, to give city-dwellers, even poor ones, a taste of nature. (Their namesake, Moritz Schreber afflicted generations of German children with his theories on child-rearing.) You pay €1,000 up front and a €150 annual lease for one of these plots – a little patch of land that you lease, but never own. Each plot has a cabin, in which you can sleep in a pinch, but it isn’t meant to be a vacation home – they are more for napping than spending the night. Each colony has a little clubhouse where you can have beer with your neighbours – a country club for the workers. And, of course, you can grow things. There are now 1.4 million of these schrebergartens, all over Germany. Wouldn’t it be wonderful if all working-class families in cities all over the world had their own schrebergartens? If a fast-food worker or cab-driver had access to a plot of land with a little house, just over the city border, where they could go with their families and grow peppers and tomatoes and enjoy the springtime air, and wake up to birdsong rather than sirens? Access to nature should be a human right, and not just for the rich. In the UK, demand for allotments soared during the pandemic, with applications to join waiting lists rising by as much as 300%, as people clamoured for a spot in one of Britain’s 330,000 allotments, most of which are run by local councils. People wanted to grow their own fruit and veg, much like the “victory gardens” that grew a fifth of the country’s produce during the second world war. One in five Londoners has access to a garden; the other four can only look on enviously. When we did emerge from our homes, we did so to protest. The entire city became a speakers’ corner. There was a lot of shouting – but, truth be told, very little actual conversation across the political divide. Can we imagine a public space where we actually have an unanticipated dialogue? Where a cop actually talks to a Black Lives Matter activist? Can this be designed? We need a new commons. Where can we meet? The bazaar, the library, the park? In cities around the world, outside space is increasingly being privatised – such as the private parks attached to expensive flats, nominally open to everyone but staffed with intimidating guards that keep the poor at a distance. In New York, the most successful new park I know of isn’t the High Line – which seems mostly used for conveying tourists from overpriced condominiums in Hudson Yards to overpriced restaurants in the Meatpacking District – but Diversity Plaza in Jackson Heights, where, by the simple expedience of banning cars from the street in front of the subway entrance, a commons was born. If you want to know the debates in the Bangladeshi elections, or listen in on the Chinese-Tibetan dispute, you can grab one of the unlovely metal chairs or benches the city provides, and buy a chai from one of the small storefronts fronting the plaza and settle in. You will find people with time on their hands, and stories to tell you. When I was a teenager growing up in Jackson Heights, the place where my friends and I hung out, flirted with girls, read the news of the world and checked out books in 30 languages – because few of my fellow immigrants could afford to buy them – was the branch of the Queens Public Library on 81st Street. A library is, in the words of sociologist Eric Klinenberg, a palace for the people. We need libraries more than ever because, post-pandemic, they serve as a place to work or study for those who don’t have space, or internet access, at home. What we don’t need are epic follies such as the Indian prime minister Narendra Modi’s planned Central Vista Redevelopment in New Delhi, a $3bn futurist extravaganza. “It’s like an old slum – it’s like a little village in there,” the project’s architect, Bimal Patel, said to CNN, explaining why he was intent on demolishing existing heritage structures, and other buildings that had been repurposed over the years, such as stables and barracks now used as offices. It’s the oldest and heaviest weapon in the jargon of urban planners: “slum”. Robert Moses dropped that word on the South Bronx, the real estate lobby dropped it on the bastis of Mumbai, and the police use it against the comunidades of Rio. Grandees like Patel believe urban architecture must be monumental and awe-inspiring, so that the commoners are dumbstruck upon entering, and are reminded that there is a direct connection between God and their ruler. Architecture becomes another way to remind ordinary human beings of their powerlessness. But every city contains villages. * * * The best way to understand people who are different from you is to live among them – even if it causes conflict, and even if you arrive as antagonists. The Crusades pitted Christians against Muslims, but also led to the greatest transfer of knowledge between the Arab world and Europe – the west became acquainted with Ptolemy, the number zero and Islamic architecture. My concern as a writer, at the most essential level, is about this: the individual human being struggling underneath the foot of history, personal and political. In Hindu mythology, Shiva dances on one foot with a circle of flame around him, and underneath is a dwarf, struggling to get out from beneath the massive foot of history. History is in his control and out of his control, and it is this struggle that we as writers witness and document. Humanity has now splintered off into a divide as absurd and arbitrary as left- and right-hand drive. We’ve lost the ability, which great literature gifts us, to differentiate between individual human beings in a group or class. We classify people in huge categories: blacks, whites, migrants, trans, feminists, police, Democrats, Republicans. And then each member of that category has to walk around with the heavy weight of this classification on their head. Within each group, we are assumed to be fungible. The individual human being is complex – much more complex than the virus. Diversity, or heterogeneity, will save us. Unpredictability, or even eccentricity, will help. We are creatures of moral complexity. I was once reporting in the holy Indian city of Benares, studying a brutal outbreak of Hindu-Muslim rioting. The city’s main industry is exquisite silk saris. Muslims weave them, and Hindus sell them – they’ve been coexisting for centuries. But in the early 1990s, that compact broke down, and the city erupted. Dozens of Muslims were killed by Hindus affiliated with the BJP. So I sought an appointment with the Hindu leader of the BJP, a man who had fomented the riots, and he asked me to come to his house one morning. As went in, I passed two old Muslim men on his veranda, talking among themselves. I went in and spoke to the Hindu merchant, and he spewed hate against Muslims, telling me nothing I hadn’t heard before in India: that Muslims are outsiders, they should have gone to Pakistan at partition, etc. As I was wrapping up this not very valuable interview, I asked him what the two old Muslim men were doing on his veranda. “Oh, they’ve come to me to settle a property dispute between them,” he said. “Why you?” I asked. “I thought you hated them?” “Yes, but I hate them all equally,” he responded. If the Muslims went to someone in their own community to adjudicate the dispute, that person probably would be related to or biased against one or the other. But since they knew this Hindu merchant hated them all equally, they could trust him to render fair judgment in the matter of the property dispute. It’s no wonder India drives foreign journalists mad. People can compartmentalise different parts of their minds – hypocrisy in this regard is not seen as a vice. There is no law of the excluded middle in Indian philosophy. Something can be true, false, both or neither. Where Aristotelian logic admits only two possible states of being for a proposition – that it is true or false, and there is no middle ground – Jain logic expands these to no fewer than seven possibilities. The name given to this exquisitely predicated conception of truth is syadvada: “The science of maybeness”. To go forward, we could all use a little maybeness. Banish the binary. Include the middle. And the fringe, and the top and bottom. The universe is not forever a Manichean fight to the death. The virus is against us, but, as of last February, when I got vaccinated, it also lives in me. It is part of me, and defends me against its number who seek to invade and kill me. To defeat the virus, we have to come together as one super-organism. Not just for this pandemic, but all the pandemics that are most assuredly coming our way. What brings us together, and what pulls us apart? And do all of us really want to be together, or would many rather stay apart? The coronavirus – more than 9/11, more than the financial crisis of 2008 – has been humanity’s test. But the greater test is coming, for nations and cities: climate breakdown. Covid is just a dress rehearsal. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.As the Covid-19 pandemic hurtles towards its second anniversary, New Zealand will emerge from 2021 with some of the best health outcomes in the world, despite confronting its toughest few pandemic months. This year New Zealand experienced its longest lockdown, its highest daily case numbers (222 in mid-November), more hospitalisations than in 2020 and a pivot away from the government’s ambitious elimination approach to one of strict virus control. But it can now boast a 90% double vaccination for the eligible population and one of the lowest per capita death rates, while its cases in the current outbreak are trending downwards. As other countries reimpose restrictions alongside the Omicron variant’s emergence, New Zealanders can look forward to celebrating Christmas and the new year with family and friends. With no community cases of Omicron yet detected, restaurants, cafes, cinemas, sports venues and night clubs remain open with minimal constraints aimed mostly at the unvaccinated. “I’m really proud of the decisions that we’ve made this year because they have stopped people from dying from Covid-19,” says Chris Hipkins, the Covid-19 response minister. “We know too from the past two years that a good health response is also the best economic response – and that gives our country great reason to celebrate.” Until August, New Zealand had experienced relative normalcy for a year, with just a few community cases that were rapidly stamped out, open schools and workplaces, and even 50,000 people attending a single concert while the virus raged overseas. When Delta broke through the border and into the community, vaccination efforts ramped up and a new approach to tackling the virus was ushered in. “I think it’s very pleasing that we are reaching, by international comparison, high levels of vaccine coverage, while at the same time having suppressed cases and prevented hospital overwhelm,” says Dr Jin Russell, a developmental paediatrician. “We have had more days of in-person schooling over the pandemic than most other countries. From a child-centric point of view New Zealand has actually done very well.” ‘No one is safe until we’re all safe’ New Zealand’s success story has some caveats. The staged vaccine rollout began in February but has been criticised as sluggish and inequitable. This month, the Waitangi Tribunal – which makes rulings based on claims brought by Māori against the crown – found the government’s rollout had failed in its duty to Māori, after it rejected advice from its own officials to adopt an age adjustment for Māori, who have a younger population and are more vulnerable to the effects of Covid-19. It also ruled the rapid shift to the Covid-19 Protection Framework, commonly known as the “traffic-light system”, put Māori health providers under extreme pressure, undermining their ability to provide equitable care for Māori. In the face of this, Māori vaccination rates are rapidly improving, which is largely thanks to a huge push from Māori health and community organisations working on the ground, and in some cases going door-to-door to educate and support people to get the vaccine. “As a nation, Māori and non-Māori can be really proud of the way Māori providers, and Whānau Ora [family health] providers across the motu [island] have come together and rallied for the betterment of Aotearoa whānui [broader New Zealand],” says Elijah Pue, the lead for Te Ranga Tupua – a collective made up of iwi (tribes) delivering health services across parts of the North Island. New Zealanders abroad and migrants whose families have been unable to join them in New Zealand have also felt isolated and angered by the government’s response to the pandemic, which included closing the international border in March 2020. Since then those wishing to return have had to vie for places in the country’s oversubscribed managed isolation and quarantine system (MIQ), with thousands saying the difficulty of getting home has taken a financial, emotional and psychological toll. This week’s announcement that the government was delaying the staged quarantine-free reopening of the border until the end of February, while spots in MIQ were also pulled due to the threat of Omicron, caused further anguish for those stranded abroad. “The right to enter your own country is a not a time-limited, ‘one and done’ right,” the campaign group Grounded Kiwis tweeted. “There are sensible science and risk-based ways to get more people back while controlling the risk.” But with Omicron “throwing a spanner in the works”, microbiologist Siouxsie Wiles said the government must be cautious with its border reopening plans. “We’ve started well, and hopefully people will understand why we need to continue on this path, because we have to stop transmission of the virus everywhere,” Wiles said. “No one is safe, until we’re all safe.”Harry Callahan is the cop we’ve been warned about. Though this week marks fifty years since Don Siegel’s genre-defining thriller Dirty Harry busted into cinemas with Smith &amp; Wessons blazing, the general profile of dangerous, off-the-leash law enforcement solidified over the last half-decade of public discourse sounds like it could’ve been traced from the film’s example. Played with a scowl of blanket disgust by Clint Eastwood – Paul Newman had passed on the role as “too right-wing” – San Francisco PD’s top inspector is more than your standard-issue misanthrope. He’s an equal-opportunity bigot, contemptuous of every ethnic group rattled off by a fellow officer in a laundry list of slurs. He’ll readily resort to violence in his work, not above a bit of crude torture to extract information from a perp with a bullet wound. And most hazardous of all, he believes himself unanswerable to anyone but God, who he’d probably just meet with the same glowering frown. From its earliest stages of development, the script conceived by husband-and-wife team Harry and Rita Fink made clear that Harry’s no boy Scout, but partisans on either side of the ideological aisle looking for affirmation in their stance will be disappointed. Those with hopes for an out-and-out denunciation of this brutish approach to policing have another thing coming, the coarser methods often validated by necessity, as if Harry’s the last line of defense for a society teetering on the brink of anarchy. (The guy can’t even get a hot dog without a bank robbery demanding his attention.) Any gung-ho types walking away as converted Calla-fans have also missed something crucial, however, blind to his placelessness in the city he’s sworn to protect. Neither condemning nor condoning his actions, the film offers what may be the clearest image of the archetypal cop’s self-perception as the only one willing to do the dirty jobs holding America together, even if it means getting dirty yourself. Wedged between Gary Cooper’s compromised sheriff in High Noon and Jack Nicholson howling that we need him on that wall in A Few Good Men, Harry Callahan presents himself as the bastard we can’t survive without. He’s the seminal ‘70s antihero, a man who’ll break the law to enforce it. That phrase is just one of many cliches worn down precisely because they cut to the core of policework’s foundational philosophical quandary: loose-cannon cops on the edge don’t play by the rules, but dammit, they get results. When the Zodiac-inspired killer dubbed Scorpio terrorizes the Bay Area with a murderous spree, the ineffectual pencil-necks in management positions can’t do anything but twiddle their thumbs. Harry refuses to be hogtied by red tape, to the point that his rough-handed arrests are ruled inadmissible in court, allowing an apprehended Scorpio to walk. He’s so contemptuous of institutional authority that he refuses to sit in the seat reserved for him when meeting with the mayor, whom he treats like little more than a loser in the way. If the parts of Harry that won’t be domesticated make him a captivating tough guy and a productive member of the squad, they also mark him as an outsider unfit for a polite, civil community. From the meticulously deployed POV shots in the opening scene, Siegel silently conveys Nietzsche’s enduring adage about how those who tangle with monsters are destined to become one. We initially glimpse a bathing beauty frolicking in a rooftop pool through the crosshair of Scorpio’s sniper rifle, and when Harry comes to scope out the crime scene following her killing, he peers at the pool from the same vantage on the same rooftop. To catch a criminal, a man needs to think like a criminal, a tactic that rubs off in an unsavory way. We soon learn that Harry’s something of a pervert, twice distracted while on the job by peeping on nude women in the next building over. He thinks of it like a perk in an occupation without many to go around. Even as the film acknowledges Harry’s defects of character and the alienation stemming from them, it supports his position that an imperfect police force is nonetheless vital and under-appreciated. When his partner resigns after getting shot, Harry chats with the guy’s wife outside the hospital and she laments the disrespect the public has for men in uniform, jeered as “pigs” by the younger generation. It’s telling that Scorpio liberally uses that same epithet in the taunts of his deranged clues; his traits reveal the film’s truest stances, in that he embodies everything it most ardently opposes. He’s a social conservative’s worst nightmare, the hippie menace (note Scorpio’s peace-sign belt buckle and flowing post-Summer-of-Love tresses) gone homicidal. His vilification also compels the most underhanded brushstroke in the film, the choice to code Scorpio as the sort of closeted homosexual who delightedly cackles “my, that’s a big one!” upon Harry’s unsheathing of his sidearm. We’re meant to recognize that he’s a deviant by the erotic glee he experiences while paying a hulking Black man – another phantom of the reactionary imagination – to beat him up in order to exaggerate the injuries sustained from Harry. Though Harry’s not an ideal defender, the film concedes, his faults pale in comparison to what we’re up against. It’s convenient that Scorpio’s crimes lack the ambiguity in Harry’s policing, that he’s a psychopath who takes simple pleasure in hurting people. In Siegel’s astonishingly taut set pieces, the chief reason this nasty piece of work has remained infinitely rewatchable after half a century, Harry represents the difference between a busload of dead kids and a day saved. A growing faction of the American people have come to reject this premise, a favored excuse of police gone rogue to justify their overreach without this film’s key ambivalence. Harry’s pathology has become more embattled, but it hasn’t gone away. His thin-blue-line mentality is revived in every argument against police abolition, with his shadow of amorality unmentioned. The film ends with Harry casting his badge into a body of water, turning his back on the SFPD for a presumable pivot to vigilantism. Most troubling of all, his innumerable wannabes in the present day feel they shouldn’t have to, disposing of the subtext that no longer suits them.Fourteen-year-old Alondra Salinas had set out her new white sneakers and packed her backpack the night before the first day of in-person high school when police say she responded to an offer on Snapchat for blue pills, which turned out to be deadly fentanyl. Her mother couldn’t wake her the next morning. Seventeen-year-old Zachary Didier was waiting to hear back on his college applications when a fake Percocet killed him. Sammy Berman Chapman, a 16-year-old straight-A student, died in his bedroom after taking what he thought was a single Xanax. Their tragedies are part of an explosion of drug-related deaths among US high school and college-aged youth, fueled by what experts say is a flood of fentanyl-filled counterfeit pills being sold on social media and sometimes delivered straight to kids’ homes. National statistics show a huge surge in drug-related deaths during the pandemic, with fatalities leaping to more than 93,000 in 2020, a 32% rise from 2019. But no group has seen a faster rise than youth under 24, according to a Guardian analysis of 2020 federal data. Among this age group, accidental drug deaths increased by 50% in a single year – taking 7,337 young lives in 2020. Experts say a large portion of this increase is due to the vast quantities of fentanyl streaming into the US. In California, where fentanyl deaths were rare just five years ago, a young person under 24 is now dying every 12 hours, according to a Guardian analysis of state data through June 2021. That’s a 1,000% increase over 2018, according to data from the California department of public health’s drug overdose dashboard. Fentanyl, a cheap, synthetic opioid up to 100 times more potent than heroin, is not only getting mixed with traditional street drugs such as heroin, cocaine, methamphetamine and marijuana, federal authorities say – it is being pressed into millions of pills that look exactly like traditional pharmaceuticals. But the potency of counterfeit pills can vary dramatically. Federal agents seized nearly 10m counterfeit pills in the first three quarters of 2021 – more than the previous two years combined. And tests conducted on the pills showed that two out of five of the counterfeits contained enough fentanyl to kill, according to the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA). Meanwhile, experts say drug dealing has moved away from dark alleys and street corners and on to social media, enabling young people to buy what they think are Xanax, Percocet or Oxycodone tablets from the privacy of their bedrooms. “These are not overdoses; these are poisonings,” said Shabbir Safdar, director of the Partnership for Safe Medicines, a non-profit fighting pharmaceutical counterfeits. “Nobody dies from taking a Xanax; nobody dies from taking a single Percocet. These are fake pills.” The author Sam Quinones, who follows the rise of fentanyl in his book The Least of Us: True Tales of America and Hope in the Time of Fentanyl and Meth, says the staggering quantities flooding into the country means “the days of recreational drug use are over”. “Every drug you try now is a game of Russian roulette.” ‘It was one pill’ Ed Byrne is tired of looking at dead bodies. Byrne, a special agent for the investigations unit of the US Department of Homeland Security, works in cooperation with the DEA and local law enforcement agencies on a San Diego task force that focuses solely on fentanyl deaths. In the team’s first year, 2018, there were 92 fentanyl deaths in San Diego county; this year, Byrne said, the county was on track to respond to more than 810. Sometimes he is called out to respond to multiple deaths a day. “This stuff doesn’t discriminate,” Byrne said. “We go and deal with a dead person who’s homeless. Then we get another call and we’re in a house that’s worth $12m and that person’s dead from the same drug.” On the morning of 23 June 2020, it all became personal. Byrne’s partner called him to say her 14-year-old nephew, Alexander Neville, had been found unconscious in his bedroom 40 minutes away in Orange county. Byrne and his partner jumped in their cars, but it was too late. Amy Neville, Alexander’s mother, said she had felt something was very off as soon as she went to her son’s room that morning. “I knocked on his door and, as soon as I touched the door, I knew something was wrong,” said the mother. “There was no energy there, it was like a weird feeling. I knocked on the door and he didn’t respond.” The family had already been struggling to get Alexander to stop using marijuana and vaping. Just a day earlier, they’d made a plan to get him into treatment, because he’d admitted he had been taking pills and said that he wanted help. But he never got the chance. “Alex had taken one pill that he thought was Oxycontin – one pill. I had no idea that one pill would kill him,” said his mother. “He had ordered an illegally manufactured pill right off of social media as easily as ordering a pizza.” Law enforcement and other experts agree that buying illicit pills has never been easier. Dealers have moved from the dark web to openly selling what they label as Oxycontin, Percocet, Xanax or Adderall on platforms like Snapchat, Instagram and Craigslist. A report released in December by the Tech Transparency Project (TTP) found that Instagram offers an instant “drug pipeline” for kids, making it possible for them to find Xanax, ecstasy and opioids in just a few clicks. The easy accessibility of fentanyl “is a subterranean crisis that is about to explode”, said Dr Daniel Ciccarone, a professor specializing in addiction medicine at the University of California, San Francisco. “This is a much bigger problem than we appreciate: it’s an underground volcano.” Perla Mendoza believes it was a dealer on Snapchat who sold a fake Xanax that killed her son, 20-year-old Daniel Elijah Figueroa, on 16 September last year. Figueroa had been staying with his grandmother while waiting for community college to start. He had a bottle of 15 pills delivered to her house in Long Beach after complaining that he couldn’t sleep, Mendoza said. After his body was found by his bed in his grandmother’s home in a kneeling position that looked almost like a prayer pose, his family found the pharmaceutical bottle. Only one pill was missing. Mendoza shared with the Guardian screenshots of the Snapchat account where she believes her son got the fatal pills. In them, an advertiser offers free delivery of “Oxy” in Orange county. “Hit my line, doing hella deals the rest of this week,” one post reads. “It was one deadly pill that was strong enough to kill four adults,” said Mendoza, who hopes that other parents will get a chance to warn their children before it’s too late. “I feel like a lot of parents are like: ‘My kids aren’t into that.’ Well, neither was mine,” she said. “But that’s what kids are getting.” A push for accountability In August of this year, Neville and dozens of other parents of fentanyl victims lined up giant placards with photos of their lost children along the grand steps of the California state capitol. There were posters of kids in their school pictures, kids still in braces, kids giving the thumbs up on family beach trips. The parents gave speeches, pleading for measures to prevent drug dealing on social media, more prosecutions of drug importers and better mental health treatment for troubled teens. Mostly, they just called on state legislators to do something to stop more kids from dying. “We should be packing our son up for college right now and that is not happening for one reason: fentanyl,” said Laura Didier over a portable microphone. Her son, Zachary Didier, a talented musician who loved the cartoon character Snoopy and trained his own dog to sing while he accompanied him on the piano, died at age 17. Didier was set to be one of the valedictorians of his high school class. But on the morning of 27 December 2020, his dad found him slumped over his desk after taking one pill labelled as Percocet that he obtained on Snapchat. “He thought he was experimenting with a pharmaceutical-grade drug,” said his mom. “We are losing our kids and all they are doing is experimenting. Fentanyl doesn’t even give them a chance.” Jaime Puerta, who found his 16-year-old son Daniel Puerta-Johnson unconscious in his southern California home in April 2020, has helped parents organize protests outside the offices of Snapchat and on the streets of San Francisco, pushing for more action from social media sites, law enforcement and state regulators. “When I found him dead in his bed, I swore to myself I would do something,” he said. “I’m tired of waking up every day and hearing that a new child is dead.” Social media companies are now being forced to confront the deadly role their platforms can play. At a congressional hearing this month, lawmakers grilled the head of Instagram, Adam Mosseri, about young people’s easy access to drugs. “Why are children’s accounts even allowed to search for drug content to begin with, much less allowed to do so in a way that leads them to a drug dealer in two clicks?” asked the Republican senator Mike Lee of Utah, referencing the Tech Transparency Project (TTP)’s report. “Accounts selling drugs or any other regulated goods are not allowed on the platform,” said Mosseri. “Apparently they are,” interjected Lee. In a statement to the Guardian, Jeanne Moran, a spokesperson for Meta, which owns Instagram, said the company takes down a huge number of drug-related posts and has “developed technology to find and remove this content proactively”. Moran cited company metrics showing “out of every 10,000 views of content on Instagram, we estimate no more than 5 of those views contained content that violated the policy (on legally-regulated goods)”. Jennifer Park Stout, vice-president of global public policy at Snap, said in an October Senate hearing that Snapchat had dramatically increased its efforts and was “absolutely determined to remove all drug dealers” from its site. She said the company had “deployed proactive detection measures” to remove drug dealers, but “they are constantly evading our tactics”. “What is happening on our platforms – and all across social media and technology platforms – is that young people who are suffering from mental health and stress induced by the pandemic … are reaching for substances, oftentimes pills and opioids,” she said. “But these substances are laced with fentanyl, enough fentanyl to kill them.” Eric Feinberg, vice-president for content moderation at the non-profit watchdog group Coalition for a Safer Web, said dealers were churning out new accounts faster than technology companies could take them down. Feinberg runs regular social media surveillance looking for drug sales online and says dealers often operate with little fear of getting caught. Feinberg says that, once he signed up to follow a few drug sellers’ sites, social media algorithms began recommending more drug dealers for him to follow, in a phenomenon called algorithmic amplification. For example, after he followed some drug-related accounts on Instagram, Feinberg said, a dealer began following him out of the blue and barraging him with offers. Screenshots shared with the Guardian show the dealer flogging “pain pills, anxiety meds and other chemical research products” and urging him to make an order for delivery through the US mail. “It’s extremely easy to find this stuff,” said Feinberg. “In fact, the algorithms push this at you.” In October’s Senate hearing, Senator Amy Klobuchar commented that if social media companies were held legally liable for deaths due to drugs sold on their platforms, they might find faster ways to respond to the crisis. But the companies have long held that, as technology platforms, they are not legally accountable for content posted on their sites. “If a kid had just walked into, say, a pharmacy, they wouldn’t be able to get this,” said Klobuchar to Snap’s vice-president. “But, in this case, they can get on your platform and just find a way to buy it. That is the problem.” In a statement to the Guardian, Kelsey Donohue, a spokesperson for Snap, said the company was “determined to do our part to eradicate drug sales on Snapchat”. Donohue listed several steps Snap has taken, including raising awareness of counterfeit pills directly in the app, using machine learning to proactively detect drug-related content, and working with law enforcement and other experts. “We constantly evaluate where we can keep strengthening our work to combat this illegal activity,” Donohue said. For now, with dangers running so high, Safdar says the best thing parents and educators can do is talk to children about the deadly new stakes experimenting with drugs. “The current generation has to learn that a pill that didn’t come from a pharmacy or a hospital can’t be trusted and might be a life-ending event,” he said. “Unfortunately, they’re learning it by losing their colleagues.”My sister got married at Christmas so she wouldn’t have to bank on good weather. This is a very my-sister rationale: like her father before her, she is a worrier. She tries to contain her anxiety by planning for the worst. The night before the wedding, my father fell on the stairs. My mother was unable to move him by herself and had to call her cousins for help. That night, she accepted what the rest of us had known for some time: she could no longer care for him at home. She had tried, but it was becoming dangerous for both of them. After the fall, he remained bed-bound and never walked again. My sister went to see him on her way to the church. I waited in the car, fighting the irrational belief he had somehow done this on purpose. Of course, no one develops vascular dementia deliberately. Even so, he had managed to rearrange the dynamic of the day so that the bride was travelling to pay her respects to him, rather than the other way round. My father’s moods once had an almost mythic power. A lifelong hypochondriac, he never talked about his feelings but expressed them through a range of psychosomatic symptoms. He especially hated our mother going out without him, and would get crippling stomach cramps in the hours before her departure. Curiously, when he did become ill, he didn’t notice. Perhaps this was because the disease was laying waste to his cognitive function. By the time my sister married, he couldn’t walk, or eat without help, or talk in proper sentences. His decline looked particularly precipitous to me because I was living in London, so didn’t see him all that often. Every time I visited, it seemed he’d lost another skill. It was like having a new baby in the family, only backwards. And so it was that my mother had to walk my sister down the aisle. We huddled together in the porch, our breath coming out in pale plumes. The day was clear and very cold. The grass outside was tipped with frost. My sister was nervous, but the right kind of nervous – big-match butterflies rather than churning dread. Covertly, I scanned the congregation for my boyfriend. I had asked my sister to make him an usher, to compensate for the fact that my ex had been invited to the wedding. It hadn’t worked; he was still angry. He rarely lost his temper in public, but I knew the signs a tantrum was in the post: compression around his temples, a muscle going in his jaw. There was no statutory limit on how long he might nurse this particular grievance. But sooner or later, the bill would come in. The couple exchanged their vows. They promised to love each other, in sickness and in health. My sister came back down the aisle, on the arm of her new husband. They both looked disturbingly happy. The reception was held at a restaurant on the beach. The room was decked out in Christmas colours: red, gold, green. The marsh looked silver, in the low-angled winter sun. Over champagne, my boyfriend began to tell a stomach-churning story involving pizzas, shit and vomit. This isn’t wedding conversation, I thought. This isn’t anywhere conversation. Who talks like this past the age of three? “Don’t tell me,” I said. “I don’t want to know.” He leant in, and put his face close to mine. “You’re horrible,” he said. After the meal, my mother stood up and gave a short speech. She touched on my father’s condition, the reasons for his absence. I stared into my glass and thought about my parents. My father wasn’t perfect, by any means, but he had been a good husband to my mum: decent, dependable, kind. Now, she had to keep up her end of the compact, the guarantee that underwrites every marriage. That was what partnership was. It occurred to me then that my boyfriend and I weren’t really partners. We were like survivors in a dystopian movie, scrapping over water and bits of tarpaulin. Our relationship was less a union of two souls than a bad-tempered land grab between rival factions. I stayed with my family for Christmas. My father was kept in hospital, then moved into a care home. I remember looking at his face, against the pillow. His eyes sought mine, as if trying to communicate something. I pushed the hair back from his forehead. There wasn’t a line on his skin: he wasn’t old. But already he was consigned to a nursing bed, marking time until he died. I saw then that life wasn’t all that long. And it was briefer still, if this condition loitered in your genes. I’d like to say that I called my boyfriend and put our relationship out of its misery that instant. I didn’t. What I did do was make a private pact with myself, to stop lying. I would not marry him. I would not tie myself to him for the rest of my life, or even a small portion of it. That was the day I gave up pretending. Quite soon after that, I packed up my life in London, and left. The worst had happened, and unlike my little sister, I failed to anticipate it. My father went rapidly downhill after he moved into the care home, and stopped speaking altogether. He died four years later, a few weeks before Christmas. He never was much of a talker. But I count that moment of silent connection, a chastening glimpse of a future truncated, as his parting gift to me. He showed me that life is short and also tough. You should spend it with people you love. Sea State by Tabitha Lasley is published by 4th EstateWinning tip: Wild flamingos, pine woods and paella in Spain An easy 12-mile (19km) cycle south from Valencia takes you to the sand dune beaches of El Saler and the Albufera nature reserve. I stayed two nights in the Parador de El Saler hotel, which looks on to the Mediterranean sea and is surrounded by pine forests. The nature reserve means the area has few buildings and is full of birds. I cycled to a birdwatching centre 10 minutes from the hotel to see flamingos. Albufera is famous for its very shallow salt-water lake and there are sunset trips in traditional flat-bottom boats. There are plenty of restaurants serving paella (cooked outside over fires made from orange-tree branches). I loved the beach and the forest. Sarah Diamond beach and northern lights in Iceland A visit this month to Jökulsárlón glacier in Iceland was worth the effort. The drive from a small town, Vik, to the glacier through a vast expanse of snow-covered plains gave an exhilarating feeling of being on another planet. Small icebergs that had cracked away from the glacier and been chucked on to the contrasting black volcanic sandy beach glittered like diamonds – an extraordinary spectacle. Vik is idyllic, with snowy mountains on one side and the black sand beach on the other. The aurora watched from a hilltop church’s grounds was a spectacular display of colours. Radhamanohar Macherla Higher than eagles in the Hebrides Ceapabhal, known locally as Toe Head, looms wherever you are on the Isle of Harris. It only took me 15 years of visiting the Outer Hebrides to pluck up the courage to climb it. The views from the top are panoramic: the topaz waters and powder-white sands of almost every beach on the island sparkle below. From my elevated position, feathers glowed golden in the sunshine. For the first time, I had the privilege of looking down on not one, but three magnificent raptors. Enormous golden eagles swooped beneath me before soaring on thermals into the clouds. Vanessa Wright Fairytale waterfalls by Loch Lomond During our journey on the West Highland Way there was one place where I wished I could stay longer. The north end of Loch Lomond stole my heart with its dramatic landscape of placid lake and imposing mountains. We stayed in Beinglas Farm campsite, a quiet, friendly place with a bar, shop and good breakfasts. Walking away from the loch you come to the Falls of Falloch fairly quickly, and many other small waterfalls besides that have an enchanting, fairytale quality. Take a dip in the little pools if you are brave: the water is as clear as a mirror. Philippa Hughes Cheese pies by the side of Morecambe Bay Cycling and walking have led us to discover local gems. Glasson Dock, a port that time forgot, should be your starting point. Cycle up the gravel-and-tarmac old railway line along the estuary to Lancaster (about five miles). Cross the Lune on the elegant Millennium bridge and then head towards Morecambe. Just a few hundred metres from this excellent and well-used cycle track is Susan’s Pies – our favourite is cheese and onion. Resist eating now but turn along the coast to Heysham, where you can eat in the graveyard of Grade I-listed S Peter’s church near the much older ruins of St Patrick’s chapel and its rock-cut tombs, overlooking the famous bay. Martin Charlesworth Bracing Cornish salt water for the soul We had an utterly wonderful long weekend with family in Cornwall, where we were encouraged to partake in their regular activity of an early-morning dip in Bude sea pool, an outdoor swimming pool built the 1930s among the natural dramatic rock formations of the cliffs. The unheated seawater is refreshed with every high tide, and taking the plunge is a highly recommended to invigorate the soul and make you feel truly alive. Johanna Ogden Laid-back camping in Cornwall With its palm trees, subtropical plants and striking coastal views, Henry’s campsite in Helston, Cornwall, transported us to a vibrant and bohemian world where for one week all we needed was common sense, flip-flops and a pitcher of cider. Mornings were easy, with a slow wander up to the farmhouse for coffee and a croissant (dodging free-range chickens and children en route), followed by sunny days spent wandering the coastal paths, stopping at beach bars and swimming in hidden coves. Our evenings ended perfectly with live music, fire-pit marshmallows and watching the sun melt into the ocean. Hayley Kenney Amarante, Portugal’s best kept secret Amarante is a small, quaint village in the north-east of the country. I was taken here on a surprise trip by my partner and was pleasantly surprised by the fantastic selection of restaurants and cafes. Our trip was spent taking short walks by the river and exploring the great tourist-friendly city of Porto, 35 miles away. For those looking for a challenge, I would recommend Paiva Walkways in Aveiro for its 12km mountainside trail through the beautiful hills of Arouca. All in all, a week away in September cost us £200 each, which, when you consider the cost of other European getaways, is an absolute steal. Mariah Sowa Walk on water in Diss, Norfolk Having visited twice on short breaks this summer, we are now big fans of the market town of Diss in south Norfolk, with its historic “Heritage Triangle”, home to an abundance of independent shops, and its mesmerising mere. Among Diss’s many attractive historic buildings is the imposing neoclassical Corn Hall, still partly used as a corn exchange until the 1990s and now an arts venue. The central six-acre mere, teeming with fish, was once thought to be the waterfilled crater of an extinct volcano. We enjoyed relaxing on the lakeside decking of the Waterfront Inn and walking over the water on the floating boardwalk. Sharon Pinner Rediscovering the delights of Dovedale Dovedale in Derbyshire was close enough to our school in north Birmingham for it to be the location of all our field trips, armed with measuring wheels, notepads and generic juice cartons – but I don’t think I appreciated its beauty back then. The stepping stones are a natural starting point, but walk in any direction and the vistas are stellar, the hill of Thorpe Cloud being the star. Without the class clown as a distraction, Lion Head rock really does look feline, and lovely Milldale becomes reachable without teachers who just want to get back for happy hour. This quiet time of year is perfect. Enjoy hot food and a movie at the cosy Northern Light Cinema in Wirksworth, about a 40-minute drive away. Antony TThe majority of coal-fired power is not being phased out quickly enough to meet climate goals and avoid catastrophic global heating, despite new pledges made at Cop26. While coal is on its way out, some of the largest coal-dependent economies might be delaying for too long, according to a new report by the Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air. “Current pledges and targets absolutely are not enough to ensure that coal power is phased out fast enough to avoid the worst of global warming,” said lead author of the report, Lauri Myllyvirta. Coal is the dirtiest fossil fuel and the International Energy Agency has made clear that if it is not rapidly retired the world has no hope of staying within 1.5C of global heating. While major coal-dependent nations pledged for the first time at the UN climate summit in Glasgow to phase down coal-fired power generation, there is still a long way to go, says Flora Champenois, a research analyst at Global Energy Monitor. “The price of renewables has dropped dramatically in the last decade, so the case is now clearer than ever that uneconomical, dirty energy needs to go. At the same time, we’ve seen that it’s slow and difficult to change the status quo, no matter how compelling the economics of coal power are.” The data reveals how much responsibility higher income countries have when it comes to phasing out coal across the world. Leo Roberts, research manager at E3G, said that in addition to shutting down their own coal fleets: “Rich countries need to make the finance available to support the transition away from coal in the global south. He added that investors and taxpayers should be concerned about the profitability of new coal plants. If those projects went ahead, they could lose $150bn (£113bn) on stranded assets, according to a report by Carbon Tracker. Despite falling behind on the schedule set out by the International Energy Agency, there are signs that key players are making headway in the transition. In India, “clean energy targets announced by the prime minister, Narendra Modi, mean that coal-fired power generation could peak well before 2030”, said Myllyvirta. And while the United States is not on track for a 2030 phase out, according to Global Energy Monitor, a shifting tide of economic factors and political will might bring the country in line. Roberts pointed to how the increasing uncompetitiveness of coal is already driving coal power plants retirements nationwide. Out of the three biggest coal-dependent economies, China’s status is surrounded by the most uncertainties. Though the country has pledged to stop building new coal plants abroad, it is still planning to increase domestic capacity. “Before China, with by far the world’s largest fleet of coal power plants, announces firm phase-out plans, we won’t be on track,” said Myllyvirta. But despite uncertainty over China, experts say there is reason for optimism. The pace at which countries are abandoning coal has accelerated in recent years, and many new projects have already been cancelled. “The pace at which the [global] outlook has changed”, according to Myllyvirta, “from only a handful of small countries having a phase-out commitment as recently as 2015, to having a quarter of the world’s coal fleet assigned a firm phase-out date. It’s extremely encouraging and shows this can be done.”We are twins who needed to get our stuff home to France after graduating in London. We paid TNT to ship three large sealed plastic boxes, and two shrink-wrapped suitcases, all carefully labelled, within 48 hours. When they had not arrived three days later, we called every couple of days to be told they were on their way. Then we were informed that the documentation was incorrect, and that they had been “returned to sender”, ie, our old London address, where we no longer lived, and that the case was closed. Further calls revealed our belongings were in Deptford and could be delivered to a UK address, which we duly provided. They didn’t arrive there, either. After hours of phoning we were informed that the luggage had no identifying labels and, as a consequence, were lost. A 14-day process had to be launched to find them. After 14 days we contacted TNT again and heard that the items had been found, but had been sent to TNT’s head office in Bolton. It refused our request for photos to check they were ours. We suspect they have lost our shipment, or there’s a lack of drivers to deliver it. We are pretty distraught: our parcels contain all our student stuff. T and LW, Paris, France Fedex, which owns TNT, was rather curt about this disastrous experience. “We recognise there has been an issue with this shipment and are in direct contact with our customer to resolve the matter as quickly as possible,” it says. “We apologise for any inconvenience.” But it failed to answer questions about what had happened to your belongings, or whether you will be compensated. It’s concerning that, within days of my contact, it was able to magic up the consignment and send photos. The good news is, they were yours; the bad, that during their two months of peregrinations, they had been squashed, cracked and crudely taped back together. You accepted an offer to deliver to a UK address and made your own arrangements to get them to France, but say that, so far, there’s been no word about compensation. But there’s thunderous applause from a Bose customer I would like to give a thumbs up to Bose UK. I had a well-used pair of its SoundSport wireless headphones, bought more than two years ago. Recently, the battery in one bud began cutting out. I called Bose to see if I could get it sorted, and was told that, although the headphones were out of warranty, as a long-standing customer I would be sent a new set of upgraded headphones by courier at its expense. They arrived within five days. EG, Ramsgate, Kent Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsCivil rights groups in Malawi have cautioned the government on its decision to make the Covid-19 vaccination mandatory for frontline workers. From January, it will be compulsory for public sector workers, including healthcare staff, police and teachers, as well as journalists, to be vaccinated, after an announcement by Malawi’s health minister, Khumbize Kandodo Chiponda, last week. The government believes the measure will help reduce the spread of the Omicron variant in the country. “Accumulating data continues to indicate that the majority of those being admitted to our emergency treatment units or losing their lives to Covid-19 have not been vaccinated,” Chiponda said. As of Wednesday, Malawi had registered 66,166 Covid-19 cases and more than 2,300 deaths since the beginning of the pandemic. More than 1.6m vaccine doses have been administered. However, the move has been met with concern by civil rights groups. In a press statement, the Malawi Human Rights Commission said the directive violated the principle that medical interventions are a person’s free choice. “The commission is not in support of the mandatory Covid-19 vaccination as it violates fundamental human rights as guaranteed by the constitution of the republic of Malawi and other international instruments, even if the issue of collective or public rights is brought into the equation,” read the statement. Sylvester Namiwa, the executive director at the Centre for Democracy and Economic Development Initiatives, said mandatory jabs were not justified in Malawi. “Our decisions should be based on scientific knowledge. We understand there is Covid-19, but let’s learn to live with the disease as we have done with other diseases such as HIV/Aids, tuberculosis, malaria and diabetes,” said Namiwa. Some have said the timing of the announcement was ill-advised. “The timing of these measures is not right. Many Malawians are already hesitant to get vaccinated, and the measures have been announced at a time the administration has lost popularity due to the rising cost of living and hence forcing people to get vaccinated would make the situation volatile,” said Moses Chabuka, executive director at Neno Active Youth in Development. In a national address on Tuesday, Malawi’s president, Lazarus Chakwera, said intensifying vaccination efforts were part of the country’s socioeconomic recovery plan. “To recover the ground the economy has lost to the pandemic, we have to stop the pandemic in its tracks,” said Chakwera.The Morrison government has told a tribunal there is “strong public interest” in preserving the secrecy of “business case” documents that may outline the nucleus of the unlawful robodebt scheme. IT expert Justin Warren won access to documents connected to the since-scrapped welfare debt recovery program under freedom of information laws in 2019, but he is yet to receive them after the government appealed against the decision. Warren’s lawyer argues there is “profound” public interest in release because they may shed light on what went wrong with the scheme, which eventually saw the government reach a $1.8bn settlement with about 400,000 victims in what the federal court called a “shameful chapter”. The Administrative Appeals Tribunal, which is considering the government’s latest attempt to keep the documents secret, heard closing arguments from both parties on Thursday. The tribunal has previously heard the documents include detailed costings and other financial data about the program, which matched yearly income data against a person’s fortnightly reports to Centrelink to send a person a debt. They are also said to include draft “new policy proposal” documents and purported attachments that outline a new plan to ramp up the government’s welfare debt recovery. The tribunal is considering, among other issues, whether the documents were prepared for the cabinet process or were simply being worked on internally by the then Department of Human Services, which administered the robodebt scheme. Counsel for the commonwealth, Andrew Berger QC, insisted on Thursday the documents should not be released because they were prepared for cabinet. “There is a very strong public interest in protecting from disclosure cabinet documents, whether they be at the dead centre of cabinet, such as cabinet notebooks, or further away from the epicentre of cabinet,” he told the tribunal. That extended to “preparatory documents”, such as some of the documents in question, he claimed. The tribunal has heard the documents never made it to cabinet itself, though one is a draft of a document that did, and the commonwealth argues information in other documents also appeared in newer material subsequently considered by cabinet. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In asserting the public interest in keeping the documents secret, Berger argued ministers would not receive full and frank information if there was concern any deliberations would be made public. He also told the tribunal Warren’s public interest arguments weren’t “actually borne out by the information in the documents”. Warren’s lawyer, Tom Brennan SC, said the commonwealth had failed to demonstrate why the documents should stay secret. Senior ministers between 2015 and 2016 included the former social services ministers, Scott Morrison and Christian Porter, who were members of cabinet, and the former human services ministers, Marise Payne and Alan Tudge, who were not. Brennan argued the Commonwealth had not proven that Morrison, as the cabinet minister at the time, had authorised the preparation of the material in question. “If it’s not before you then the case isn’t proven,” Brennan said. Because the commonwealth has appealed an earlier decision, it faces the onus of proof to show why the documents must be suppressed. Brennan said understanding of the “shameful” robodebt scheme would be “significantly enhanced by the disclosure of the documents in issue”. The public interest in release was “profound”, he said. The AAT hearing is one of several efforts the government has made to block the release of robodebt documents. The government services minister, Linda Reynolds, is facing a possible referral to the privileges committee for the government’s repeated refusal to hand over documents requested by the Senate. Labor has also promised a royal commission into the scheme if it wins the election. On Thursday, the Guardian revealed the government had reached a $2m settlement over a class action that claimed another welfare program – known colloquially as “remote work for the dole” – was unlawful on the bounds of racial discrimination. Warren’s case is being run pro bono by Maurice Blackburn and the Grata Fund’s FoI Project. The tribunal deputy president, Peter Britten-Jones, reserved his decision.1) The best moment for British sport in 2021? It’s very likely to be Emma Raducanu winning the US Open, becoming the first qualifier to capture a grand slam title. That’s with apologies to Mark Cavendish, who came back from almost retiring from racing to win four stages at the Tour de France and the green jersey and become, alongside Eddy Merckx, the winner of the most stages at Le Tour, where the GC winner was the irresistible Tadej Pogacar. At the Tokyo Olympics, Team GB won a mighty 65 medals, finishing fourth in the medals table, 2) The social team at the Olympics have kindly edited together a 10-minute clip of some of the best moments of Tokyo 2020. Here’s the opening ceremony, and the closing ceremony, too, both taking place in front of an empty Olympic Stadium. For the host nation perhaps the women’s skateboarding was the highlight, with two 13-year-olds medallists and a 16-year-old, too. And world records in both the men’s and the women’s 400m hurdles finals from Karsten Warholm and Sydney McLaughlin. 3) What a tournament, just don’t mention the final. Here’s all 142 goals scored at Euro 2020, a shorter selection of the best strikes and here’s Uefa’s official review film. The best saves, too, including England’s Jordan Pickford and Gianluigi Donnarumma of Italy. How did Croydon Boxpark react to England smashing Ukraine in the quarters? Not as wildly as the Italians celebrated winning the whole thing. 4) It was Rachael Blackmore’s year in National Hunt racing, becoming the first woman to ride a Grand National winner on Minella Times. She also dominated the behind-closed-doors Cheltenham Festival when riding the winner in the Champion Hurdle on Honeysuckle as one of six winners across the week, making her leading jockey. She had to settle for second on A Plus Tard to Minella Indo, ridden by Jack Kennedy. Blackmore was by no means the only woman jockey enjoying success with Bryony Frost riding Greaneteen to two wins at Sandown. 5) This 247ft frisbee birdie was “unbelievable”, as the commentator says. Kevin Jones will see that 247ft effort, and raise to an incredible 530ft. Jordan Cox of Kent shows some serious skill and composure fielding on the boundary on Vitality Blast finals day. On the subject of which, Australia won their first ever T20 World Cup in beating New Zealand in Dubai. 6) It’s been one hell of a year for viral clips from our amazing world of sport stable, from a cricket bat being launched at a teammate, a Bolivian whirlwind mid-match, a surfing odyssey, classic sh!thousery, and some badminton frenzy. 7) Save the best until last? New Orleans Pelicans’ Devonte’ Graham hits 61-foot shot at buzzer to beat Oklahoma City Thunder. Or how about a nine-dart finish from William Borland at Ally Pally? Classic YouTube is now going on what is hopefully a well-earned hiatus. Thanks so much for all your clips and input.The history books will show that Boris Johnson’s government was hit by two shattering humiliations in December 2021, two years after it was elected. The first was the record-setting revolt of 101 Conservative backbenchers against Covid passport regulations. The second, two days later, was the loss of the North Shropshire byelection to the Liberal Democrats. But, as we approach the start of 2022, the combined consequences of those reverses now matter more than the actual events themselves. That is because, between them, the two defeats have rewritten the script for the remainder of this government’s term. We saw this in the lasting significance of what Johnson did on Monday. The prime minister emerged from an emergency cabinet meeting on the Omicron surge to announce – nothing. While other governments across Europe scrambled to save their health systems from being overwhelmed, Johnson’s decided it was undecided whether to do anything about it at all. If things changed, however, Johnson insisted: “We won’t hesitate to take that action.” Monday’s outcome negated that claim. The truth was the exact opposite. This was hesitation incarnate, a decision not to take action of the sort that the emergency cabinet meeting had presumably been called to approve in the first place. It was not the result of a considered consensus. The cabinet, it turns out, was split right down the middle, and still is. The result was that Britain now has a government unable to govern. This is the umbilical result of the fact that Johnson is now the hostage of his backbenchers and their cabinet allies, who are in turn emboldened by the voters’ damning verdict in Shropshire. So it is also important to see what happened this week as a harbinger of the Johnson government’s new – and potentially terminal – phase, in which it is no longer able to take necessary decisions and is abandoned by the electorate as a result. All failing governments eventually reach a similar point, after which it turns out to be downhill all the way. The question for British politics today is whether Johnson’s government has now reached that point. The evidence suggests it has done so, in its own distinctive way, and that consequently British voters are now open to something new. More than 40 years ago, during the 1979 election that brought Margaret Thatcher to power, the Labour prime minister, Jim Callaghan, made a famous observation about this kind of moment. “There are times,” Callaghan told his advisers, “perhaps once every 30 years, when there is a sea change in politics. It then does not matter what you say or what you do. There is a shift in what the public wants and what it approves of. I suspect there is now such a sea change – and it is for Mrs Thatcher.” Callaghan’s view can actually be disputed in some important respects. There was certainly a big sea change in political economy after 1979 that contrasted with the post-1945 world in which Callaghan rose to power. But the public never embraced Thatcherism to the wholehearted degree that Thatcher’s run of electoral success through the 1980s may have implied. Where he was right, however, is that the Labour governments of the 1970s had lost the public’s confidence in important ways, and that Thatcher was always likely to win in 1979. And he was right that, once a government reaches such a point, it has relatively little chance of clawing the old advantage back. There is no iron law about precisely how this works. Circumstances differ widely. Theresa May’s government began to fail near its start, when she threw away her majority in the 2017 election. David Cameron’s government, by contrast, became doomed only at the very end, when Cameron lost the Brexit vote. Had he won, Cameron might still be prime minister. With other governments, the crossing of the watershed is more gradual. Even John Major’s, which seems doomed in retrospect after Black Wednesday in 1992, might have survived if Labour had not focused so ruthlessly on ending its own run of four election defeats. And it wasn’t quite as obvious at the time as it seems now that Tony Blair’s authority was destroyed by Iraq; he went on to win another election, after all. Gordon Brown’s trajectory felt more predictable when, shortly after arriving in Downing Street, he flirted humiliatingly with calling an early election. In 2009, I was sitting next to the great lawyer Tom Bingham at a dinner when he turned and said: “I think the country decided two years ago that it will need a new government when the time comes.” On that, as on so much else, he was right. December 2021 feels like such a moment for Johnson. It is hard to recover from the reputation-shredding stories – with more to come – that produced North Shropshire. A prime minister being mocked by football and darts fans is not a good sign. Bad election results next year will undoubtedly trigger the leadership speculation that is never far below the surface in the party. Perhaps Bingham’s law applies today too, just as it did after 2007. The country feels as though it it is in the process of deciding that it will need a new government when the time comes. If that is right, then it may not matter too much who leads the Tory party next time. The crucial question will be whether the country has enough confidence in the Labour alternative. Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnistKate Winslet will be ready in a sec. “I’m just going to put some more eyedrops on my stye,” she says. Blame her intense crime drama Mare of Easttown, one of the TV hits of the pandemic. “It was quite a stressful job, and about nine weeks in I got three styes in my left eye, the third of which turned into a solid little marble and had to be cut out. But I pushed on. On with the show!” In it, she plays DS Mare Sheehan, who is raising her grandson, coping with her son’s suicide, and trying to solve the murder of a young mother in a working-class Philadelphia suburb. All without makeup: Mare is more likely to reach for a Cheeto topped with a squirt of spray cheese than anything in the Max Factor range. “The discussion about how Mare looked blew my mind,” says Winslet. The 46-year-old actor is speaking by phone from the West Sussex home she shares with her husband, Ned Abel Smith, and their seven-year-old son Bear, as well as her two children from previous marriages: 21-year-old Mia by her first husband, Jim Threapleton, and 17-year-old Joe by her second, the director Sam Mendes. “People were asking, ‘Did she gain weight? Didn’t she look frumpy? Wasn’t that brave of her?’ But why should that be brave? I suppose because it’s not how leading actresses are represented. Maybe Mare will be the tipping point, and we’re going to stop scrutinising women on screen quite so much.” Realism extended to every corner of the show. “We were always saying on set: ‘That’s too TV. Keep it real.’ I’d constantly be rubbing Marmite into the knees of my jeans, or scuffing up my sneakers with a Brillo pad. You can’t just make one thing feel real: it has to be everything.” Take Mare’s car. “She would have been driving her grandson to and from kindergarten, feeding him breakfast on the fly. I know what the floor in the back of my own car looks like – there’s crushed cereal, with bowls and spoons clinking around, because we’ve had breakfast on the school run. You’re sitting on crumbs which are so embedded in the seat it would take a fucking blowtorch to get them out!” This is Winslet’s shtick: she may be a seven-time Oscar nominee (she won in 2008 for the Holocaust drama The Reader) and a double Emmy-winner (for two HBO shows, Mildred Pierce and now Mare of Easttown) but she remains the star who’s a slob like us. It’s a persona that chimes perfectly with Mare – Winslet intervened to ensure that publicity pictures weren’t airbrushed to make her look more presentable – as well as with our times. “Mare is how most of us felt through lockdown,” she says. “She validated the permanent pyjama look.” Inadvertently or otherwise, Winslet became almost the face of the pandemic. As reports of coronavirus spread at the start of last year, her 2011 disaster movie Contagion, in which she plays an epidemiologist, shot to the top of the streaming charts. Three months later, she and several Contagion co-stars, including Matt Damon and Marion Cotillard, presented public information videos. Winslet became a kind of Covid Vera Lynn, jollying people along by teaching us how to wash our hands, cough into the crooks of our arms, and deploy the word “fomite” correctly. During the interminable third lockdown, she gave two outstanding performances: first as the 19th-century palaeontologist Mary Anning in Ammonite, and then in Mare of Easttown. Both characters force Winslet to play against her natural warmth: it’s more than an hour into Ammonite before Mary smiles, while Mare doesn’t laugh until episode five. “I took some of what I learned on Ammonite into Mare,” she says. “That brooding stillness. It’s hard for me because I’m a joyful, busy, active, huggy person. That’s who I am.” The scripts for Mare of Easttown arrived one by one while she and Saoirse Ronan were shooting Ammonite on the Dorset coast. “I’d say: ‘Oh my God, episode five just came in’, then Saoirse would go” – and here Winslet slips into her co-star’s breathless Irish lilt – “‘Jesus fooking Christ, this is so exciting, you’ve gotta tell me what happens!’” Audiences turned out to be every bit as enthusiastic. “It came along just as people badly needed something to discuss other than who they knew who had died from Covid. It put families on couches, and there was a nostalgic quality to the one-episode-a-week format. It gets conversation going while you’re waiting for the next one.” Winslet’s own fondest TV memories from growing up in Reading, Berkshire, revolve around exactly those kinds of cliffhangers. “You’d desperately want to know what would happen to Zammo next on Grange Hill, or to the Fowlers in EastEnders.” Is she a binger now? “Covid has taught me how to binge. In more ways than one. But yes, Ned and I watched Ted Lasso pretty much back-to-back. Covid made you not feel so bad about hanging out on the couch.” It would be wrong to suggest that Mare of Easttown has catered simply to a nostalgia for delayed gratification when there is so much else to praise it for, not least its female characters. “Middle-aged women have long been underestimated, disrespected and disregarded in the film and television community, and now that’s changing,” she says. “Look at the actresses who won at the Emmys. None of us were in our 20s by any means, and that’s cool! I feel way cooler as a fortysomething actress than I ever imagined I would.” She also felt a deeper connection between herself and the character than she has done on previous jobs. “I knew Mare and this world vividly. I grew up in a tiny terraced house in a working-class, small-town community where your life overlaps with your neighbours’ lives just because the walls are so thin. If Lorraine down the road had her varicose veins done, the entire world knew. And if, for the first time ever, the couple two streets across voted Conservative instead of Labour then – bloody hell! – all shit went off in our house, and my parents would be debating whether they ought to talk to those people about their choices. This wasn’t a teeny-tiny cul-de-sac. It was the Oxford Road. If I was standing in my parents’ bedroom, I could be eye-to-eye with the people on the top deck of the No 17 bus.” Winslet is proud of Mare of Easttown’s focus on community; the whodunnit element may be the motor, but it’s the milieu that makes the show feel so salty and rich. There is also far less emphasis on damaged female bodies than audiences have come to expect from crime drama. “You’re right, we did show less,” she says. “In the morgue scene, we had a dummy that was an exact replica of the actress’s body and we were even respectful of that. Between takes we would cover the dummy with a sheet.” For all the show’s sensitivity, its vision of the police as uniformly caring, conscientious and true feels antiquated in light of the murders of George Floyd and Sarah Everard, to choose only the most shocking recent examples of police criminality. Shouldn’t television reflect the fact that the police badge is not necessarily a reassuring or honourable symbol? “I don’t know if I’m going to be playing Mare again,” Winslet says. “But if we were to do a second season, then for sure these atrocities which have existed in the police force here and in America will find their way into the stories we tell. One hundred per cent. You can’t pretend these things haven’t happened.” She sighs. “It’s horrible, isn’t it? This moment in time. It’s horrific. You can hear me, I can’t quite find the words because we all feel so betrayed and powerless. We have to turn this moment into something meaningful. We have to use our voices on behalf of people who don’t have one. That matters to me now in ways that hadn’t even crossed my mind in my 20s.” Possibly, she had other things to think about. Her 20s began, after all, with Titanic. “Do you know Leo just turned 47?” she asks, suddenly shocked. Then her voice grows wistful as she thinks back to herself and DiCaprio as pups. “I turned 21 on that shoot, and Leo turned 22,” she says. I tell her that when I met DiCaprio back then, he complained to me about Titanic’s arduous production and how miserable he felt. She lets out a raucous laugh. “I remember! I remember that he was! It wasn’t pleasant for any of us, but we were all in it together. Though he had way more days off than I ever bloody did. I guess I was raised to be grateful and just get on with it. I didn’t feel it was my right to be miserable, and if I was miserable I certainly would not have let a journalist know.” She is laughing again. “There is no way I would have let that slip!” She and DiCaprio later played a troubled married couple in Revolutionary Road and met again in Los Angeles recently for the first time in three years. “I couldn’t stop crying,” says Winslet. “I’ve known him for half my life! It’s not as if I’ve found myself in New York or he’s been in London and there’s been a chance to have dinner or grab a coffee and a catchup. We haven’t been able to leave our countries. Like so many friendships globally, we’ve missed each other because of Covid. He’s my friend, my really close friend. We’re bonded for life.” Were she sitting in front of me now, I get the impression she might appear to have something in her eye. Or perhaps it would just be the drops.We are going to put the blog to bed now – thank you so much for spending the second half of Thursday with me. Here were the big stories: A man died after a triple stabbing in Sydney. 20 Victorian Covid-19 testing centres closed due to huge lines. Victoria recorded 2,005 cases, NSW 5,715 and one death, Tasmania 26, Queensland 369, the ACT 85, the NT 10, SA 484 and WA had one new local Covid case. All Victorian frontline police to be equipped with Tasers. Indoor mask mandates to return in Victoria. Hunt says Omicron is not creating a serious increase of cases in ICU. NSW to mandate masks. Chant says roughly 80% of NSW Covid cases are Omicron variant. There were fires at Melbourne hotel housing refugees. And WA to introduce a mask mandate after a community case. And I’ll see you all again tomorrow! The Morrison government has told a tribunal there is “strong public interest” in preserving the secrecy of “business case” documents that may outline the nucleus of the unlawful robodebt scheme. IT expert Justin Warren won access to documents connected to the since-scrapped welfare debt recovery program under freedom of information laws in 2019, but he is yet to receive them after the government appealed against the decision. I suspect many separated families will be asking similar questions. Minister for Foreign Affairs Marise Payne has announced Australia will provide $5m in emergency relief to help the people of the Philippines recover from the devastation caused by Super Typhoon Rai. As many as 2.6 million people have been affected by the typhoon, with thousands sheltering in evacuation centres and many still without access to fresh food and water, power, and basic services. “Australia will continue to partner with the Philippines Government and humanitarian organisations to respond to this disaster,” Payne said in a statement. “Our assistance will include: funding for the Philippines Red Cross and UN Population Fund to distribute relief supplies (including sleeping, shelter and water and hygiene kits) and essential child and maternal health services (including sexual and reproductive health kits) funding for the World Food Programme, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization and the International Organization for Migration to provide critical transportation and communications support to the Philippines Government for delivery of relief supplies funding for Australian NGOs already operating in the Philippines to deliver immediate lifesaving assistance (including food and non-food items, shelter and water and hygiene kits), protection and livelihood recovery activities funding for local NGOs to respond to the needs of particularly vulnerable groups in remote areas. “I would like to convey Australia’s condolences and heartfelt thoughts to those families in the Philippines who have lost loved ones or whose lives have been affected by this disaster.” Earlier today, the Australasian College for Emergency Medicine (ACEM) put out a statement on Omicron, calling for a system-wide approach to preparing for more Covid cases. ACEM president, Dr Clare Skinner, said: Emergency physicians, nurses and other acute healthcare workers must be included in the conversations and planning for Covid-19 increases. Covid-19 surges have significant impacts on ED demand and workload, which are not reflected in reported numbers of patients admitted to hospital or ICU. Skinner said many of Australia’s emergency clinicians are anxious about Omicron. We experienced this anxiety when Covid-19 first appeared, and then again with Delta. The first waves were challenging, but we worked together, adapted our processes, and worst-case scenarios were avoided. So there are quite a few exposure sites: On 22 December: Aldi and Kmart at The Square Mirrabooka shopping centre and Vinnies Mirrabooka. On 19 December: McDonald’s Girrawheen, Perth Mess Hall, Connections Nightclub, and Geisha Nightclub. On 18 December: Dan Murphy’s Joondalup. On 17 December: the Bloody French restaurant in Subiaco and Palace Cinema Raine Square. On 16 December: the Galway Hooker pub, Scarborough Sunset Markets and WA Museum Boola Bardip. And that’s it for the WA presser, but sit tight and I will get the full list of current exposure sites. Sanderson says the backpacker and his girlfriend are being kept in hotel quarantine. They are in hotel quarantine, and at the moment the department is attempting to find a hotel quarantine for the four campers. Sanderson has been asked if WA’s hospitals and ICU departments are ready. We have made a significant investment in putting online a number of beds, and more than 200 will be online by the end of this year. We have the ability of 300 ICU beds and ventilators and have them staffed. If we put in place sensible public health measures and higher rates of vaccination, we think that will serve us well. The WA health minister, Amber-Jade Sanderson, is asked how long it will take for people to get results. We have increased testing capacity. [It should take] the same amount of time as it has previously. For some people it is a matter of hours, for others a couple of days, but generally, we are not expecting ... that to blow out at all. Dawson reiterates that anyone who has been in the Perth/Peel region from 16 December who has travelled out of the area will have to wear a mask inside unless in a private residence. Dawson says it is a $50,000 fine for nightclubs that open. “We have had actually good cooperation through the licensed premises,” he says. Dawson says there are no restrictions on the number of people in a home, but people should use common sense. In a private home, there is no restriction in terms of the numbers of people but, again, common sense has to prevail here, so we’re just asking people to use common sense in a private setting. But if you’re going shopping, if you’re going to do last-minute buying drinks etcetera, you will have to wear a mask. While it [comes into effect at] 6pm, it is an arbitrary rule to give businesses and people a chance. Dawson says people need to go and get tested if they have been to those venues or are feeling symptomatic. You do not know who you have been in contact with. The virus does not respect any venue, any road, it will go wherever it goes. Check on the website where those venues are and if you have been, if you are in contact with others that have been to any of these venues, then use your common sense, go and get tested. Clearly, get vaccinated if you have not been vaccinated. Commissioner of police Chris Dawson is up now. 100,000 people have now had the third dose, I know from our statistics, 165,000 others who have had five months lapsed and have not taken the booster. So have it. Testing clinics will be open tonight until 10pm and from 7am to 8pm tomorrow and Christmas Day, and 7am to 10pm Boxing Day. McGowan is asked why police had to use his phone pings to find him. He is 25 years of age and he is a backpacker and goes out a lot. We had to check his phone, knock on the door and tell him the bad news. McGowan says the man is symptomatic. The reason that he went and got tested is that he was unwell, and now the degree of unwellness, I don’t know. But that was the reason that he went and got tested, which is fortunate, and that’s the reason that we know about it now. McGowan says if WA has community spread the February opening day will become redundant. Obviously, if we have community spread of the virus, obviously the February 5 border opening in many ways becomes redundant. McGowan says “this may be the event” that ends WA’s Covid-free streak. I’ve said to you repeatedly over the course of the last couple of weeks, I hope that we make it to February 5 without community spread of the virus. We’ll be lucky to make it that far. This may be the event that provides us with community spread of the virus. ... And that’s why I’m saying to everybody, please go and get vaccinated as soon as you can. If you’re eligible for a third dose, go and get vaccinated. McGowan is asked if it could stretch on to NYE: We don’t know yet. We’ll see what we pick up and see what the health advice is. We’ll see if the testing brings any more cases to light. It’s four campers who are positive and have been all over the place. We’ll have to investigate that. The contact tracing teams will be working on all of these things now and as the minister said, there are a great many contact tracers now working on this. ... So we just want to track down any cases that might be out there and make sure that they’re dealt with appropriately. McGowan on the mask mandates: It’s from 6pm tonight: the mask-wearing mandate, the closure of nightclubs, the shutting down of the music festivals and the like, until 6am on Tuesday morning. McGowan says they believe it is Delta, not Omicron. We suspect that it is Delta but they have to do the whole genome sequencing to work out if it is the Omicron variant. At this point in time, we think that it is the Delta variant. If it is Delta, that’s less infectious than the Omicron variant. Whilst none of this is good news, at least it’s better than the more infectious [variant]. McGowan says if you leave Perth now you still have to wear a mask. I’m saying if you leave Perth now ... the requirement is, at least for the next 4.5 days, that you’re required to wear a mask. Now, that may extend. We’ll just see what we pick up through the testing clinics in the course of the next four days. McGowan says the backpacker is currently being interviewed. There are a lot of questions about when the backpacker came to Australia. WA doesn’t know, but as McGowan points out, there are a lot of backpackers who stayed in Australia over the course of the pandemic. The main priority is to find out where he’s been. Obviously, when you’ve been in the community for 12 days, particularly infectious from the 16th of December, you want to find out every single place that he went to. And I don’t know about you, but if you asked me where I’d been in the last 12 days, every single spot I went to, it’s hard to remember. So the main thing is that we track his movements entirely over the course of that period of time so that we can work out every single place that needs to be declared an exposure site. In terms of his arrival in Australia and the like, you know, I suppose we can ask those questions but the main priority at this point in time is trying to keep people safe. McGowan says they are acting in proportion to the risk. One truck driver who visited a service station and slept in his cab, we probably wouldn’t be doing this. But this is a backpacker who has been to multiple nightclubs, restaurants, bars with hundreds of people, and has been in the community for an extended period of time, so therefore, we are taking this action. McGowan says there are five close contacts currently. Five close contacts we know of, the backpacker’s girlfriend who has shown symptoms and a number of his housemates. The number of close contacts may grow, but at this point in time, in terms of casual contacts, that will [be] in the hundreds. McGowan is asked if it is mandatory for contacts to isolate while they wait for their test results. Close contacts need to isolate and get tested. That’s a two-week period. For casual contacts, it is isolation until you get a negative test. At the moment the vast majority, overwhelming majority of people are casual contacts, so they will need to isolate and get tested. Look, if they have to isolate over Christmas Day, that’s an unfortunate reality, a sad reality, but the reality of Covid. Someone has asked if it will lead to further cases. You don’t know with COVID ... That’s why we are encouraging everyone who has been to any of the exposure sites, anyone who is showing symptoms, please go and get tested. “We are ramping up the staff, expanding hours. They will be open until 10pm tonight, and depending on demand, open until 10pm tomorrow night. And 10pm on Christmas Eve and Christmas. If you see the sites he went to – nightclubs, shopping centres, bars, museums, restaurants, he has been to lots of places, so lots of people who have potentially been exposed. McGowan is asked if he is disappointed in the backpacker because he didn’t get tested earlier. He is a backpacker. He felt unwell. At the time he left Queensland, there had only been a handful of cases in the whole state reported when he left Queensland and came here. I don’t think he would have been thinking he could have been Covid-positive, but it turns out he was. McGowan is asked if visitor restrictions will be put in place for Christmas Day. Christmas Day will proceed as normal. The mask-wearing mandate applies in all public indoor settings, workplaces, shopping centres, hospitality venues, public transport. All indoor settings – hospitals, wherever you might be, except for family homes, those sorts of family lunches and get-togethers. Obviously we are not going to put in place a mask mandate for those. McGowan is asked why WA is not going into lockdown. We are at around 84% double-dosed over 12s, but the over 16s it is obviously even higher. I expect this event will mean far more vaccination occurs, so here we are at very high levels of vaccination – in fact, almost world-leading vaccination. This gives us a level of protection. That’s why I have been saying it, banging on about it, every day for months on end – please go and get vaccinated because you never know what’s around the corner. He came in one hour before the hard border went up with Queensland. He has arrived. We hope there hasn’t been community spread, but there may have been. That’s why we are taking the steps to protect ourselves if there has been spread of the virus. McGowan says the type of venues the Covid-positive person visited and the length of time he was infectious means they have to take these steps. I think [the number of contacts] is in the hundreds. As you can see, he is a backpacker who went out and went to nightclubs, bars, museums, restaurants, and it is in the hundreds. That’s why we are so concerned. He has been to events where there has been lots of dancing, lots of fun, lots of interaction by lots of people in close proximity. That’s why we are concerned about it. Some people are saying we are going too far in our reaction to this because it is one case, but the venues he has been to and the length of time he has been infectious means we have to take these steps. McGowan says this was not what anyone wanted before Christmas. I know this is not the news we wanted to hear two days before Christmas, but unfortunately this is the reality of Covid-19. No matter how hard our border controls ... [Covid] can sneak into Western Australia. We now need to face the potential of community transmission in Perth and Peel. That is why I am asking everyone to please do the right thing over this period. McGowan is introducing some changes to the Perth and Peel region: From six o’clock tonight until at least six o’clock in the morning on Tuesday, December 28 the following rules will apply across Perth and Peel. Masks will be mandatory in all public indoor settings including workplaces, shopping centres, hospitality venues and public transport. The mask mandate will not apply to the home and will not apply people doing vigorous indoor exercise. We are recommending masks be worn outside when you cannot physically distance, so we’re urging people just to use common sense. High-risk, large public events like music festivals will be cancelled during this period and all nightclubs closed. All dancing is banned except for weddings. In addition, the mask rules will apply to anyone who has been in Perth or Peel since Thursday, 16 December and are now located in a different part of the state. McGowan has listed multiple exposure sites – which I will post at the end – and says if you’ve visited them, you need to get tested. The backpacker has been checking in which has enabled us to identify a comprehensive picture of the man’s movements since his arrival in Perth. This has allowed contact tracers to reach out to hundreds of people who have checked in at the same location. It is also an important reminder for us to keep checking in, now more than ever. Obviously some people have dropped away from checking in, but this proves that we need to make sure that if one does the right things that we can keep track of any potential outbreaks. Health staff are very busy working to piece together a clearer picture of the level of risk to our community, but as we know when it comes to Covid, the situation can change very dramatically and very quickly. McGowan says the backpacker is not vaccinated; his girlfriend is symptomatic and has been moved into hotel quarantine. Further investigations have confirmed he has been living with four other people at a house in Girrawheen. These four people have been camping, but they have since been contacted and are now undergoing testing. They will also be directed into hotel quarantine. Health has identified several exposure sites across Perth. Premier Mark McGowan is up. WA has one new local Covid case. In this case it is a backpacker, case 1133, who travelled into Western Australia from Queensland earlier this month, a 25-year-old man who was originally from France. He felt sick on Sunday and got tested yesterday. The result came through this morning and it was a strong positive. The advice at this point is that it is unlikely to be the Omicron strain and therefore more likely to be the Delta variant. Investigations have confirmed the backpacker came into Western Australia 11 days ago on Sunday night December 12. The WA premier, Mark McGowan and health minister, Amber-Jade Sanderson, will hold a press conference soon with updates on the pandemic. The Royal Australasian College of Physicians (RACP) has welcomed the reintroduction and extension of vital Covid-19 public health measures. Dr Jacqueline Small, president-elect of the RACP, has expressed relief governments have moved in line with the RACP’s recommendations and those of the country’s senior public health advisers. “What we are seeing with Omicron is that it spreads at lightning speed, and if we don’t take action now, we will have even more challenging times ahead of us,” Small said. “The unprecedented climb in case numbers in NSW shows why we urgently needed public health measures to be put back in place. “We strongly welcome the state governments’ decisions to reintroduce or maintain mask mandates, in addition to QR code check-ins and density limits. Modelling by the Doherty Institute earlier this week had shown the need to remain flexible and prepared to reintroduce certain public health measures, Small said. “We have to ensure that people can continue living their lives and celebrate this time of the year with their loved ones while minimising risks to their health and safety. “These proportionate actions help keep all in our community safer and ensure the health system can meet the needs of those who become unwell,” Small said. Queensland’s deputy premier, Steven Miles, has called in an application mining magnate Clive Palmer made to a regional council to build a large coal-fired power station. Palmer’s application to the Barcaldine regional council was seen by conservationists as an attempt to sidestep consultation on the plan, which Miles himself had suggested could be a “thought bubble.” Miles said this afternoon: “Barcaldine regional council has never assessed a project of this size. This call-in allows the state to address a broader range of matters than the council was able to under their planning scheme. “This will include seeking public comment on the project. I want to make sure the community get their say on a project of this scale.” Palmer’s Waratah Coal company made the application in February 2020 to build a 1,400-megawatt power station near the tiny town of Alpha, about 390 kilometres west of Rockhampton. Waratah Coal has an undeveloped but approved coal mine project about 30 kilometres north of Alpha, and Waratah coal says the mine project is dependent on the power plant. After Miles said last month he intended to call the project in, Waratah Coal wrote that the power plant would have lower emissions than other plants and provide jobs and cheap power to the state, and said the application through the council was appropriate. Dave Copeman, the director of Queensland Conservation Council, said the project should be stopped. “Minister Miles has acted responsibly by calling in this project. Proper government assessment will find what Queenslanders already know; we cannot build a new coal-fired power station in the face of the worsening climate crisis. “New coal in Queensland would lock consumers into higher prices and get in the way of our chance to fully embrace the opportunities of becoming a renewable energy superpower. “Queenslanders want a vibrant and innovative future that takes advantage of new renewable energy technology, not outdated, toxic coal-fired power.” While we’re on SA – I have this from AAP: South Australia’s Covid-19 cases have more than doubled in 24 hours, setting a record for the seventh consecutive day as the paramedics union warns the hospital system isn’t coping. SA Health reported 484 new cases on Thursday, taking the number of new infections since the state’s borders opened a month ago to 1307. Seven people are in hospital with one man in his 30s on a ventilator. SA now has 1214 active infections, most being managed in home isolation. The big jump in cases came as the Ambulance Employees Association said suspected and positive coronavirus patients were kept waiting in ramped ambulances outside the Royal Adelaide Hospital overnight in further evidence of the stress on the healthcare system. Taking to social media on Thursday, the Ambulance Employees Association said one crew was sent to three “severely unwell” Covid-19 patients overnight. It said two patients were ultimately transported in one ambulance while another crew eventually arrived to take the third patient. “Treating paramedics almost ran out of oxygen, they ran out of medications,” the association said. “They were calling for intensive care back-up with none available. Our healthcare system is not coping.” But the premier, Steven Marshall, said all the patients taken to hospital were treated appropriately. “They were triaged, they were treated within the clinically appropriate time frame,” he said. “Our clinicians treat people in accordance to their acuity and the advice I’ve received is that’s exactly what happened.” Marshall said of the four cases transferred to hospital overnight, three were from the same family, so it was acceptable for them to travel in the same ambulance. More on the SA Covid situation here: Western Australian fire authorities are preparing for maximums of more than 40 degrees across WA in the coming days. Fire and emergency services commissioner, Darren Klemm, addressed the media a little earlier and warned total fire bans are likely to be introduced soon. The forecast weather conditions present significant challenges from a fire weather point of view. [There are] some challenges around the health and wellbeing of those people responding, so it is important from our point of view that everyone plays a role. Total fire bans are likely to be placed in certain parts of the south-western state. They get decided around 4pm on each day for the next day, and people need to monitor WA to make sure that they are aware what bans are [in place] in the area they will be in on any day. Comments from Chris Minns, NSW Labor leader on rule changes: NSW Labor welcomes the decision by the NSW Government to back our calls for a mask mandate, and to reintroduce the 2SQM rule. We’ve already said this is a health crisis and is above politics. Whatever levers we can pull to get this pandemic under control, short of a lockdown, should be used. We all want to avoid a lockdown, and today’s announcements are sensible steps that the community, experts, and Labor have been calling for. We are in a position of strength to get through this, with some of the highest vaccination rates in the world. The NSW transport minister, David Elliott, says he has put brakes on the easing of capacity limits on public transport until January next year. In a statement, he said: This afternoon I instructed Transport for NSW Secretary Rob Sharp to cease the further easing of customer capacity limits on public transport services until late January 2022. Customer capacity limits and green dots across all modes of public transport were set to be removed on Friday 31 December 2021. In light of the current environment and measures announced by the Premier today, I have directed this work to be delayed to keep commuters and staff safe. The current capacity limit of 75 per cent of customers on any public transport service will remain in place. Masks are mandatory for anyone using public transport services across the network. SA Health says seven people are now in hospital, including a child. One man in his 30s is in the Royal Adelaide Hospital on a ventilator. Two new people are in hospital. Two separate fires have broken out in a hotel housing refugees and asylum seekers in Melbourne. Shortly after 1.30pm on Thursday, fire crews and police were called to the five-storey Park Hotel in Carlton – where 34 asylum seekers are being held – after an automatic fire alarm was triggered. Wearing breathing apparatus, some of the 30 firefighters on scene “entered the building and worked to contain the fires, bringing the incident under control at 2.11pm”. Crews are still on scene extinguishing flames and ventilating the building, a Fire Rescue Victoria spokeswoman said. There were fires on the third and fourth levels of the hotel, including one in a room. It is not clear how the fires started. While the FRV spokeswoman said “all occupants were safely evacuated” and some patients were transferred to ambulances, Ian Rintoul, spokesman for the Refugee Action Coalition, said the asylum seekers, who are staying on levels two and three of the building, were evacuated to level one. Mehdi Ali, one of the asylum seekers being held at the hotel, tweeted that authorities were “keeping us in the building instead of taking us to a safe place”. Victoria Police and FRV will investigate the cause of the fires. Additional reporting: Ben Doherty OK, that was a big presser for NSW. Let’s recap on the big changes: From midnight tonight, masks indoors will be mandatory – that’s until January 27. Next year, rapid antigen tests will be provided for free, but how that will be rolled out is yet to be determined. QR codes will be brought back in a limited way in low-risk settings. People have been asked to work from home if they can. The one person per two square metres rule in indoor hospitality will be reintroduced from 27 December to 27 January. And people in the state are being asked that, unless they are feeling unwell or they have been specifically told to get a PCR test, don’t get one. Hazzard is asked about visitors to households and if they will be restricted for NYE. The phrase I have used is ‘never say never’. We are in a pandemic, one in 100 years; we are keeping it under review, we will make changes as necessary and take public health advice where appropriate. At this stage my view is, Christmas, you know what? Last year we had the northern beaches locked down for Christmas, then we had parts of the eastern suburbs locked down, and parts of western Sydney – we need a break. We need people, as the premier said many times, to take some responsibility for themselves, but we don’t want to impose unnecessary restrictions. Take it easy folks, don’t have too many people over to your house. Open the windows. Hazzard says his advice to the federal government is that NSW “will do our bit”, but he is glad the feds are offering GPs and pharmacists more money. If you’re a pharmacist and already tired from two years of the pandemic, 23 months on Christmas Day, you’re only making $16 a pop for a job, you won’t be too keen because you’ll make a lot more money selling things across the counter, doing prescriptions. The fact the federal government have now said they will step up and pay additional funds to GPs and pharmacists – we should say thank you to the prime minister and thank you to the federal health minister, and hopefully that’ll make a difference. Hazzard says the majority of cases are young people. 10- to 39-year-olds occupy 70% of all of our positive cases. He says one positive case in Newcastle resulted in 250 positive cases. Look after yourself and don’t actually start hanging too close together with people you probably don’t know all that well. As we saw in Newcastle, one person went for a party boat and turned 250 people into positive cases in one nightclub in one night. We are striking a balance of personal responsibility – get sensible, folks, don’t try and mingle too closely with people you don’t know. In some cases, even with people you know. But also, if you can, get vaccinated. Hazzard is back up now: I’d like to see the federal government get advice from Atagi to bring forward the vaccinations [boosters] from the five-month point to the four-month point. Perrottet says the government hopes to offer free rapid antigen tests in 2022. Perrottet has just been asked about elective surgeries – he says the state is catching up. At the moment we have a very strong position and the health team – and I’ll ask a minister to make further comments on this, to give more direction – we are still bringing forward and catching up to those elective surgeries that we had to delay from last year. Perrottet says the pandemic is a balance of health and economic choices. This pandemic is a balancing act and we balance the health needs with the mental health needs, with the economic needs. The decisions of the NSW government has kept our state strong. People are working, being kept safe, low death rate, ICU presentations are incredibly manageable at the moment, particularly given where our case numbers are. We are in a strong position in our state, and the slight changes we have made as we move through until 27 January are modest but cautious, to make sure New South Wales gets through the holiday season ... they will play some role but ultimately, personal responsibility plays the key role. Someone has asked about NSW businesses having to shut if they have a case, because of staff isolating. Perrottet: The alternative is we close everything down. It’s very similar to the challenges we have seen in the school system. We brought kids back into the classroom as quickly as possible which meant from time to time, schools had to close. That was a challenge and difficult, but in the main, schools remained open. We believe the changes made to the close contact definition have made a marked improvement on that front and I’ve heard from the hospitality industry that they have seen a change, but they will be offset as cases increase. This will be a challenging time as we go through 2022 with difficulties, but in the main, we are in a much stronger position. I couldn’t hear the question, but I think it was about the backflip on some measures. Perrottet says: We have always said we tailor the settings ... we have said that through the entire pandemic and that’s what we’re doing today. The concern we have seen [in the past] 48 hours, it is primarily based on health staff and we want to ensure the system is resourced. There are many other pleasing factors so when you look at what we are seeing today, there are a lot more good than bad. The early evidence in relation to Omicron is it is five times less severe than Delta, which is incredibly pleasing. We have seen an increase in ICU but it is very manageable ... we always have our number one priority here in NSW to keep our people safe as we learn to live alongside the virus. We just ask everybody across our state to be cautious over Christmas, treat everyone with kindness and respect, we will get through the other side and we will have a strong 2022. Perrottet is again stressing that if people get pinged from the QR code check-ins, but they don’t feel unwell – they do not need to get a test. Especially when we have a situation when many people in NSW are travelling around the country for holidays to see families, we are doing everything we can to get those test results back as quickly as possible. But if we can reduce the people lining up on those queues who don’t need to do so, that will be very much appreciated from the government and everybody across the state who really does require ... one of those tests. “The last point in relation to that – I look forward to working with the other state premiers about minimising or reducing the time because it is the taxpayers [who] are ... paying for those tests, for people to travel interstate, and the queues are substantial and slowing down the testing but also affecting the health response. Only get a test if you feel unwell or are contacted by health authorities, he said. Perrottet is asking people to use “personal responsibility and common sense and be cautious over the Christmas break.” Perrottet: I think the changes we have made are modest, cautious and precautionary, to make sure, as these case numbers increase over this period of time, that we get through the summer ... and NSW will continue to lead our state out of the pandemic. With the QR codes, the issue for national cabinet’s decision yesterday – it became very apparent to me different states are in different positions. We have much greater cases especially of Omicron; other states aren’t in that position yet but will be eventually. In those circumstances, the effectiveness of having QR codes in every single retail store may work in a WA setting but not necessarily in a NSW or Victoria setting. Perrottet is back – he says the changes they are making today “are proportionate”. While we are seeing low numbers in ICU, very manageable numbers in ICU, it is more in relation to making sure that our health system is able to be well-manned during the summer period. We have already heard from David in relation to NSW Ambulance over the summer months, there are challenges that come our way ... In relation to masks, we are seeing pretty much right across the board, 85% of people wearing masks, that’s incredibly positive. NSW Ambulance acting commissioner David Dutton is up and he is asking people to only call an ambulance in an emergency. Yesterday, we answered an emergency 000 call every 24 seconds. We are asking to save 000 for saving lives. I want to be clear: if somebody is unconscious, if someone has chest pain, somebody has shortness of breath, if there are injuries as a result of a motor vehicle accident – please call emergency 000. I want to be equally clear on the following points: if you can’t sleep, if you have a toothache, if you have a splinter, if you want to check the opening hours of testing clinic, or follow-up on a Covid-19 vaccination, please do not call emergency 000. Those calls that I just referenced potentially delay NSW Ambulance mounting an emergency response, to a member of the community that really needs it. Chant says get vaccinated and wear a mask. Only get tested if you have symptoms or [if] health directs you to, or you know you had contact with someone that is Covid-19 positive. In the current settings, NSW Health will only be contacting and focusing our efforts on people that have entered or worked in high-risk settings. So what we are doing currently as we test people who have a positive result, we give them advice about what they need to do to self-isolate. We also ask them to fill in an online questionnaire. Chant asks people that they dance and sing outside over the festive season. We are introducing those density restrictions and hospitality settings and discouraging activities we know are associated with increased transmission: singing, dancing, things often associated with fun. At this time of year we have to tell it as it is in terms of what are the things associated with risk, especially indoors. Please take those activities outdoors, with lots of social distancing. Chant says more than about 70% of cases are in the age group of 10 to 39-year-olds. It’s really sad to see some very young people in ICU who are not vaccinated. So, again, a big callout to everyone – just because you’re young, this message doesn’t mean you’re necessarily going to be lucky enough to have the mild disease. You can be hit hard. Please get vaccinated. Get your first vaccine, get your second and get your booster. I want to talk about the transmission settings. So at the moment, Covid is circulating in a very young population relatively. We’ve got Kerry Chant now, who says NSW is currently experiencing both the circulation of Delta and the Omicron variant of Covid. Approximately 80% of our cases are currently Omicron. The increase in Omicron largely explains the steep rise in cases. The Delta case numbers did start to rise in mid-December, but we’re now seeing the Delta proportion of cases declining and that large uptick being accounted for by Omicron. Pulling together multiple pieces of evidence from overseas countries such as South Africa and the UK, and using some of our own emerging data, it indicates that infection with Omicron is likely to be milder than infection with Delta, with the risk of hospitalisation being around 60% to 80% less than for Delta. But the issue is the increased transmissibility, leading to high case numbers, and the impact this is having on vulnerable settings, vulnerable people and critical workforces, such as our health and aged care workforce. Hazzard says people who are unvaccinated are still in the ICU. They need to take the opportunity and get the vaccine while they can. In the last couple of weeks, we get the daily announcements on how many people are in ICU but I want to stress people come in and people go out from the ICU. Obviously that’s a good thing when they go out of the ICU, but we had about 60 people in ICU over the last two weeks and 65%, more than two-thirds, are unvaccinated people. Unvaccinated people. My message to those out there who think this is still some sort of pixie-land argument, that it doesn’t exist, is: it does exist. And you might be one of those two-thirds who have ended up in our ICUs in the next week or two or three, it might be you. This is your chance to take it seriously. Hazzard says people need to make sure they get boosters. Because we do know that particularly for older people, and those who had AstraZeneca, whilst it was fabulous for the time, it does have its challenges now [with] its waning effect on immunity, so we need to get a booster. I was one of those. Hazzard says people are also calling out ambulances when they don’t have to and that needs to stop. It’s frustrating for me to hear that ambulances are being called out at a time when we’re so busy dealing with Omicron. Our hospitals and frontline staff are so busy ... people are still thinking that ambulances are for something other than emergencies. They’re not. Ambulances are here for emergencies. Hazzard: If you’re going visiting over the next few days, please don’t go out and just get a PCR test for the sake of it, because next time when you do need a PCR test, seriously, you may not be able to get it because too many people go out and use our pathology system to that extent. Hazzard says testing is “a bit of an issue”. There are too many tests. Go back 22 months, we were excited when we were up around 40,000 tests. We’re now four times that amount, 160,000 tests. But it is sucking the energy out of all the frontline pathology workers, the people who are doing it, doing the tests, people who are then doing the pathology examinations, the administration, people who are sending the details out. I would ask everybody to listen very carefully to the message that if you don’t need to go – if you haven’t got symptoms or haven’t received a message telling you that you must have a PCR test – probably you don’t need to have a PCR test. Move your celebrations into the open air, Hazzard says. Anything you can do over the next few days, if you’re having people around to your house, try and do it out on the balcony or backyard, or if you can’t do that, open all the windows. What we do know is Omicron is not terribly successful when it’s out in the fresh air. It tends to get us when we’re inside in closed environments. Be very cautious. Brad Hazzard is up now – he says “it’s too early” to tell what will happen with Omicron. The Omicron virus seems to be challenging, it is very transmissible. So far it hasn’t been causing the level of anxiety medically that previous variants did. But we’re on high alert. The government is on high alert. I think the community should be on high alert. We don’t know yet. It’s too early. Perrottet: I do know there has been a fair bit of frustration out there. Many people waiting hours in queues, particularly as we come into Christmas. We’re doing everything we can to alleviate that pressure. In addition to the PCR testing, if you’re unwell and those people from New South Wales ... if you aren’t feeling unwell, please do not get a PCR test. Perrottet is now addressing the testing times – he says if you are not unwell, but get a ping through the QR code system, please don’t get a PCR test. At the moment what we’re seeing is that many people across the state who are asymptomatic and do not feel unwell are lining up for a PCR test. This is putting enormous pressure on the system and I thank everybody for their patience as we go through this period of time. But we need to make sure those people who need to get tested get tested in a timely way. If you aren’t feeling unwell ... [if] you receive a notification through the QR code system, the position that we have here in New South Wales is monitor for symptoms. If you do feel unwell, at that point in time, please go and get a PCR test. Perrottet is now talking about the change in QR codes. Many of you will be aware we’ve had those QR codes in place for some time. We kept them in place for high-risk settings. What we will do in relation to retail settings and lower-risk settings is we’ll bring them back in a limited way. The reason we removed those QR codes I think has been slightly misunderstood. It’s not in terms of opening up the economy, it’s to provide the support to the health system. Perrottet says there will also be density limits. We’ll be moving from hospitality venues indoors to two square metres from December 27 to January 27. And also the indoor face mask requirement will also be in place until January 27 as well. That’s just to ensure, as we move through this period of time, we do have that support for our health officers over this summer and holiday period. In addition to that, we’re encouraging people not to mingle ... when you’re out and about at a restaurant or cafe or a pub or a club, please, where possible, don’t mingle. We know that from a case we’ve seen in Newcastle, that singing and dancing and the like has been part of that increase in spread. So we just ask everybody use personal responsibilities, please be cautious as we move through this phase. Perrottet says masks will be mandated inside. As of midnight tonight, we will be requiring that masks are worn in indoor settings. We are encouraging people, particularly over the holiday period, if you can work from home, please work from home. Perrottet says, “it looks like the Omicron [variant] will be five times less severe than Delta.” Perrottet says NSW will be getting 300,000 boosters a week in January. That will be crucial. It’s our best line of defence as we move through this next phase of the pandemic. I want to thank everybody who has gone out and made the effort. Perrottet is talking about boosters, and says the numbers are good. If it’s been five months since your second vaccination, the booster shot is key to keeping you and your family safe, and to see now that health has administered 158,000 booster shots as of December 22 is incredibly pleasing. I congratulate the prime minister and the federal treasurer for their decision yesterday to provide additional financial support for our GPs and pharmacists who will be taking a heavier load when it comes to the booster shots over this period of time, particularly over the next four months. Perrottet begins by thanking frontline health workers. [They] have done an amazing job over the last two years, and particularly going through this most recent period of time, with significant vaccination and our booster shots required. I want to thank you on behalf of the government and the people of our great state for the continued effort in keeping our people safe. Perrottet is up now. We are just waiting for NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, who is expected to address media any moment now ... Here’s more on QLD’s numbers – one person in ICU. Melbourne airport is now only doing pre-departure Covid-19 testing for international flights on the day of departure: From AAP: Queensland planning minister, Steven Miles, will scrutinise an application for a controversial coal-fired power station proposed by Clive Palmer’s Waratah Coal. Waratah, a subsidiary of Palmer’s Mineralogy, submitted a development application for the power plant with Barcaldine regional council in central Queensland. The application was made under a 2006 planning scheme that does not require public consultation. But Miles has called in the application, saying this will make sure a thorough planning assessment can be made on the project and the community get their say. “Barcaldine regional council has never assessed a project of this size,” he said. “This call in allows the state to address a broader range of matters than the council was able to under their planning scheme.” Calling in the project places approval of the power station in the state government’s hands. An earlier notice proposing the call in gave people the chance to make representations which had been considered together with the council’s initial assessment. A Northern Territory environmental group has won a court battle over a Morrison government grant to develop the Beetaloo basin onshore gas field. The Environment Centre NT argued in federal court that the $21m grant for exploration wells was legally unreasonable on multiple grounds. Justice John Griffiths on Friday rejected arguments that the resources minister, Keith Pitt, should have considered the risks of increasing greenhouse gas emissions when he made the grants. And we’ve just found out there will be a NSW Covid update at 2.30pm with premier Dominic Perrottet, minister for health Brad Hazzard, CHO Dr Kerry Chant, and NSW Ambulance acting commissioner David Dutton. A big lineup there! In closing Fyles thanks frontline health workers. In closing want to acknowledge our frontline staff. They’ve worked incredibly hard. It has been a gruelling 20 months and I think all of us thought, heading into the Christmas period, that would be an opportunity to take stock and prepare for the new year, but Covid is here and it has proved a significant challenge. So from the centre to the top end, whether it’s people delivering vaccination, people in our hospitals, or in our quarantine facilities, thank you for all your efforts to our Aboriginal medical organisations. Thank you, and now can we wish you a safe and merry Christmas. NT health minister, Natasha Fyles, says vaccinations are the best gift you can give for Christmas. While it is slowly creeping up ... We’re seeing a number each day, but we certainly would like to see more people vaccinated, and I again reiterate my message about how safe and effective the vaccine is. Of those new cases, five of them are linked to the Tennant Creek outbreak and locally acquired. Currently, there are 11 people in hospital with Covid and one, a woman in her 60s, is in ICU. And that’s it from Hunt. To recap: Hunt said the public health measures discussed at national cabinet had started in some states and territories. 1.8 million Australians have received their booster shot. And while Omicron is becoming the dominant strain, we are not seeing an increase in the seriousness of cases in ICU. Hunt has pivoted from attacking Labor to thank Australians for getting boosters. “Having said that, I want to thank Australians for coming forward to be vaccinated. “Thank Australians for coming forward in record numbers to be boosted, 167,000 boosters yesterday, 54,000 of those in pharmacies. The states have indicated they’ll be stepping up and restoring the capacity, which understandably was wound down when the first and second doses were being completed. “We can do this. We know how to do this as a country. We have done this before. We’ll do it again, no change in ventilation numbers on the latest advice I have, we’ll keep Australians safe, but Australians are doing their part as well. Thank you very much.” Hunt has been asked about remarks Anthony Albanese made this morning about testing sites. This is what Albanese said: “Overwhelmingly, people are waiting in queues because the governments haven’t prepared. The federal government shut down a whole lot of the testing areas.” Hunt has said this is false. “For Mr Albanese to make a false, untrue, incorrect, inaccurate statement, either without thinking or deliberate knowing it was a lie, is the act of someone who is not fit to be prime minister,” Hunt said. Hunt was asked if Vic was prudent to implement mask mandate indoors. “It’s entirely a matter for Victoria.” Hunt has been asked about Victoria mandating masks: “We’re encouraging people, as a result of the advice to national cabinet, to use masks in indoor settings. “It’s a matter for states and territories. But states and territories with their public health orders, whether it’s the QR codes in New South Wales, the masks in Victoria, have responded well.” “I think that it’s very important to show that national cabinet is delivering safer outcomes, but without constraining people’s lives. Across the board, I welcome the actions of the different states.” Hunt is asked about why we are seeing private health providers delay their premiums. “In terms of private health providers – one of the things that we have done is encourage them to have as low a premium as possible, and where they can give people no change for longer, then that’s even better. “And I’m pleased that they’ve responded. The lowest change in 21 years and if some of them have deferred that change, that means people are paying lower premiums for longer. “And so, I think that that is a really good outcome.” Hunt has been asked about how many aged care residents have had their boosters. “We’ve had over 1,500 aged care facilities receive their boosters. “Every aged care facility that has been able and willing to receive, because they were eligible and they were ready, has had their deliveries done so far. “Those that are still to be done are on the basis of their own timing. And so, we’re well ahead of schedule. We’re about 300 facilities ahead of where we’d anticipated and expected to have been.” Hunt is asked if we are equipped to deal with any change to the booster timeline and if hospitals can deal with Omicron. “I have requested that Atagi plans and focuses on continuous review about the booster program. They’ve already shortened it from six months to five months. “There’s the eligibility period. And in that time, what we’ve seen is 1.15 million doses in a 10-day period delivered with regard to boosters. And that’s now tracking at over 160,000 a day.” On Omicron: “But ventilation a week ago was 54 patients with Covid around Australia. As of yesterday, there were still 54 patients on ventilation with Covid. “So despite the increase in case numbers, there had been zero increase in ventilated patients numbers. ICU – what we see is that a week ago, there were 109 patients in ICU. “As of yesterday, the figures provided at midday today by the National Incident Centre, there were 112. So an increase of only three patients in a week. So the two things that we know - the hospital system is well equipped ... “The second thing is, despite an increase in case numbers, we’re not seeing an increase in the serious cases of ICU or ventilation in any significant way, with no increase in ventilation on the latest numbers that I have. “Now, these things can change. There can be a lag. So we’re fully prepared and I don’t want to make false promises on that.” And Hunt says public health measures discussed at national cabinet yesterday have started in some states and territories. “The states and territories have begun to implement the measures discussed yesterday at national cabinet. “There are measures in relation to QR codes in New South Wales and masks in some states and territories. “In terms of vaccination clinics in Victoria. That’s matched with the additional $10 for vaccinations by GPs and pharmacists under the commonwealth system which is being paid immediately as of today. “So, I want to thank all of those people for coming forward. They’re helping themselves. They’re helping their friends, their family and they’re helping to protect the country.” Hunt says there’s been a 2.7% increase in private health insurance - which is the lowest in 21 years. “At the same time, I’m really pleased that we’ve just achieved the lowest change in private health insurance fees in 21 years. “A 2.7% increase. We’ve had progressively the lowest change during my time in 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and now 21 years. “And so, the lowest change in private health insurance in 21 years. That’s good for families. That’s good for private health insurance and what we’ve seen as a result is five successive quarters of an increase in private health insurance uptake. “It takes the pressure off the public hospitals. It shares the load across the system and it means that the Australian model of public and private - it’s not as reliant on the public as the UK system. “It’s not as reliant on the private as the US system. It means that the Australian model is not just being sustained, but it’s strengthening.” Greg Hunt is speaking in Melbourne now – he says the rates of bulk billing are up and that’s a good thing. “We have had bulk billing increase to 89.6% in the July-to-September quarter. “So the last quarter is up 0.7% in terms of bulk billing. And what does bulk-billing mean? “It means that now almost nine in ten visits to the doctor are completely free for people. And that’s a really extraordinary national achievement. “Again, thank you to our GPs and our clinicians right across the country. This is approximately 7.9% higher than for the same period immediately prior to the Coalition coming into government. So a nearly 8% increase in bulk-billing over the life of the Coalition. “It just means more services, more people, more people able to access the doctor without having to dip into their pocket.” With that, I will pass you on to Cait Kelly, who will keep you company for the rest of the afternoon. We are still waiting to hear from Greg Hunt, who was due to front the media at 12.30pm. Over in the ACT, testing numbers have eased at Nicholls but Mitchell’s drive through testing centre is still at capacity. As of 12pm: Mitchell drive through testing clinic (open 8am to 10pm): at capacity Garran testing clinic (open 7.30am to 9pm): 3 hours 30 minutes+ Kambah drive through testing clinic (open 8am to 6pm*): 2 hours+ Nicholls testing clinic (open 8am to 6pm*): 15 minutes+ Still at the Victorian press conference, Foley says fines for mask wearing will vary between $500 and $1,000. There has been no confirmation as to whether he accepted all the advice of the chief health officer but this will eventually be tabled in parliament under the pandemic legislation. The ABC is reporting two positive cases have been identified in Alice Springs. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese is strolling in to throw in his two cents around the same time as Greg Hunt (due to front the media at 12.15pm). The Victorian Chamber of Commerce and Industry says it would have preferred mask-wearing to be a choice, but recognises it will allow venues to stay open without density limits: A reporter asks if Victoria is looking at going in the same direction as Western Australia, which has become the first jurisdiction to mandate a third vaccination dose. Sutton: I have got no advice on that at the moment. I think people are super keen to get the booster. We need to make it available. We need to ensure that appropriate numbers are available and then see how the booster coverage goes. A reporter asks the difference between getting a booster at four months verses five. Sutton: We can’t say with absolute certainty, and that is why this is not an easy space to provide advice in order to lead a position, but we need to respond to what is in front of us right now as an immediate and urgent concern. That is my view, and I know that people are at risk without the booster dose and I want to see them, especially those that are most at risk ... to have access to the booster ... we can say for certain that people who have not received the booster are at greater risk of dying and ICU. Reporter: So the difference between four and five months? Sutton: The difference is who is eligible to get it right now as we face large numbers of Omicron and having those individuals eligible and perceiving that booster will protect them. We need as many people in that category already boosted as we possibly can, especially those at risk of dying. Sutton is asked: why mandate instead of strongly encourage masks? The difference between highly recommending something and mandating something is the level of compliance that we see. I have just pointed out to you the masks that we saw come off as soon as we went from mandate to strongly recommended. We usually get about 50% levels of cooperation or compliance with a strong recommendation. It goes to 95-99% with a mandate. Why would you introduce a half measure when you need the full measure to be in place? This was the PM yesterday on mask mandates: Sutton reasserts the importance of ventilation and socialising outdoors coming up to Christmas. He made a video about this. Perhaps our TikTok aficionado Matilda Boseley has met her match! I have made a video recently about the importance of ventilation. Meeting outdoors, critically important. If you can, please do. If you can open doors and windows wherever possible if you are meeting indoors, please do. I will be doing a little round for Christmas to open doors and windows whenever I am inside. The video: Victoria’s chief health officer Brett Sutton is up. He got his third dose yesterday, and has a satisfyingly sore right arm. We are reporting over 16,000 doses delivered through state run centres yesterday. That is double what it was a week ago, and a week ago is double what it was the week before that, so it is really ramping up which is fantastic. We also hit another milestone today - 5 million vaccinations delivered through services. A huge effort. One of the biggest in Australia if not the biggest, and as the acting premier said, we have built one of the most vaccinated societies on earth. That puts us in just a fantastic position - a wall of immunity to meet Omicron and it means that we can go ahead with much more confidence than other places in the world ... I know Victorians are concerned about what summer might have ahead, but again, our current vaccination rates are very important in measuring our individual and collective protection. We know that two doses provide good protection against severe illness against hospitalisation, against ending up in ICU. The booster dose, and the evidence is increasing day by day, provides even greater protection against severe illness and hospitalisation. Some 28 more pop-up vaccination sites will open in the coming weeks throughout Victoria, and the current 50 sites will extend opening hours to 12 hours a day, seven days a week. The site at the Royal Exhibition Building will stay open as the “iconic flagship site” well into late March 2022. Health minister Martin Foley is up, confirming Victoria is in a “strong position” by any measure worldwide to combat the new variant. In addition to mask mandates, there are new “recommendations”, not orders, to have in place for the festive season. One is working from home, and the second is a recommendation for hospitality venues to, “when they can”, stick to seated service and save dance floors for outdoor, well-ventilated areas. We acknowledge that Victorians have done so much to go out and get vaccinated in such strong numbers. And we’ve delivered on our part of the national plan for reopening. But a new variant of concern has arisen globally and we need to take measures to protect our community from that rapidly spreading variant whilst our health experts ... understand what it means for our community going into 2022. On advice of the chief health officer, the health minister will introduce additional measures to slow the spread of Omicron in Victoria, to remain in place until 12 January. From 11.59 tonight: Face masks will be required in all indoor settings, except private homes, for persons eight and over. Face masks will also be required at major outdoor events for people over 30,000 people. They can be removed when seated. Work from home if you can over the festive period. This is a recommendation. Merlino announces investment in a “major boost” to support the third dose rollout, including more than $31 million to support the commonwealth vaccination program while waiting for Atagi to provide advice on the potential shortening of the interval between a third vaccination dose. I want to be really clear. The interval needs to be shortened and the interval needs to be shortened immediately. That’s the view of Victoria. That’s the view of New South Wales. That’s the view of jurisdictions across the country. It is the clear public health advice we are getting. The interval needs to be shortened and it needs to be shortened immediately. We’re announcing today that we are ready to scale up to meet that demand so this new investment will enable a massive scale-up to support a major expansion of our state-run vaccination centres. Victoria’s acting premier James Merlino is up alongside health minister Martin Foley and chief health officer Brett Sutton, announcing changes to come into effect in response to the new variant. Merlino says Victoria is in one of the “strongest positions” around the world to combat Omicron because of high vaccination rates. Victoria is not considering going into lockdown. As a Victorian even the word “lockdown” is triggering. Tasmania’s premier Peter Gutwein has been providing a Covid update after 26 cases were recorded in the state. There has been no community transmission yet, but it is expected cases will pop up in the days ahead. Gutwein has ordered 100,000 rapid antigen tests to add to the current stockpile, which can be purchased at chemists and supermarkets. Someone PCR test that snake stat: Back to Palaszczuk, who says testing delays “are not just [because of] Queensland”. Let’s be very clear about this, it’s a bit Sydney-sided at the moment ... our response is we have always kept Queenslanders safe, and the measures in place were the measures outlined in the roadmap and the roadmap stands. The press conferences are rolling in, and in a quite civilised manner. We’ll be hearing from Victoria’s acting premier soon, followed by health minister Greg Hunt from Mount Martha. Case numbers in the ACT are in, and they’re up again. There have been 85 new Covid cases. There are three people being treated in hospital, but fortunately none in ICU, and no deaths. Some 123 confirmed Omicron cases have been detected in Queensland, but there’s likely to be more as there’s also a lag in testing, Gerrard says: We’ve tested 123 confirmed Omicron viruses, but there’s a lag in our testing. There’s a lag until we know the total numbers of Omicron. It’s clear that Omicron is becoming dominant and will dominate henceforth. We continue to see infections across the state. So wherever you live, you need to assume that you will be exposed in the coming weeks to this virus. Queensland’s chief health officer John Gerrard is up, making an interesting point about the “necessary” spread of the virus through the state. Masks and other social measures won’t stop the virus but slow it “a little bit” until we receive our third vaccination, he says. I think it is important at times like this as the numbers increase that we reflect on what exactly we are trying to do and where we are going. The spread of this virus, which is now this particular strain Omicron, is extremely contagious. Not only is the spread of this virus inevitable, it is necessary. In order for us to go from the pandemic phase to an endemic phase, the virus has to be widespread. We all have to have immunity. You will all have to develop immunity. There’s two ways you can do that - by being vaccinated or getting infected. There are only two choices, only two ways to do that. And once we’ve done that, once the virus is spreading, once we all have some degree of immunity, the virus becomes endemic, and that is what is going to happen. Queensland is now at 90.1% single dose targets. But the premier is concerned about lagging vaccination rates on the Gold Coast, a major tourist hotspot. We’re on the beautiful Gold Coast but I am still worried that vaccine coverage is not high enough here on the Gold Coast, which is one of the reasons we’re doing this press conference here today. Across the south-east of our state, essentially every area is above 90% except the Gold Coast region. Logan, Ipswich, where we had a huge vaccine drive, they have hit over 90%. In Brisbane, they’re heading towards 95%. On the Gold Coast, it’s 88.8%. This is a tourism hotspot. This is where the tourists are coming from just across the border. If you have not been vaccinated, go and see your GP or your pharmacist or one of our vaccination centres today. It is absolutely imperative that we drive up the vaccination rates on the Gold Coast. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk is providing a Covid update. The state has recorded 369 new Covid cases, which she says will inevitably rise. Positive cases have been detected across the state - in Brisbane, Central Queensland, Gympie, Noosa, Redland, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba, Townsville and the Whitsundays. There is currently one person in intensive care, with “other medical issues”. Wait times for Covid tests are out in South Australia: Heavy rainfall and a possible thunderstorm warning is in place over the Central Coast. The latest update from ACT Health is out, and all testing clinics are currently at capacity. As of 10.15 am: Mitchell drive-through testing clinic (open 8am to 10pm): at capacity Garran testing clinic (open 7.30am to 9pm): 2 hours 30 minutes+ Kambah drive-through testing clinic (open 8am to 6pm*): 2 hours 30 minutes+ Nicholls testing clinic (open 8am to 6pm*): 2 hours 30 minutes+ We are experiencing high demand for testing this morning and all our testing clinics are at capacity right now. Please do not queue on the roads, and come back later. We apologise for any inconvenience this may cause, however the safety of staff and our community is paramount. Victoria’s health minister Martin Foley will be up later today. No word yet on whether any changes to restrictions will be made in the state. Federal opposition leader Anthony Albanese this morning backed calls for the timing of booster shots to be reduced from five months. All the medical advice from overseas and the experience that we have is that it should be. And I’m sure that Atagi will come up with that recommendation as I’m sure it’s inevitable as well as it is overseas, in order to be considered fully vaccinated, that third shot as the protection against Omicron is particularly important. One of the benefits that we’ve had here in Australia due to our location, where we are, this island continent with natural protections, due to our distance from the world, is that we can see as we did with the first and second waves, we can see what is happening in the rest of the world. And anticipate it and get ahead of it. We need to do that. We need to stop playing catch-up, which is what this prime minister consistently does. Meanwhile, Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk will hold a press conference at Burleigh Heads in roughly half an hour. Tasmania’s numbers are in. There have been 26 new Covid cases reported - a record high for the state. One active case is in hospital for another medical condition. The Police Association Victoria has welcomed the announcement, which it says has been long advocated for as a “critical non-lethal tactical option”. The $215 million rollout comes as the state’s war on crime has seen spending on police, courts and prisons grow at double or triple the rate of other states and territories over the past decade. Victoria’s police minister Lisa Neville is up now alongside chief commissioner Shane Patton. She confirms all Victorian frontline police and PSOs will be equipped with Tasers, which will be linked to body warn cameras. The rollout of 6,000 of the stun guns is expected to take five years. Specialist training will be provided to officers. A 62 year old man has died following a single-vehicle crash in the New South Wales Riverina overnight, NSW police report. Emergency services were called to Shoards Road, north-east of Temora, late last night, following reports a double truck towing two trailers left the roadway and rolled. A passing motorist called emergency services and attempted CPR on the driver until paramedics arrived. The man died at the scene. A report will be prepared by the coroner. Back to Covid, the good news is high testing numbers. The bad news is the reference rate. Some 3.56% of tests are coming back positive in NSW, and 2.36% in Victoria. That’s a significant growth rate in the past week. Looking for a useful distraction from the pandemic this morning? How about a dip into Guardian staff’s funniest things we saw on the internet. I laughed out loud at this more than once, and not just at my own contribution (the guy with a phone full of QR codes). Thanks as ever to Matilda Boseley for guiding us through this morning’s news and bringing us Jacqui Lambie’s elf costume. With that, I shall pass you over to the amazing Caitlin Cassidy who will bring you the rest of the morning’s news! The Omicron variant of coronavirus appears to be milder, with a 20%-25% reduced chance of a hospital visit and at least a 40% lower risk of being admitted overnight, the first UK data of its kind has showed. But as daily Covid cases topped 100,000 for the first time on Wednesday, experts warned that high transmissibility means the NHS is still at risk of being overwhelmed. In what was described by scientists as a “qualified good news story”, two studies on Wednesday pointed to a lower risk of hospitalisation with Omicron. An Imperial College outbreak modelling team led by Prof Neil Ferguson analysed hospitalisations and vaccine records among all PCR-confirmed Covid cases in England between 1 and 14 December. The dataset included 56,000 cases of Omicron and 269,000 cases of Delta. You can read the full report from Ian Sample and Heather Stewart below: No word yet on when we will be getting a health update from Victoria today. Just to put things into perspective: Just to break the absolute doom and gloom that was those Covid numbers, here is Jacqui Lambie dressed as an elf. Looks as though we will be hearing from Anthony Albanese at 11.50am today. NSW daily case numbers have jumped by nearly 2,000 cases today, with 5,715 new cases. According to AAP, 20 testing sites have closed in Melbourne this morning after reaching capacity. Scott Morrison insists it’s not necessary for the states to introduce mask mandates in response to a rapid rise in Covid-19 cases, despite health advice recommending they be compulsory in indoor settings. Speaking after a national cabinet meeting on Wednesday, the prime minister instead said it was “highly recommended” to wear masks indoors, urging Australians to use common sense and to reduce their risk of spreading Covid to their loved ones over Christmas. Health advice circulated to state and territory leaders late last week made the case for mandating masks in all indoor settings, including retail, entertainment facilities and hospitality when not eating and drinking. “Implementation of mask wearing measures should occur prior to Omicron case escalation to have maximum benefit,” said the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee advice. You can read the full report below: A man is dead after a triple stabbing in a western Sydney park and a teenager is fighting for his life in hospital, reports AAP. NSW police were called to a reserve at Catlin Close, Whalan, about 7.30pm on Wednesday. Officers found three men – aged 40, 25 and 19 – with stab wounds. The 40-year-old died at the scene and the two injured men were taken to Westmead hospital for treatment. The youngest man is in a critical condition with injuries to his torso and arm, while the 25-year-old is in a stable condition with a cut to his arm. All three men were known to each other. As Covid cases surge in Australia, attention is turning to how the health system is coping. To track the impact of the spread of the Omicron variant on hospitals, we have brought together the data on hospitalisations and new case numbers – both nationally and across states and territories for the last six months. Cases include those infected locally, overseas and where the source is unknown or under investigation. Due to the difference in reporting times between jurisdictions it can be difficult to get a picture of the numbers, trends and impact on the healthcare system. But the seven-day average of new cases shows how cases are trending in each jurisdiction. Experts say there can be a lag of 10 to 14 days from when cases are reported and subsequent hospitalisations. You can read the full data blog below: The NSW government is considering providing free rapid antigen tests in the mail and it’s likely there will be a return to mandatory QR check-ins at retail and hospitality venues, reports AAP. But premier Dominic Perrottet is still resisting bringing back mask mandates at indoor venues, despite NSW Health urging everyone to wear them in high-risk settings. Covid-19 cases are surging in NSW and testing clinics are being overwhelmed. Some 15,815 people have tested positive since 16 December and yesterday’s record daily caseload of 3,763 infections could be smashed today. Perrottet emerged from yesterday’s national cabinet meeting to flag a plan to provide residents with the rapid tests, which are in short supply and expensive: Providing rapid antigen testing kits for those who want to do the right thing will help take the pressure of our testing clinics while giving people confidence to get on with their lives ... This will also help people monitor their symptoms and go about their daily activities in a responsible manner helping protect themselves, their families and the community. The need to relieve pressure on Covid-19 testing sites across the state is becoming more urgent with just two days until Christmas, after days of long queues at the facilities. People wanting to travel interstate or get the all-clear to attend Christmas celebrations are waiting hours to get a PCR test and about 72 hours to get a result. Restrictions eased in NSW on 15 December for all residents, including the unvaccinated, but the government is now expected to announce it will bring back mandatory QR check-ins at supermarkets, shops and hospitality venues. The ABC is reporting this morning that NSW is poised to reintroduce QR code check-ins as well as provide free rapid antigen testing kits as cases surge in the state. Reportedly there isn’t a strict time frame for when businesses will be required to comply with the reintroduced check in-laws, but we should learn more when Dominic Perrottet speaks today. The ABC reports that free rapid antigen tests are being explored as a way to potentially reduce pressure on Covid-19 testing sites. Covid-19 testing clinics are reducing their openings hours during the Christmas period despite “unprecedented demand” and reports of hours-long wait times in several states. Guardian Australia analysis shows 77% of the 490 testing sites listed on the NSW Health website on Wednesday will either close or operate on reduced hours through the Christmas and new year period. This comes amid record Covid cases in NSW and the highest testing numbers in Victoria since the beginning of the pandemic. Victoria reported 92,262 Covid test results on Wednesday, the most processed in a 24-hour period. In Melbourne overwhelming demand for testing forced at least 14 testing sites across the city to shut from 9.45am, after reaching capacity. You can read the full report below: John Frewen has been asked if the hotly anticipated Novavax will be included in the booster program mix. But it seems we will still have a while to wait: Novavax is still going through the approval process. I know they’re getting closer. We’re looking forward to get Novavax into the mix of available vaccines as well. It won’t be until the new year. I don’t know exactly when. As soon as Novavax is ready to go, we’ll be delighted to get it out there. I know some people have been holding out for Novavax specifically. It will be part of our arsenal and we look forward to helping people access that vaccine if that’s what they want. John Frewen: We have got 5m doses on shelves around the country in GPs and pharmacists. We have got record number of deliveries going in this week. We have had orders placed both before Christmas and for the first week of January, we have got an emergency ordering system in place and we also have a cell within the taskforce that’s helping people get connected to stuff that’s sitting on shelves in GPs and pharmacists not being used. Sometimes it’s a pharmacy or a GP around the corner, sometimes it’s across town. The vaccines are there. I encourage any of these businesses to contact the vaccine operations centre and we’ll have them connected to supply. But I assure you that supply is not a concern. We are working hard on the distribution. And then it’s about that great workforce to get the vaccines into people’s arms. Lieutenant General John Frewen (the army guy who is in charge of all our vaccines) has defended Australia’s booster rollout: The booster rollout is proceeding at speed. I think the queues you may be seeing at the moment may be around the testing regime. We have been hitting record days on boosters. We had almost 2 million people have their boosters over the last few weeks. We adapted very quickly to the Atagi decision to shift from six months to five months. We did that in a matter of days. That decision only happened a little over a week ago. We’re postured ready to respond if Atagi shifts the medical health advice around the booster recommendations again and supply is absolutely not a concern this time around. We have got more vaccines than will be needed over the months ahead. Australia’s peak doctors body has criticised an “unethical” proposal to charge unvaccinated people for their medical care that is being considered by the New South Wales government. The state’s health minister, Brad Hazzard, confirmed the government was looking at forcing people who had not received the jab to pay for their medical bills if they required hospital treatment for Covid. “This is an option under consideration by the NSW government,” Hazzard said in a statement on Wednesday evening after it was first reported by Sydney radio station 2GB. The health minister did not provide any further details about how such a plan would work and did not respond to further questions. You can read the full report from Lane Sainty and Michael McGowan below: Good morning everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley here, and Merry Christmas Eve Eve! As a Christmas treat, I have ... well, more Covid-19 news. Mask regulations are tightening in Queensland cinemas and hospitality venues as Covid-19 case numbers in the state surge into triple figures for the first time. Queensland reported 186 new Covid-19 cases on Wednesday, prompting the state government to ramp up the requirement for mask-wearing. From 5am on Thursday, workers and patrons at theatres and cinemas will be required to wear masks, while staff in hospitality venues such as pubs and restaurants will also have to mask up. Masks are mandated in supermarkets and shops as well as public transport and rideshares. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk vowed Queensland would stay open despite the rapid increase in Omicron infections: We want to keep our restaurants and our cafes and everything operating over Christmas and new year. The rules come as the state on Wednesday hit the 90% threshold for first-dose vaccinations, according to federal government data. Moving south, it’s expected that mandatory QR code check-ins will be reintroduced in high-risk settings in NSW after an informal national cabinet meeting yesterday. These rules were scrapped on 15 December but as case numbers in NSW reached 3,700 yesterday, it appears premier Dominic Perrottet has conceded that Omicron may require some backtracking on the rules. We should learn more when he speaks later in the day. It’s a similar story in Victoria this morning, only this time it’s masks that might be coming back. The acting premier and chief health officer have voiced their support for increased mask-wearing in high-risk settings, so we shall see what the ruling is when they step up later in the day. Well, there is clearly plenty to get through today, so why don’t we jump right into the day!New South Wales’s laissez-faire premier, Dominic Perrottet, has found himself mugged by reality on the cusp of Christmas. Here are the grim statistics that tell us what is happening in NSW: 5,715 new cases reported on Thursday; 1,500 health workers sick or isolating (leaving the health system even more stressed); rising Covid cases in ICU and nearly 150,000 people a day lining up to get tested. Yes, some of these are travellers, who are required to be tested by other states. But most are people who worry they have been exposed and are now wondering whether they should attend Christmas Day with parents or grandparents. In the three weeks since the Omicron variant was first detected here on 28 November, Perrottet has been telling us to go out and spend, head to the pub, get back to normal. A week ago, NSW dropped its last remaining restrictions on mask-wearing, mandatory QR code check-ins and venue capacity limits. “Personal responsibility” was Perrottet’s main mantra. “Living with the virus” was his backup. He even did a gawky media picture opportunity at a pub, downing a schooner. Perrottet’s subtext was that people who wanted the rules on wearing masks indoors to remain – or the continuance of QR codes – were all for NSW being a nanny state. The Liberal premier was backed this week by the prime minister, Scott Morrison, who after national cabinet brushed off the idea of pushing for mask mandates. Premiers and chief ministers would make their own decisions about how best to promote masks, Morrison said, adding that some leaders “like to use mandates” and others “rely on the individual responsibility to achieve that”. “What matters is that people wear them, not whether people get fined,” Morrison said. Most people are wearing masks in retail settings in NSW. But, and here’s the kicker, the problem is the 15-20% who are not. As health authorities have stated, mask-wearing is particularly effective at stopping people who have the virus from breathing it onto others, and somewhat effective at stopping a person breathing in the virus. So dampening transmission depends on everyone doing it. “Implementation of mask-wearing measures should occur prior to Omicron case escalation to have maximum benefit,” recommended the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC). Social distancing helps as well. But how do you do this when the venue owner allows hundreds in, as they are entitled to do in Perrottet’s NSW. NSW scrapped most restrictions on 15 December – just in time to see the Omicron variant run rampant in the lead up to Christmas. Masks indoors are now being mandated again from midnight. Density caps are back on 27 December. QR code check-ins are being reinstated too. The irony for many businesses hoping a pro-business Perrottet would be good for business is it’s too late: staff are already ill or isolating, patrons are staying at home for fear of getting Covid, travel has been cancelled. The virus is hitting young people, with over 70% of cases among the 10 to 39-year-old cohort. They are the ones who have been going to crowded nightclubs and bars – just as Perrottet encouraged them to do. Many young people are now trying to address the risks they have taken since restrictions were relaxed by Perrottet by getting tested at clinics or doing rapid antigen tests, which are all but sold out. So what did Perrottet say on Thursday when backflipping on the easing of restrictions? “[Use] personal responsibility and common sense and be cautious over the Christmas break.” But he also wants some people to stop getting tested. “If you don’t need a test, don’t get one, because it always delays the turnaround time,” he said. “That’s affecting interstate flights and travel and affecting things like surgeries.” The state’s somewhat sidelined chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, made a rare appearance with Perrottet on Thursday. She said the new advice was to get tested if you had symptoms or if directed by NSW Health. NSW is also redefining “close contacts” to include only household contacts, contact with people in high-risk settings such as aged care, hospitals and Indigenous communities or if the health department contacts you. Perhaps Perrottet has sensed the public mood, finally. It’s one of worry – that NSW is out of control, that cases are skyrocketing, as has happened in the UK, many parts of Europe, and the US. My prediction is there will now be more urgent backtracking from Perrottet. The health minister, Brad Hazzard, did not rule out restrictions on New Year gatherings. Cancelling elective surgery is also being discussed. The spread of the virus is already baked into the next two weeks’ case numbers. Expect NSW to quickly reach 10,000 cases a day. What changes the transmission rate (and case numbers) is changes in behaviour – and that depends on leadership from the top. No matter what the premier says. What determines the stress on the hospital system – the government’s new measure of how we are living with the virus – is case numbers and staffing. Both are going in the wrong direction. The past week of no restrictions will be rued as a lost week in the fight against the impact of Omicron. Perrottet could well learn the hard way that “letting it rip” in the interests of the economy comes at a high cost.Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk says no final decision has been reached on substituting PCR tests for rapid tests on border crossings, despite the New South Wales premier saying she had already agreed to such a measure. On Thursday, NSW premier Dominic Perrottet announced new Covid-19 rules for his state, including mask requirements, density limits and rapid antigen testing priorities to relieve his state’s overwhelmed PCR test capacity. Perrottet also mentioned the need to address the impact interstate tourism requirements for a negative PCR test were having on spiralling Covid-19 testing queues across NSW this week – something the NSW government has labelled “tourism testing”. He also appeared to suggest the Queensland government had eased its testing requirements for entry, saying that from 1 January, people travelling to Queensland could instead rely on a negative rapid antigen test to enter Queensland. “I want to thank Annastacia Palaszczuk, who has announced she will remove that requirement and transition to a rapid antigen test from 1 January,” Perrottet said. However, a spokesperson for Palaszczuk insisted that no such policy to accept negative rapid antigen tests from travellers had been agreed to by Thursday evening. Guardian Australia understands the Queensland premier is willing to agree to the measure but is still waiting for further medical advice to understand the impact it would have. Also on Thursday, Palaszczuk used less certain terms than Perrottet, saying her state was still “looking at” the idea from the beginning of the year. “We’re talking about those rapid tests. So, you know, we need to see how they would be administered.” Guardian Australia contacted Perrottet for further clarification. There were 160,000 PCR tests conducted in NSW in the 24 hours to 8pm on Wednesday, with daily testing numbers exceeding 100,000 in recent weeks ahead of the Christmas period. At a press conference on Thursday, Perrottet acknowledged testing clinics had been overwhelmed by demand. “I do know there has been a fair bit of frustration out there. Many people waiting hours in queues, particularly as we come into Christmas,” he said. “We’re doing everything we can to alleviate that pressure. In addition to the PCR testing, if you’re unwell and those people from NSW … if you aren’t feeling unwell, please do not get a PCR test.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The health minister, Brad Hazzard, said high testing numbers were “sucking the energy out of all the frontline pathology workers”. “I would ask everybody to listen very carefully to the message that if you don’t need to go – if you haven’t got symptoms or haven’t received a message telling you that you must have a PCR test – probably you don’t need to have a PCR test,” Hazzard said. • Additional reporting by Michael McGowanEnergy bills could rise as much as 50% in the spring as the UK faces a “national crisis” over soaring wholesale gas and electricity prices, the energy industry has warned. The trade body Energy UK has called on the government to intervene to help cut the cost of bills as soaring wholesale prices drive dozens of energy companies out of business. “Domestic energy prices are going to go up 45% to 50% in the spring,” warned Emma Pinchbeck, the chief executive of Energy UK, speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Thursday. “It is looking pretty serious for the spring. This is a system-wide issue now. We are asking for the Treasury in the UK to intervene as others have [in Europe],” Pinchbeck said. While wholesale prices continue to climb steeply, the UK’s price cap on energy bills stops companies from immediately passing those costs on to their customers. Since 1 October, the price cap, set by the industry regulator, Ofgem, has been set at a record £1,277. It is due to change on 1 April when Ofgem is set to raise the cap significantly, which will in turn result in consumers’ bills rising significantly. “We have had record-breaking gas prices across Europe since September and over the last couple of weeks prices have spiked again and they are at levels we frankly have not really faced in the industry,” Pinchbeck said. “Particularly not in a winter period, with the UK in the middle of a pandemic, and other cost of living issues and inflation.” Pinchbeck said that only about a fifth of a consumers’ energy bill in the UK is in the control of suppliers. The government sets other costs such as VAT and green energy levies, which could be reduced to help domestic customers. “A significant proportion of the bill is policy costs,” she said. “Many other governments across Europe have reduced taxes or VAT on bills. In the UK that would save around £90 per customer. There are also policy costs on energy bills that government was consulting on removing, on electricity bills primarily, they could bring that forward. That saves about £190 per customer.” Nigel Pocklington, the chief executive of London-listed Good Energy, described the situation as a “national crisis”. “Wholesale gas and power prices have increased to unprecedented levels over the last three weeks, creating an extremely difficult operating environment for every business in the industry,” he told the Financial Times. EDF, the UK’s fourth biggest energy supplier, said the situation was “critical” and the government must “act now to support energy customers”. Philippe Commaret, the managing director for customers at EDF Energy, said that by next October the UK’s energy price cap “could easily exceed £2,000”.The “comfort zone” is a reliable place of retreat, especially in times of stress – living through a global pandemic, for instance. But psychologists have long ƒextolled the benefits of stepping outsideit, too. The clinical psychologist Roberta Babb advises regularly reviewing how well it is serving you. The comfort zone can, she says, become a prison or a trap, particularly if you are there because of fear and avoidance. Babb says people can be “mentally, emotionally, physically, socially, occupationally” stimulated by facing their fears or trying something uncomfortable. “Adaptation and stimulation are important parts of our wellbeing, and a huge part of our capacity to be resilient. We can get stagnant, and it is about growing and finding different ways to be, which then allows us to have a different life experience.” Facing fears can increase confidence and self-esteem, she adds, and achieving a goal is associated with a release of dopamine, the feel-good hormone. “Then you start to feel better about yourself – you’re aware of what you can do, more willing to take positive risks. You have more energy. It’s a kind of domino effect.” In her bestselling 1987 book, Feel the Fear and Do It Anyway, Susan Jeffers advised people to try something “small or bold” outside their comfort zone each day, building confidence “so that stretching your comfort zone becomes easier and easier”. But it isn’t about becoming generally “fearless”, as if we could override all of human evolution. “People often ask: ‘How can I prevent myself from ever having those kinds of fearful responses?’ My initial reaction is: ‘You wouldn’t want to live life without the ability to experience fear,’” says Ethan Kross, professor of psychology and management, director of the Emotion and Self Control Lab at the University of Michigan, and author of Chatter: The Voice in Our Head and How to Harness It. Fear, when appropriate, is a safety mechanism, but “it can sometimes become miscalibrated, so that the fear doesn’t match the reality of the circumstance”. Kross doesn’t see the benefit of taking on fears for the sake of it – you don’t have to jump out of a plane or do a bungee jump unless you think it will drastically improve your life. Instead, he says, it’s about facing the fears, or overcoming the discomfort, that prevents us from doing the things “that are really important for our wellbeing, our relationships and our performance. Those are the instances in which you want to try to regulate the fear.” Different things are daunting to different people, of course, and there is a spectrum to their severity. It could be going on a date, or giving a presentation at work, or having a difficult conversation with a relative. It could be making a big decision, such as leaving a relationship, or a job. It may be relatively minor – getting up an hour earlier to exercise might not trigger a debilitating phobia, but might feel uncomfortable – and it could still bring benefits to your life. It’s hard to generalise, says Kross, about the psychological effect of facing one’s fears, or stepping outside the comfort zone, but doing it can change the way you think. “When you’re afraid of something, you have a mental representation that tells you it’s dangerous. If you then go through that situation, and learn ‘This wasn’t as bad as I thought it was’, that, typically, will update that mental portrayal of the situation.” There are clearly more tangible potential rewards for stepping outside your comfort zone, too – a better social life, a pay rise, more intimacy in a relationship, a new skill. In her book Fear Less, the performance psychologist Pippa Grange sets out the ways that living in a “fear culture” affects our lives. “It may have shrunk you, so you have stayed small in some ways, limiting your potential and what you can achieve. Fear can also stiffen you into rigid over-control of yourself and the people around you. And it can also push you into painful, burning shame. All of these things send you down a rabbit hole away from your real potential as a human being.” Many of the fears that keep us safely within our comfort zone are what Grange calls “not-good-enough” fear – fear of being exposed, rejected, of not being loved. One way of tackling it, writes Grange, is her “see, face, replace” strategy: explore the fear, face the impact it has on your life, then replace it with something, such as a different story, or a sense of purpose or humour. Get comfortable with the idea, when trying something new, that failure is possible, says Babb – or rather, don’t view it as failure. “We go in with a perfectionistic idea about achievement, and that we should be able to do it. The reality is, outside our comfort zone, why would we know how to do it? That’s the whole process.” If you are ready to expand your comfort zone, consider breaking down the uncomfortable action into steps, advises Babb. “People think about going from zero to 100, as opposed to all the different steps in between. This is linked to a cognitive behavioural therapy technique called exposure and habituation – you are building up to what you want to do. You have an opportunity to celebrate the little wins that give you a boost of confidence and energy, which makes it exciting.” Kross says “different tools work for different people in different situations, and there’s a bit of self-experimentation that’s required”. He also recommends building exposure to demonstrate the way our “fear responses are often out of sync with the actual danger. When we confront those situations, we quickly learn it’s not actually so bad.” Another technique he recommends is to “coach” yourself through a situation. The idea, he says, is that we’re much better at giving advice to other people than to ourselves. “So what would you say to someone else? Use your own name: ‘All right Ethan, here’s how you’re going to manage the situation.’ We call this ‘distanced self-talk’. One of the reasons we think it’s useful is because the link between using a name, and thinking about someone else, is very strong in the mind. It switches your perspective, it gives you some distance, which helps you think more rationally about the situation.” Turning a fear into a “challenge” can also help to overcome it. “In a situation,” says Kross, “we ask ourselves two questions, often subconsciously: what is required of me, and do I have the resources to deal with it? If you determine ‘No, I can’t do it,’ that’s a ‘threat response’ and it is associated with [negative] behavioural and physiological reactions – you perform less well under stress.” Switching the answer to “Yes, I can do this”, makes it “a ‘challenge response’,” says Kross. Distanced self-talk can help: “It activates that challenge response. You can consciously choose to change the way you think about a situation.” It means that, if you are ready to step outside your comfort zone – or rather broaden it – you can start right now.When is a movie that’s only good, rather than great, the best thing you’ve seen all year? When it’s a fan event on the scale of Spider-Man: No Way Home, which unites everyone who ever loved the big-screen franchise (going back to 2002’s Spider-Man) for a gorgeously nostalgic feelgood romp. This is the climax to Jon Watts’ “Home” trilogy, following the excellent Spider-Man: Homecoming and its 2019 sequel Far From Home. But while it nicely rounds off the character arc of Tom Holland’s Peter Parker, it also restores a sense of wellbeing to the Sony-owned Spider-flicks that came before it, and may just turn out to be the future. So what did we learn from our latest trip into Spider-Man’s rapidly expanding world? Doctor Strange: shonky characterisation or ingenious arc? We already know there’s something pretty weird going on with Benedict Cumberbatch’s wacky wizard, and our spider-senses are only tingling more intensely by the time the credits roll on No Way Home. No longer Sorcerer Supreme after disappearing for five years, Strange seems bored and reckless, happily going for Parker’s rash suggestion that he cast a dangerous spell to restore Spider-Man’s secret identity. It ends up going horribly wrong and inviting supervillains and heroes from alternate realities (AKA the five Sony-owned films from 2002-14, prior to the studio striking a deal with Marvel) into the MCU. Perhaps Strange is just going through a narcissistic phase a la Tony Stark in Age of Ultron. But for such a trusted, supposedly wise member of the Avengers to make such a bad decision almost beggars belief. Maybe Marvel simply used the plot device to set up the forthcoming Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness, with the former Sorcerer Supreme now a rogue agent being run down by former comrades. At the very least, Strange’s character arc looks set to make Tony Stark’s look like an episode of Countryfile. Three Spider-Men are better than one No Way Home reminded me of those Doctor Who specials in which multiple versions of the Time Lord played by various actors would team up to face down a greater threat. While these were not always the most incisive modes of storytelling, the opportunity to see past iterations of the Doctor always upped the goosebumps factor. This is certainly the case during the scenes in which the Tobey Maguire and Andrew Garfield incarnations of Spider-Man unite with Tom Holland’s to restore normality to the MCU and save the interlopers from instant death. We could go on about the ways in which No Way Home gives the webslingers from previous series a fitting finale, but the simple fact is that it is just nice to see Garfield, and in particular Maguire, swinging back into action once again. Aunt May’s death and the threat of constant sorrow It’s the oldest trick in the book: kill off a major character and ensure your audience spends the rest of the movie panicking that other fan-favourites are set to go next. Still, it felt like a dirty move to take out Marisa Tomei’s Aunt May, especially when we’ve always assumed Holland’s Spider-Man lost his Uncle Ben before first appearing on our screens. And yet it’s May’s kindness in the face of adversity that ends up fuelling Spidey Prime’s determination to cure the supervillains rather than taking them out. That ultimately makes for a surprisingly original narrative that allows all three Spideys to play their part in the action, even if it also does remind us that pretty much all Sony’s bad guys followed a rather samey path towards villainy. The de-ageing, the villains and the brilliance of Willem Dafoe It’s been the over a decade since we saw Alfred Molina’s Doc Ock and Willem Dafoe’s Green Goblin on the big screen, but No Way Home lets us know early on that we’re seeing them as they were just before their respective deaths in Spider-Man and Spider-Man 2. It’s not surprising that some special effects were clearly used to restore Molina to his younger self. Whether the same went for Dafoe is harder to tell – the 66-year-old is still so spritely that he insisted on doing all his own stunts this time around, to spectacular effect. His Green Goblin stakes his claim for the all-time list of movie supervillains with a bravura return of cackling insanity. The movie’s nod to the Goblin’s traditional hooded costume is another lovely touch. How about those other villains? They never quite made it to a Sinister Six, as in the comic books, unless you count the fleeting post-credits appearance of Tom Hardy’s Venom. And truth be told, Rhys Ifans’ Lizard and Thomas Haden Church’s Sandman take relative back seats. As for Jamie Foxx’s Electro, this was a very different character to the one we saw in The Amazing Spider-Man 2. Has Sony finally won the battle of the studios? The first two movies in the Home trilogy always felt like Marvel films, even if Sony continued to hold co-ownership on paper. With characters from the MCU popping up incessantly, as well as the bright and breezy writing, Watt’s films felt like a new beginning for Spidey. By contrast, No Way Home feels like the movie Sony demanded when it struck the deal that allowed Spider-Man to appear in the Avengers movies. Both the Sam Raimi trilogy and the films overseen by Marc Webb ended poorly, with Spider-Man 3 and The Amazing Spider-Man 2 receiving short shrift from critics. Story arcs were left unfinished, redemption for our hero was never quite achieved, and without Marvel’s intervention it is unlikely we would ever have seen Maguire or Garfield suiting up on the big screen again. But after the events of No Way Home, all bets are off: Spider-Man on the big screen has now potentially been spliced in three, and Sony has a completely different sandpit to play in. Where does Peter Parker’s future now lie? It seems unlikely the studio would ever make new Spider-Man movies starring Garfield or Maguire, but the reality is that No Way Home paves the way for either option. The Raimi and Webb universes have been brought thrillingly back into the picture, and there is no reason further adventures might not take place for either. There’s even the option of teaming all three Spider-Men up with a new Miles Morales big-screen webslinger, though that would take some seriously snazzy writing. There is no reason Sony couldn’t introduce one of its Spideys into a Venom film. Meanwhile back in the MCU, Holland’s Parker faces an uncertain future. His world has been shrunk from an infinite sandpit of universes to a much smaller one based around the mean streets of New York. After the casting of Strange’s spell, he has no friends, no job, no apparent access to Stark technology and little to do but take down minor criminals in the back alleys of Queens. Will the already green-lit fourth instalment see Parker slowly rebuilding all his connections to the wider world, or will this slimmed-down version of reality become the new normal, with Spidey returning to his comic-book roots? The post-credit scenes … and a significant shakeup One clue may stem from the mid-credits scene in which Venom is briefly revealed as having been zapped into (and then out of) the MCU during the sequence of events that ushered in the other supervillains. This might seem like a cheeky plug for Sony’s Venom flicks were it not for the scene’s final frame, in which we note that a small amount of the character’s unique alien symbiote has been left behind. Is our new, friendless Peter Parker about to fall victim to that infamous, dangerously cool black suit? What about that final end-credits scene? It looked more like a full-on trailer for In the Multiverse of Madness than anything we have seen before, showing Doctor Strange teaming up with Scarlet Witch, coming into conflict with Chiwetel Ejiofor’s Mordo and even seeming to meet an alternate version of himself. Is this the future for Marvel’s post-credit teases? If so, it seems we’re even more likely to be forced to sit tight until the absolute final frame than we have been until now. There’s just too much to risk by making an early exit.A change is desperately needed. I know it and you know it, but someone in this citizenry – most likely you – isn’t ready to make a vast adjustment to their lifestyle. This is a common fallback position among progressives. I’ve always felt comfortable in this territory and simultaneously aggravated by it. Nowhere is this position more routinely applied than in relation to the climate crisis. The argument goes like this: people across the political spectrum broadly agree on the fundamentals and the urgency of the climate crisis, and yet we probably won’t do what we need to do because we’re just too useless. Society is too fractured for people to make altruistic choices; poverty is too endemic for many to be in a position to make changes; financialisation has subverted democracy, so even if the demos was able to make a good, collective decision, it would be thwarted. Even if, by some miracle, the UK managed to overcome these obstacles to make good on its net-zero pledges, the same problems would play out on a global scale to prevent other nations from doing the same. But this year I changed my mind about this position. It wasn’t because of Cop26, which left most campaigners disappointed. It was because of what Cop26 couldn’t undo. The first two components of reaching net zero are basically in the hands of the government: cleaning up the energy supply, and becoming more efficient in the energy we use. Throughout the 2010s, we assumed that both the major parties were equally committed to tackling the climate emergency and merely differed on whether the state or the market should pay for it. This seemed like a reasonable assumption – the Conservatives in opposition, after all, were behind the Climate Change Act, an inspiringly strong piece of legislation – except for the fact that it was plainly not true. Conservatives committed to arresting the climate crisis wouldn’t have talked about “green crap”. Nor would they have wasted five years on Brexit, or wanted to leave the EU in the first place. The price of entry to the grownups’ conversation was to pretend that all politicians wanted broadly the same thing, by a different route. This was a peculiarly low point for common sense, and it squandered time, fostering a sense that even when those in power wanted to tackle the climate crisis, still nothing constructive could be achieved. Even as recently as September, when Rachel Reeves described at her party’s conference the state spending a Labour government’s green new deal would entail, it was still normal in climate policy circles for people to describe the parties as equally committed to constructive, large-scale change. But it is no longer necessary to pretend that the Conservative government means well, keeps promises or has any long-term plan for tackling the climate crisis. Removing it from power has become more urgent than ever. Accepting these facts is now, paradoxically, less daunting than the effort of papering over reality. The third plank towards net zero has always been behavioural – are people prepared to stop flying and eating meat, and change to bikes and electric cars? And even if you are personally committed to these things, what about those who don’t care, or can’t afford to make adjustments, and what about young people and their fast fashion, and didn’t Greta Thunberg once buy a salad wrapped in plastic? There is a tendency to respond to every climate aspiration with a darting list of the insufficiencies of humankind. Yet the granular work done by the Climate Change Committee shows the lifestyle changes this crisis will ask of us are in fact pretty manageable. The most demanding will probably be the switch to battery-powered cars (60% of vehicles by 2035). Otherwise, the number of miles per driver will need to reduce by 4%; plane kilometres per person by 6%; meat and dairy consumption by 20%. Arguably, this is the time to start new conversations – is net zero, in this time frame, ambitious enough? Can the disproportionate carbon usage of the affluent somehow be reflected in redistributive policy, so everyone has an allocation of plane miles and those who can’t afford to use theirs can sell them instead? Would it make sense to subsidise meat and dairy alternatives in the same way renewables were initially supported? Is it feasible to make a carbon budget, as a nation, that doesn’t take into account the footprint of your imports? (Not really.) What is now unarguable is that all this is within our grasp. Radicals and progressives may maintain the longterm goal of bringing down capitalism and re-evaluating what life is for, but that doesn’t mean there’s nothing constructive that we can do in the short term. I’m not sure that I would make a different or more certain prediction of what life will look like in 30 years’ time. But the idea that the changes required are too radical or the people who need to make them too timid, I’ve completely put aside. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistOn her fourth day of Covid symptoms, Ruth woke up in the worst pain of her life. It felt like her joints were filled with broken glass; she couldn’t walk, couldn’t move. “It was worse than childbirth,” she said. When friends texted to check on her, she couldn’t hold the phone or move her fingers to write back. Her doctor called in medication, and it took Ruth 40 minutes to shuffle to the pharmacy half a block away. Ruth – who did not want her full name used – is certain that if she weren’t vaccinated and boosted, she would be in the intensive care unit or worse right now. But while she’s recovering from this “mild” case, she’s unable to work even as cases surge in her region. Ruth is an emergency nurse in Washington DC. Her case of breakthrough Covid shows what may happen when the more contagious variant hits health workers all over the country – and the pressures Omicron will put on a US health system already groaning under the weight of the pandemic. In this wave, it’s not a shortage of beds but a shortage of qualified workers to care for people in those beds that is raising alarm bells. “What do you do when you have a tidal wave coming at you in a little paddle boat?” Ruth asked. “There’s going to be a huge uptick. Our entire waiting room is going to be all Covid-positive.” In Washington DC the infection curve looks like a straight line up. On Saturday, the city nearly tripled its previous record-high number of cases. At least two of Ruth’s colleagues were already out sick with Covid. In a matter of weeks, Omicron has become the dominant variant in the United States. It accounts for 73% of sequenced cases, six times higher than last week. As the holidays approach, officials and experts warn of an unmanageable crush of patients and potentially catastrophic staffing shortages. “This is a big concern,” said Marcus Plescia, the chief medical officer at the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials. “This is a highly contagious variant, and we really think it could cause significant issues with the workforce.” Omicron is spreading like wildfire and slamming into hospitals, and “there’s no question that this is going to be on us, really in the next week or so”, Plescia said. Others agreed. “There’s no question” that Omicron outbreaks among healthcare workers are “significantly diminishing the workforce”, said Georges Benjamin, executive director of the American Public Health Association. “It has profound implications for our ability to not just take care of people with Covid but [also] the other diseases that are out there.” The American Nurses Association is urging US officials to declare the nursing shortage a national crisis, and the American College of Emergency Physicians has expressed concerns the shortage will affect patient care. Makers of monoclonal antibodies also delivered crushing news recently: most of them – including the one the US heavily invested in – don’t work well against Omicron. The only one that does is in short supply, and the last available shipment just went out. Without widespread medications to prevent hospitalization and death, health systems may face more stress. Even before Omicron, the situation was growing dire as hospitals grappled with a Thanksgiving surge in cases. Nearly two years into the coronavirus outbreak, nurses, doctors, specialists and other key health workers are exhausted. In April, 55% of front-line health workers reported feeling burned out. They frequently face harassment and frustration at work. “It’s really horrible,” Ruth said. “I got into medicine to take care of people, and people are just angry at me all the time.” The day she was infected, there were 150 people in the waiting room, facing a nine- or 10-hour wait time. Recently, a child came into her hospital with a broken arm. An orthopedic surgeon was ready to operate, but there were no nurses available to assist in the procedure. The child had to wait for 10 hours. Yet Ruth knows she’s not ready to go back yet; it still hurts to move, and her thinking is foggy, even if she’s not contagious anymore. “I cannot provide appropriate care for my patients,” she said. Just getting up to tidy her apartment made her oxygen drop to 91%. She had Covid before, early in the pandemic, and it wiped her out for a week and a half. She had to wear a cardiac monitor for two weeks because of heart complications. She was eager to get vaccinated, and received her first shot on the first day vaccines were available in the US. Those vaccines cut her illness short and kept her out of the hospital. Omicron is a particular threat because it is effective at overcoming protection against infection among those who have been vaccinated or survived previous cases of Covid – which means even vaccinated health workers may need to isolate after a positive test or take time off to recover from the illness. “Health systems are going to have to plan for that,” Benjamin said – a calculation that is especially fraught during the holiday season. Hospital administrators may need to bring back retired workers, even for a short period of time, and “rethink some of the services that they’re delivering”, Benjamin said. “They’re probably going to have to put off a lot more discretionary procedures. But there are some services that we just can’t continue to put off.” The national guard may also be deployed in areas with overwhelmed health systems. Health workers who become sick need time to recover. But it’s possible the public health guidance will change for those who experience mild or no symptoms. “We’re kind of waiting for some guidance from CDC and others on whether we could bring some further flexibility into some of the current isolation and quarantine and other guidance,” Plescia said. “Perhaps, particularly with healthcare workers because they’re wearing pretty significant PPE, maybe they could return to work in five days rather than 10.” In previous surges, even nurses who tested positive were asked to continue working with Covid patients if they were able. In March 2020, in the face of many unknowns about treating the virus and massive testing delays, we were encouraged to stay home and flatten the curve. But Benjamin doubts that will happen again. “We’ve got to figure out how to flatten the curve a little differently,” Benjamin said. He recommends instituting rules requiring proof of vaccination in public places – essentially making it “more difficult for people not to be vaccinated”. Everyone needs to be vaccinated and boosted, Ruth warned. “It’s not a matter of ‘if’ at this point. It’s a matter of when. And how well do you want to be protected against it?”Judges across the US have been handing down stiff sentences and hard words in recent weeks for extremist supporters of Donald Trump who took part in the 6 January insurrection at the US Capitol. Since a federal judge sentenced Jacob Chansley, the US Capitol rioter nicknamed the “QAnon shaman” for his horned headdress, to 41 months in prison last month, more US judges have been delivering strict sentences to defendants charged over their roles in the attacks earlier this year. Since the riots, federal prosecutors have brought cases against 727 individuals over their involvement in the deadly riots. With hundreds facing criminal charges, Trump has come under growing scrutiny from the House select committee investigating the attacks. The longest sentence so far was handed down to a Florida man who threw a wooden plank and fire extinguisher at police officers during the riots. On 17 December, Judge Tanya Chutkan sentenced Robert Palmer to 63 months of jail time, describing the prison term as “the consequence of those actions”. According to Chutkan, individuals who attempted to “violently overthrow the government” and “stop the peaceful transition of power” would be met with “absolutely certain punishment”. At his hearing, Palmer said he was “really, really ashamed” of his behavior, adding that he was “absolutely devastated” to see the “coldness and calculation” that he used to attack Capitol police. On Tuesday, a Washington state man was sentenced to 46 months of prison time for assaulting police officers with a speaker and a metal baton during the riots. According to court documents, Devlyn Thompson helped move police shields up against a line of rioters in a tunnel, as well as hit police officers. US District Judge Royce Lamberth told Thompson, “The violence that happened that day was such a blatant disregard to the institutions of government … You’re shoving and pushing … and participating in this riot for hours.” Thompson is the second rioter, after Palmer, to be sentenced for the felony of assaulting a police officer with a dangerous weapon. More than 140 other rioters face the same charge. Lamberth also sentenced an 81-year-old Army veteran on the same day to three years of probation for illegally breaching the Capitol. Gary Wickersham, one of the oldest of more than 700 rioters facing charges, was sentenced to 90 days of home detention, and will also have to pay a $2,000 fine and $500 for building damage. Defense lawyers argued against any confinement, saying that Wickersham would be unable to visit his grandchildren during his “golden years”. During his hearing, Wickersham asked for “mercy” from Lamberth and explained that he went to the Capitol because “you get bored” sitting at home. “Mr Wickersham, I appreciate what you’ve done here. I think you have led the way for others to recognize that the jig is up,” said Lamberth. The 78-year-old judge also told Wickersham that he is “the first defendant I’ve had that’s older than me in quite some time”. On Tuesday, a Pennsylvania man was also sentenced over his involvement in the riots after his wife accidentally implicated him in a Facebook status. US District Judge James Boasberg sentenced Gary Edwards to one year of probation, 200 hours of community service, as well as a $2,500 fine and $500 in damage fees. In a since deleted Facebook post, Edward’s wife wrote, “Okay ladies, let me tell you what happened as my husband was there inside the Capitol,” adding, “these were people who watched their rights being taken away, their votes stolen from them, their state officials violating the constitution of their country.” According to authorities, Edwards took pictures, helped teargassed protesters and entered an office of an unidentified congressional official. “There really is no more serious and profound action democracy takes than the certifying of a lawful and fair election,” Boasberg said. “And to the extent anyone would interfere with that, particularly with force of violence, they strike at the root of democracy,” he added. That message would seem to go for organizers of the 6 January events as well as participants in the violence. On 22 November, US District Judge Royce Lamberth sentenced Capitol rioter Frank Scavo to 60 days in prison, one of the strictest sentences handed down to a misdemeanor defendant and more than four times the prosecutor’s recommendation of two weeks. Scavo, a Trump supporter from Pennsylvania and former school board official, was found guilty of chartering buses to transport approximately 200 residents from Pennsylvania to the Capitol on 6 January.Previously a fashioner of star vehicles for Salman Khan, director Kabir Khan anchors this nimble and big-hearted biopic of the India cricket team’s improbable 1983 World Cup triumph in a smiling performance from new-generation hunk Ranveer Singh as captain Kapil Dev. Dev’s wobbly English, which makes him a laughing stock among his teammates, seems to stand for the group’s inferiority complex. But inside this awkwardness is an obduracy and capacity for improvisation that becomes the guiding light of their victory run. As he blurts out on the team bus: “Taste the success once, tongue want more!” India, who had only won a single World Cup match before the tournament, were deeply unfancied outsiders. So Khan frames the arrival in England of Dev, and other now legendary cricketers such as Sunil Gavaskar (played by Tahir Raj Bhasin) and Roger Binny (Nishant Dahiya), in jauntily comic underdog vein. They exceed import regulations by bringing in pickles to spice up British grub and ogle sex workers’ calling cards; they’re beaten in the warm-ups by a county side and condescended to by officials, journalists and commentators. What separates 83 from the likes of The Full Monty, though, is a realpolitik edge; in finding their groove and turning over a terrifying West Indies side whose fast-bowling style the film suggests was their riposte to their one-time British masters, the Indians were also mustering an anti-colonial poke in the eye. There are a lot of matches and players to cover, but Khan skates energetically through it all, sketching tactical shifts in creaseside exchanges between batsmen and deploying economic character riffs (Viv Richards gets a funky fanfare every time he struts on). He adroitly balances entertainment and politics, mostly ducking the kind of hoarse nationalism currently creeping into Indian and Chinese blockbusters and lobbing in his anti-colonial spinners at unexpected moments. One scene in which Indira Gandhi muses on the World Cup’s potential to defuse tensions on the domestic front hints at sport’s role as part of the bread-and-circuses setup for distracting the masses. 83 doesn’t delve any further than that into what degree sporting victory ever translates to social and political progress. But it is an endearing sports film with just enough awareness of where it stands, now that Britain’s imperial legacy is being questioned more than ever, on a larger field. • 83 is released in cinemas on 24 December. • The main image in this article was changed on 1 January 2022. An earlier image misidentified one of the actors starring in the film.Artists around the world helped us illustrate some of the biggest stories of the year, from eroding coastlines to the rise of teletherapy. The art for these stories were painted on canvas, drawn on digital tablet and even cut out of paper for a collage. Thank you to all the illustrators who worked with us this year. *** Can recycled glass help restore Louisiana’s eroding coastline? The state’s coastline is eroding – but some ecologists think they have the solution: by recycling New Orleans’ many glass bottles into sand. Illustrator: Luis Mazón *** Revealed: The true extent of America’s food monopolies, and who pays the price A joint investigation by the Guardian and Food and Water Watch found that only a handful of brands control 80% of the total market share of many grocery store items that shoppers regularly buy, creating a system that exploits workers and farmers while falsely giving consumers the illusion of variety and choice. Illustrator: Julia Louise Pereira *** How mercury sneaks into the most vulnerable communities in US and Canada This lush comic by Julia Louise Pereira shows how mercury is steadily poisoning the lakes and rivers that Indigenous communities and communities of color have historically relied on. Illustrator: Julia Louise Pereira *** ‘Nobody ever put hands on me before’: flight attendants on the air rage epidemic Since our gradual return to society after Covid-related lockdowns, flight attendants have experienced a severe uptick in passenger tantrums. Illustrator: Ulises Mendicutty *** The dirty dozen: meet America’s top climate villains This article dispels that myth that Americans are personally responsible for the climate crisis, when really a handful of “climate villains” have allowed fossil fuel companies to destroy the planet. Illustrator: Jason Goad *** What personality are you? How the Myers-Briggs test took over the world Personality tests are whimsical and sometimes delightful, despite their many flaws. But what happens when the results are used to make real-life decisions? This is a story about how the Myers-Briggs – called “astrology for businessmen” – took over the personality test world. Illustrator: Ricardo Cavolo *** A teenager was a suicide risk – and then the pandemic happened Pandemic shutdowns caused many people’s mental health to deteriorate, giving rise to teletherapy. But the physical and psychological distance were an especially big challenge for people who were already at high risk for suicide. Illustrator: Maria Medem *** Would you live with your boss 24/7? These people do Does living with your boss sound like a nightmare scenario? It’s the reality for employees of the US startup Fiveable. Illustrator: Kike Congrains • This article was amended on 24 December 2021 to correct the spelling of Ricardo Cavolo’s surname in the credits of his illustrations.Ratnaboli Ray regards one of the lowest points of her life as a breakthrough. After years in an arranged marriage in which she felt stifled and trapped, her mental health took a catastrophic turn in 1997, when she was in her mid-30s. “I was feeling very caged, I was not able to express myself,” she says, from her home in West Bengal, India. She describes the psychological symptoms as like a pressure cooker bursting. “I used to get angry, have weeping spells. I was neglectful of my young son.” Ray, a trained psychologist, was working in a private mental health facility run by an NGO in West Bengal at the time, so she recognised what was happening to her. She was diagnosed with a severe mood disorder, underwent therapy and was prescribed medication, which she still uses. After about a year and a half of treatment, her condition was more stable. Although the deterioration of Ray’s mental health meant she had to resign from her job, it also empowered her and set her on a different path. “I acknowledged my fragility and vulnerability, and it gave me a power to speak to the authorities, whether that was my in-laws or the government. I learned to speak up, and that is why it was a breakthrough and not a breakdown.” In her previous role, she had seen some of what patients experienced in government-run mental health facilities, where care was much worse than the kind she received in a private facility, and decided she wanted to do something about it. “I thought we had to do something that was different from setting up isolated institutions, which were like islands,” she says. “I had this idea of entering a public mental health hospital and bringing systemic change.” Conditions in public mental health hospitals at the time were “terrible”, she remembers. “Women were overdrugged, nobody could go home. The wards were dingy. The conditions were abysmal. Care was very poor,” she says. “The nursing staff were reminiscent of those in One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest. There were a lot of human rights violations.” Patients went on hunger strike because the food was so bad, it was normal for them to be completely naked and have lice, indicative of the filthy conditions. Shackling patients to restrain them was commonplace, as were seclusion cells where patients were locked up in solitary isolation when they were thought to be dangerous. Ray believes conditions were worse for women than for men. Little research has been done on the prevalence of mental health problems or facilities in West Bengal, but in 2016 the National Mental Health Survey of India said 13% of the state’s population were living with conditions such as anxiety, stress and schizophrenia, while research from 2019 found women in state psychiatric facilities are more likely than men to stay there for many years. Lancet research, spanning 1990 to 2017, showed a slightly higher rate of depressive disorders and suicide among women than men across India. It concluded this “could be related to gender discrimination, violence, sexual abuse, antenatal and postnatal stress, and adverse socio-cultural norms”. Ray focused on helping female patients because she was aware of the impact of societal issues and violence against women in India. “As a feminist and human rights activist, suicide is not just a mental health issue. It’s an intersectional issue and has huge social determinants,” she says. Ray approached the state’s human rights commission, asking to address overcrowding in hospitals. She was given permission to work in Kolkata Pavlov hospital, the largest government mental health hospital in West Bengal, in 2000. She would arrive every morning at 8am, visit a female ward and collect six women. They would sit on mats outside, sing, chat, create art or play, and Ray would listen to their stories. One patient had been there for three years after leaving her family for her lover, who then abandoned her. She told Ray she wanted to return to her children. Ray helped her, along with more than 20 other women, to go home in her first year of working there. “It was a huge milestone for the government,” she says. At first, her presence at the hospital was seen as a threat by some. One day, early in her work, Ray says four officers working at the hospital locked her up to try to intimidate her. It wasn’t until six hours later that people heard her cries for help and let her out. However, Ray says that the climate in the hospital has changed and they now have a “mutually respectful partnership”. She still faces threats for her work from elsewhere and often receives anonymous letters filled with sexual insults. In 2019, she was charged with sedition along with other prominent voices in India for writing a letter to the prime minister voicing concerns about mob lynching. Charges were later dropped. Ray has gone on to work in all the hospitals in West Bengal and, in 2000, founded Anjali, which, as part of its work to modernise treatments and end stigma surrounding mental health, provides skills training to patients to help reintegrate them back into society. This included setting up a launderette in Kolkata Pavlov hospital, which patients are paid to run. There is also a bakery and small canteen on the hospital premises, as well as a block printing studio. There are plans to expand the project to other hospitals. Ray was born in 1961 into a middle-class and educated family with liberal values. “I grew up listening to the Beatles. I was inspired by the civil rights movement. I was into rock’n’roll. I used to go hiking,” she remembers. She studied for a masters in clinical psychology and entered into an arranged marriage when she was in her early 20s; she and her husband now have a son. She says: “[In West Bengal,] you don’t get married to a person, you marry the entire family. There was a huge amount of pressure. Finally, I realised after getting married that it was a patriarchal setup.” Throughout her career, Ray, now 60, has worked to shed light on some of the human rights abuses in hospitals. She has successfully lobbied for change in the law, including challenging the use of solitary confinement and electroshock therapy without consent in West Bengal. In 20 years, she has seen conditions improve and that there are now more organisations that advocate for the rights of mental health patients. But for Ray, there’s still much to do. In a country with a population of more than a billion people, continuing stigma and a paucity of resources dedicated to mental health, change is hard. Ray acknowledges: “I won’t be able to see complete change in my lifetime, because it’s a continuous process.” • This article was edited on 27 December 2021 to correct correct some personal information. • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org • In the UK, the charity Mind is available on 0300 123 3393 and Childline on 0800 1111. In the US, Mental Health America is available on 800-273-8255. In Australia, support is available at Beyond Blue on 1300 22 4636, Lifeline on 13 11 14, and at MensLine on 1300 789 978 Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:It was hard to get through 2021 without hearing about the supply chain. Before the pandemic, the way products from all over the world would get to American consumers seemed to be a part of a smooth-going system. A survey of consumers found that 45% of Americans admitted to never thinking about how their products were made and delivered before the pandemic. But the last year has seen dozens of ships stuck at ports, warehouses full to the brim with stuff and a shortage of truck drivers, all leading to emptier shelves and out-of-stock messages online. Issues with the supply chain have led to shortages across the country of goods ranging from cars to cream cheese to Christmas trees. Experts believe the pandemic caused a perfect storm of factors that led to cracks in the supply chain that was already vulnerable in the first place. “You have a supply chain that has been built on a premise of being lean and efficient and that works great when things are operating smoothly,” said Keely Croxton, a professor of logistics at Ohio State University. “But as soon as there’s a glitch in the supply chain, these lean supply chains become brittle and break.” Companies today largely rely on a supply chain model called “just in time” that was created by Toyota in the 1950s. As its name suggests, the model has companies keep few raw materials on hand and only order them when they need it, all with the goal of getting the end product to consumers just on time. The “just-in-time” model clashed with the reality of consumer demand during the pandemic. Many companies assumed that demand would drop as the spread of Covid-19 caused worldwide shutdowns, including in manufacturing factories. But the pandemic ended up bolstering consumer demand for goods as aid from stimulus bills and savings from spending less on other expenses like travel and eating out encouraged people to shop online. Retail sales during the 2020 holiday season grew 8.3% despite the pandemic as Americans continued to shop. Ultimately, consumers were wanting more goods while companies were simultaneously making less. This phenomenon particularly hurt the manufacturing of computer chips, which led to shortages of cars and some consumer electronics, like video game consoles. Increased demand also saw more goods being shipped from Asia to the US, leading to seemingly indefinite congestion at two major ports in California. At one point, a record high of 100 vessels were waiting off the coast of Los Angeles to dock. Some ships were waiting months to unload their goods. This affected retailers like Victoria’s Secret, which saw half of its inventory for the fall season delayed because it was stuck on ships unable to unload. Part of the congestion clog comes from a lack of space at the ports because they are overwhelmed with large empty shipping containers. Some reports say there are over 115,000 empty containers sitting in the ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach. The twin ports have started threatening ocean carriers with fine penalties for leaving empty shipping containers in the ports in an effort to offload empty containers. Costco and Walmart were some of the few major companies that resorted to renting shipping containers to ensure goods get to stores in time for the holidays. On top of issues at the port, the US has been seeing a shortage of truck drivers. The trucking industry estimates that it is now short 80,000 truck drivers because of pandemic-induced retirements and resignations. In mid-December, the White House announced it would expand paid apprenticeships and recruit military veterans to bolster the industry, though the impacts of the initiative will probably not be seen any time soon. Croxton said supply chain researchers have long studied the weaknesses of today’s supply chain and have advocated for more resilient structures that can handle disruptions. For example, companies could pay attention to weather events and news and track inventory levels throughout the supply chain. Shortening the supply chain, like relying on domestic manufacturing, would also mean more oversight. “The number of disruptions that we’ve had in our supply chains has been increasing over the last decade,” Croxton said, citing extreme weather events and economic and political uncertainty. “This isn’t new to companies that the supply chains get disrupted.”Marcia Griffiths – Sweet and Nice (1974) Marcia Griffith’s debut solo album – released between her UK hits as one half of Bob and Marcia and her membership of Bob Marley’s backing vocalists the I-Threes – is the kind of record you can’t believe you haven’t already heard, or at least heard of: surely people should have been banging on for years about something this good? Griffith’s tough-but-tender vocals are incredible, and while the sound seems to pitch her as something more than a straightforward reggae artist, it was made the year after Bob Marley’s breakthrough album, Catch a Fire, had proved Jamaican artists could reach a wide international audience. Whatever the thinking behind it, the results are just exquisite: the versions of The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face and Just Don’t Want to Be Lonely – a then-recent hit for the Main Ingredient – sound like proto-lovers rock; Everything I Own takes the song at a Northern Soul-like clip, there’s a vaguely psychedelic funk aura about Children at Play and the astounding opening cover of Al Green’s Here I Am (Come And Take Me). The version you want is released by the exemplary reissue label Be With, which adds a whole additional album of extra tracks, including an awesome cover of the Beatles’ Don’t Let Me. AP Various Artists – Heisei No Oto: Japanese Left-field Pop from the CD Age (1989-1996) (2021) More diamonds from cratedigging’s current coalface, Japan. Amid releases from Light in the Attic and 180g surveying the country’s pop, folk and ambient sounds comes this compilation on Dutch label Music From Memory, in which Osaka-based collectors Eiji Taniguchi and Norio Sato burrow into a beautiful corner of their country’s musical history. A UK comparison might be the wistful pop of Talk Talk or the Blue Nile, blended with the “fourth world” ambience of Jon Hassell, but of course there’s a very particular non-western mood here: whether it’s trip-hop, new age, nu-disco or playful jazz-pop, each transporting track evokes a utopian, pastel-shadowed mirror-world outside linear time. Highlights include Yosui Inoue’s Pi Po Pa, the most delicate ska song imaginable, and the stirringly romantic violin melodies of Keisuke Kikuchi’s Retro Electric. Buying a physical version is essential, as not all the tracks are licensed for streaming/download. BBT Pat Metheny Group – Pat Metheny Group (1978) The pleasure of being a jazz neophyte means I get to enjoy lightning-bolt moments with the genre that bring back the mind-expanding feeling of first hearing Bowie, Bush or Joy Division as a teenager. Mingus! Aki Takase! Cecil Taylor! Evidently, I’m not plotting a linear, or by any means logical, path through its history, but going purely by ear (and sometimes the generous guidance of Guardian jazz critic John Fordham). When I first heard San Lorenzo, the opening track from the debut album by the Pat Metheny Group, it was as if Lee Krasner had started flinging paint around my kitchen in the drabbest days of the pandemic. It was splashy, jubilant and alive in a way I hadn’t felt in months, and made space for contemplation amid its vivid trills. The whole album expands on those themes, braving moments of almost cheesy optimism (fit to soundtrack my favourite kind of big-city 80s film), and balancing them with quieter, more skittish grooves. One day I might have the language to approach this sophisticated record on its own terms; for now, I’m content to revel in its vibrancy. LS The Marvelettes I only really knew the Marvelettes though Bananarama’s cover of Really Sayin’ Something but a mention by Elvis Costello led me to their deeper catalogue. It’s a treasure trove of songs that have become more associated with later artists, such as Please Mr Postman (the Carpenters), The Hunter Gets Captured By the Game (Grace Jones) and When You’re Young and in Love (the Flying Pickets). With Motown’s best songwriting and production teams at their disposal, the Inkster, Michigan vocal group were obviously spoilt for songs but, with two lead singers, Wanda Young and Gladys Horton, their delivery is quite different to glossier peers such as the Supremes or the Ronettes. High school friends who formed a group initially called the Casinyets (as in “We can’t sing yet”), their 1960s career faced setbacks from a breakdown to serious illness (key member Georgeanna Tillman died aged just 35), but their voices have a youthful, gleeful, hopeful quality that I’ve found really touching. DS Lonnie Liston Smith For someone who considers themselves a rap sample connoisseur, I’m embarrassed to admit I only discovered Lonnie Liston Smith’s wider catalogue earlier this year. I knew the famed jazz keyboardist as the architect of thousands of samples in hip-hop, such as the mournful keys from A Garden of Peace that appear on Jay-Z’s Dead Presidents. I had been listening to the latter track and searched the original out of bored curiosity. The discovery felt like a door opening in my mind. Smith’s trademark jazz-funk fusion is so expansive it borders on psychedelic, and the song titles themselves suggest an urge to score the fantastical. The glimmering synths of Shadows and rolling piano runs of Inner Beauty engulf the mind, also thanks to the musician’s penchant for gorgeous, chimerical paintings as cover art. Most beautiful of all is his commitment to bringing serenity to his listener through what is not there: largely sans human vocals, his compositions are a place where the instruments themselves find a way to sing. CO A1 – Make It Good (2002) Everyone remembers the controversy surrounding gravel-voiced hitmaker Bob Dylan “going electric” in 1965, but perhaps we’ve all been focused on the wrong musical volte-face. In 2002, with seven UK Top 10s under their Burton Menswear belts, Ben, Paul, Christian and Mark, AKA boyband A1, took a huge creative risk, ditching Same Old Brand New You’s plastic drum machines in favour of lilting full-band instrumentation. Alongside producer Mike Hedges (the Cure, Travis), they created Make It Good, a Radio 2-focused opus that preceded Take That’s soft-rock relaunch by four years. At the start of lockdown 2020, I became fully obsessed with the album’s keening lead single, Caught in the Middle. All acoustic ripples, gently percolating drama and an immaculate, heaven-sent chorus melody, it tickled my brain for months. By the start of 2021 I’d moved on to the whole album. Turns out the featherlight title track is just as moreish, while Learn to Fly, One Last Song and Here Comes the Rain are laser-focused boyband ballads dressed up in Coldplay’s Yellow-era baggy cords. Sure, the album flopped, and one member quit, but what is life without risk? MC Itsuroh Shimoda – Love Songs and Lamentations (1973) The YouTube algorithm gifted me this on a crisp, dwindling October afternoon. Ever since, the Japanese artist’s 1974 psych-y folk/pop/rock album has acted as a cosy comfort, lightening my seasonal depression. Given much pop in 2021 reverted to pared-down songwriterly richness, this feels fresh and timely. Alongside the warm, intermittent flourishes from vocalists Alex Easley and Vicki Sue Robinson, and the vast melody of Shimoda’s acoustic guitar and weaving piano, his own singing flies above it all with quiet intensity. As the title suggests, these songs speak to yearning and tenderness – and though much of it is in a language I don’t understand, you can still hear the feeling pouring straight from Shimoda’s chest – sweet and unbound, fierce in its intimacy. TJ Carter the Unstoppable Sex Machine Before this year, the only thing I knew about Carter the Unstoppable Sex Machine was that they had a song called The Only Living Boy in New Cross, a pun on the Simon and Garfunkel classic that I found pleasingly bathetic, in a quintessentially British sort of way. Then, in January, I moved to New Cross and soon the title began circling my brain on a near-daily basis. For months I walked round vaguely imagining what the song sounded like, but constantly forgetting to actually listen to the thing. When I finally did, it did not disappoint. Melodically rapturous, ridiculously sentimental indie-punk with eye-wateringly try-hard lyrics: the kind of music I can’t help but love. It also sounded incredibly dated, in the best possible way: the band’s early-90s sartorial choices – fisherman beanie, garish knitwear – may have returned to SE14, but guitar music this exuberant, earnest and gloriously embarrassing rarely gets a look-in these days. RA Steely Dan Maybe it’s because of their critical re-evaluation in recent years, their arrival at meme status thereafter, or simply down to inevitability, like the passing of time itself: I spent 2021 absorbed by the colourful, fabulist yacht rock sound of Steely Dan. I was a fan before I knew I was, thanks to De La Soul’s genius interpretation of Peg. Though the original remains an irresistibly fun tale detailing the distance between ex-lovers (as does Reelin’ in the Years, from the opposite end), the Dan are at their most lovable when playing the part of commiserating friend. They’re acting in bad faith at times – the insincere coaxing of Rikki Don’t Lose That Number and the self-pitying, assumed camaraderie of Midnite Cruiser, for example. But a friend is a friend, and no better support has been extended, no better advice offered than on Any Major Dude Will Tell You. In another year that feels lost to global despair, spent fighting losing battles and well, feeling like a loser, I’ve taken solace in playing their Rikki, their Felonius, their funky one. TA Eliane Radigue – Trilogie de la Mort (1994) My 2021 Spotify Wrapped is a brutally honest, hilarious assessment of what I’ve been up to this year: pacifying a child in the car (The Lion King soundtrack, a Spice Girls best-of) and writing a book (Brian Eno’s Thursday Afternoon and other mood-softening ambient epics on endless repeat). But Eliane Radigue’s Trilogie de le Mort – another regular – has provided something more meaningful than a simple playlist to accompany work. Inspired by the six states of consciousness in the Tibetan Book of the Dead, it can silence the noise in my head, helping me lose myself entirely in the incredible beauty and simultaneous unease of Radigue’s ARP synthesiser drones. I’d admired other works by her in concert before, but my attention often wandered, craving brighter melodies and rhythms. No longer. On my headphones at night at my laptop, I marvel at how a modern instrument can create such guttural, primordial reverberations. JR • Which historic music gems did you discover this year? Share your new-to-you revelations in the comments.Moms and dads stormed into the Spotsylvania county town hall, in Virginia, in early November, hell-bent on purging all “objectionable” books from the scholastic jurisdiction. Novels containing any commentary about race, sexuality and sexual content were put under the microscope, as a fresh reactionary panic takes aim at the stacks in high school libraries. “Results for gay, 172. Results for heterosexual, two,” said Christina Burris, one of the attending parents, who used the district’s literature search function to make her point. The board relented, voting 6-0 to enact a liquidation. One of the books targeted by name was 33 Snowfish, an acclaimed 2003 novel concerning a trio of runaway teens and all sorts of sordid, Kids-ish behavior. The concerned parents of northern Virginia believed that heady themes of poverty, addiction and abuse have no place in the sanctums of learning, and therefore, the book needed to go. When Paul Cymrot heard about the meeting, he tracked down as many copies of 33 Snowfish as he could find. He soon discovered, ironically, that book was never really in the school library. 33 Snowfish is barely in print, and Cymrot tells me that it was an ebook version, lingering in some dusty corner of the school library servers, which sparked the initial animus. The moral militancy immediately backfired, because Cymrot knows a good business opportunity when he sees one. He’s owned the Spotsylvania-area Riverby Books for 25 years, and possesses a shrewd nose for the ebbs and flows of the publishing market. One bookselling truth remains eternally undefeated, explains Cymrot. When a censorious zeitgeist swallows up a novel, a lot of people will want to buy it. “It was not easy to find a box full of 33 Snowfish, but we did,” he continues. “We sold all that we bought, and we kept a couple as loaners because we wanted to make sure any students in the community could see what the fuss was about. There will always be some around.” It’s now easier than ever to read 33 Snowfish in Spotsylvania county, subverting the rightwing siege on the supposed woke conspiracy infecting school libraries. New ominous headlines about book bannings trickle in all the time. Just this month, Texas state representative Matt Krause pushed for the ousting of 850 books, including classics by Alan Moore and Margaret Atwood, from the public curriculum. A few days earlier, Parents in Kansas City stormed school conventions because they fear that their children might start internalizing the wisdom of Alison Bechdel or Angie Thomas. Two members of the board at the Spotsylvania meeting floated the idea of literally burning the offending titles, which would be an assault on both our precious norms and our precious subtext. As always, the impetus of the mania is simple, stupid and cynical. The Republican party has made a concerted effort to bring outré philosophic principles like critical race theory to the heart of our politics, which is why the Virginia governor-elect, Glenn Youngkin, spent much of his time on the campaign trail griping about Toni Morrison’s Beloved. Parents took the bait, and overnight high school librarians – those brazen extremists pushing their anti-American agendas by cataloging Pulitzer winners from 1987 – were put in the crosshairs. These books are rarely inflammatory or obscene; instead, they simply contain narratives about race, gender and inequality that chafe against prescribed American ideology. That’s more than enough for an emboldened conservative movement. But there is no evidence that the wave of book bans are actually accomplishing their intended ambition. If anything they’ve achieved the opposite effect. Sales of Beloved increased after Youngkin transformed Morrison into a partisan figure, and Jerry Craft, an author and artist who found himself on the Krause list for his 2019 graphic novel New Kid, has spoken at length about how legislative suppression is an unlikely boon for his career. “What has happened is so many places have sold so many copies because now people want to see what all the hubbub is,” he said, in an interview with the Houston Chronicle. “They’re almost disappointed because there’s no big thing that they were looking for.” In 2021, with countless different merchants all manacled together by an intercontinental supply chain, proscribing a novel is almost entirely ceremonial – more of a whinging fit than a genuine political project. The Nazis burned thousands of books after seizing Berlin in 1933. Today, if a constable comes looking to repossess your literature, a replacement copy can be delivered to your mailbox the next morning. In fact, the booksellers I spoke to for this story all seemed eager to take on the government’s injunction as a spiritual challenge – almost like a test of their moral fortitude. Mark Haber, operations manager at Houston’s Brazos Bookstore, tells me his staff put up a display featuring a selection of the books evaporating from Texas school libraries. (Beloved and Michelle Zauner’s Crying in H-Mart are performing very well.) “We had a drive where people could buy a banned book as a donation for a free library somewhere in the city,” says Haber. “The bannings feel so organized. They aren’t targeting a specific book, they’re targeting ‘books’ in general.” Brazos, of course, is part of Houston’s liberal enclave. There is a self-selection bias in his sales figures and customer clientele, which Haber happily admits. “It’s definitely a political stance,” he says. “We have customers who’ve maybe already read the book, and just want to buy it again.” In fact, Cymrot tells me that he thinks that the book-ban sales bump is truly a bipartisan phenomenon. He notices a surge regardless of what party is relitigating the library. Earlier this year, when six of Dr. Seuss’ books left circulation due to some offensive caricatures in the pages, Riverby thrived once again. “These paperbacks in our basement suddenly became collectibles,” he says. At the very least, the censorship campaigns may encourage kids to read more. I like the idea of enterprising teens wielding the Krause agenda like a summer reading list, checking off every title, one by one, until they’ve firmly opened their third eye. One of the most heartening stories that surfaced from the hysteria occurred in York county, Pennsylvania, where local ordinances forbade teachers from using a swath of texts in their lesson plans last November. (The taxonomy was bizarre. Biographies of Aretha Franklin, Malala Yousafzai and Eleanor Roosevelt were put on ice.) High schoolers around the community roused to action – staging campus protests, canvassing the local papers and eventually winning a reversal of the policy in September. Today, the confluence of students and teachers who overturned the ban are known as the Panthers Anti-Racist Union, named after the mascot of Central York high school. The group aims to continue their social justice advocacy into the future, which could soon result in much bolder action than the mealy proclivities of the local school board. “We’ve always said this organization is about creating a safe space for everyone to talk about who they are, and what their struggles are. Not just in our school community, but in their lives,” says Edha Gupta, a senior at Central York high school and a member of the Panthers Anti-Racist Union. “Any healthy way for people to genuinely express how they’re feeling about these matters. We want a place for students to feel like they have the authority to speak up about what they’re passionate about.” “I went through the list of the banned books and I thought they sounded great. My mom had a ton of them, I got others from random people,” says Olivia Pituch, another member of the union. “It’s funny, the ban made me more curious to see what they were about.”There are two ways of looking at the fact that I was given The Colour of Magic by Terry Pratchett one Christmas when I was about 11. The first: my parents thought that because I was reading a lot of fantasy novels, I was going to love this one. I’d devoured the Lord of the Rings (more than once), I’d loved Ursula Le Guin’s Earthsea trilogy, I’d munched through Redwall by Brian Jacques. I needed more and I was bound to love a book whose cover featured a chest sprouting pink human feet, a wizard and a goblin with an axe. The second: my parents thought that because I was reading a lot of fantasy novels, I needed an intervention. My eagerness for stories about swords and magic had recently led me to The Belgariad by David Eddings. These were the earnest adventures of Garion, Mister Wolf, Durnik, Torak and another bazillion characters with daft names. They were books with the potential to corrode my psyche. One passage ended with the statement “thou art truly approaching manhood, young Garion” and left me determined to avoid puberty until I was at least 21 and more able to cope with the attendant embarrassment. It was also painfully clear that most of the female characters in the books seemed to want nothing more than to be 1950s housewives – only without the labour-saving gadgets. This kind of fantasy was ripe for the kind of corrective that Pratchett promised. Talking of correctives, I should probably attend to my own premise at this point. I can see a third possibility here: I just got lucky. Maybe it’s wrong to analyse the provenance of a beloved present. Quite often the real reason you get a gift is “just because”. But never mind that. Because it’s also fun to overthink why you were given something – especially if that something has gone on to have a profound impact on your life. Which The Colour of Magic has. I was immediately swept up in the misadventures of Rincewind, the inept wizard careening around the Discworld, a flat planet floating through space on the back of four elephants, who were in turn on the back of a giant turtle called Great A’Tuin. I loved such absurd stretches of the imagination. And I loved the jokes. And the jokes about the jokes. And the footnotes attached to the jokes, which were in turn jokes. Pratchett was gleefully, unashamedly and quite gloriously silly. But he also gave me a whole new way of thinking both about fantasy and reality. The truth is that neither of the two apparently contradictory ideas I considered above actually mattered when it came to reading this first Discworld novel. The beauty of The Colour of Magic is that while it reveals and mocks plenty of the absurdities of fantasy, it never entirely undermines them. Pratchett said he wrote the book in protest against “too many dark lords, too much lack of thought” – but that he also loved the genre. He understood the appeal of escaping into strange new worlds, and he also knew that doing so had the potential to tell us something new about our own circumstances and morality. The Colour of Magic may not have had the complexity and profundity of his later works, but it still had fascinating things to say about life and death. (Not to mention a character called Death who spoke IN CAPITAL LETTERS and “in tones as deep and heavy as the banging of doors, far underground”.) It was wonderful heady stuff and it changed me. Most obviously, I was never able to take David Eddings entirely seriously again. Of course, I still read him. I still enjoyed him, in fact. But I was also able to laugh whenever anyone gave their sword a daft name or broke into faux medieval English. Meanwhile, and conversely, Pratchett also helped me to take the genre of fantasy more seriously. It made me better appreciate the books that really worked – and also helped me to start to have an idea about how and why they did succeed. Now that I myself have become a publisher of fantasy fiction I like to hope that Pratchett’s unique brand of wisdom has guided me in my work. And even if it hasn’t, I still have plenty to thank him for. Because perhaps the greatest benefit I got from reading The Colour of Magic was that it led me on to all the other Terry Pratchett novels and the endless pleasure and enlightenment they’ve given me over the years. It was a good present. I’m grateful.Puerto Rico was once a thriving agricultural hub thanks to its tropical climate, rich biodiversity, and sustainable farming traditions. Today, less than 2% of the workforce is employed in agriculture and tens of thousands of acres of arable land sit idle. Meanwhile 85% of the food eaten in Puerto Rico is imported, grocery prices are among the highest in the US and last year two in five people experienced food insecurity. “Unemployment is brutal, prices are brutal, migration from the island is brutal,” said Denise Santos, who runs Puerto Rico’s food bank. Puerto Rico, a mountainous Caribbean archipelago, is also one of the places in the world most affected by extreme weather such as storms, floods and droughts. In 2017, Hurricane Maria devastated the islands and people went hungry as ships were unable to dock at the damaged ports. In the face of so many challenges, a new wave of interest in food and farming among younger Puerto Ricans is flourishing, as part of a wider movement demanding political, environmental and social justice. Small scale sustainable farming known as agroecology is driving a resurgence in locally grown produce that chefs, farmers, entrepreneurs and researchers argue can help revitalize the local economy, improve food sovereignty and both mitigate and adapt to the climate crisis. What is agroecology? Agroecology is low impact agriculture that works with nature and local conditions to produce food sustainably so as to protect biodiversity and soil quality while drawing carbon out of the atmosphere. It involves a set of farming principles and practices that can be adapted to any ecosystem, microclimate and culture – a way of life practiced for thousands of years by indigenous people and peasant farmers. Farmers often integrate crops, livestock and trees (agroforestry) in order to maximize ecological conditions, such as a fruit orchard that aids water retention and provides shade for crops and grazing animals who in turn fertilize the earth to improve the yield. Crop rotation and crop cover are fundamental to this holistic approach, that takes into consideration the well-being of the Earth, those who produce the food as well as the local communities who eat it. Like in nature, every part of every ecosystem – which includes the farmers – help and depend on each other in some way. Contrast this to intensive industrialized farming which guzzles water, depletes the soil and burns fossil fuels (for fertilizers and powering machinery) to control the environment for genetically identical monocrop production. Advocates say agroecology offers locally driven solutions to a myriad of interconnected crises including food insecurity, biodiversity loss, environmental degradation and global heating. Agroecology is a social and political movement seeking to influence public policies so that sustainable farming benefits from government support (tax breaks, subsidies, and bailouts) currently propping up the dominant industrial agriculture system which is a major cause of biodiversity loss and accounts for more than a quarter of global greenhouse gases. “We would be far better transitioning away from the mess of the fossil fuel, planet-warming, industrial agricultural system that fights against nature, to climate-sensible agroecology that would produce the food we need while helping cool the planet down and increasing our carbon capital,” said Ricardo Salvador, director of the Union of Concerned Scientists’ food and environment program. Here we profile three agroecology farms striving to change what and how Puerto Ricans eat by challenging the political, economic and agricultural status quo. The school radicalizing a new generation El Josco Bravo, Toa Alta After graduating with a degree in agronomy – the science of soil management and intensive crop production – Ian Pagán-Roig founded the Josco Bravo project in 2004 in the wild Toa Alta mountains as an act of political and social dissidence. At the time, agroecology was either ignored completely or ridiculed as a hippy movement by Puerto Rico’s universities and government officials, so Pagán-Roig started the farm and opened a school to radicalize a new generation of farmers. “We grew up in a colonial regime being told that without the US we would die from hunger or end up like Cuba. Our ancestors and lands were exploited, agriculture was disparaged, but we are part of a new generation that sees sustainable agriculture and food sovereignty as an act of rebellion,” said Pagán-Roig, 32. Puerto Rico was one of the first places colonized by the Spanish, who for four centuries exploited the island’s natural resources through the violent displacement of indigenous people and forced migration of enslaved Africans – until the Americans seized it in 1898. Over time, both occupying forces profited from cash crop plantations where campesinos were forced to work in such miserable conditions that parents pleaded with their children to study hard in order to avoid ending up being a farmer. The poverty and stigma associated with farming helped the US to roll out its industrialization plan in the mid-20th century, leading to an exodus from rural areas as farmers switched to factories. Farmland was abandoned, as manufacturing and then tourism became the mainstay of Puerto Rico’s economy. “The agroecology revolution on the island is about psychological and social transformation to achieve food and political independence because it recognises our land and people as our most valuable resources,” Pagán-Roig said. In the past eight years, more than 600 young people have graduated the program, and more than half of them are women – itself a radical change from industrial farming, which is dominated by men. The course now works with several universities across the island, with all students learning scientific principles and sustainable production techniques within a broader social and environmental justice framework. Industrial agriculture remains dominant, but the influence of agroecology is growing in mainstream politics as global heating forces farmers to adapt or fold. At the farm, education and innovation go hand in hand since extreme unpredictable weather is the new normal. In dry periods they rely on an artificial lake built after the 2014 to 2016 drought – Puerto Rico’s worst in a century. Now they’re building a greenhouse to protect vegetables from heavy rain which set back several crops this year. But genetic diversity in crops is key for natural adaptation to a changing environment, and the small team is currently testing 30 varieties of six vegetables – carrot, cabbage, broccoli, onion, pickling cucumber, and zucchini – to identify which are most resistant to heat, pests and tropical diseases. The school hopes to celebrate the thousandth graduate during the project’s 10th anniversary, but access to land and capital continue to limit ambitions for small scale farmers. After hurricane Maria struck and destroyed 80% of crops across the island, Organización Boricua, the oldest food sovereignty and farm justice network where Pagán-Roig serves on the board, organized solidarity brigades to clean up and repair farms so they could quickly start producing food for their communities. Still, access to federal funds remains bureaucratic and painfully slow, and many small scale farmers were forced to sell up. In addition, land prices are rising as speculators and developers take advantage of tax incentives and desperation. At Josco Bravo, located just 20 miles west of the capital San Juan, only 5 of the 69 acres rented from the department of agriculture are being farmed. The densely vegetated terrain is very fertile but requires substantial investment to clear and there’s no irrigation system and limited road access. The government won’t rent smaller plots, and accessing credit is tough, so large areas of public arable land remain abandoned. Pagán-Roig said: “We saw with Maria it’s very risky to be dependent on imports for our food, and we have enough good land in Puerto Rico to sustain our fruit, vegetable and starchy dietary needs, but we lack capital resources and political will.” Fresh food for locals Güakiá Colectivo Agroecológico, Dorado The Güakiá project is the collective brainchild of four graduates from Josco Bravo whose main objective is to improve access to healthy affordable food for vulnerable local communities. The farm is located off a highway in Dorado, an economically divided municipality with both multimillion dollar beach homes and families living hand-to-mouth in houses without indoor plumbing. The land belongs to a New York-based order of nuns who agreed to rent them 11 acres in 2017 for a symbolic amount ($1 per acre per year) after they’d almost given up hope of finding somewhere affordable. Back then it was a mess, having been used for years as an unauthorized rubbish dump, and they were still cleaning up when Maria struck, leaving many without work, shelter, food or clean water. By the beginning of 2018, they were able to share the first crop – plantain, beans, yuca and papaya – with families going hungry. “Agroecology has always been a form of resistance against colonial capitalism, and here we are trying to rescue collective working and reject individualism by reconnecting people to the land and food, and building trust and solidarity,” said Marissa Reyes-Diaz, 32, a biology graduate who also works for the nonprofit El Puente: Latino Climate Action Network. (All four members of the collective have second jobs.) Agroforestry is a big focus here, and there are fragrant fruit trees growing alongside a variety of crops, which has created multiple small ecosystems that help keep precious nutrients and rainwater in the ground. (Diversity enhances a farm’s resilience, as different crops are vulnerable and resistant to different pests, climate extremes and soil deficiencies.) So far the orchards have helped them survive two very dry spells, but it’s not enough to sustain and grow the farm, even with rainwater tanks and water from a neighbouring farmer. They’re trying to raise $40,000 to build a well connecting to the underground aquifer as water remains the biggest obstacle to long term success. But Güakiá is not just a farm, it’s also a community hub where neighbors come to enjoy the green spaces and try unfamiliar produce such as beets, turmeric roots and wild basil, as well as taste tomatoes fresh from the vine. Some locals volunteer, others exchange their food waste (needed to make compost) for vegetables, and prices remain accessible. They’ve hosted festivals with live music, art exhibitions, self defence classes, yoga and dominos - a very popular Caribbean pastime - and have built an emergency shelter fitted with solar panels ready for the next climate catastrophe. Reyes-Diaz said: “Agroecology has never been just about producing food, it’s also about sustaining our physical and mental health and spiritual wellbeing.” The foodies supplying the top chefs Frutos del Guacabo, Manatí Efrén Robles and Angelie Martinez, the couple who founded Frutos del Guacabo, are foodies not farmers. With little land at their disposal, Robles, an industrial mechanic, and Martinez, a chemist, started out using a soilless growing technique known as hydroponics to grow herbs, watercress and lettuce that chefs at their favorite restaurants struggled to find. Over the past 12 years, they’ve introduced livestock and expanded their techniques and crops, but the close relationship with chefs remains at the heart of the operation which now includes a distribution network with around 50 small farmers and more than 200 restaurants. The focus is on niche produce that chefs can’t get elsewhere: they grow sishito peppers, a smoky sweet Japanese variety served sauteed coated in sea salt, and the mindblowing habanada, a fairly recent creation by an organic breeder that looks, smells and tastes like the fiery habanero without any of the heat. “We can’t compete with the main chillies and peppers, so we focus on specialties and delivering consistency, which is what chefs want,” said Robles, 40. His favorite plant is the lemon drop, a bright yellow bullet shaped solid flower, better known as the toothache plant as it contains a natural anesthetic which briefly numbs the tongue and gums – a bit like popping candy or mild pins and needles. Chefs are sprinkling a few crushed petals in drinks or sorbets as a fun palette cleanser. The farm hosts open-kitchens: demos where chefs showcase what they can make with non-native ingredients such as eggplants, turmeric and lemon balm, while farmers explain what will grow in their particular microclimates. Connecting small farmers across the island with some of its most celebrated chefs has played an important role in Puerto Rico’s popular farm-to-table movement. According to Robles, high-end restaurants play an important role in changing dietary habits. “We work with top chefs to create enthusiasm for new produce that then cascades down to cafes and communities.” The soil in the central northern part of the island, just south of the Tortuguero lagoon, one of only two natural lakes in Puerto Rico, is very sandy so passion fruit trees are among those planted in compost filled tyres to protect fragile flowers and herbs from the coastal winds. Amaranth, an ancient seed enjoying a resurgence as a superfood in the Americas but which isn’t popular in Puerto Rico, is grown at strategic pointsto serve as a natural pest control. Rabbits and sheep are raised for meat; goats for milk, cheese and dulce de leche, while trying to create new breeds suited to Caribbean conditions. They recently started experimenting with an intensive but pretty sustainable farming practice that has roots in ancient civilizations like the Mayans and Aztecs. Aquaponics involves raising fish like Tilapia in tanks and then circulating that nutrient rich water to nourish soil-free plant beds of herbs and salad greens, before recirculating the water to the tanks. But while innovative small farms, farmers markets, pop-up kitchens, vegetable box schemes and farm-to-table restaurants are gaining popularity in Puerto Rico, it’s not easy competing in an economy designed to favor foreign investments and US exports. Robles said: “Eating is a political act, and reducing our dependence on imported food will help create a locally based more sustainable economy and environment. We’ve a long way to go but I’m going to die trying.”Successful clubs crave stability because that is what keeps them at the top. It is a trait Arsenal have lacked on and off the pitch in recent years but Mikel Arteta is bringing it back and putting them on an upward curve. When Arteta arrived the team were all over the shop but he has brought together a cohesive unit thanks to his tactics and the club’s recruitment. The former midfielder has enjoyed plenty of highs and endured numerous lows in his two-year tenure while sticking to his principles, which is paying dividends. A sign of the stability is that Arteta has picked the same starting lineup for the past four Premier League games. Players want continuity, especially when it comes to the goalkeeper and backline, so they can learn about their movements, strengths and weaknesses, allowing them to create an understanding and grow together. The defence is reaping the rewards and bringing a solid base for others to build on. Aaron Ramsdale, Takehiro Tomiyasu and Ben White have slotted into a defence that could stay together for a long time, which is fantastic news for the club. Arsenal are being smart in the transfer market, signing only players aged 23 or under. It makes business sense, gives the players room to grow and offers the club financial gains because those players should hold or increase their value. Previous windows have not worked in terms of some senior signings, so bringing in younger players gives a little more freedom to allow time for development. Young players are naturally eager and it is a coach’s job to harness that in training to keep them firing. They will be hungry for a couple of seasons because they want to get called up to their international squads, win trophies and keep progressing. There will come transitional periods where Arsenal need to freshen things up but they are on a really good path. It helps that they have a number of young players for others to look up to. Emile Smith Rowe and Bukayo Saka have come through the academy and become first-team regulars. It has been a privilege to watch them grow since they were blooded in the Europa League two seasons ago, because they show what hard work and talent can achieve. I was at the Carabao Cup quarter-final against Sunderland on Tuesday and it was further evidence of the positivity around the Emirates. It was in effect their second string but they showed that competitiveness is running throughout the squad. Training must be very intense at the moment, with players pushing one another for their place in the team to ensure no one can rest on their laurels. Nuno Tavares is one of those players putting pressure on the man in front of him. He arrived from Benfica in the summer almost under the radar having not been a regular for his previous club but he has stood in for Kieran Tierney and even been selected ahead of him a few times, and Arsenal have not missed the more experienced left-back. This is not the case throughout the squad and is one of the areas Arsenal fall short in. Manchester City, Liverpool and Chelsea have two players for every position to ensure continuity. That’s where you need to be if you have regular Champions League aspirations. Arsenal are going in the right direction but there are areas to improve on. The major position holding Arsenal back is centre-forward, where they have problems. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s absence is well documented but he has also struggled for form over the past 18 months; Eddie Nketiah is yet to sign a new deal; and Alexandre Lacazette is doing well currently but it remains to be seen whether he is the long-term future as the main striker. They need to find some gem who will give them 20 goals a season if they are to reach the next level. It is interesting to look at the Aubameyang situation. Arteta has come out and said some things but we do not know fully what has happened. He is trying to build a culture and set standards and is showing that everyone, regardless of their status, is required to follow the rules. That allows players to know where they stand, which will help with creating that stability. Arsenal have struggled this season to compete with the three teams above them, losing those games in meek fashion. They have conceded 11 and scored zero goals against Manchester City, Liverpool and Chelsea, a statistic they will need to improve on to reach the same level. The Gunners will hope to still occupy fourth spot at the end of the season. With everything going on in football and the outside world there will be plenty of twists and turns and it could be a case of who copes best with the ups and downs. If you look at the past two seasons the margins are minuscule when it comes to winning the league, earning Champions League spots and determining relegation. They just need to ride this wave of momentum, because you never know where it could take them. Regardless of where Arsenal finish, the most important thing is that they improve on the previous campaign’s eighth place and keep on the upward curve Arteta and the squad have created. That is a challenge in itself but one they look set to meet.‘Everyone’s done brilliant, not just me.” I’m chatting to Lucy, an artist with Project Art Works, about the Hastings-based collective’s Turner prize nomination (they lost out to Belfast’s Array Collective in the end). Today she’s in the character of Listey Cat; Lucy’s work revolves around her love of animals, which often manifests in the form of the bright, elaborate costumes she makes and has worn to give gallery tours. “It’s given us more independence and we get to work with other artists,” she says, of the collective. “I feel lucky and chill. It’s therapeutic.” Founded in 1996, Project Art Works collaborates with neurodiverse artists and those with complex support needs, providing them with studio space, materials and facilitators. Tom, who works with lead artist Lucy, is like many of the facilitators also an artist, and is keen to stress the collaborative nature of the practice: “It’s a mutual experience,” he says. “I support Lucy and she supports me.” Neurodiversity has become something of a buzzword in recent years. It’s about replacing the stigmatisation of people with conditions such as autism with the recognition that these are simply normal variations, with qualities of their own. The Turner nomination suggests that the art world finally seems to be catching on. Though perhaps not fast enough, if some of the attitudes Project Art Works CEO and artist director Kate Adams has encountered are anything to go by: “It was only about six years ago that a head of exhibition somewhere within an organisation said to us, ‘I don’t think it’s right [to have] people with learning disabilities in an exhibition downstairs with an artist of calibre upstairs. They shouldn’t be in the same building.’” Such attitudes have been infuriatingly commonplace. Adams co-founded Project Art Works with fellow artist Jonathan Cole after attending neurodiverse classrooms with her son, who has complex needs, and noting the high standard of the work. Special schools were “these fantastic anarchic little kingdoms”, Adams tells me, producing talented artists the art world was oblivious to, and who lacked practical support. She set out with two goals in mind: to help create connections with individuals who are sometimes hard to reach, and to change perceptions though showing the work they were making. “It’s really important within an exhibition to curate a gradual insight in where the work comes from,” she says. “That tends to have a really good impact on people, because they’re seduced by these incredible artworks, many of which are extraordinary, abstract, spirited images. And then there’s a sort of deeper insight into how they were made and who they were made by.” Audiences, perhaps being less hung up on an artist’s background or identity, have always responded well. But it isn’t the audiences who are the problem. Project Art Works have spent years trying to open up institutions using the methodology they established, and for which they received Arts Council funding in 2017. Some, like MK Gallery in Milton Keynes, have been very receptive, but it hasn’t always been easy. “It’s been really hard to open up the cultural sector,” Adams says. “It is incredibly conservative, especially contemporary visual arts because it’s so aligned with theory, commerce and ego,” she says. Adams believes that they have benefited from what she calls “an existential crisis in the cultural sector about what it’s for. Covid has propelled that. And I think that’s one of the reasons why the Turner prize this year is artists’ collectives.” When they got the nomination, however, they still had to brace themselves. How has it been? “Interesting,” is the response. Some of the coverage has been patronising and dismissive, putting Project Art Works in a box marked “charity” and invoking a word that we both confess to hating: “worthy”. “That is a big put-down. It’s also a way of putting us in a box that says this isn’t real. We don’t need to take them seriously, they’re not real artists,” says Adams. “It’s a disgraceful aberration of actual thinking about what people are seeing.” Critics, she says, are heavily invested in the idea of the “artist with a capital A”, so this sort of collaborative practice simply doesn’t seem to compute. Nor does the fact that autism doesn’t somehow preclude a person from being an artist. “We never talk about our work as outsider art. It’s just art,” says Adams. People are hopefully starting to recognise this. “I think we’re in a moment. I can’t say that I absolutely trust it. But it’s a good move in the right direction.” In London, Studio Voltaire is currently hosting the first significant survey outside of the US of the American artist William Scott’s prolific 30–year practice. It features among its 80 works Scott’s utopian depictions of an alternative San Francisco, known as Praise Frisco, an inclusive place free from crime and violence, and his portraits of black politicians, celebrities and activists including Maya Angelou, Prince and Barack Obama. Refreshingly, the materials surrounding the exhibition focus on Scott’s status as an artist in his own right – as opposed to his dual diagnosis of autism and schizophrenia – and his artistic concern with community, activism and urban development. The Studio Voltaire exhibition is a collaboration with Creative Growth, a non-profit in Oakland, California, where Scott has practiced since 1992. It is here that I find him when I call him over Zoom to discuss his work and practice. His emphasis on “wholesome encounters”, he tells me, comes from a utopian desire to create a better city. “There was too much violence on the news,” he says, of his interest in architectural painting. “That’s why it makes me draw new cities … I can make a new world when I paint.” Creative Growth doesn’t just provide space, materials and facilitators for neurodiverse artists; it also acts as agents, bridging the gap between them and the art world. It’s been running since 1974, so they’ve witnessed a lot of change over the decades, though, as gallery director Sarah Galender Meyer points out, it’s been something of a slow burn when you consider that Jean Dubuffet introduced the concept of art brut in the 1940s. “Even in the past 10 years, there has been quite an increase in acceptance and excitement in the art world,” Meyer says. “It’s really being embraced, even without being under the umbrella term of ‘outsider art’, or ‘self-taught’, which is used, and it’s fine, but I think that they’re just contemporary artists. They warrant the same kind of inquiry that other artists do.” At the heart of this acceptance, Meyer thinks, may be the dawning understanding that neurodiverse artists offer something new and exciting. “Collectors and institutions and galleries … everybody’s really interested in our artists’ process. And in their work, as well. It’s not like anything that anybody’s seen before. It’s different than somebody coming out of an MFA programme.” The discovery of neurodiverse artists is often led by other artists, she tells me. “It has typically been a pattern that contemporary artists are the first to discover and applaud the work of self-taught artists. They themselves are steeped in artistic process and are attracted to other artists that embody innovative practices.” That’s not to say that there isn’t work to do in changing perceptions. “Even in major exhibitions they are not always received as contemporary artists, which further marginalises their work,” says Meyer. “There is an assumption that unless an artist has received formal training and respond to the canon, their process is not ‘legitimate’.” Encouraging artists to speak for themselves is part of Creative Growth’s ethos. As Scott says, “art can help make the world better. It will bring peace to the world, and bringing peace makes people feel lucky and happier.” Later that week I’m at Hart Club, a studio space in an old estate agent’s shop in Lambeth, London, looking at some of the work its members have produced. Though much smaller and much newer than Creative Growth and Project Art Works, it shares with them a dedication to championing neurodiversity in the arts by working closely with small groups of neurodiverse artists and exhibiting their work. I’m here to meet Yangdzom Lama, an artist who works here, and whose paintings are like a beautiful, colourful mix of Frida Kahlo-esque symbolism and Tibetan thangka paintings of Buddhist deities. “I don’t remember this, but my dad used to be a thangka painter, and apparently I used to watch him when I was really little. So I guess all the colours got ingrained into my life.” “I’d love to be in exhibitions in galleries. That would be a dream come true,” Lama says, when I ask what she hopes for. Hart Club has given her happiness and a sense of community. “I did a term of art school at Camberwell College of Arts but I didn’t really like that,” she says. “There was just too many people (there were 600 on art foundation). At the time, I didn’t know that I was on the autism spectrum either.” “One thing that’s really wonderful about [Hart Club] is they know that I’m on the spectrum and they’re really accommodating towards that and just really nice. Back in Camberwell, I felt like they weren’t really aware of that kind of thing.” It wasn’t that she didn’t make friends at art school, she explains, so much as the fact that the tutors felt very removed. “It was hard to figure out who you could ask for assistance.” Hart Club was set up by artist and art school graduate Helen Ralli in 2018 after she worked on an exhibition of neurodiverse artists’ work called Great Minds Think Different. “I was really blown away by the work that I saw,” she says. But there was a disconnect between the work’s quality and where it was being seen, which was mostly limited to a community setting, so she resolved to provide a platform for some of the artists to exhibit. “Those events were a really mixed crowd, very different from the kind of typical art openings that I personally was experiencing before,” says Ralli. Neurodiverse people are often excluded from such environments, not to mention art school. Ralli said she saw first-hand how “incredibly selective” it is: “It felt lacking in terms of a creative environment, because it was the same people.” Hart Club is an alternative that aims to provide time, materials and encouragement in a nonhierarchical environment, with an emphasis on co-working. “I don’t think it’s about emulating the existing structures. It’s not about ticking boxes. It’s about having to completely rework and rewrite what creative spaces look like.” Like others in the field, Ralli finds the charity label problematic. “That’s really not what’s happening here,” she says. “Whether they’re a facilitator, or one of the artists, everyone is learning.” She also stresses that a diverse environment is a gift to be embraced by neurotypical artists as well. “Until you’ve really experienced what it is to have a culturally diverse space, I don’t think the true value of it is understood. This is more exciting, enhancing and enriching.” • Turner prize 2021 is on display at Herbert Art Gallery and Museum, Coventry, until 12 January and William Scott is at Studio Voltaire, London, until 2 January.England have named a 16-player squad for their T20 matches in West Indies next month, with Eoin Morgan leading a group containing 11 players who reached the T20 World Cup semi-final in November. With Chris Silverwood on Ashes duty, Paul Collingwood will coach the team in the five-match series to be played in Barbados from 22-30 January. Marcus Trescothick, Collingwood’s former England batting partner, will join the squad as assistant coach. There are two previously uncapped players in Gloucestershire’s David Payne and Sussex’s George Garton, both left-arm seamers. Garton was called up for England’s one-day squad to face India in the summer but did not play. Phil Salt, who made his England debut last summer in the ODI series with Pakistan, could also make his T20 bow. Despite the absence of T20 regulars Jos Buttler, Jonny Bairstow and Dawid Malan, all with the Ashes party in Australia, the squad still leans heavily on the players who lost to New Zealand in the World Cup semis in the UAE. The next T20 World Cup takes place in Australia in October next year, and Morgan has hinted it may be his last assignment as England’s white-ball captain. “We have selected a strong squad with some serious batting power and a balanced attack as we begin preparations ahead of the T20 World Cup in Australia,” said Collingwood. ‘The next World Cup is less than a year away and there will be increased opportunities for the squad in the absence of those players who are with the Ashes squad. “I have good memories winning a World Cup in Barbados and I’m really looking forward to going back there with this squad to face a very good West Indies who will test all aspects of our skills.” England T20 squad to face West Indies Eoin Morgan (Middlesex – captain), Moeen Ali (Worcestershire), Tom Banton (Somerset), Sam Billings (Kent), Liam Dawson (Hampshire), George Garton (Sussex), Chris Jordan (Surrey), Liam Livingstone (Lancashire), Saqib Mahmood (Lancashire), Tymal Mills (Sussex), David Payne (Gloucestershire), Adil Rashid (Yorkshire), Jason Roy (Surrey), Phil Salt (Lancashire), Reece Topley (Surrey), James Vince (Hampshire).Two days until Christmas, eh? Why not put aside your last-minute panic-buying, your anxiety about whether the day will go well, and your distress that nothing seems as magical as it did when you were a kid by doing the Thursday quiz? Fifteen questions on topical and general knowledge, with a few of our beloved regulars like Kate Bush, Ron from Sparks and 🎶Ding dong merrily on high 🎶 the anagrams are back. Let us know how you get on in the comments, and we are sure this week you will definitely all spot the hidden Doctor Who reference. The Thursday quiz, No 35 If you do think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quiz master’s word is always final, and you don’t want him sneaking down your chimney late at night. Also he is on holiday so isn’t looking at his email.As the Biden administration attempts to increase incentives for the production of electric vehicles, labor unions and climate groups have teamed up to push for better wages and working conditions for autoworkers – and leave the door open for the nascent EV industry to unionize. Last month, leaders from some of the largest environmental groups in the country sent a letter to top executives at Toyota, lambasting the automaker for appearing to support the electric vehicle revolution all while lobbying against a proposed tax credit for union-made electric cars. The tax credit would give $4,500 to consumers who buy electric from unionized US plants – currently just Ford, General Motors and Stellantis NV would qualify – and has been hotly opposed by companies like Tesla, Honda, Hyundai and Nissan. But Toyota went a step further and began funding ads in papers like the New York Times, Wall Street Journal and trade press claiming the federal bonus would hurt non-union autoworkers. (All electric vehicles, union or not, would remain eligible for an existing $7,500 tax credit.) Representatives from 12 groups – including the Sierra Club, the League of Conservation Voters and Evergreen Action – blasted Toyota for “greenwash[ing] its image” and called its lobbying “extensive and unacceptable”. The organizations rejected Toyota’s claim that incentivizing electric vehicles with union labor would hurt the nation’s climate targets, and said its “manipulation of the political system and undermining action on climate is not limited to the United States”. This came on the heels of another letter from prominent climate groups, urging electric vehicle start-up Rivian to respect workers’ wishes should they decide to unionize, and permit what’s known as a card check process. Rivan, which went public last month in the biggest US IPO since Facebook, is poised to ramp up vehicle production in the next year. Ten climate groups, including Friends of the Earth, Greenpeace USA, Sunrise Movement and 350.org, signed on to the letter – and said therein that they had reached out to Rivian privately in August. After two months with no response, the groups decided to take their demand for labor peace public. The president of the United Auto Workers announced in the spring that his union was planning to organize EV workers. As lawmakers in Congress continue to hash out a wide-ranging social spending bill, labor unions, climate groups and prominent liberal thinktanks have joined forces to make the case that reducing emissions while creating unionized manufacturing jobs in the US is not only possible – but better for consumers and manufacturers alike. *** This isn’t the first time that labor and climate groups have found common ground – but it represents a revitalized alliance that could help strengthen both the fight for reducing emissions and for bolstering worker rights. Transportation is the largest source of pollution in the country, and the growth of non-union auto work has been accompanied by a nearly 20 percent decline in wages in the auto industry since 1990. “The fight for environmental and economic justice –the right for every American worker to not just survive but to thrive – are inextricably linked,” wrote UAW president Ray Curry and Center for American Progress founder John Podesta in a joint-op-ed this summer. Rivian is not the only vehicle manufacturer that green groups have been targeting, according to Katherine García, who leads the Transportation for All campaign at the Sierra Club. “Behind the scenes there are other vehicle manufacturers we’re working with on labor peace,” she told the Guardian, adding that they’ve been holding one-on-one meetings to make their case. While environment and labor groups have not always seen eye-to-eye, the two have a history of shared interests. Josiah Rector, an urban historian at the University of Houston who has studied the 20th century environmental movement, noted that the UAW has previously fought against toxic chemicals and pollution in auto plants. But in the 1970s, says Rector, automakers viewed the fight for cleaner air and other environmental standards as yet another threat to their bottom line, at a time when they were already hurting from two major oil crises, intensifying deindustrialization, and the closing of manufacturing plants. Automakers began to play “environmental blackmail” against their workers, insisting that any further regulation from the government would force companies to cut even more jobs. “UAW, under threat of job blackmail, helped the companies lobby for a weaker Clean Air Act, which really strained tensions with the environmental movement,” said Rector. Erik Loomis, a labor historian at the University of Rhode Island, also noted that the decline in industrial unions has especially hurt the unions that were more progressive to begin with – widening the gap between climate progressives and labor. “That left you with the longtime more conservative unions, and as environmentalism has become more of a rich person’s movement it also became disconnected from working-class culture,” Loomis said. “I think the reality is climate groups have now realized that’s politically untenable and they need to build working-class coalitions if they want to get climate change legislation passed,” he adds. In other words, Loomis said, whether the modern-day solidarity is an alliance of deeply shared values or of convenience, the fact is that “neither are particularly strong enough on their own to get laws passed.” Jason Walsh, executive director of the BlueGreen Alliance, a coalition of labor unions and national environmental groups, attributes the work they’ve been doing recently to many years of relationship building, but credits the Build Back Better Act for catalyzing their efforts in 2021. “That has focused everyone’s attention, and there’s an understanding that we need to reverse this trend of offshoring and de-unionization that’s hollowed out communities across the country,” he said. *** The White House has set an ambitious goal of making half of all new car sales electric by 2030. Even with the united front from labor and climate groups, and the strong backing of a unionized EV sector from Joe Biden, it’s not clear the union-made tax credit will make it through the Senate. West Virginia senator Joe Manchin has voiced opposition to the subsidy, saying that taxpayer dollars shouldn’t be used as an incentive for consumers. Republican governors with non-union auto facilities have also urged Congress to reject the tax credit, and Elon Musk, the CEO of Tesla, called Biden a “UAW … puppet” on Twitter. (Brian Rothenberg, a spokesperson for UAW, declined an interview, saying their focus is on passing the Build Back Better Act.) For now labor and climate groups are scrambling to get the bill over the finish line, and make the case that in order to compete effectively in the global electric vehicle revolution, the US needs to invest more in the workers who make the cars on American soil. Sam Ricketts, co-director of Evergreen Action, said while there have been signs of solidarity between unions and environmental organizations in recent years, the steps being taken in the electric vehicle debates, like climate groups pressuring companies directly and publicly, represent something new and more concerted. “This is new work happening in civil society, with groups recognizing that organizing can happen in the commercial sphere, not just the halls of Congress,” he said. “It’s leading-edge in that way.” Rector, the University of Houston historian, said that if climate and labor groups want to surmount the problems that have plagued their solidarity efforts in the past, they’ll need a plan to defeat arguments that climate goals are zero-sum for union workers. “To solve the environmental blackmail problem, you need to have strong policies that undercut the argument coming from corporations and today from politicians like Joe Manchin,” he said. “And to do that, you need a strong coalition to push those policies through.”The UK, European Union and the US have received more doses of Covid-19 vaccines in the past six weeks than African countries have all year, according to analysis from the People’s Vaccine Alliance (PVA). The research comes after the former UK prime minister Gordon Brown called the rollout a “stain on our soul” and organisations and charities stepped up calls for Moderna and Pfizer to share their vaccine recipes, and for governments to distribute urgently needed vaccines to poorer nations. The Amnesty International-backed organisation, which is made up of a number of not-for-profits including Human Rights Watch and Oxfam, says that despite making billions in profit Pfizer and Moderna continue to refuse to share the new generation of vaccine technology. Its push to get the companies to waive their intellectual property rights has won backing from global leaders, including Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon. Between 11 November and 21 December, the EU, UK and US received 513m vaccine doses while the continent of Africa received 500m throughout the whole of 2021. Governments such as the UK risk “trapping the world in an endless cycle of variants, boosters, restrictions and even lockdowns” if low vaccination rates are allowed to persist in the global south, said the PVA. Anna Marriott, the health policy manager at Oxfam and the PVA, said blocking vaccine access in poorer countries was “prolonging the pandemic and all its suffering for every one of us”. Reliance on boosters was misjudged and could only be “a temporary and inadequate firewall”, she said. “Extinguishing the threat of variants and ending this pandemic requires vaccinating the world. And that means sharing vaccine recipes and letting developing countries manufacture jabs for themselves.” Just 8.6% of people in Africa have been vaccinated and at the current rate of delivery by manufacturers it will not be until April 2023 that everyone will receive a first dose. G7 countries will have 1.4bn surplus doses by March 2022, even after giving all adults a booster, but are failing to deliver on donation pledges. The US has delivered a quarter of the vaccines it promised to donate while the UK and Germany have delivered 15% and 14% respectively. In an interview with the BBC World Service, Brown said a further 5 million people could die from Covid worldwide if vaccine access was not improved soon. He said: “It’s really a stain on our global soul and it affects us all – because I think people are beginning to realise that if we allow the disease to spread in poor countries and the virus mutates, it comes back to haunt even the fully vaccinated.” The PVA analysis comes after the World Health Organization (WHO) chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, commented that “no country could booster its way out of the pandemic”. The WHO director general said on Wednesday: “Blanket booster programmes are likely to prolong the Covid-19 pandemic, rather than ending it, by diverting supply to countries that already have high levels of vaccination coverage, giving the virus more opportunity to spread and mutate”. WHO scientists are attempting to reverse engineer Moderna’s U taxpayer-funded vaccine, a process that would take two years less if the company shared its recipe. Human Rights Watch and Médecins Sans Frontières identified more than 100 manufacturers that could produce mRNA vaccines if intellectual property barriers were removed and pharmaceutical companies transferred the technology and knowledge required.Chile always gave the lie to the cold war claim that the United States stood for democracy. When its voters in 1970 showed the temerity (“irresponsibility”, Henry Kissinger called it) to elect socialist Salvador Allende as president, Washington helped orchestrate the coup that toppled him, and backed the resulting dictatorship. It seems those “irresponsible” Chilean voters are at it again – on Sunday, they elected leftist Gabriel Boric as president by a 12-point margin, on the back of a campaign for a new constitution. But if Chilean democracy seems on the road to recovery from its Washington-backed disfiguration, prospects for democracy in the United States look rather bleak. Sunday also saw Joe Manchin brandish the veto power the US system grants a senator representing fewer than 300,000 voters to tank the agenda of a president chosen by 80 million. And that was but the latest reminder that Americans are not governed by the democratic will of the citizenry. The US supreme court looks ready to strike down abortion rights supported by about two-thirds of the electorate, while Democrats in office seem unable or unwilling to deliver on basic social programs supported by a majority of voters, whether on drug prices or childcare or public health, and much more – or to prevent Republicans brazenly reengineering state-level laws and procedures to prevent voters of color from ever again making the difference they made in 2020. Minority rule is a feature, not a bug of the US constitutional system. Donald Trump was legitimately elected president in 2016 despite losing by 3m votes. And 6 January notwithstanding, the Republican party needs no coup to lock itself into power for the foreseeable future, even if it represents a diminishing minority of voters. The US constitution provides all the tools they’ll need: the electoral college; the US Senate (two seats per state means it can be controlled with less than 20% of the national vote); the supreme court the Senate effectively picks; and the state houses empowered to set voting laws and rules, and even redraw districts to partisan advantage. The framers of the constitution never intended that every American would have a vote, much less a vote of equal value. They created a system to regulate a society ruled by and for wealthy white male settlers engaged in the conquest and subordination of the country’s Indigenous and Black populations. Decades of bitter struggle on the streets have won Black and Brown people far more access to the US political system than the founders ever intended. Still, even the gains codified in the civil rights era are being consciously rolled back by a billionaire-funded white nationalist party looking to cement its hold on power for the foreseeable future against any demographic headwinds. Ineffectual appeals to “save our democracy” reflect the paralysis of mainstream Democrats in the face of the Republican offensive that has weaponized a minority-rule constitutional system. Nor is a majority of citizens easily able, within its rules, to change these anti-democratic provisions of the US constitution: even minor changes require agreement by two-thirds of each house of Congress, and three-quarters of the 50 states. Democratizing the United States – creating a system of government shaped by every citizen having the right to a vote of equal value – would require a different constitution, democratically adopted by a national community quite different from the one imagined by the founding fathers. But that’s what Chileans are attempting. *** Boric is a product of a student rebellion a decade ago that fed into a broader social justice movement focused on issues ranging from austerity, a failing social safety net, healthcare and economic inequality to gender violence and Indigenous rights. While even center-left governments were stymied from delivering on voter expectations, many in this parliament of the streets recognized that their grievances were products of the democracy deficit built into the dictatorship’s 1980 constitution to ensure continuity of its economic model. Although it allowed Chileans to elect their president and lower house of parliament, that constitution built in minority vetoes, such as appointing one-third of senators and much of the judiciary, as failsafe mechanisms to prevent democratically elected politicians from enacting the systemic changes demanded by voters. Thus the emergence of a democracy movement based outside formal political parties, which in late 2019 won a referendum to have a new constitution democratically drafted. That movement’s energy also propelled Boric to power. So, does Chile have lessons to teach US progressives? It’s a question worth investigating. Sure, the US is nowhere near a point where public opinion recognizes the need for a new constitution. But it’s equally clear that the US fails as a democracy – and the morbid implications of US minority-rule-with-a-democratic-face can’t credibly be avoided. Curiously enough, US conservatives have never been shy to follow Chilean examples: the shrink-government campaign that began in the Reagan era was road-tested by Chile’s dictatorship under the tutelage of US “free-market” ideologues. And President GW Bush, in his 2005 effort to privatize social security, cited Chile as the model to emulate. But the Chilean popular rebellion against that same neoliberal model, and the potential it has raised for a democratic reordering of power and of that country’s social contract, suggests that the right are not the only Americans who may have something to learn from Chile. Tony Karon is a South African-born journalist and former anti-apartheid activist. He is currently the Managing Editor of AJ+Ghost pingos, unique ponds forged by the ice age and buried during the era of industrial agriculture, are to be excavated to revive wildlife on two former farms. Rare species including the scarce emerald damselfly and the northern pool frog are set to return to the pingos, which are being restored on farmland next to Thompson Common near Thetford in Norfolk, a little-known nature reserve whose 400 ancient ponds make it the pingo capital of Britain. The first of 26 ghost pingos on Watering Farm is being excavated by Norfolk Wildlife Trust, a painstaking process which requires soil to be removed an inch at a time under expert supervision. The restorers hope to precisely locate the former bottom of the pond to open up the still-viable seed bank that remains from when the ponds were filled in by a desire to “improve” farmland over the last 150 years. “This is restoration from within,” said Jonathan Preston of Norfolk Wildlife Trust. “You can dig a pond anywhere but the unique thing with these is getting down to that original sediment which will unlock an ancient seed bank.” “Pingo” is an Inuit word for hill, and the ponds were the result of springs forming subterranean ice pinnacles during the last ice age. When these melted, hundreds of small round ponds were created. The pingos’ excavation will be overseen by experts led by Prof Carl Sayer of University College London, who has spearheaded the Norfolk Ponds Project, which has restored 250 lost ponds across the region. Sayer said: “We know from our research that often quite rare plants can be preserved. Can we bring back things that are lost even from Thompson Common? We’re disturbing sediment from a time when there were no sprays, no fertilisers and much wilder places, so plants can come back and say hello.” Once the original shape of the pond is excavated, the depressions will fill up naturally with an upwelling of water from the aquifer, releasing naturally filtered and nutrient-poor water in which sensitive aquatic plants and invertebrates such as diving beetles can flourish. Initial tests by Sayer’s team have identified the dark layers of ancient pond sediment and seeds within it on the 60 acres of Watering Farm. Norfolk Wildlife Trust is also planning to resurrect up to 40 ghost pingos it has identified on 130-acre Mere Farm, which it acquired after a fundraising appeal to expand the unique landscape of Thomson Common. The ghost ponds are first detected using old maps and aerial “lidar” laser scanning which reveals the ponds in hi-tech 3D maps. This joining up and restoration of wetland habitats is crucial for the prospects of rare species such as the northern pool frog, which was reintroduced in Thompson Common in 2005. The native frog, which became extinct in Britain in the 1990s, is doing well, but requires a network of warm pools with surrounding vegetation in which to thrive. Crucial to the success of resurrecting the ghost pingos is to remove subterranean drains that were installed in the 1970s when the land was intensively farmed. Traditional Breckland grassland will be revived around the pingos as a species-rich mosaic of glades, scrub and larger trees is allowed to develop. One of Sayer’s previous restorations brought to the rediscovery of grass-poly, a delicate pink wildflower that is one of Britain’s rarest plants and had been lost to Norfolk for a century. He said that some seeds in ancient sediments could possibly remain viable for hundreds of years. Sayer predicted that the ghost pingos would be brimming with life by this time next year. “When you restore ponds and go back there, sometimes it’s just gobsmacking. It’s almost the most successful form of restoration we know of in Britain – you create systems that are flourishing, alive and very quickly working again.”On Wednesday, the New York Times – and others – published what appeared to be good news. “Omicron infections seem to be milder, three research teams report” read the headline. Many readers must have been relieved to see this news, especially with cases sky-rocketing even as the holiday season is in full swing. As someone living with post-viral conditions exacerbated by Long Covid, I read the story carefully. I noted the preliminary nature of the data from South Africa, Scotland and England, and the prediction that the greater infectiousness of Omicron would still likely land many people in hospitals already strained to capacity. But despite these caveats, I felt little relief or reassurance after reading the article. It contained no mention at all of Long Covid. Not one. This is not a benign oversight; it’s a fundamental and dangerous misread of our global predicament and the future that awaits us. We’ve still got a lot to learn about Covid-19, including this new variant. But one thing we know for certain is that “mild Covid” can be debilitating and lead to long-term or permanent disease and disability. We now know that at least 10-30% of those who survive any Covid infection (from asymptomatic or “mild”to severe) will go on to live with (and sometimes die from) long Covid – a long-term, lifelong, or even life-threatening or fatal, disabling chronic syndrome, the biological pathways of which are still largely unknown. Even before Omicron, the CDC estimates there have been at least 146.6m Covid infections in the United States alone – meaning at least 15 million people are estimated to have long Covid. And now, many formerly healthy people who now have long Covid face the Omicron wave made more vulnerable by conditions known to greatly increase risk of severe or fatal Covid – including long Covid-associated diabetes, strokes and lung disease. As Omicron entered the news in November, early reports from South Africa noted that many cases were mild. In some ways, this was utterly predictable – the nation has a relatively young population, and more severe disease often takes several weeks to develop. But the rapid dissemination of this speculation was not politically neutral. And the potential consequences are not mild at all. The “mild” theme was quickly picked up by leaders who have vowed to never repeat the lockdowns and other restrictions of previous waves. A faster-spreading strain in the lead-up to a holiday travel season in many areas of the world would have drastic economic implications. It also was an opportunity for dog whistles on “herd immunity”, the bot-fueled and misguided notion embraced by some of the same forces promoting climate science denial: that preventing Covid-19 spread would become unnecessary or even harmful by delaying natural immunity or the evolution of a truly globally insignificant dominant strain. But Omicron, more resistant to vaccines and natural immunity, is driving a huge global wave of infection. Thus, even if there’s a higher percentage of mild cases, we expect a terrible toll in mortality and strained health systems. One individual infection can rapidly spiral into a multi-generational tragedy, multiplied on a world scale. Any one young person’s mild infection this Christmas could rapidly become their grandparent’s demise. And few reports on Omicron even mentioned long Covid as a concern. If we were in the early, terrifying days of 2020, perhaps we could forgive the beleaguered general public and frazzled world leaders for not also referencing long Covid as a terrible consequence of a Covid surge. After all, those of us living with post-viral conditions – such as ME/CFS, dysautonomia, postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (Pots) – are used to being ignored, disbelieved, or misadvised. We were on few radars before Covid; even now, the National Institutes of Health (NIH)‘s Recover Initiative on Long Covid has all but ignored post-viral researchers and sidelined patient advocates. But it’s been abundantly clear for more than a year that even asymptomatic infection brings a significant risk of long Covid – a wide spectrum of more than 200 symptoms and conditions that can appear months after initial infection or apparent recovery, and leave children, adults and elders disabled, chronically ill and desperate for medical care, income, housing or even recognition that their suffering is from real physical conditions. On 15 December, South Africa’s Dr Salim Abdool Karim, who co-authored Omicron SARS-CoV-2 variant: a new chapter in the COVID-19 pandemic in the Lancet, told a global Zoom audience: “I have no idea what’s in store for us as far as long Covid is concerned … It’s a really important question, and it’s particularly so because Omicron is spreading so fast and so widely so quickly – the number of people getting infected is so big that … if it’s a common consequence of even mild infection, you can imagine, even if in 10% of people, there’s going to be a lot of people with long Covid. It’s certainly something we want to keep a beady eye out on.” As comrades in a terrible journey, people with post-viral conditions have shared all we have learned with people with long Covid – like the importance of resting and pacing instead of pushing through ME/CFS fatigue, and the jarring reality that ME/CFS has the lowest amount of NIH research funding relative to the burden of disease in the population. We now shudder to think that more will be joining our ranks. There is nothing mild about the massive wave of loss and suffering washing over our world. As a global community, we parrot phrases such as “the majority of cases are mild” at our peril. We’ve already lost too many lives from the false hope that Covid-19 will become more mild or subside. We’ve gone months without significant investments in indoor ventilation, distribution of effective masks and global vaccine access. We need sustained systems of benefits, housing security and basic income support for avoiding Covid infection or dealing with post-viral illness. It’s time to choose our words, and our policies, much more carefully. Let it begin by including analysis of long Covid and post-viral illness in any reporting, speculation or policies, starting with this Omicron wave. JD Davids, a health justice strategist working with networks of disabled and chronically ill people, including people living with HIV, long Covid and ME/CFS, is the lead author of Chronic Injustice: Centering Equitable Health Care and Policies for COVID-19 and Other Chronic Conditions. He has served as an external expert advisor to the NIH and CDC, is a contributing member of the Patient-Led Research Collaborative, and is the founder of Strategies for High Impact (S4HI)When it comes to the surging Omicron variant of Covid, just about all I’m hearing is advice about holiday planning. Should one attend a holiday party? Travel? Meet friends at a restaurant? Much of the answer boils down to how to calculate one’s tolerance for risk when so little is known about Omicron except that it spreads easily. Experts are throwing around a lot of numbers. Columnists are sharing their own personal calculations. I understand. We’re all a bit spooked and don’t know exactly what to do. Calculations offer a degree of reassuring certitude. But why does America need to turn this latest Covid surge — as we do so much else — into a question of individual risk, personal calculation, and self-concerned choice? Personal responsibility is important, of course. But I worry that this hubbub over individual risk assessment is distracting us from what we need to do now as a society to be readier for Omicron than we were for Delta or for the first Covid surge. It also plays directly into the hands of anti-vaxxers who want to believe Covid is only about personal choice. On Friday’s Fox Business, Florida Governor Ron DeSantis was asked if he was getting the booster. DeSantis smirked, shook his head no, and then went into a long harangue about why people should make vaccine decisions “for themselves.” This past weekend, at Turning Point USA, the Maga college Republican spin-off (whose founder died from Covid-19 last summer), Sarah Palin said it would be “over my dead body” that she got vaccinated (no pun intended). And Tucker Carlson (perhaps the most harmful person in America these days) railed against those who are urging vaccination, saying they just want to “punish people.” Carlson then praised the “naturally immune” who “earned it.” It’s too easy for the rest of us to respond to this rubbish by telling ourselves that anti-vaxxers will pay the price because they’re putting themselves at much higher risk of being hospitalized and even dying. But this kind of thinking reflects the same dangerous fallacy — that each of us must make such life-or-death decisions solely for themselves. On Friday, Jeff Zients, the White House Covid coordinator, inadvertently promoted this fallacy by telling reporters that while the administration will work to minimize Omicron disruption for the vaccinated, the unvaccinated should expect “a winter of severe illness and death for yourselves, your families....” In reality, all of us are in this together. And so far, all of us together are failing. America’s rate of deaths from Covid is the highest of all advanced nations. Fewer than 62 percent of us are fully vaccinated — the lowest of all advanced nations. Those who continue to refuse to get vaccinated are endangering the rest of us — and not just because they’re increasing the risk of a “breakthrough” infection in those of us who have been fully vaccinated. As Omicron surges, the unvaccinated are likely to overwhelm hospitals throughout the land, making it harder for our entire health system to respond to all health needs and emergencies. The unvaccinated are also incubators for the next variant. Anti-vaxxers aside, the emphasis on individual risk is allowing us to forget the social needs that became exposed when the pandemic first hit in early 2020 — most of which are still unmet. America is still doing almost no contact tracing compared to other advanced nations. Rapid Covid tests are still difficult to find, and too expensive. (The free tests that the Biden administration is touting won’t be available until next month.) N95 masks are still in short supply. There’s still little or no coordination among different levels of government. Biden’s order that large businesses require employees to be vaccinated remains stuck in the federal courts. Hospitals in many places still don’t have enough Intensive Care Units. We could once again face a shortage of ventilators. Too many workplaces are still unsafe. They’re still not required to test employees and report all Covid infections. They still don’t have to provide personal protective equipment. Workers still can’t stay home for fear of getting the Omicron variant at work because we still don’t have a national system of paid leave (thanks to Joe Manchin and senate Republicans). They can’t quit their jobs because extended unemployment insurance has run out. America still isn’t taking the lead in getting vaccines to poor nations around the world, thereby allowing more variants to emerge. I’m unable to advise you about whether you should attend that holiday party or cancel your travel plans. But I can assure you that what we’re facing is not just a matter of personal choice or individual risk tolerance. We’re facing another test of America’s capacity to respond to a public-health crisis. And the safety of every one of us depends on the nation doing better this time than we did before. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comOn Sunday, Senator Joe Manchin finally said the word that many have expected from him for a long time: “no”. After a year of mammoth negotiations over the Biden administration’s social welfare and climate legislation, called Build Back Better, the senator from West Virginia told Fox News that it was time to stop trying and move on. At the same time, he released a statement blaming inflation, the national debt and Covid-19 – in other words, anything but himself – for the failure to reach a deal. The White House was reported to be “blindsided” by the news. But progressives have long seen this moment coming. All year long progressives in Congress have been negotiating with moderates like Manchin over the Biden administration’s legislative priorities. They agreed to support an infrastructure bill which the moderates badly wanted (and which was, to be fair, a good piece of legislation) in exchange for assurances that Build Back Better would also pass Congress. They stuck by this deal through thick and thin, even when Manchin insisted on defanging many of its climate provisions. They didn’t even balk when asked to drop their demand that both pieces of legislation pass Congress at the same time, which would have prevented Manchin from shirking on the agreement later. In return, progressives got screwed – badly. For all the talk over the last few years of the emergence of a “tea party of the left” or moderate hair-rending over the social media antics of “the Squad”, progressives in Congress approached these negotiations constructively, reasonably, and in good faith. They put aside their concerns about Joe Biden and gave him the wins he wanted on centrist priorities, even when that meant delaying action on their own. And they did this even though the evidence is that the main components of the Build Back Better agenda are overwhelmingly popular with the public at large and might even help to save an administration which the public sees as badly adrift. This outcome is devastating for the future of trust and cooperation within the Democratic party. Progressives can hardly be expected to continue to subordinate their own goals to those of the moderate wing in the future or trust moderate leaders to work towards progressive goals. There’s not likely to ever be a “tea party of the left”, but progressives can be expected to start exerting themselves much more vigorously through public debate, legislative negotiation and launching primary challengers against the centrists who thwart their agenda. Progressives are also likely to be emboldened because Manchin’s betrayal provides additional validation for two important components of their critique of the Democratic party. The first is that the party has been too willing to put corporate interests above tackling social welfare and climate change. Manchin not only represents the coal state of West Virginia but also profits handsomely from the industry personally. This consideration can hardly have been far from his mind when he forced the removal from the Build Back Bill of a provision which would have done more than anything to force energy companies to phase out fossil fuels. With the future of the planet at stake and figures like Manchin blocking the party from doing anything about it, progressives can only conclude that the party itself needs transforming. The second progressive critique which has been vindicated by this turn of events is the charge that the Democratic party’s leadership is too complacent and chummy – some might also add old – to face up to the challenges facing America today. Throughout this year, Biden has barely lifted a finger in public to shepherd Build Back Better through Congress. If activists used to worry about the deals that got done behind closed doors in smoke-filled rooms, then 2021 was the year of the smoke-filled Zoom: a hazy interminable conversation between the president and Manchin which never seemed to yield any concrete results, but which did just enough to keep Biden quiet in public. If the president had seen himself as more of a crusader for progressive goals than a former senator still working the room, there’s no guarantee the outcome would have been different. But one thing is for sure: the approach he did take failed. Trust takes years to build and only a single act to destroy. And unfortunately, there’s no time now to rebuild it, because Manchin’s blow comes as Democrats have only a short time to pass major legislation before campaigning begins for the midterms. This could meanlosing out not only on salvaging some parts of Build Back Better, but also on crucial action on safeguarding voting rights. And without any significant new accomplishments, the party faces dim prospects in 2022 and 2024. As imperfect a vehicle for progressive hopes as it is, the Biden presidency may be the last in a long time with both the desire and the capabilities to tackle social inequality, hold back the rise of the oceans, and safeguard American democracy. Manchin and his enablers may have just killed it. Progressives will never forgive, and they will never forget. Andrew Gawthorpe is a historian of the United States and host of the podcast America ExplainedYou could forgive the good burghers of Goole for being a bit put out: what chance do they have against Gibraltar? Old feuds have been dusted off and battle lines drawn, as the competition to decide which town will be awarded city status as part of the Queen’s platinum jubilee celebrations begins in earnest – with the Cayman Islands, Gibraltar and the Falklands included for the first time. The competition, in which 39 places across the UK and British overseas territories will contend to become a city, is part of a series of planned celebrations to mark the Queen’s 70-year reign next year. City status is traditionally associated with having an Anglican cathedral, although this link has long since been broken and the monarch can elevate towns based on the advice of the government. Among the smaller Davids hoping to take on the Goliaths of British overseas territories and crown dependencies is Marazion, a small Cornish village outside Penzance (population 1,440) and Oban in the Scottish highlands (population 8,490). The chair of the Marazion Chamber of Commerce, Paul Elliott, said that while the picturesque nook on the shore of Mount’s Bay was a “small town”, its business welcomed more than 400,000 British and international visitors each year. The smallest city in the UK currently is St David’s in Wales, which has a population of 1,841. The mood was bullish in Goole, east Yorkshire, with a report from East Riding council declaring confidently that it had “a good case for success” even if it was taking on its unofficial twin town, Gibraltar. The Humber port town is best known for its historic coal boat hoists. By contrast, Gibraltar clings to a rock off the south coast of Spain seized by the British in 1704 for strategic reasons. Some areas submitted entire council regions for consideration as cities – such as South Ayrshire in Scotland, or Medway in Kent. Medway council is applying in an attempt to correct a historic wrong. The local authority was formed in 1998 when the town of Gillingham merged with the historic city of Rochester. Unfortunately, four years later it was discovered that as part of the merger process, the council had failed to appoint trustees to protect Rochester’s historic rights – meaning its city status was irrevocably lost. Some towns applying for city status have already attempted to informally apply the label, despite not having the formal approval of the monarch. Guildford’s football club is Guildford City FC. Elgin in the north of Scotland – which already welcomes visitors with signs declaring itself to be a “historic cathedral city” – has also applied for formal recognition. Other contenders include Doncaster, South Yorkshire; Crewe, Cheshire; Livingston, West Lothian; Ballymena, County Antrim and Dudley, West Midlands. They will be up against Stanley in the Falkland Islands, almost 8,000 miles away. There have also been entries from George Town in the Cayman Islands – and the whole of Gibraltar. In a break with past civic honours competitions, an expert panel will work closely with ministers to make their recommendations, which will then be approved by the Queen. In guidance, applicants were asked for details about “the distinct identity and community which they felt meant that their area deserved to become a city”, as well as the royal associations of their area. The new city or cities will be in addition to Southend-on-Sea, which was awarded city status by the Queen in tribute to its long-serving MP, Sir David Amess, who was fatally stabbed while holding a constituency surgery. The Cabinet Office minister, Steve Barclay, called the list a “celebration of the rich and diverse communities” including “friends” farther afield. “It’s fitting that, as we look towards celebrating the 70-year reign of Her Majesty the Queen, we extend the competition to include those parts of the world which also hold her so dearly,” he said. The full list: Alcester, Warwickshire; Ballymena, County Antrim; Bangor, County Down; Blackburn, Lancashire; Bolsover, Derbyshire; Boston, Lincolnshire; Bournemouth, Dorset; Coleraine, County Londonderry; Colchester, Essex; Crawley, West Sussex; Crewe, Cheshire; Doncaster, South Yorkshire; Dorchester, Dorset; Douglas, Isle of Man; Dudley, West Midlands; Dumfries, Dumfries and Galloway; Dunfermline, Fife; Elgin, Moray; George Town, the Cayman Islands; Gibraltar, Gibraltar; Goole, east Yorkshire; Greenock, Renfrewshire; Guildford, Surrey; Livingston, West Lothian; Marazion, Cornwall; Medway, Kent; Middlesbrough, North Yorkshire; Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire; Newport and Carisbrooke, Hampshire; Northampton, Northamptonshire; Oban, Argyll and Bute; Reading, Berkshire; Peel, Isle of Man; St Andrews, Fife; Stanley, Falkland Islands; South Ayrshire, Ayrshire and Arran; Warrington, Cheshire; Warwick, Warwickshire; Wrexham, Clwyd. The full list of cities that have applied for lord provost/lord mayor status: Bath, Somerset; Derby, Derbyshire; Gloucester, Gloucestershire; Inverness, Inverness; Lancaster, Lancashire; Lincoln, Lincolnshire; Newport, Gwent; Perth, Perth and Kinross; Southampton, Hampshire; Sunderland, Tyne and Wear; Wolverhampton, West Midlands; Worcester, Worcestershire. • This article was amended on 24 December 2021 to correct a misspelling of Livingston.Evidence the Omicron variant is less severe than originally feared does not remove the threat to the NHS this winter, a health service leader has warned. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents hospitals and other NHS trusts, said two studies showing that people infected with Omicron were at less risk of being admitted to hospital than those infected with the Delta variant were good news. But he emphasised that it was still not clear exactly what impact the rapid rise in Omicron cases would have on hospital numbers, and said the NHS remained under “incredible pressure”. Downing Street has not commented directly on the findings, although Boris Johnson is likely to see it as some vindication of his decision to resist calls to announce further restrictions for England after a cabinet meeting on Monday. He has not ruled out measures for the post-Christmas period, but on Thursday the health secretary, Sajid Javid, confirmed nothing would be announced this week. “We are not planning any further announcements this week,” Javid told broadcasters. “Despite the caution that we are all taking, people should enjoy their Christmases with their families and their friends – of course, remain cautious. “We will keep the situation under review. We are learning more all the time as we have done from this new data. We will keep analysing that data and if we need to do anything more we will, but nothing more is going to happen before Christmas.” Commenting on the studies published on Wednesday, Hopson told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “We still don’t have conclusive data in terms of what impact Omicron could have in terms of level of hospitalisations. We have some very early studies, but it’s a bit like trying to predict the result of a football game when you’re only a third of the way through.” A study by Imperial College London using data from England suggests that Omicron patients are 40% less likely to need overnight hospital care than Delta patients. A separate report from Scotland found that the risk of hospitalisation could be 70% lower with Omicron than Delta. Hopson argued that the new data did not mean the threat to the NHS had been lifted. “The issue is that we’re in incredible pressure right the way across the health and care system,” he said. He said the surge in Covid cases was causing staff shortages, and cited as an example the London ambulance service, which this week has 12% of staff off sick. And he said the NHS was already “busier at this time of year than we’ve ever been before”. He went on: “Our bed occupancy rate is 94.5% compared to last year’s 89%. That’s a huge difference in terms of much more busy. We’ve got 2,800 people every day who are having to wait more than 30 minutes in the back of an ambulance before we can admit them into hospital because we’re so busy. “Twenty five per cent more people, compared to last year, are having to wait more than 21 days [to be discharged] because our colleagues in social care are under pressure.” Although Omicron may lead to a smaller proportion of infected people needing hospital treatment, the fear remains that because the variant spreads so rapidly, this could nevertheless amount to a number large enough to risk overwhelming hospitals. Prof Andrew Hayward, the director of the UCL Institute of Epidemiology and Healthcare and one of the government’s scientific advisers, told the same programme that the new studies were “undeniably good news” but that the country was “definitely not out of the danger zone”. He said: “I think perhaps we can downgrade this from a hurricane to a very severe storm.” In an article for the Sun, Johnson urged people to take “extra care” before meeting relatives at Christmas and to get a booster jab if they had not done so already.Britain is full. That vague but powerful assumption has shaped so much of our politics. From the Brexit campaign with its “breaking point” poster of a queue of migrants and refugees, and border-fixated home secretaries from Jack Straw to Priti Patel, to the regular immigration panics spread by newspapers to voters, the idea that these small islands have reached their maximum viable population has become hugely influential. It’s a convenient situation for the right. Blame for congestion and strained public services can be placed on population growth and migrants, rather than on our profoundly unequal patterns of land ownership and use or Conservative cuts in state spending. But the idea that Britain is full – or too full already – also appeals more widely: to some environmentalists, to people who like peace and quiet, and dislike cities or new housing developments, or think that being British is a privilege that needs protecting. A fear of overcrowding is deep in our island psyche. And over recent decades the UK population has undeniably changed quite dramatically. Between 1981 and the beginning of the pandemic, it grew by more than a fifth, or about 12 million people. Meanwhile, the number of people visiting the UK also surged, almost doubling during the first two decades of this century. So many factors contributed to these increases – from globalisation and the end of the cold war to EU membership and improvements in life expectancy – that they seemed unstoppable. In British cities, where most of the influx took place, railway stations, restaurants, museums, schools and train carriages all got bigger. How underpopulated those spaces have often been since the arrival of Covid-19. Lockdowns and anxiety about the virus do not fully explain the transformation. Far from having too many people, Britain may be in the early stages of a population decline – and it may last longer than the pandemic. One recent Friday evening in central London, with Omicron yet to spread much and the Christmas shopping and drinking season theoretically in full swing, the usually packed pavements of Oxford Street, Regent Street and Piccadilly Circus were dotted with people walking unobstructed in small groups, surrounded by empty space. As absent as the usual crowds were the usual foreign accents. The tourism body VisitBritain expects that the number of foreign visitors this year will be more than 80% below its pre-pandemic figure – a much steeper fall than in comparable destinations such as France or Spain. For Britain, where tourism is the fifth-largest sector of the economy and the source of a lot of national self-confidence, this is a big change – even if it has been masked in places by an increase in domestic visitors. Yet the suspension of our status as a leading destination may be less significant than what is happening to our more permanent population. In 2020 alone, according to the Economics Statistics Centre of Excellence, the number of UK residents may have dropped by “more than 1.3 million” – the largest fall since the second world war. Other demographers estimate that there was a smaller fall or a tiny increase. But all agree that thanks to our terrible Covid death toll, a drop in the birthrate, and fewer EU and non-EU migrants after Brexit, the UK’s population boom has come to an end. If and when the pandemic fades, there is little confidence that this growth will resume. Even before Covid, the birthrate was falling, and the long modern rise in life expectancy was stalling – the latter almost certainly connected to Conservative austerity. Through Brexit and other policies, the Tories effectively promised a less crowded and less cosmopolitan country, and that is what they have created. During the first lockdown, some people of all political persuasions relished the emptier, calmer streets. And with fewer foreign tourists, famous British places have felt more like meaningful national monuments and less like theme park attractions. Even the pompous plaza in front of Buckingham Palace had an atmosphere – a sort of stoical Victorian grandeur – when I found it almost deserted at dusk one day last summer. But as with lockdowns, the appeal of this quieter country is wearing off. This year’s disruptive labour shortages are a sign that depopulation and consumerism are not completely compatible. In the longer term, we may also discover that living in a shrinking or static population is psychologically unsettling, even alarming. The last time Britain’s population stopped growing, in the mid-1970s and early 1980s, it was widely seen as a sign of national decline. When fewer people are choosing to live in a country, or to have children in it, that country feels less confident, and its prospects contract. For now at least, many Conservative voters may not mind. Lots of them grew up in a postwar Britain with considerably fewer people, so they may feel that a return to those population levels is a restoration of the natural order. Alternatively, their opinions may not be that connected to social realities. During the Brexit referendum, the political journalist Stephen Bush visited Hull, and found that “the issue that moves [Brexit] voters” was “Britain is full”. Since the 1960s, the city’s population had actually fallen by a seventh. Yet Hull still voted leave by two to one. Conversely, the most pro-EU and pro-immigration parts of Britain are often the most densely populated, such as inner London. Many Britons who have actually experienced life on a crowded island seem to like it. It’s possible that the current population slump, like that of the 1970s and 1980s, will turn out to be temporary, ended by changes in economic and political conditions. But if it doesn’t, life on our archipelago at the edge of Europe will gradually become very different. One day, we may look back with nostalgia at when Britain felt full. Andy Beckett is a Guardian columnistChildren who have arrived in the UK on their own to seek asylum are at risk of self-harm and dying by suicide, according to 25 child and migrant rights organisations, as figures reveal they are waiting longer than adults for a decision on their claim. The warning, in a letter to safeguarding institutions, including the children’s commissioner and the chief social worker, said the risk was “exacerbated by Home Office failures to decide the children’s asylum claims”. It cites an independent inspection that found that children who received a decision last year were waiting on average 550 days, or 18 months, compared with 449 days for adults. The independent chief inspector of borders and immigration (ICIBI) said the Home Office had promised to prioritise vulnerable, unaccompanied asylum-seeking children in January 2019, but no evidence had been found of any cases being prioritised. The inspectorate also said the Home Office had “failed to keep on top of the volume of claims it receives”. The signatories call for “urgent action”, warning that “some of the children we support are at risk of self-harm and dying by suicide – a risk that is being exacerbated by Home Office failures to decide the children’s asylum claims”. At least 11 children who had come to the UK seeking sanctuary have been identified as having taken their own lives, many in the past year and some of whom were awaiting a decision on their claim. In the north-west of England, 80 children represented by Greater Manchester Immigration Aid Unit (GMIAU) have been waiting longer than six months for a decision on their asylum claim. Among those are nine children from Afghanistan who have on average been waiting 417 days for a decision. The signatories include social workers, lawyers, and children’s and migrant rights charities such as GMIAU, the Children’s Society and the British Association of Social Workers. The letter states that the backlog in children’s asylum cases existed before Covid, but had been made worse by the pandemic when interviews by the Home Office stopped in March 2020. Meanwhile, as one solicitor said, the children he represents have quietly been developing severe mental health problems because they have been left in limbo. Sammy, 27, a refugee from Afghanistan, knows only too well the devastating effect of delays in children’s asylum claims. He arrived in the UK at 15 after fleeing persecution, travelling unaccompanied through five countries before finally reaching the UK. But once he was in the UK he endured 13 court cases before finally being granted leave to remain 11 years later, in 2020. He said the Home Office kept insisting it would be safe for him to return to Afghanistan. “I am suffering from a lot of depression and the Home Office system has not helped,” said Sammy. “I feel like I’m 60 or 70 years old rather than 25 because of everything I’ve been through. The golden years of my age have already passed. All asylum seekers and refugees who came here alone as children have mental health problems.” Sammy says education and volunteering have been his salvation. He is at university studying electrical engineering and volunteers with the Red Cross, helping newly arrived refugees to adapt and settle into their unfamiliar surroundings. Most recently he has been visiting hotels where Afghan families who escaped the Taliban takeover are staying. Parviz, also from Afghanistan, came to the UK on his own in 2015, aged 16. Six years on, the Home Office still has not made a decision on his initial asylum claim, and did not even interview him until May 2021. The 22-year-old has provided evidence of the significant impact of the delay on his mental health to the Home Office. Denise McDowell, GMIAU’s chief executive, urged the government to make urgent decisions on the asylum claims of unaccompanied young people, whom she described as being “in limbo, while their childhoods are slipping away”. “We cannot stand by while children are at risk of suicide, self-harm and exploitation because adults are failing to run the UK’s refugee system properly. How many more deaths will it take for this national scandal to get the urgent action needed to keep them safe?” she asked. The Home Office said: “A significant proportion of asylum claims in the last year should have been made in a first safe country not in the UK, leading to an overall increase in claims and asylum applications taking longer to be resolved. We are committed to speeding up decision-making and since the ICIBI’s report have established two dedicated case-working hubs for deciding children’s asylum claims. We are also recruiting additional decision-makers who will be trained to process children’s asylum claims.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Fans have reacted with dismay to the news that Coldplay will stop recording music as a band in 2025, although quiet glee was also detected among some detractors. The band’s frontman, Chris Martin, shared the “huge revelation” with the BBC Radio 2 presenter Jo Whiley on a special show to be broadcast on Friday from 7pm. The announcement comes two months after Coldplay released their ninth studio album, Music of the Spheres, which went straight to No 1 earlier this year. “Our last proper record will come out in 2025, and after that I think we will only tour,” said Martin. “And maybe we’ll do some collaborative things but the Coldplay catalogue, as it were, finishes then.” Whiley spoke about her interview with Martin on The Zoe Ball Breakfast Show on Wednesday and shared a preview clip where Martin confirmed the news. Whiley told Ball that while Martin is “disarmingly honest” in interviews, she is also “never quite sure if he’s joking or being deadly serious”. But the news is consistent with statements Martin has made previously. He told the NME in October they intended to make three more albums – to bring the total to 12 – but this is the first time he has put a date on the end point. The band’s vast following reacted with resigned sadness to the news, with a fan Thomas Rowson tweeting: “Well, we knew the day would come sometime. I guess I was just in denial and hoping it would be longer. It’s the first time they’ve put a date on it … Here’s to the last 3 albums!” But the news got a mixed reaction elsewhere, with taxi driver Martin Holmes tweeting: “Amongst all the Covid misery, there is a small glimpse of a better future.” In October, Coldplay announced a world tour with a range of initiatives designed to mitigate its environmental impact. The band have promised to cut CO2 emissions by 50% compared with their 2016-17 world tour, and almost entirely use renewable energy to power the stage show. The tour, which will start in August next year, will include a “kinetic floor” to harness energy created by fans, a stage made of renewable materials, solar panels, while battery and mains power will be drawn from renewable sources. Earlier this month Coldplay pulled out of several performances including their planned show at the Capital Jingle Bell Ball in London because of positive Covid tests in their touring party. Coldplay have been nominated for group of the year and best rock/alternative act at the 2022 Brit awards, which take place in February.Leeds v Liverpool and Wolves v Watford have been removed from the Premier League’s Boxing Day fixture list after Covid caused further disruption to football’s festive schedule. Outbreaks within the Leeds and Watford squads mean neither side are able to call on the 13 outfield players and goalkeeper necessary. The Premier League acknowledged the decision “will disappoint supporters” and said it “understands their frustrations at a special time of year when fans look forward to attending and watching football games”. The decision has been taken three days before the scheduled date, a contrast to last week when Watford’s match at Burnley was postponed hours before kick off. It comes after an extraordinary league meeting on Monday resolved to continue with the festive programme but also to offer clubs and supporters greater clarity, and quicker action, over Covid cases. Leeds asked for the postponement of their game with Liverpool after recording five new cases on top of existing illnesses and injuries. Their Thorp Arch training ground has been closed for two days this week. “All of the cases we have experienced are asymptomatic which we believe is due to our high vaccine take up,” the club said. Watford, who sit just above the Premier League relegation zone in 17th place, have now had three consecutive fixtures postponed, but the Premier League said that with players set to come out of isolation, “it is fully expected” that their home match against West Ham next Tuesday will go ahead. No similar message was relayed regarding Leeds’ game at home to Aston Villa on the same day. The league held talks with Premier League captains and club managers on Thursday, to discuss the decision to play on, as well as Covid protocols and concerns the impact of a condensed fixture list may have on player’s health. This week the Liverpool captain, Jordan Henderson, told the BBC he was concerned over player welfare. “I don’t think anybody does take that seriously enough,” he said, “especially in this [Covid] period.” The league said: “It is the clubs’ and the league’s collective intention to continue the current fixture schedule where safely possible. The health and wellbeing of all concerned remains our priority and the league will continue to monitor and reflect public health guidance, always proceeding with caution.” Ralf Rangnick has stated Manchester United have all outfield players available apart from the long-term injured Paul Pogba for Monday’s trip to Newcastle, after the postponement of their past two games. The interim manager said: “For our last training session [last Thursday] we had eight outfield players and we closed the training ground for four days in order to break the chain. Today [Thursday] was the third day of training this week – we trained Tuesday, yesterday and today and had 25 field players. Paul Pogba, he’s the only one missing out, everyone else is on board. The [improvement] is extremely positive.” Rangnick suggested that the League Cup could be abolished to ease the congested schedule. “England is the only country in the top five leagues in Europe that plays two cup competitions,” he said. “In France they abolished the second one a year or two ago. “This is something we could maybe speak about and discuss. I know the reason for that: the League Cup is kept for the third and fourth division teams to improve the financial situations of those clubs. But I still think if we talk about a tight calendar, maybe having to play too many games, this could be something where we speak and discuss.” One suggestion for clearing space in the calendar that looks unlikely to go ahead is that of one-leg semi-finals in the Carabao Cup. After progressing to the final four on Wednesday, Liverpool’s Jürgen Klopp and Tottenham’s Antonio Conte suggested that home and away ties for the semis should be scrapped. But this proposal is unlikely to be considered by the competition organisers the EFL because it would cost an estimated £20m in revenue losses and broadcast rebates to make the change.The BBC’s chief newsreader, Huw Edwards, has revealed he has suffered bouts of depression that have left him “bedridden” during a 20-year struggle with his mental health. In a Welsh-language documentary about his career, Edwards said at times the problem has been so severe he “didn’t want to go to work” as he fought to reconcile his assured public persona with his low moods. Edwards, 60, said his bouts of depression began in 2002, when he was presenting the Six O’Clock news, and a year before he became the presenter of the corporation’s main nightly bulletin at 10. “People tend to think that if you are confident, then you never doubt yourself. But that’s not true,” he said. “Like everyone that suffers with depression, you don’t get one bout of it. It comes and goes. For me, it started around 2002 I think. I went down fairly quickly and I couldn’t understand it.” He added: “I couldn’t get out of bed. I didn’t want to go to work. I didn’t want to speak to anybody. Maybe it was partly due to the fact that I wasn’t happy in work. I couldn’t describe how overwhelming it was. I had a bit of a scare and I had never experienced that before. “The issue was you have to maintain a public image, that is – you’re a well-known face. Whenever I had to go live on air, I would literally have to tell myself – come on now, you’ll be OK now. You just have to do it, and I just had to push myself in a way. “Eventually it did alleviate. And then, I had another bout that wasn’t quite so severe in the years after that.” Edwards is the latest prominent figure to admit to mental health problems. He said losing weight and taking up boxing had helped improve his mood. “I never understood before that there was a connection between your physical and mental health,” he said. “There’s a lot of advantages when it comes to boxing – the practice, the fitness, and there’s something else – a kind of peace of mind. “You are in some sort of a personal zone. The whole thing is about relaxing even though it is fitness.” Edwards has previously admitted that he was “angered” by the decision to publish the salaries of highest paid employees at the BBC. The BBC’s latest figures revealed he took a pay cut from £599,000 to £529,000 last year. The documentary, Huw Edwards yn 60, will be broadcast on S4C on 29 December.The UK public’s appetite for eating out has plunged to its weakest since the spring amid growing evidence of the impact of the Omicron variant on the hospitality sector during its crucial pre-Christmas period. The number of seated diners fell by 14 percentage points in the week ending 20 December to 88% of the level in the same period of 2019, before the start of the pandemic, according to the weekly digest of flash economic indicators from the Office for National Statistics (ONS). Using data from the online restaurant booking site OpenTable and other sources, the ONS said Britons were eating out less and working from home more in response to rising infection rates and the government’s plan B measures. Amid widespread reports of bookings being cancelled, the drop in the number of diners in the latest week was the sharpest since early September and the lowest level since restaurants reopened indoors in England, Scotland and Wales in May after last winter’s lockdown. It was also the first time the weekly comparison with 2019 has dropped below 100% since May. Restaurants in London have been especially hard hit by Omicron, with the number of diners in the latest week falling 18 points to 57% of the level in the same period of 2019. In Manchester, despite an eight-point drop on the week, the number of diners stood at 104% of the level in the run-up to Christmas 2019. The ONS said the number of firms reporting staff working from home in the latest two weeks had risen by two points to 14%, with a marked impact on businesses reliant on consumers. Transactions at Pret a Manger sandwich outlets were lower in the week ending 16 December than in January 2020 in six of seven urban locations, with London again the most affected city. While trade in regional towns remained above pre-pandemic levels, sales in the capital dropped by 29 points to barely 50% of the January 2020 level. The ONS report showed retailers doing less badly than restaurants, with footfall in the latest week 81% of its 2019 level – a drop of only one percentage point. Credit and debt card payment purchases were up 4% on a year ago. Earlier this week, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, announced an emergency £1bn package to help businesses struggling with the impact of Omicron. Meanwhile, analysts are warning that the economy is likely to contract in December even if restrictions in England remain unchanged. Andrew Goodwin, a UK economist at the consultancy firm Oxford Economics, said: “Though the government has opted to defer a decision on introducing further restrictions until after Christmas, it seems likely that a mix of greater consumer caution and reduced mobility will ensure that the UK’s GDP falls in December.”Newcastle United have written to the Premier League requesting “clarity” regarding a series of recent contentious refereeing decisions which have gone against them during defeats against Manchester City, Liverpool and Leicester City. At Leicester a penalty was awarded against Eddie Howe’s side despite Brendan Rodgers’ midfielder James Maddison appearing to have initiated the contact; Diogo Jota scored for Liverpool at a moment when Newcastle’s Isaac Hayden was down with a head injury; and last Sunday against City, Ederson seemed to clearly foul Newcastle’s Ryan Fraser but no penalty was awarded. “All we’re asking for is some clarity on the decisions and how the officials have come to those decisions,” said Howe, whose relegation-threatened side have won only one game all season and face Manchester United at St James’ Park on Monday night. “That’s all we’re asking for to help the processes for the future. Those decisions have influenced the results, I’ve got no doubt about that. “There’s definitely a feeling of injustice among our group. There’s been disbelief in the games at a few of the things that have gone against us. When VAR was first introduced I think it was used regularly to try to get the right decision. But I think the use of it has been diluted and I don’t see it effectively intervening as much as it did in a positive way. The use of VAR as far as we’re concerned has definitely been a bit contentious.” While Howe hopes to make referees think twice before declining to offer his side the benefit of the doubt he has also questioned Newcastle’s “unfair” schedule which dictates that his players will fulfil their fourth fixture in just over a fortnight against Manchester United but the visitors will be playing for the first time since 11 December. Whereas Manchester United are one of a number of sides to have seen fixtures postponed by Covid outbreaks among their squad, other teams, including Newcastle, have soldiered on after remaining largely virus-free. Along the way Howe’s side have collected injuries at a time when two relegation rivals, Burnley and Watford, have been able to give some key players a fortnight’s rest. Leeds were in a similar position to Newcastle but on Thursday their Boxing Day game was called off. “For the benefit of the league you want everybody to be treated the same and you want a level playing field,” said Howe. “With the postponements some teams have not been playing while others, like us, have played. You also have January to think about. If teams have a fixture backlog and those games get moved to February or March they can then play new January signings in them. “I think it’s questionable whether the current situation has been fair to everybody. Moving one of our games would be nice because we’re in a position where we’re playing a lot and our players are fatigued and carrying injuries. “The trouble when players carry injuries into games is that it only makes your squad smaller. That’s what we’re currently faced with and it’s proving very difficult for us.”The EU’s top diplomat has accused Russia of creating “a severe deterioration of the security situation in Europe” while calling for dialogue to avoid conflict in Ukraine. Josep Borrell, the EU high representative for foreign policy, was responding to Vladimir Putin’s proposals for security guarantees for Russia that would effectively rewrite the post-cold-war order. Russia last week put forward a list of highly controversial security demands, including a ban on Ukraine entering Nato and a limit to troop and arms deployments on the alliance’s eastern flank – effectively returning Nato forces to where they were in 1997, before an eastward expansion. The Kremlin’s proposals were handed to the US and Nato, but the EU is part of the west’s coordinated response to Russia’s military buildup on the border with Ukraine. On Wednesday Borrell spoke to the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, where they “took note” of Russia’s proposals, according to an EU account of the call. “They underlined that any further military aggression against Ukraine will have massive consequences and severe costs,” the EU statement said. A US state department spokesperson used similar language to describe the exchange: “They emphasised the need for coordinated action to support Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and reaffirmed that any further Russian military aggression against Ukraine would have massive consequences for the Russian Federation.” Russia has massed around 100,000 troops on its side of the border with Ukraine, while Putin has escalated his rhetoric, sparking fears that he is looking for a pretext for an invasion. Earlier this month the Russian president said war in eastern Ukraine – where Ukrainian government troops have been fighting Russian-backed rebels since 2014 – looked like genocide. EU leaders have stopped short of detailing specific sanctions against Russia, but last week agreed that “any further military aggression against Ukraine will have massive consequences and severe cost in response”. Nato has called on Russia to withdraw its forces and said its relationship with Ukraine is a matter between Kiev and the 30 members of the transatlantic security alliance. In his statement on Putin’s security proposals, Borrell said Europe’s security was under threat. Listing the Kremlin’s recent foreign policy adventures, from Russia’s annexation of Crimea, to its role in eastern Ukraine, actions in the Georgian breakaway regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia, as well as in Transnistria and support for the Belarusian dictator, Alexander Lukashenko, Borrell said Russia’s actions had “led to a severe deterioration of the security situation in Europe”. “The EU believes that dialogue, negotiation and cooperation are the only means to overcome disputes and bring peace,” Borrell said, citing the need to respect international commitments, including through the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. The OSCE announced on Wednesday an agreement between Russia and Ukraine to restore a ceasefire. “I was delighted that participants expressed their strong determination to fully adhere to the measures to strengthen the ceasefire agreement of 22 July 2020,” said Mikko Kinnunen, an OSCE special envoy in Ukraine. “This is of utmost significance for the people living on both sides of the contact line.” The OSCE has an observer mission in Donbas and has reported five times as many daily violations of the ceasefire this month compared with December 2020. Ceasefire violations include explosions and the firing of weapons, which monitors have recorded despite restrictions on their movement and jamming of GPS signals on OSCE drones. The agreement was reached during a meeting of officials from Ukraine, Russia and the OSCE – known as the Trilateral Contact Group – and representatives of the Kremlin-backed, self-proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics. Many ceasefires have been agreed and collapsed since the conflict began in 2014. More than 14,000 people have been killed, while the region’s economy has been devastated.People who cross the Channel in small boats to claim asylum could be tagged on arrival under Home Office plans, it has emerged. The home secretary, Priti Patel, is expected to announce the plan early in the new year as part of her overhaul of the immigration system. According to a government source familiar with the proposal, ministers believe that making working-age people wear tags while their asylum claims are processed would make it harder for them to work illegally during this period, reducing the UK’s “pull factor”. Ministers also believe tags would stop people absconding during the application process. The government wants more people whose asylum applications are rejected to be removed from the country, although absconding is only one factor and there are significant legal reasons why removal numbers are low, including the UK’s post-Brexit withdrawal from the Dublin agreements, which enabled people to be returned to EU countries they had travelled through. More than 27,000 people have arrived in the UK this year by crossing the Channel on small boats, up from 8,500 in 2020, and Patel has faced strong criticism, particularly from within the Conservative party, for not doing more to curb these numbers. Under her “new plan for immigration”, linked to the nationality and borders bill, which begins its passage through the House of Lords in January, the Home Office wants to make illegal entry into the UK harder, simplify and speed up the processing of asylum claims and remove more people whose claims fail. The plan to tag people whose claims are being considered, first reported in the Sun, is likely to be piloted before being rolled out more widely. Sources claim new legislation is not required because powers to require asylum seekers to wear tags are already available. Under the “new plan for immigration”, the Home Office wants to ensure all asylum seekers are accommodated in reception centres, instead of hotels, while their claims are processed. It is understood that tagging would be part of this, with asylum seekers subject to restrictions on their movements. One source argued that making it more difficult to work illegally would protect people from modern slavery-type exploitation. In the autumn, in response to growing concern about the number of people crossing the Channel on small boats, Boris Johnson asked Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, to review whether more could be done across government to address the issue. The tagging plan may be one of the first outcomes to be announced from this process. Last month the Home Office admitted that only five people crossing the Channel on small boats had been returned to Europe this year. On Thursday the Home Office declined to comment on the tagging plan. It referred journalists to a comment from Tom Pursglove, an immigration minister, who said: “The nationality and borders bill will make it a criminal offence to knowingly arrive in the UK illegally and introduce life sentences for those who facilitate illegal entry.” The head of the Refugee Council, Enver Solomon, said: “Reports today of plans to tag and curfew people seeking asylum of working age smack of desperation from a government that doesn’t know how to manage our asylum system in an orderly, effective and, most importantly, humane way. “Treating innocent men, women and young adults who have fled war and persecution like criminals is cruel, draconian and punitive that sets a new and unprecedented low in the UK’s approach to responding to people in desperate need. It won’t act as a deterrent nor stop people making dangerous journeys across the Channel. Instead the government needs to create more safe routes for people and ensure everybody who reaches our shores is treated with humanity and given a fair hearing on UK soil.” Minnie Rahman, the interim chief executive of the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants, said: “The government seems bent on pursuing ever more desperate and draconian measures like electronic tags, which are disproportionate and aimed at solving a problem that simply does not exist. “The government continues to ignore the evidence, and would rather turn their backs on the vulnerable people we should be protecting. Instead we need a faster and more efficient asylum system that provides people with safe routes to the UK, and which allows refugees to rebuild their lives as part of our communities.”It is 17 years since the Gender Recognition Act was enacted in the UK, permitting those aged over 18 to have their acquired gender legally recognised and recorded on a new birth certificate, as long as certain criteria are met. However, for many transgender people the process is outdated, intrusive and bureaucratic. In order for an individual to have their acquired gender recognised, a person has to prove to a panel of strangers that they will never meet – the gender recognition panel – that they are either feminine or masculine. It has caused a great deal of concern in the transgender community that the panel, in effect, sits in judgment upon them and their transition. Who is anyone to decide whether someone is feminine or masculine enough? Gender identity is no longer as rigid as it once was, thank goodness. Women wear trousers. Some of us choose to eschew makeup altogether, others only on some days. Hair can be long, or short, or shaved off. But there is no way of knowing whether the panel is making judgments based on outdated stereotypes because it is devoid of transparency. Those wishing to transition also require a medical diagnosis of gender dysphoria – a mental health condition, effectively giving the view that being transgender is an illness. They also have to live in their acquired gender for two years – a pretty arbitrary period of time, and again, upholding stereotypical views of what it is to live as a woman or a man. In a report published this week, the women and equalities select committee is calling for the requirements to be updated, pretty much in line with the extensive consultation carried out, but not acted on, by the government more than two years ago. This would mean replacing the gender recognition panel, dropping the requirement to have a diagnosis of gender dysphoria and to live in the acquired gender for two years. Gaining a gender recognition certificate would still require a formal statutory declaration – a safeguard that ensures “genuine intent”, and possibly other legal safeguards, but the process would be respectful and accessible. We spent months speaking to trans rights and women’s rights groups and sought to strike a path that safeguarded the rights of both. They are not zero sum – both can be supported. As the chair of the committee, I spent Tuesday on broadcast media discussing our recommendations. I understand this is a highly contentious issue, with very polarised views, but the correspondence I have received in my inbox over the following 24 hours suggests that the most determined correspondents have not read a word of the report. The most common objection people have raised is the issue that any changes to the GRA would make it easier for men to legally change their gender, access women’s spaces and pose a serious threat to their safety. First and foremost, even with our proposed reforms, the process for an individual to have their acquired gender legally recognised is a drawn-out process, with numerous stages to go through. Waiting lists are incredibly long for NHS consultations, and I can think of my own constituents who have waited years for just a referral to one of the very few clinics, before having given up and paid for private treatment they could ill afford. The suggestion that someone could change legal sex on a whim is quite patently nonsense; the process takes years. The new clinics announced last year were of course welcome, but they had already been commissioned by NHS England and, at only three, are a drop in the ocean compared to what is needed. Second, we have specifically called for single-sex exceptions to be not only upheld but clarified. We have asked the Government Equalities Office and the Equality and Human Rights Commission not only to improve their guidance for female-only spaces, such as refuges, but to use worked examples, so that there can be no doubt about the right of service providers to restrict use to natal women only. There should also be best practice to provide trans and non-binary inclusive and specific services, including those relating to domestic violence and sexual abuse. Sometimes it will be appropriate to provide exclusive spaces. Those that argue I am against this are plain wrong. I urge those currently directing the bile and abuse I have received on this issue to read our report in full. Ultimately, the current process is clunky, time consuming and, in many cases, those going through it find it downright cruel. All I have ever sought is to make the GRA kinder, quicker and much more understanding of the needs of transgender people and the concerns of women’s rights groups. Is that so bad? From my email inbox you would have thought so, but I don’t. Caroline Nokes is the Conservative MP for Romsey and Southampton North • This article was amended on 30 December 2021. An earlier version incorrectly said that people wishing to transition need spousal consent to live in their acquired gender for two years. Spousal consent is required for couples who wish their marriage or civil partnership to continue after the transitioning partner has been issued with a gender recognition certificate.Hundreds of mourners gathered at Liverpool’s Catholic cathedral on Thursday morning for the funeral of 12-year-old Ava White, who was stabbed to death after the city’s Christmas lights switch-on. It was a grey, wet Liverpool day but there was lots of colour as many people arrived in purples, pinks, reds and blues – anything but black at the request of the family. Her coffin, which had made its way to Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral on a horsedrawn carriage, was covered in family photographs of the 12-year-old. Ava was with friends at Liverpool’s Christmas lights switch-on when she was attacked on 25 November. She was taken to Alder Hey children’s hospital where she died from her wounds. Police have said they believe a “verbal argument” took place which resulted in Ava suffering “catastrophic injuries”. Archbishop Malcolm McMahon said at the funeral Ava was a “popular, loving young person” who he was told “would try anything once” and “did not fear anything”. She loved going on holiday, mixed martial arts, singing, dancing and making TikTok videos, he said. He said: “Ava was loved by so many people, undoubtedly heaven will be a happier place.” A round of applause broke out as the coffin was carried out of the cathedral to continue its journey to Anfield Crematorium. Afterwards McMahon talked of the “tragic and heartbreaking” loss of Ava which “brought deep shock and sadness to everyone in the city. “The turnout today at the cathedral shows the unity and love that we have in Liverpool for Ava and her family. It was an incredibly moving and emotional funeral which was a fitting tribute to Ava. “We continue to pray for Ava, her family, her friends, her teachers and the community.” Pupils and staff from Ava’s school, Notre Dame Catholic College, and staff from her former school, Holy Trinity Catholic primary school, were in attendance. After Ava’s death, her father, Robert Martin, issued a statement thanking people for their ongoing support through what was a “devastating” time. “Thank you to every one of you for your kind messages and donations. “As Ava’s family we are completely devastated and heartbroken by what has happened and we ask that you respect our privacy at this time and allow us to grieve as a family.” A vigil was held in Liverpool city centre, close to where the incident took place, on 4 December. Hundreds of balloons, some in the shape of the letter A, were released simultaneously and Astrid Smith sang John Lennon’s Imagine. A coroner last week opened an inquest into Ava’s death at which he said she died as a result of a stab wound to the neck. A 14-year-old boy, who cannot be named for legal reasons, appeared at Liverpool crown court on 29 November charged with her murder. He is expected to face trial next year.Some people may need a fourth dose of Covid vaccine to remain protected, a government scientific adviser has said, with a decision expected shortly after the Christmas and new year holidays. Prof Adam Finn said: “I think there may well be people who received their boosters early who are in the older more vulnerable age groups who may need a further jab. That has not been decided yet. It is still under review and discussion, and we will be providing recommendations on that at some point in the new year.” Finn, a professor of paediatrics at the University of Bristol and a member of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), told LBC Radio on Thursday: “I think there will be people probably who will receive a fourth jab. Whether that will be everyone, I think, is still very much in doubt … We do need to see how things go through this wave and beyond.” On Tuesday, Israel became the first country to announce it would offer a fourth dose of vaccine to people over 60 and healthcare workers, in an effort to increase protection against the Omicron variant. The country’s prime minister, Naftali Bennett, urged those eligible to “go and get vaccinated” in a rollout expected over the next few days. Finn also raised the possibility of vaccinations for all children aged five to 11. He said the move was still under “very active consideration”, but that there were “very, very few severe cases” in the age group. The government had originally introduced vaccination for older children to prevent disruption to education and reduce transmission rates. With the Omicron variant, however, “the ability of the vaccines to do that will be reduced”, he said. A government-backed study published on Wednesday found that Covid infections among five to 11-year-olds were three times more prevalent than in the general population. React-1, a joint study by Imperial College London and Ipsos Mori, found an estimated 4.47% of primary school-aged children had the virus, compared with 1.41% across the population as a whole. The JCVI recommended vaccinations for about 330,000 five to 11-year-olds on Wednesday. It updated its advice after the UK’s Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency approved the move after a robust review of safety data. A low-dose version of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine will be offered to those in the age group who are clinically vulnerable, or who are a household contact of someone who is immunosuppressed. They will be offered a primary course of vaccination, which is typically two doses.Joe Lycett has a problem: he can’t seem to perfect his roast potatoes. “I love cooking and I love the challenge of a roast,” he says, “but when I parboil my potatoes, it wanders into mash a little too quickly.” In a pub in north London, Lycett is discussing the pitfalls of cooking Christmas dinner – something he’s no stranger to. “One Christmas I had the turkey in a flimsy tray,” he continues, “and I managed to bend it, sending the turkey fat all over the floor. My kitchen was like an ice rink for the rest of the day, which added a level of peril that was quite entertaining.” Given his anti-establishment approach to comedy, peril and entertainment feel like Lycett’s forte. The 33-year-old has become one of the country’s most beloved and in-demand comics thanks to standup shows that often feature elaborate tales of him standing up to people who he feels need a reality check. They might be people behaving appallingly online, anti-LGBTQ+ bigots or cold callers, scammers and landlords. He has hosted two series of Joe Lycett’s Got Your Back – his consumer affairs show on Channel 4. Described as “a cross between Rogue Traders and RuPaul’s Drag Race”, it’s like Watchdog but fun. He successfully set up a dirty skip as a restaurant on Uber Eats to challenge their food hygiene policies. He flashmobbed RBS into refunding one customer £8,000. And in 2020 he legally changed his name by deed poll to Hugo Boss, internationally embarrassing the luxury German fashion brand after it sent cease and desist letters to small businesses, including a Swansea-based brewery, Boss Brewing, and charities that used the word “Boss” in their branding. Next, he was meant to be taking on Christmas, albeit not in a way that involves exposing the dodgy practices of the baby Jesus. Instead, Lycett was meant to be hosting his own festive special, Joe Lycett: Mummy’s Big Christmas Do, a live TV event that hoped to recapture the anarchic spirit of shows such as TFI Friday, the Big Breakfast and SM:TV Live. It was going to be a celebration of LGBTQ+ culture and, most importantly, filmed in his home city of Birmingham, where Lycett still lives now. Unfortunately, because of the rapid spread of the Omicron variant, that special was cancelled less than a week before it was meant to air. It was so last minute that the Guardian printed a version of this interview telling the world the show was running. “Loads of people from the team started testing positive and it was all over very quick, really,” Lycett says just after the show’s cancellation. “Also, with Boris and all his parties, the sentiment wasn’t really there to be hosting what is, essentially, a party. Everyone else is having to cancel their parties, and it just became more and more apparent that if we went ahead, we wouldn’t be reading the room.” However, the cancellation doesn’t mean that Lycett will be absent from our screens. Describing himself as “very much flavour of the month at Channel 4 at the moment”, he recently took over from Richard Ayoade as the host of Travel Man. The first episode, a festive special that sees Lycett and fellow comedian Bill Bailey exploring Iceland, is set to air just after Christmas. “I’ve really enjoyed doing it,” Lycett says. “I love comics and I love spending time with them. But normally when I’m working with comics, it’s in quite a heightened environment. You’re working with people when they are full of adrenaline, maybe even boozed up. Whereas with this show, it’s so much more relaxed. With Bill, I sat on the flight with him the whole way there and back. We talked about his memories of Sean Lock, as they were great friends, and his family. You do really get to immerse yourself in a person in a way you wouldn’t if you were just doing a gig with them.” Iceland wasn’t at all what Lycett was expecting. “I thought it was going to be really miserable and cold, and that we’d eat terrible salted food,” he says. “If I’m going to go on holiday, I want to go somewhere hot. But that trip changed my mind: the food was great and the people were hysterical. It’s such a happy place.” The episode sees the comedians knitting their own trolls, boiling eggs in natural hot springs and making a traditional Icelandic bread called laufabrauð, which is made with a thin dough that is decorated then fried in lamb fat. Are these activities Lycett chose himself? “No, I leave that entirely up to the production company,” he says. “If I was in control it would be catastrophic. You wouldn’t see any activities. You would just be watching Joe and someone else get pissed.” One thing he has done in every place he’s visited for the show is enquire about local politics, especially when it comes to LGBTQ+ rights. Iceland was progressive, but Lycett says he could feel the encroaching anti-LGBTQ sentiment making its way through Europe. “We went to Vilnius in Lithuania and a lot of eastern Europe are starting to have dangerous curbs on LGBT rights, which is really concerning,” he says. “The local fixers who helped us seemed really embarrassed by it. But there are lots of things to be embarrassed about by our politics, so we can’t throw stones.” Lycett’s own queerness is part of why he’s so keen to challenge authority figures, big companies and establishments. “I think I have a disrespect for authority because authority, both when I was growing up and now, is quite a straight, cisgender thing,” he says. “It doesn’t respond well to camp, flamboyance and people being silly. I think comedy is almost part of that rebellion; I use it as a way of making authority figures look silly. It all comes from a place of wanting to piss off boring grey people, basically.” He did this most recently in a documentary about Shell, where he attempted to confront the fossil fuel mega-corp about their advertising, which shows them as eco-friendly but is actually an egregious example of greenwashing. Nevertheless, he was aware while filming that there might be accusations of hypocrisy levied at him, especially as it turned out that Shell advertised with Channel 4, something that did come up. “But everyone is a hypocrite when it comes to climate change,” he argues. “We are all going to produce emissions. Even if you become homeless, you’d still be producing emissions. You can’t avoid it.” He played with this concept during a segment on Got Your Back where he successfully got yoghurt drink brand Yop to stop using white PET plastic for its packaging. Appearing on daytime TV to talk about the issue, Lycett stormed off set when a photo of him with one of the bottles appeared on screen. It was all staged, though it still led to him “getting cancelled” online. “It was an interesting and quite useful exercise in understanding the speed at which the public can change their opinion of you,” he says. “There was definitely a sense of people going: ‘Aha! We’ve got him. He’s a prick.’ People were really relishing that. Now I don’t think I can be cancelled because I’d just pretend it was a stunt. I’d just be like: ‘No, no, I was trying to see what would happen if I saw lots of sex workers for my show.’” One adversary he still can’t topple, though, is Peppa Pig – whose Heinz pasta shapes are marketed as one of your five a day, despite being full of salt and sugar. “I’m sick to the back teeth of her,” he sighs. “It’s not a healthy meal. But Peppa Pig should be worried about what Heinz does, because sometimes they put little sausages in those tins. Be careful who you get into bed with, Peppa!” The battle with that anthropomorphic pig might have to wait, though. Along with the upcoming series of Travel Man, he also kicks off his next tour, Joe Lycett: More, More, More! How Do You Lycett? How Do You Lycett?. It’s set to include his biggest stunt yet. “I wondered if there was a way of doing a show that calls back to something in the world outside: that you’ve seen, but you didn’t know you were seeing until later,” he says. “It’s slightly Derren Brown-like.” While he’s vague about the details, the show is about how he attempted to raise the price of his house in Birmingham. “It’s ended up becoming this huge, long-form stunt – which some may call madness – that I’ve been doing for about three years,” he says. “Purely by chance, I ended up making something a lot more moving than I anticipated.” It is, of all the things he’s done in his career, the thing he’s most proud of. So much so that touring it seems bittersweet. “I’m a bit sad to let it go because it’s been such a fun project to work on and it’s not something you can tell twice,” he says. “It’s bigger than I could have ever anticipated. I’m very proud.” Hopefully after this Christmas, he’ll be saying the same about his roast potatoes, too. Travel Man: 96 Hours in Iceland is on Channel 4 at 8pm on Monday 27 December. Tickets for Joe Lycett: More, More, More! How Do You Lycett? How Do You Lycett? are available now.The celebrity makeup artist Charlotte Tilbury’s company has repaid £3.2m in furlough money after sales soared during the pandemic as shoppers switched to buying online. Accounts filed at Companies House also reveal that Tilbury sold her business for £1.3bn – considerably more than the up to £1bn previously thought – to the Spanish cosmetics and fragrance group Puig last year. The scale of the deal means that Tilbury, who personally held a controlling stake in the business of between 50% and 75%, is likely to have received hundreds of millions from the takeover of the company in which she remains a minority shareholder. The London-born makeup artist, who grew up on the Spanish island of Ibiza, also received a consultancy fee of £1.55m from one of the group’s parent companies, Islestarr Holdings, last year, according to Companies House filings. Global sales for Charlotte Tilbury Limited Group rose 11.3% to £258.5m in the year to 31 December 2020, according to figures released by the company, driven by strong performances in key markets including the UK, mainland Europe and Asia. While its stores were forced to close for long periods, the cosmetics group said online sales doubled to account for two-thirds of total sales. Sales were underpinned by online video beauty consultations and a virtual store featuring an avatar of Tilbury, and the firm also continued with new product launches when some rivals held back. Tilbury’s tips learned from years in the trade, with celebrity clients thought to include Amal Clooney and Penélope Cruz, have helped her build a big social media presence with about 10m followers over various platforms enabling the company to continue to thrive during the coronavirus pandemic. The group fell to a £9.9m loss before tax for the year, after more than £29m in one-off costs related to its buyout by Puig. However, a spokesperson said the company had repaid furlough cash as underlying profits, before one-off costs, interest payments and other adjustments, rose almost 44% to £32m. “We would like to thank the UK government for its support,” the spokesperson said. Alongside Tilbury’s business, Barcelona-based Puig owns brands including Paco Rabanne, Jean Paul Gaultier and Nina Ricci.Ministers will not be making any announcements about future Covid restrictions in England before Christmas, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, has said. On Tuesday Boris Johnson said no new rules would come into force before Christmas Day, but there had been speculation that a post-Christmas tightening of rules might be announced this week, before a recall of parliament next week. Javid’s comment on Thursday may be an indication that fresh regulations are becoming less likely, but he stressed that ministers were still tracking the Covid data very closely and that new research suggesting the Omicron variant is less severe than feared did not lift the threat to the NHS. Speaking to broadcasters, Javid said: “We are not planning any further announcements this week. Despite the caution that we are all taking, people should enjoy their Christmases with their families and their friends – of course, remain cautious. “We will keep the situation under review. We are learning more all the time as we have done from this new data … and if we need to do anything more we will, but nothing more is going to happen before Christmas.” Javid said two reports published on Wednesday suggesting people infected with Omicron are at less risk of being hospitalised than people infected with Delta, the last dominant variant, were “of course good, encouraging news”. But he said the studies were “not very clear yet … by how much that risk is reduced”. He went on: “We do know with Omicron that it does spread a lot more quickly, it is a lot more infectious than Delta, so any advantage gained from reduced risk of hospitalisation needs to be set against that. If a much smaller percentage of people are at risk of hospitalisation, if that is a smaller percentage of a much larger number, there could still be significant hospitalisation.” Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, also cautioned about placing too much reliance on the new data at the final session of first minister’s questions before the Christmas recess. The Scottish Conservative leader, Douglas Ross, asked why she was not following the example of the UK government and allowing people to isolate for just seven days, not 10, after testing positive, if lateral flow tests later showed they were no longer infectious. Ross said a reduction in days was necessary to protect essential services and the economy from a rise in isolation-related absences, adding: “These rules are forcing whole families to self-isolate for 10 days, even if they have tested negative.” Sturgeon said sector-based exemptions to self-isolation rules had been published earlier in Scotland, but she would not make wider changes until the public health benefits outweighed the risks. “If we allow this spread of Omicron to get too far ahead of us, then even if it is significantly less severe, that is going to overwhelm us,” she said. “So anything we do right now that risks increasing spreads, such as removing self-isolation rules, or weakening self-isolation rules too quickly, actually could be seriously counterproductive. “If we act rashly right now, then what we risk is a counterproductive effect … These studies are really positive but they are also early data. When even the authors are saying ‘don’t get carried away yet with what these studies are telling you’, then I think we should listen.”The developer of one of the world’s tallest towers has responded to a multi-million dollar lawsuit from the building’s condominium board over construction and alleged design defects that have resulted in floods, elevator malfunctions and electric explosions. The response, filed on Wednesday in New York state supreme court by an entity managed by Los Angeles-based CIM Group, said that the complaints against 432 Park Avenue in New York’s so-called Billionaire’s Row are “vastly exaggerated.” The developer also called the lawsuit “ill-advised” and argued that it was “an effort to wrest unwarranted payments”. In September, the condo board sued the tower’s developers, CIM Group and Macklowe Properties, for $125m in damages. The lawsuit includes costs to repair over 1,500 construction and design defects that were identified by an engineering firm hired by the board, along with other breakdowns and safety issues. “This case presents one of the worst examples of sponsor malfeasance in the development of a luxury condominium in the history of New York City,” said the complaint. The board complained about “horrible and obtrusive noise and vibrations” including creaking and clicking sounds in the building, which has 102 floors. It also said that trash that went through the trash chute sounded like a bomb detonation. According to the suit, the issues for certain residents were so serious that they were displaced from their units for as long as 19 months. The suit also detailed one incident in which a worker who tried to fix water infiltration issues allegedly drilled through concrete and into the tower’s electric wiring, resulting in an arc-flash explosion. The worker was allegedly thrown back several feet as a result of the explosion. Jonathan Adelsberg, a partner at the law firm Herrick Feinstein, which is representing the board, described the defects as “peeling an onion”, referring to ones that may yet be discovered. “This is a work in progress in ascertaining what’s wrong,” he told the New York Times in September. In its response to the lawsuit, the building’s developer said the building is “without a doubt safe.” “Like any other skyscraper, 432 Park’s sophisticated symphony of systems needed to be fine-tuned when residents began to move into the building,” it said. “But the board repeatedly and unlawfully prevented sponsor from accessing the building and finishing the job, all while manufacturing an ever-increasing list of demands,” the developer added in Wednesday’s court filing. Adelsberg responded to the developer’s filing, saying, according to the Wall Street Journal: “This is yet another attempt by the sponsor to shirk responsibility by rewriting the record of its malfeasance. We will continue to ensure that the sponsor is held accountable for their persistent failures.”“Chasse à la glu has ended, but the fight to save other birds is not over,” says campaigner Yves Verilhac. “We are now battling to stop other cruel hunting methods that lead to the killing of skylarks, lapwings, golden plovers, thrushes and blackbirds.” Two years ago, Verilhac, of France’s Ligue pour la Protection des Oiseaux (LPO), was fighting to stop the French tradition of chasse à la glu – hunting songbirds with twigs and branches covered in adhesive. La chasse à la glu had been banned in the EU by a 1979 bird directive, except in special circumstances where it had to be “controlled, selective and [done] in limited quantities”. Since 1989, France had invoked these circumstances to permit glue-trapping in five south-east departments on the grounds that it was traditional. Today, Verilhac and other campaigners are celebrating a rare victory. This year, facing legal action initiated by the European Commission and possible fines, the French government announced glue-trap hunting would be definitively banned. The fight to save endangered bird species goes on, however. “Of the 64 species of bird hunted in France, at least 20 are on the danger list,” says Verilhac. “We have succeeded in suspending hunting of only three species: turtledoves, curlews and the black-tailed godwit.” The LPO says France continues to kill millions of birds every year. Some of the “traditional” methods used involve huge nets, wire nooses that strangle the birds, or traps that crush the birds with stones. As it did for decades with chasse à la glu, the French government has allowed exemptions from the EU directive. However, after a legal challenge by conservationists, the state council, France’s highest court, suspended these methods temporarily, despite protests by the country’s powerful hunting lobby and an attempt by the French president, Emmanuel Macron, to reinstate licences. The LPO wants a permanent ban on these hunting methods and so, it appears, does Europe; Verilhac produced a letter from EU commissioner Virginijus Sinkevičius advising the French government it is on its last warning over this issue before being hauled before the European court of justice. France is not the only country in Europe that sees hunters decimate bird populations. It is estimated that between 11 million and 36 million birds are illegally killed or taken in Mediterranean countries every year, many of them while migrating. More than 5 million birds are believed to be illegally hunted every year in Italy; in October, Italian hunters were found in Norway with 2,000 dead thrushes. Verilhac says French hunters are now travelling to Morocco to hunt turtledoves, where each hunter is allowed to kill 50 a day. The battle over France’s love of hunting, in all its forms, is proving to be a key issue in the run-up to next April’s presidential election. There are up to 1.2 million hunters in France who, along with their supporters and families, could make up a pool of 5 million voters. Willy Schraen, president of the French Fédération Nationale des Chasseurs (national hunters’ federation), has been doing the rounds of television studios to explain the “passion” involved in hunting. Schraen readily admits he does not hunt to control animal numbers – farmers frequently lament wild boar destroying their crops, for example – but for pleasure. He has said he would not turn down a ministerial job in charge of “rurality and agriculture”. But after a spate of shooting accidents in recent years – about 20 people have been killed and dozens more injured – a recent Ifop poll revealed that 70% of those surveyed would at least like to see hunting banned at weekends and during school holidays. Recent accidents have involved walkers, cyclists and drivers shot as they passed hunting areas, though most deaths each season are among the hunters themselves. “It is scandalous that a candidate so pro-Europe as Macron has done everything possible to try to get round the European birds directive,” Verilhac says. “They’ve been fighting this to the end. We have won on glue trapping, but have wasted time and energy fighting this. We have lost a year and the numbers of species are falling. “So the fight goes on.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and features This piece was edited on 24 December 2021 to remove a photograph in which a yellowhammer being used as bait in a poacher’s trap was wrongly identified as a trapped ortolan.After grappling with volcanic eruptions that dragged on for three months, piling on to the tourism woes brought by the coronavirus pandemic, a bit of luck has landed in the Canary Island of La Palma. Spain’s Christmas lottery – the two-century-old tradition that on Wednesday showered €2.4bn in prize money across the country – included a nugget of good news for the hard-hit island as two local kiosks said they had sold winning tickets worth a total of €400,000. While the amount fell far short of that paid out for the top winning number, worth a total of €516m in prizes, news that a small piece of El Gordo – or the Fat One, as the world’s richest lottery is known – had landed in La Palma sparked jubilation. “We really needed this,” said Ricardo Cobiella, who uncorked a bottle of champagne after finding out his kiosk had sold €200,000 worth of winning tickets. “People here were in need of a bit of good news.” One day after the closely followed draw, the identity of the winners remained shrouded in mystery. “If the winner is someone from here, that’s great,” said Cobiella. “And if it’s someone from outside the island, then come to La Palma and spend the money here because we need people to invest in the island’s economic recovery.” Since mid-September much of life on the island has been dictated by the whims of the Cumbre Vieja volcano. It first erupted on 19 September, spewing ash and rivers of lava that swallowed nearly 3,000 buildings, decimated the lush banana plantations that drive the island’s economy, and forced thousands of people from their homes. The seismic activity came to a halt last week, leaving the 80,000 residents cautiously optimistic that another piece of good news may be on the way in the coming days, with scientists expected to declare the eruption officially over. From there the focus will shift to the tremendous task of rebuilding the affected areas. The lava buried parts of key highways and blanketed some areas in a thick layer of ash, leaving parts of the island cut off and without potable water or electricity. While no injuries or deaths have been directly linked to the eruption, many people continue to reel from the mental toll of living through months of roaring eruptions, tremors and sudden evacuations. “There’s a lot of work to do,” said Cobiella. “And that’s why we’re asking people not to forget La Palma. They need to keep supporting La Palma.”Boris Johnson has decided to allow 25 December celebrations go ahead this year, narrowly avoiding becoming the prime minister who cancelled Christmas for the second year in a row. Another man who knows how it feels to be accused of cancelling Christmas is Michael Chubb, the former head of events at Birmingham city council – and the legacy has not been short-lived. In 1998 Chubb inadvertently gave birth to one of the most pervasive media myths in the UK when he found himself at the centre of claims that the council rebranded its traditional December events programme to avoid offending non-Christians. Looking back 23 years on, Chubb is amazed that his team’s suggestion to promote two months of events in Birmingham city centre under the banner of “Winterval” continues to resonate. “We put it to the council, they liked the idea, and it didn’t seem necessary to explain to anyone why we did it,” he says, explaining that the programme covered everything from BBC Children in Need events to Diwali celebrations and Christmas parties. “That’s why the furore that happened afterwards was a surprise – maybe we were a little naive.” The story began when the Anglican bishop of Birmingham made some mildly critical comments about the Winterval branding in a message to local churches, suggesting Christianity was being downplayed by a council that was “embarrassed by faith”. These comments were picked up by a news agency, and almost every national newspaper – including the Guardian – subsequently ran short stories on the bishop’s intervention. What could have been a swiftly forgotten tale then took a life of its own. “The council that banned Christmas” became a regular reference in right-leaning outlets, popping up in columns and news stories about attacks on traditional British values for years to come. “It stunned me at first,” says Chubb. He insists he was so busy putting together the event that it was only the following year that he became aware of how far the story had spread. “It is because it was reported by so many people that it became a fact.” Chubb says he always attempted to promote events from different religions and cultures in one of the most diverse cities of the UK. “Everyone’s got their own festival – Diwali, Eid, Vaisakhi, Chinese new year – they’re each celebrated in their own way by their own community. No one festival should overpower the other. Each festival deserved its own communication strategy.” The Telegraph has run 61 stories referencing the term Winterval, the Mail has used it 78 times and the Sun 67. The saga also provided the basis for further claims about Birmingham, with the Mail claiming the following year that the city council wanted to “scrap Easter”. By 2004 the then Sun columnist Richard Littlejohn was stating that the city had banned Father Christmas from the Bull Ring shopping centre “in case he offends non-Christians” – something denied by all those involved. The news story about pen-pushing officials trying to erase Christmas has now become an annual event. Last month the Mail on Sunday ran a front-page story claiming civil servants were trying to “ban Christmas” by changing the language of a Covid vaccination advert because it would “offend minorities”. The term of attack has changed: in the 1990s these plots were blamed on “political correctness”, but now the word “woke” serves much the same purpose. Chubb, now 66 and living in Cardiff, says: “Ask yourself the question: why? What was the reason for falling on this one, what were they trying to achieve by putting thoughts into people’s minds? It’s to rile people, to make people take a stance and choose a team. It’s a bit like what’s happening at the moment in terms of politics.” But in terms of branding, Chubb is proud that the Winterval name is still talked about almost a quarter of a century later. “It bloody worked in terms of marketing.”Nearly two years into the pandemic, Angela Rasmussen was looking forward to a more typical Christmas with her family. She was planning to fly from Canada back to the US, hoping that preventative measures would be enough to keep everyone safe. And then Omicron hit. Rassmussen, a virologist at the Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization at the University of Saskatchewan, isn’t worried about herself. She’s vaccinated and boosted, and she knows if she got sick, it’s very unlikely to be severe. But she has a two-year-old niece who is too young to get the vaccine, and older people in her family who could be vulnerable. Tough choices on holiday plans Like many people at this moment, she faced a tough choice. So she canceled her flight, and she plans to spend Christmas with friends nearby. “I don’t want to contribute to further transmission of omicron,” said Rasmussen. “You really have to take that into consideration – not just your own individual risk, but their individual risk as well and the risk to others within your community.” Americans were looking forward to the return of a more typical holiday season when the omicron variant turned everything on its head. Now many are scrambling to make new plans in light of the more transmissible and immune-evasive variant. Omicron changes everything: a viral Uzi “Omicron is a game-changer,” said Michael Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota. “As much as Covid has been an immense challenge, omicron takes it to a whole new level.” He called the new variant a “viral Uzi” for its rapid spread. “Before omicron, I was very optimistic that this was fading away, but it threw us another curveball,” said Katelyn Jetelina, assistant professor of epidemiology with the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston. Yet more than 109 million Americans are expected to travel this holiday season, up 34% from last year and nearly at pre-pandemic levels, according to AAA. While some people are scaling back or canceling holiday plans altogether, others are trying to make existing plans a little safer. Decisions based on limited information As scientists scramble to understand the new variant, holiday celebrants are making decisions with limited information. “This is not going to be just a scientific question,” Osterholm said. “Because we don’t have enough science to answer this with any clarity. This is going to be one’s personal choice of what’s the risk picture, and what can people tolerate?” To be as safe as possible, experts recommend keeping gatherings small, limiting travel, getting vaccinated and boosted, wearing high-quality masks, getting tested, improving ventilation, and quarantining if possible. “What people really should be thinking about here is putting as many layers of protection between themselves and the virus as possible,” Rasmussen said. Communication is key. “The biggest thing is having a conversation and a plan before getting together,” Jetelina said. That way you’re not pulling into your grandparents’ driveway only to learn they ran out of rapid tests last month. Plan for the most vulnerable person in the room One rule of thumb is to plan for the most vulnerable person in the room, whether they are older, immune-compromised, or unable to be vaccinated. “I would take out all layers of protection if an immunocompromised family member was with us,” Jetelina said. Osterholm thinks of it like this: “Who do we put at risk if we’re infected?” Getting vaccinated and boosted is one important measure, even if it only provides partial protection in the next few days. “The booster shot works much faster in terms of producing those high neutralizing antibody responses, and it really does significantly increase your neutralizing antibody titers within a couple of days of getting it,” Rasmussen said. But keep in mind that children under 5 aren’t eligible for the shots yet. Kids under the age of one are at particularly high risk for developing serious illness. “As parents, we are our kids’ only advocate, and so there are hard stops for my family if other family members aren’t willing to do public health mitigation measures,” Jetelina said. Masks remain a key tool Masks are another important tool – especially high-quality, well-fitting masks, like an N95 or KF94. Rasmussen recommends wearing a pair of sunglasses or glasses with the mask; if they fog up, the mask is leaking around the edges too much. Double-masking can help stop some of that leaking. Wearing masks is particularly important if you’re traveling by plane or train. “You should still keep the mask on the entire time,” Rasmussen said. But not just on the plane itself, she said – during “that Uber ride to the airport, hanging out in the airport waiting for your flight, especially when people are all gathering and clustering around at the gate.” This may be particularly true for your flight back, when rates of Covid may be higher. Ventilate and test At the get-together itself, ventilation is another key tool. “Crack the windows, get an air purifier that has either HEPA or MERV-13 filtration,” Rasmussen said. PCR and rapid tests can also help, if you can find and afford them. The home tests should be used immediately before getting together, since infectiousness can change within hours. And keep in mind that “no test is perfect or infinitely sensitive,” Rasmussen said. “Just because you tested negative for a rapid test, that doesn’t mean you’re 100% safe.” With the rise of the omicron variant, there have been preliminary reports of symptomatic people initially testing negative on rapid tests, Osterholm said – and they may still be transmitting the virus. “I don’t know how frequently that occurs,” he said, but “that’s a huge challenge” for understanding how infectious you may be. Back out if you need to but accept a small risk If you don’t feel safe gathering, especially if your family or friends aren’t willing to take precautions, “don’t feel shy about telling people that you just can’t make it,” Rasmussen said. “Don’t feel ashamed or uncomfortable setting firm boundaries about what you’re comfortable with and what risks you will tolerate.” Every expert said they are going through the same risk calculations and trying to figure out the best plans for them and their families. “If you’re all vaccinated, and use rapid tests and masks and put other mitigations into effect such as increasing ventilation and air filtration, then you’re safer, but it’s not completely safe,” Rasmussen said. “That said, we’re human beings, and we need to be around other human beings. So most people are willing to assume some level of risk.” Prioritizing what is important can help you decide the level of risk you’re willing to accept, Jetelina said. “For me, [sitting on] Santa’s lap isn’t important – my girls are too young for that. But seeing great-grandma is, so we’re gonna be extra careful before we see great-grandma.”There were at least 16 Salernitana fans at the Dacia Arena on Tuesday. It is no small commitment to make a 1,000-mile round trip to support a team that sits bottom of the standings on a weeknight in December. The group came knowing they would not have a team to support at all. Salernitana had been barred from travelling after two players tested positive for Covid, together with a third member of staff. The decision was made by the local health authority in Salerno, not the Italian Football Federation, meaning that their fixture away to Udinese, in the north-east, was not officially cancelled. And so, we had a repeat of the surreal theatre that surrounded unplayed games between Juventus and Napoli last October, as well as Lazio and Torino this March. The home team showed up, submitted a starting lineup and even posted it on social media. Then they waited around. Finally, 45 minutes after the game was scheduled to kick off, the referee Giacomo Campione blew his whistle three times to bring the charade to a close. Everyone was doing what they should, following the rules as written, but these scenes provoked a wearying sense of deja vu. Both the Juventus-Napoli and Lazio-Torino games were eventually played at later dates, but only after lengthy appeals processes and arguments over why some teams had been forced to carry on with squads decimated by the virus while others got a reprieve. The Lega Serie A justice department has so far declined to make a ruling on whether this game should be awarded as a walkover win for Udinese or rescheduled for a later date. There is little point in doing so until they know whether Salernitana will play any more matches at all. The club has until 31 December to find a new owner or be thrown out of the league. Their promotion to the top flight last spring created a conflict of interest, as they are co-owned by Claudio Lotito, also the owner of Lazio. This is a mess 10 years in the making. Lotito relaunched Salernitana together with another businessman, Marco Mezzaroma, after the club went bankrupt in 2011 and oversaw their rise from Serie D, with Lazio frequently sending them young players on loan to gain experience. The Italian Football Federation’s rules at the time prohibited individuals from owning more than one club within the professional divisions – from Lega Pro upwards. But when Salernitana were promoted to that level in 2012, Lotito was granted an exemption. Potential clashes with Lazio in the Coppa Italia were clumsily avoided by drawing the teams on opposite sides of the bracket and trusting in the probability that they would not both make the final. Even the federation’s own president, Gabriele Gravina, has acknowledged that “everyone knew what would happen” when Salernitana finally made it up to Serie A. There could be no more bending of rules to allow one man to own two teams in the same division. Lotito was permitted to surrender the club to a blind trust on the condition that they be sold by the end of December. The question of how things were allowed to go this far remains a vexing one. Rules have since been amended to prevent a repeat. In Salernitana’s case, Gravina has been clear that there can be no further extensions. If no buyer is found, the team will be thrown out of Serie A. He remained defiantly optimistic on Tuesday, saying: “I bet that a buyer will be found in the next 10 days,” and declaring it as unthinkable that nobody would be willing to invest in such a “healthy club”. Those fans who travelled to the Dacia Arena that same evening would love to believe him. They unfurled a banner outside with a plea to “Free Salernitana”. The rest of the league can only watch and wait. There would be a knock-on impact for everyone if Salernitana are thrown out, with their results so far set to be scrubbed from the record, even if the impact on the standings would be modest. The club has struggled badly on its return to the top flight after 23 years away – collecting eight points from 19 games despite signing Franck Ribéry this September. It is a situation everyone would prefer to avoid. There is anxiety enough over Salernitana’s Covid cases, and the potential implications of the Omicron variant. Up until this week, the hope in Italy had been that a high vaccination rate could keep the league running smoothly. La Repubblica reported in October that 98% of Serie A players had received two jabs – the biggest uptake across Europe’s top five leagues. As of Tuesday, only 19 had tested positive all season. Half of teams were yet to experience a single case. But rising infection numbers across the country were sparking concern even before Salernitana were ordered to stay home. Earlier this month the government tightened restrictions for fans attending games, requiring them to meet the ‘Super Green Pass’ criteria of having received two jabs or recovered from Covid in the preceding six months. Further government measures may be introduced before Christmas, although Serie A is on break now until 6 January. Attendances at Serie A games have been limited to 75% of stadium capacity since October, up from 50% at the start of the campaign. In practice, many clubs are not hitting their upper limits. These worries did not overshadow Serie A’s final games of 2021 entirely. Internazionale signed off on a brilliant year by beating Torino 1-0 at San Siro. They had already tied up the title of ‘Winter Champion’ over the weekend and look ever more likely to retain the actual Scudetto in the spring. Simone Inzaghi was justified in his observation that: “It suits everyone now to say that Inter are a dreadnought, but that was not what people were saying in the summer.” He has taken the team to new heights since succeeding Antonio Conte, even finding ways in recent ways to reintegrate and get the most from players who had fallen to the fringes: Alexis Sánchez and Arturo Vidal. Milan rebounded from their weekend defeat to Napoli with an impressive 4-2 win over Empoli, Franck Kessié thriving as a makeshift no 10. Napoli, by contrast, undid all their good work by losing at home to a Spezia side that sat 17th in the table, easily the biggest shock of the round. And then there were Roma, who delivered their best performance of José Mourinho’s tenure as they thumped Atalanta 4-1 at the weekend, but threw away a lead as they drew 1-1 on Wednesday with Sampdoria. “It was a horrible match,” said Mourinho. “If I was at home I would have changed the channel.” At least it was a match. Those Salernitana fans who made the trip to Udine could only head home afterwards to anxious Christmases, not knowing if they would have excuses to return to a Serie A stadium in 2022.In the middle of downtown Cairo is an anonymous-looking concrete building that stretches along one side of a huge landscaped roundabout. If you peer upwards, you’ll see it labelled, between rows of air-con units, in Arabic and English: “Opera office building and garage.” As monuments to past cultural glories go, it’s not a thing of beauty. But this block marks the site of the Khedivial Opera House – a venue erected in 1869 – and which, on 24 December 1871, staged the first performance of a new opera by the world’s then most famous composer: Giuseppe Verdi’s Aida. Today, Aida is one of the most regularly performed operas across the globe. Its just-add-pyramids ancient Egypt setting is as beloved by directors and audiences as Carmen’s Spain or Madama Butterfly’s Japan, almost always preserved as a spectacular backdrop for its conventional Italian-opera love story. Yet in recent decades Aida’s overt exoticism has attracted controversy. The Palestinian intellectual Edward Said argued that it was just another product of European imperialism – an opera that has had, he wrote in 1993, “an anaesthetic as well as informative effect on European audiences”. Tempted to dismiss Said’s critique as outdated or too grandly abstract? Don’t be: in 2019 Aida made the news when the American soprano Tamara Wilson refused to wear blackface makeup to sing the title role at Italy’s Arena di Verona. I’ve loved Verdi’s score for as long as I’ve known anything about opera, but it’s impossible to ignore Aida’s problems today. Yet in Europe at least, the piece’s roots in 19th-century Cairo have been largely forgotten and Egyptian perspectives on it marginalised amid the liberal handwringing. Which is why, to mark the 150th anniversary of Aida’s world premiere, I’m standing next to roaring traffic in central Cairo, staring up at an office block in the hope of finding out what happened next. Not the familiar story of Aida’s popularity on the mainstages of Europe and North America – but the opera’s fate here in the Egyptian capital. Never an enthusiastic traveller, Verdi would probably not have appreciated the gesture. In fact he might have been pleased that the Egyptian origins of his “Egyptian” opera have mostly been forgotten. He confessed to a friend while working on Aida: “If anyone had told me two years ago, ‘You will write for Cairo’, I would have considered him a fool.” To another, he described ancient Egypt as “a civilisation I have never been able to admire.” No wonder the composer refused Egyptian ruler Khedive Isma’il Pasha’s initial request, for a hymn commemorating the new opera House’s official opening. “It is not my custom to compose occasional pieces,” Verdi explained icily. When the Khedive instead asked for a new “purely ancient and Egyptian opera”, promising a splendid staging, Verdi continued to play hard to get. Weighing up other options, the Opera House’s management reckoned that Richard Wagner “could do something grandiose”. But Wagner’s Aida remains one of music history’s great what-ifs: the 150,000-franc fee finally proved irresistible – though Verdi refused to travel to Cairo to supervise the premiere because he was “afraid of being mummified”. That joke’s conflation of contemporaneous and ancient Egypt is significant. Few cultures can match the powerful hold that ancient Egypt has had on the European imagination since 19th-century archaeologists scrambled to unearth monuments and bag treasures dating from pharaonic times. Aida’s setting was designed to capitalise on the fashionable world of pyramids, mummies and hieroglyphs. Like the archaeological excavations themselves, the opera’s historical spectacle drew its audience’s attention away from contemporary Egypt and instead focused minds on the country’s glorious past. As singing teacher and impresario Neveen Allouba puts it, “Aida shows the past of Egypt, it’s our history. And so we’re proud of that. But modern Egypt is so totally different.” In this city of 21 million inhabitants, vehicles jostle for space on smog-filled boulevards and car horns are a permanent feature of the soundscape. Arriving there in 2021 feels like plunging into the polyphonic thudding of a superclub. So has Aida become a historical relic in its own right? Magdy Saber, president of the current Cairo Opera House – opened in 1988 after fire destroyed the Khedivial Opera House – insists Aida still has modern-day meaning. “It’s very important to the history of the Egyptian military,” he explains, “because Radamès [Verdi’s tenor hero] is the head of the Egyptian military and when he commits a crime, he admits it – so it’s about the honour of the country’s history and at the same time the honour of the Egyptian military.” Meanwhile soprano Fatma Said – Egypt-born and a rising international star – tells me the opera’s Triumphal March is still used for university graduation ceremonies in Cairo. “We’re very, very proud of the music,” she says. Even though it was written by an Italian who refused to visit Egypt? “Art isn’t only about taking facts and putting it into music,” she argues. “It’s all about using our imagination. I think this is the most interesting part: how artistically involved these western artists [such as Verdi] were with the Middle East.” Ahmed El Maghraby, who runs a performance space dedicated to traditional Egyptian music, is less convinced. Aida is good for tourism, he admits. But celebrating the opera as one of modern Egypt’s cultural exponents? “Why should you play Aida when we have our own music?” Allouba, too, confesses she would love to see operas about “the real Egypt now, the real Egyptians – what is happening and the problems and the successes that we have through our life now”. But my assumption that ancient Egypt might feel like, well, ancient history to those growing up there today couldn’t have been more wrong. “When I was 12 or 13, I could see the pyramids from my house,” says Daniel, a twentysomething dentist and tenor-in-training. “We used to take taxis and we’d go to the pyramids. This is part of my identity.” Back at the roundabout where Cairo’s first opera house stood – still called Meidan El-Opera – I ask our taxi driver whether he’s ever seen Verdi’s Aida. “No.” Would he want to, I wonder? “Of course! Who wouldn’t?” • Aida at 150, presented by Flora Willson and produced by Steven Rajam, is on BBC Radio 3 at 19:15 on 26 December and then on BBC Sounds.Comedians are not scared of anything. We’re already doing the most frightening thing of all – and once you’ve disobeyed your Asian mother, anything is possible. I’ve withstood appalling reviews, complaints from customers, dying on stage and my parents refusing to speak to me for doing jokes about them. When I performed a comedy show about Islamic State called The Kardashians Made Me Do It, the tabloids accused me of recruiting young people to the terrorist group. I’ve been called mad, bad and dangerous. Someone once threw a trifle in my face. None of this deterred me from getting up on stage and doing the same material night after night. As a comedian it is my right to offend you, and it is your right to be offended. Trust me, nothing can shut a comedian up; try getting a word in edgeways on a panel show. The idea that cancel culture is “on the cusp of wiping out comedy”, as Maureen Lipman told the BBC this week, is self-righteous hysteria. The same YouGov poll that brought this apparently terminal threat back to the front pages also revealed that two-thirds of British people don’t know what “cancel culture” is, including 38% who have literally never heard of it. The notion that professional comedians are scared of offending for fear of their careers ending is as outrageous as having a Christmas party in the middle of a lockdown. I heard some comedians talking backstage at a gig recently about Dave Chappelle. They were saying, “He’s been cancelled.” I thought, “Cancelled? Is he a train? The 12.50 at Aintree? A credit card?” How can a person be cancelled? My peers told me Chappelle had done some offensive jokes about transgender people in his latest TV special, and he’d consequently had his new documentary pulled from some film festivals. I bought a ticket to see him at the Hammersmith Apollo. It quickly sold out. Surely if 5,000 people turn up to see you, you’re not really cancelled. Chappelle is famous for doing uneasy material. Race, drugs, sex and defending Michael Jackson. It’s groundbreaking and challenging, it’s difficult to do and sometimes difficult to watch. When that’s the nature of your comedy, it’s going to be divisive, and there’s going to be a tsunami of people on Twitter who are upset. Chappelle knows this, but it hasn’t stopped him. Everyone’s voice has the right to be heard – and his is being heard. It’s also true that over generations, people’s sense of humour changes. While a white man making jokes about his Pakistani neighbour may have been considered funny in 1975, they are not found funny today because the world has evolved. This has made a lot of people angry: mainly old white men crawling over our screens like reptiles, whining, “You can’t say anything these days.” There is a difference between being cancelled and being unemployed. Chappelle may have been “cancelled” by a few film festivals, but he is definitely not unemployed. If you’re a comedian and you are unemployed, maybe it’s because your material is as dated as you are, and it’s more convenient to blame all the petition-signing woke vegans for the fact you can’t get on Blankety Blank any more. This is all fine. I respect and revere Lenny Bruce, but I don’t laugh today at material he did in the 1950s. If you’re a comedian, you are outspoken. That’s the job. No one wants to be a secret, quiet, anonymous comedian. This furore over “cancel culture killing comedy” is entirely a media invention. In real life people have real problems: my friend Maureen, who works in a corner shop, isn’t getting “cancelled” for the jokes she tells her friends. And the biggest threat to professional comedy in the UK right now is venues closing down, tours being postponed, and my show going out of date quicker than the spinach in my fridge. People who want to say racist, sexist, homophobic or transphobic things also want a licence to say them – but then they get upset when people respond, “That’s racist, sexist, homophobic or transphobic.” That’s right. If you say bigoted things, that makes you a bigot. That’s how it goes. Just like breaking into a bank and stealing money makes you a bank robber. That’s what the words mean. Cancel culture is just a term used by people to put a cloak of respectability over the fact they want to be able to say offensive things without consequences. When I first started standup, I got a death threat and it was considered shocking and dangerous. Now comedians get death threats on Twitter all the time. It’s the same with so-called cancel culture, it’s water off a duck’s back. In the future maybe every comedian will be cancelled for 15 minutes; it can be worn as a badge of honour, and none of us will ever shut up about it. Shazia Mirza is a comedian. Her latest show, Coconut, is on tour now“We can’t see it,” says a character in The Matrix Resurrections, “but we’re all trapped inside these strange repeating loops.” Small surprise techno producer Marcel Dettmann was commissioned to write music for this latest film in the franchise. It’s a natural fit. Its director, Lana Wachowski, goes clubbing at Berghain, the Berlin techno club where Dettmann is resident and where, cut off from the everyday world, people have surreal, liberating experiences. Techno continues to inspire the franchise’s aesthetics. When club techno arose in 1980s Detroit, African American producers were reimagining the deindustrialised city as a site of futurist fantasies. Cybotron’s dystopian 1984 track Techno City was inspired by Fritz Lang’s Metropolis and the Tokyo of Yellow Magic Orchestra’s track Technopolis. “I extrapolated the necessity of interfacing the spirituality of human beings into the cybernetic matrix,” said Cybotron’s Rik Davis (using the word “matrix” before the film existed), “between the brain, the soul and the mechanisms of cyberspace.” It’s telling that The Matrix’s character names (Neo, Trinity, Morpheus) all sound like the monikers of techno producers (Function, DVS1, Cadency). Similarly, the fashion in the film is not unlike stereotypical Berlin techno clubwear. “When they go into the Matrix, they create their persona, which is how they see themselves,” said Matrix costume designer Kym Barrett of the characters, with their PVC coats, heavy boots and micro sunglasses (by Richard Walker). Techno artist Jeff Mills similarly speaks of shedding his human form through music. “I’m becoming the third person,” he told the Wire, comparing his productions to robot probes of alien territories. Along with Mike Banks, Mills was co-founder of the Detroit techno collective Underground Resistance (UR). UR sought to harness techno’s power of anonymity to de-programme people from what they called the “dominant mindbeam”: the false reality by which, through mass media, we’re conditioned to accept an untrue sense of who we are. “Everything you see may not be real,” UR sang on their 1998 album Interstellar Fugitives. “It might be a mirage.” The Matrix is also based on such a distinction between the apparent world and the real world. Co-creator Lilly Wachowski recently revealed that, in the original screenplay, Switch was supposed to be a trans character who in the matrix was a woman and in the real world a man. Many trans and queer people experience this truth in underground party scenes, where the techno club is a safe environment to explore who they really are. The Matrix Reloaded’s most striking sequence occurs at a subterranean rave in Zion. In a cavernous space lit by naked flames, hundreds of sweating bodies dance to a techno track (Fluke’s Zion) mimed by drummers. The fashion is muted-tone tunics with bald heads, beaded wrists and swinging dreadlocks. That scene invokes the exhilarating sense of freedom one feels at an underground club night, when the everyday world vanishes. It shows The Matrix’s kinship with techno’s strange marriage of the futuristic and the ancient. Why techno? At its best, it is synthetic electronic music without any familiar features – no melody, no harmony, no song structure – relayed in dark featureless spaces. This means it can give a momentary release from history and identity, including race, gender and sexual constructs. In Berlin, through clubs such as Berghain and promoters such as Gegen, techno is allied in an empowering way to queer countercultural movements. “Leave your digital surveillance device at home (or in the coat check),” said the blurb for a recent Gegen party. “Destroy your self-image.” French theorist Jean Baudrillard’s Simulacra and Simulation was one of three books the Wachowskis told Keanu Reeves to read before shooting The Matrix. “There is no more fiction,” it quips. “[Science] fiction will never again be a mirror held toward the future, but a desperate rehallucination of the past.” In this view, movies such as The Matrix Resurrections are vain attempts to rehash traditional grounding myths for our quickly dissolving world. But I think that’s too pessimistic. The term Gilles Deleuze uses for some post-realist cinema is “fabulation”. Blockbuster pyrotechnics notwithstanding, The Matrix is a cinematic fabulation, tapping into our deep, hard-to-shake-off sense of modern life’s unrealness, and inventing new identities. Our postindustrial environment – work, cities, social media, interiors, race, gender – can feel like a collective dream from which we yearn to be shocked awake. For many, techno clubs have that power. “A world without rules and controls, without borders or boundaries,” in Neo’s words. “A world where anything is possible.” It makes me think of my friend’s first night at Berghain, the clandestine power station turned techno club. At the first-floor bar, a woman asked him if he’d like some psilocybin mushrooms; he nodded and she said to follow her. As they walked along the back of the strobe-lit dancefloor, surrounded by dancing leather-clad bodies, he noticed the tattoo on her back shoulder: a white rabbit. Life imitating art – it was just like the scene from The Matrix precipitating Thomas Anderson’s transformation into Neo and his entering a new, weirder reality.The US chipmaker Intel has apologised for telling its suppliers not to source products or labour from Xinjiang, a province that human rights groups and governments including the US allege uses forced labour, after facing a backlash across China. Intel, which derives more than a quarter of its $80bn (£60bn) in annual revenues from the Chinese market, apologised to the people of China and its local partners on Thursday for telling suppliers to avoid the region in accordance with restrictions imposed by “multiple governments”. “We apologise for the trouble caused to our respected Chinese customers, partners and the public,” Intel said in a post on the social media site WeChat, hours after its annual letter to suppliers was made public, prompting fury across China. “To clarify, the paragraph about Xinjiang in the letter is only for expressing the original intention of compliance and legality, not its intention or position.” The US and Amnesty International have accused China of widespread human rights abuses in Xinjiang against the province’s majority Muslim Uyghur population, including forced labour, mass internment and torture, which Beijing denies. Earlier this month, Intel published its annual letter to suppliers saying that it had been “required to ensure that its supply chain does not use any labour or source goods or services” from Xinjiang. The letter, which is available in English and Chinese, went viral on Chinese social media this week. The Global Times, a Beijing-backed nationalist tabloid, accused Intel of biting “the hand that feeds it” and said the move was “absurd”. “What we need to do is to make it increasingly expensive for companies to offend China so their losses outweigh their gains,” the newspaper said in an editorial. The Chinese pop starWang Junkai posted on his official Weibo microblog that he would no longer serve as an Intel brand ambassador, adding that “national interests exceed everything”. Multinational companies have come under pressure as they aim to comply with Xinjiang-related trade sanctions while continuing to operate in China, one of their biggest markets. Brands including Nike and H&amp;M have come under pressure in China for voicing concerns about the treatment of Uyghurs, or trying to eliminate Xinjiang from their supply chains. Earlier this month, the US senate passed a new law barring imports from China’s north-western region unless businesses can prove they were produced without forced labour. The US has also announced a diplomatic boycott of Beijing’s Winter Olympic Games next year in protest against the alleged abuses. The Global Times said in its editorial that multinationals “should be able to endure, properly handle and balance pressure from all parties”.Netflix’s Selling Sunset is clearly doing well, given that it’s expanding its universe with a series of spin-offs. And the follow-up that has piqued my interest in particular? Selling Tampa, which follows the lives of the all-female, all black agents of Florida-based Allure Realty. As with Selling Sunset, there is plenty of cattiness and consumerism off the bat. Cast-mates preen and casually discuss “lucky Chanel handbags” on all-expenses-paid trips to Miami. It’s set against a backdrop of impractically large, undeniably impressive mansions. But while Selling Sunset focuses on a luxury real estate agency whose glamorous, all-female agents are employed by the two brothers who rule the roost – giving it a Playboy mansion feel at times – it’s female boss Sharelle Rosado at the helm of Allure. She is often a shoulder to cry on (even if some of her own clapbacks are enough to cause tears themselves). Compared with the established company run by the Oppenheim brothers in Selling Sunset, Allure Realty is essentially a startup, so the stakes feel even higher. Like its Los Angeles-based predecessor, Selling Tampa also has a certain edge that realty-reality shows have over their contemporaries. The women more often bicker over business than boys, while also touching on themes such as divorce, familial trauma and how unplanned pregnancies can reshape a working woman’s career aspirations. Many of them are navigating their high-powered roles while juggling family life. But what it has been praised most for is its diversity. The ethnic makeup of the cast means these often sidelined conversations are even more powerful. We don’t hear enough from women in these spaces, let alone black women, and we rarely see the inner workings of black-owned businesses. In fact, Allure Realty is an all-black, all-female agency because Rosado had previously worked at companies where she was the only woman of colour and in 2019, decided to become a part of the change she hoped to see. With their casual brokering of multimillion-dollar deals, the cast is one of many US reality show ensembles that lead the way in depictions of the African American middle class. Reality TV programmes in the US have pioneered aspirational black representation, with shows like The Real Housewives franchise or Married to Medicine, which follows female doctors and the wives of doctors in Atlanta. That isn’t to say the genre hasn’t exacerbated stereotypes with their black fronted programming; fist fights and relationship woes remain central in many shows. But there are enough black casts to ensure more than one story is being told. Selling Tampa isn’t alone in focusing on affluent, successful black women. But it takes it even further in the right direction, by focusing on women whose inclusion is not by virtue of their adjacency to successful men. The commission is earned entirely by these women, with scenes more often than not passing the Bechdel test. It operates in the sweet spot between positive representation and the mess required to keep a reality show from becoming a documentary – something we haven’t yet seen in the UK. While Channel 4’s Highlife must be applauded for showcasing a different black reality, it lacked the drama needed to hold attention. ITV’s Peckham’s Finest currently lacks either. Portrayals of black excellence via reality TV aren’t perfect, but I’m glad they exist. The aim of the genre is rarely to bathe subjects in glory – programmes such as Jersey Shore, The Hills and in the UK, TOWIE and Made in Chelsea, make caricatures of their cast. But there is so little black representation that more of it can only ever be a good thing. When Cardi B name-checked her dentist Dr Catrise Austin in her 2017 hit single Bodak Yellow (and trebled the dentist’s business in the process), I was amazed to see she was a fabulous, bouffant haired black woman. My best friend, a fervent fan of shows like Married to Medicine – and the successful black people they portray – didn’t even blink.On the internet, nobody knows you’re a dog, went the New Yorker cartoon. Nearly 30 years later, it says so in your profile. My Instagram feed is full of dogs, or people posting as their dogs from their own accounts. Some I know well, like my sister’s sweet but vacant pug Margot. Others I have found by searching hashtags for my favourite breeds. Now I see almost as many dogs as I do friends. It makes my Instagram a relatively peaceful place – and through the pandemic, it’s been practically restorative. Pictures of cute dogs invite only joy, not self-comparison or consumerism. It is very hard to form a parasocial relationship with someone else’s pet – or so I thought, before I found @leothepeke. With his sandy centre-parted hair and long dark ears, Leo looks like a fancy rabbit, or an Ewok. He posts about his daily life in Pennsylvania, his favourite snacks and spots to sit in and, occasionally, his views on politics. Leo hates baths – but as a Democrat, he hated Trump more. With around 2,300 followers, Leo is not a big name among dogfluencers – he describes himself as: “Just a seven-year-old pekingese, trying to make sense of the world.” But ever since I came across his profile in 2016, Leo has been my most consistent source of joy online. Whenever I felt overwhelmed by my inbox, or stressed by Twitter, I would scroll pictures of Leo to remember that the internet wasn’t all bad. By 2021, I was basically codependent. Just the sight of his dark eyes, gazing out from underneath his hair, makes my blood pressure drop and my heart swell. Over five years I’ve kept up with Leo through challenging home haircuts, celebrity deaths (he posted touching tributes to Anthony Bourdain and Ruth Bader Ginsburg), a Trump presidency and now a pandemic. I’ve seen him struggle, like everyone else on my Instagram. Last August, in an uncharacteristically long, emotional post, Leo acknowledged his “botched hair”: “Our household decided that grooming me is a luxury we shouldn’t spend on right now. No surprise – Mom’s afraid to work in schools this year … Is this our America, or am I in a very bad dream? The dereliction of duty in this administration is omnipresent.” I responded with a supportive message. After all, Leo had brought me solace for years. His photo is even my profile picture on Instagram, meaning everybody knows me as a dog on the internet. But after his outburst, I wondered: what did I really know about Leo? It is fair to say that Leo, or our interlocutor, Sandra, was surprised to hear from me. After a hesitant back-and-forth, she set up an email address especially for Leo – and we began our correspondence. “From the get-go, Leo was different,” Sandra told me. Leo’s grandfather Malachy had won best in show at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show (held in New York) in 2012. He had been destined to be a show dog, too, but his testicles never descended, disqualifying him. Leo was adopted as a puppy by Sandra’s daughter, while her son started his Instagram. At first, “It was fun to match Leo’s face with the right words,” said Sandra. But then her son moved away and Sandra took over. Now she worries Leo’s posts are mundane. Sandra, a Democrat like Leo, tries to keep the politics to a minimum. But when she makes references to music or movies or art: “Those posts are not as well received as a cute photo of him.” Leo is “one of the most polite dogs I’ve ever known”, Sandra wrote. He awaits his meals patiently, sits on Sandra’s lap after dinner and barks when someone rings the doorbell. But, she added: “He has a pretty boring life.” He sleeps almost all day, never plays with his toys and only goes outside to do his business. Leo only likes to do two things: go in the car and chew on a beach towel. What motivates Sandra to keep up with his Instagram – “What touches my heart the most” – are the comments. One follower told her Leo reminded her of her childhood peke; another said he had provided comfort through a health crisis. “While I feel stale about his Instagram, helping a few people to have joy gives me a reason to keep posting,” Sandra said. 2021 has been a tough year for her family, too, with three deaths (including their shih-tzu Chloe, Leo’s companion) and a health scare. “I just want to move on to 2022,” Sandra wrote to me. “Next year I want to visit my grandchildren more often … I want to go to the beach and walk with the sand between my toes. I’d love to see Leo at the beach – can’t imagine him with sandy hair. And Leo would get what he loves most: being with his family, on the longest car ride of his life. Take care, Elle,” she signed off. I thought of Leo by the sea with sand in his hair, and of what PG Wodehouse said: “All one needs in life is two good friends, books and a pekingese.” He may be small, and a bit strange, but Leo the Peke really does add something to mine.Vladimir Putin has accused the west of “coming with its missiles to our doorstep” as he reiterated demands for no further Nato expansion in Europe. The Russian president did little to reduce tensions over Ukraine as he spoke at a televised press conference, saying he would be prepared to launch an intervention if he felt Ukraine or its western allies were preparing an attack on Russia’s proxies in the country and saying he was seeking an “immediate” response to his demands over Nato. “They keep telling us: war, war, war,” Putin said on Thursday. “There is an impression that, maybe, they are preparing for the third military operation [in Ukraine] and give us a fair warning: do not intervene, do not protect these people but if you do intervene and protect them, there will be new sanctions. Perhaps, we should prepare for that.” Analysts have said Russia may be seeking a casus belli as it stations more than 100,000 soldiers, along with tanks and artillery, within striking distance of the Ukrainian border. The Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, this week accused American mercenaries of transporting chemical weapons to the frontlines of the conflict zone, although he did not provide any evidence for the claim. There are few signs that Ukraine’s military is preparing an offensive in Donbas, where the frontlines have remained mostly static for six years. More than 14,000 people have died since fighting began in 2014. Putin said he did not want war with Ukraine but would seek new security guarantees from the west in upcoming talks with the US, reiterating his controversial demand that Nato’s eastern members remove troops and military installations that appeared after the countries’ accession to the alliance in 1997. At the press briefing, Putin said Russia needs an “immediate” response from the US and its allies to its demands. “We have made it clear that Nato’s move to the east is unacceptable,” he said. “The United States is standing with missiles on our doorstep. Is it an excessive requirement not to install shock systems at our house? How would the Americans react if missiles were placed at the border with Canada or Mexico?” He once again expressed anger over Nato’s expansion since the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, an issue that has become central to his growing antagonism with the west. “Sometimes it seems we are living in different worlds,” he said. “They said they wouldn’t expand, but they are expanding.” Putin said talks with the US should begin next year in Geneva, adding “the ball is now in their court”. He said: “American partners tell us that they are ready to launch this discussion, these talks in Geneva at the very beginning of next year. Both sides’ representatives have been appointed. I hope that the situation will unfold exactly under this scenario.” Washington has confirmed it is ready to hold talks in January, although officials have made it clear that they’re not ready to discuss European security without the Europeans in the room. A Biden administration official on Thursday said a specific date and location were yet to be set. But the Kremlin has warned Washington not to stall, with Putin saying he wanted security guarantees “right away, right now”. His spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, has said he is not ready to engage in “marathon” talks. All that leaves open the possibility of a new Russian offensive in January, as weapons and crucial logistics infrastructure have continued to arrive by rail to Russia’s border with Ukraine. On Thursday, Russia’s defence ministry announced it would deploy hundreds of Russians paratroopers to hold drills in Crimea, which Russia annexed from Ukraine in 2014, and nearby Krasnodar region. The drills would simulate the capture of a territory and involve 1,200 troops and more than 250 vehicles and aircraft, the defence ministry said. Russian state television pundits have also grown increasingly aggressive, openly discussing the possibility of a conflict with Nato. “The TV set in our barrack hysterically fights Nato all day long,” wrote Alexei Navalny, the jailed opposition leader, in remarks from prison that were posted online. “On every channel, they talk about Nato threats. Putin himself laments that Nato is at our doorstep and we have nowhere to retreat. It seems that all of Russia lives on this only and people are no longer interested in any other news.” Putin’s remarks came during a four-hour press conference on Thursday that the Kremlin holds annually in December. The event often has a carnival atmosphere, as serious questions about geopolitics are followed by softball questions meant to humanise Russia’s president. Some journalists arrive in costume. Due to coronavirus, the Kremlin reduced the number of journalists in the hall to 500 and also installed special tunnels that sprayed attenders with an aerosol disinfectant. Over the four hours, Putin took three questions on the possibility of a war with Ukraine, while also deflecting questions on flagging vaccination rates (Europe’s are just as bad, he claimed), Gazprom’s role in the European gas crisis (which he claimed was invented), his crackdown on internal dissent (“exaggerated”) and the search for the masterminds of the murders of journalist Anna Politkovskaya and the opposition politician Boris Nemtsov (“exhaustive”, Putin said). “I want to remind you what our opponents have said over the centuries: ‘Russia cannot be defeated, it can only be torn apart from within’,” he told a BBC Russia journalist during the event, when answering a question about the arrest of opposition figures and declaration of dozens of news outlets as foreign agents. Putin also took some of questions on “cancel culture”, giving support to the Harry Potter author JK Rowling, as he compared views on transgender rights to new strains of the coronavirus.For a tennis player of such high achievement, Darlene Hard, who has died aged 85, was never really given her due. In an era that started with the domination of Louise Brough and Doris Hart and continued through such outstanding champions as Althea Gibson, Margaret Smith Court and Maria Bueno, Hard’s remarkable record of winning 21 grand slam titles – three in singles, 13 in doubles and five in mixed doubles – tended to get lost amid the blazing headlines that her rivals attracted. A happy, fun-loving personality off court, Hard was a tenacious force on it. In the days when top male players automatically played doubles and mixed, she had her pick of partners – a sure sign of the respect with which she was held. “Yes, I think she just came and asked me if I wanted to play with her at Wimbledon,” Rod Laver said. “I had seen her play and saw how well she served and volleyed which we all did in those days, so I thought I’d give it a go although I never really rated myself as a doubles player.” The partnership clicked and they won back-to-back Wimbledon titles in 1959 and 1960 and added the French title at Roland Garros in 1961. “I served first but after that I sort of let her get on with it,” said Laver. “She volleyed so well that I knew we had good protection at the net.” Roy Emerson, another great Australian champion of the era who won numerous doubles titles but mostly evaded mixed (“because I never liked aiming at the girl”) offered an insight into what makes a successful mixed doubles team. “The woman player has to be brave enough and good enough to handle everything the men throw at her,” Emerson said. “It was clear that Darlene was tough enough to do that and, of course, in women’s doubles she was a dominant force.” Billie Jean King, who was tutored on occasion by Hard while growing up in southern California, called her the best doubles player of her generation and her record at the US championships alone would back that assertion. Hard appeared in seven consecutive doubles finals at Forest Hills between 1957 and 1963 and won five of them. Before that she had claimed her first grand slam title with Beverly Fleitz at Roland Garros in 1955 before winning again in Paris two years later with Britain’s Shirley Bloomer at her side. Hard’s success on the singles court reached its peak in the early 1960s when she defeated Yola Ramírez of Mexico in the 1960 Roland Garros final, added the US title with a thrilling 6-4, 10-12, 6-4 victory over Bueno that September and defended her title on the Forest Hills grass in 1961 by beating Britain’s Ann Haydon. But by then her career had become inextricably linked with that of Gibson, the first black player of either gender to win a grand slam title. In 1957, Gibson justified her controversial inclusion in the Wimbledon draw by beating Hard to win the women’s singles title. Gibson, who ploughed a lonely furrow in a discriminatory world, had found it difficult to find doubles partners in a lily-white game and, the previous year at Wimbledon, it had taken Angela Buxton, a British Jew who knew all about discrimination, to ask her to become her partner. They won the title and in 1957, Hard, filling Buxton’s shoes, helped Gibson defend her doubles crown. That year Gibson would win the first of her two Wimbledon singles titles, beating Hard in straight sets in the final. Either by design or just because the gesture fitted her generous personality, the blonde Californian planted a big kiss on Gibson’s cheek at the Centre Court presentation ceremony. It would pass without comment now but in the 1950s, the kiss made quite a statement. Hard turned professional in 1967 as the era of Open Tennis loomed and spent much time coaching near her home in Montebello, California, where she was born. Both her parents enjoyed sport, and her mother, Ruth, played tennis and taught her on the local courts. Darlene attended nearby Pomona College with ideas of studying medicine but, after her success on the tennis tour, she taught tennis at local clubs on retirement and opened two tennis shops. In 1981 she was offered a job at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles. She worked on the production and design side of the USC’s student newspaper, the Daily Trojan, and stayed for 35 years. Except for Roy Emerson’s daughter, Heidi, who wrote for the college paper, few knew of her tennis exploits. Hard’s brief marriage, to Richard Waggoner, ended in divorce. She is survived by her sister, Claire. • Darlene Ruth Hard, tennis player, born 6 January 1936; died 2 December 2021The number of NHS staff off sick because of Covid is rising sharply, figures show, prompting fresh fears about how hospitals will be able to respond to any Omicron-driven surge in patients needing care. One health service leader said the NHS was now facing “a double emergency” of growing numbers of people hospitalised with Covid alongside increasing sickness absence on the frontline. The number of staff days lost to Covid across the NHS in England hit 124,855 last week, a 38% jump from the 90,277 of the week before, according to the latest “winter sitreps” data published by NHS England. The total number of staff absences for any medical reason – such as a cold, flu or mental health problem – also increased, though less steeply, from 416,995 to 457,135, a rise of 10%. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, said: “These figures show how Omicron is having a tangible real-time impact on a service that was already operating beyond full stretch. This is a big worry for trust leaders. Absences due to Covid-19 are up nearly 40% and with community infections surging ahead, that figure may well get worse before it gets better.” Prof Stephen Powis, NHS England’s national medical director, said the health service was “on a war footing”. The surge in staff sickness absence was “worrying, high and rising”, he said. Covid staff sickness rose by 122% in a week at hospital trusts in London, which has had more Omicron cases than anywhere else in England. Across the capital, 3,874 NHS staff were off for that reason on Sunday 19 December – more than double the 1,540 seen a week earlier. Across England as a whole, the number of health workers off because of Covid rose by 54% in a week, from 12,240 to 18,820. In London, 515 staff were off for that reason at Guy’s and St Thomas’s trust, more than double the 193 a week earlier. The trust plans to scale back non-essential services and redeploy staff to help in A&amp;E. At King’s College hospital foundation trust, numbers jumped from 193 to 505. The British Medical Association has estimated that anywhere between 32,000 and 130,000 NHS staff across England could be off sick with Covid by Christmas Day. “The latest data from the frontline of the NHS show that the spread of Omicron is causing a double emergency for NHS capacity, as both hospitalisations climb and as rapidly rising numbers of Covid-positive staff have to self-isolate,” said Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation. Other NHS England figures showed that London hospitals are now treating about 1,200 people who have Covid. Separate data from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) shows that about one in 45 people in private households in England had Covid-19 in the week to 16 December, up from one in 60 the previous week. One in 45 is the equivalent of about 1.2 million people, the highest number since the ONS began estimating infection levels for England in May 2020. In London, about one in 30 people were likely to test positive in the week – the highest proportion for any region – while Yorkshire and the Humber had the lowest proportion, at about one in 65.The battle-hardened professional in Bryony Frost will approach the King George VI Chase on Sunday as just another race: in the zone, fence-to-fence, a brief time when nothing on the other side of the running rail can intrude. For everyone else, the sense that a page could be turned in the space of six minutes after the toughest two years of her career is difficult to ignore. The horse, the race and the stage might all have been scripted as a way for Frost to move on from one chapter to the next. It was in the aftermath of her win on Frodon, a 20-1 outsider, in last year’s King George, that rumours emerged of issues between Frost and a weighing-room colleague. “It’s hard for me to chat about it,” she said on the TV cameras trained on her at the time, “because there are still things that need to be sorted out.” Over the months that followed, it emerged Frost had lodged a formal complaint with the British Horseracing Authority over her treatment by Robbie Dunne. Less than four weeks ago, after a six-day hearing, Dunne was banned from riding for 18 months after a disciplinary panel decided he had subjected Frost to a seven-month campaign of bullying and harassment between February and September 2020. Frost was 22 and still getting a 5lb allowance from senior jockeys due to her inexperience when she climbed aboard Frodon for the first time almost four years ago to the day, on 23 December 2017. Paul Nicholls’s chaser had already had 16 starts in Britain for other riders, including a valuable win in a handicap at Cheltenham in December 2016, but the horse and his new rider bonded so swiftly that it was soon hard to imagine him being ridden by anyone else. In November 2018, Frost rode the 75th winner of her career and joined the ranks of full professionals. It is a rung on the ladder that leaves many young riders facing a struggle to make their mark, but barely a fortnight later, and thanks to Frodon, her ever-dependable ally, Frost made the step up look easy. Under a typically positive ride from the front, and despite giving at least 17lb to all his opponents, Frodon produced one of the best handicap performances of the last 20 years to land a £74,000 first prize, the biggest of Frost’s career to that point. It was a record that survived just three months, before their win in the £196,000 Ryanair Chase in March 2019 made Frost the first female rider to win a Grade One race at the Cheltenham Festival. “He is Pegasus, he’s got wings,” Frost said shortly afterwards. It was a memorable quote, but not one that anyone could have imagined featuring in a disciplinary hearing two and a half years later. But it was this quote, according to Louis Weston, the BHA’s counsel at Dunne’s hearing earlier this month, which the jockey had in mind when he sent a tweet to his 1,500 followers before the Virtual Grand National in April 2020 that appeared to mock Frost’s post-race interviews. “Out of 40 riders … why did you pick on her?”, Weston repeatedly asked Dunne in his cross-examination. Dunne, who had claimed in his witness statement to the hearing that his relationship with Frost was “good or perfect” until September 2020, wriggled and struggled but could not find a worthwhile answer. And so the story returns to Kempton Park on Boxing Day – with one important difference. The grandstands were empty 12 months ago, at a time when Frost told Dunne’s hearing that she was already experiencing “isolation … which I wouldn’t wish on anyone” from other riders following her decision to break the weighing-room omertà and lodge a formal complaint with the BHA. Twelve thousand racegoers at Sandown Park on 4 December, midway through the hearing, made their feelings and sympathies very plain as Frost returned to unsaddle after Greaneteen’s victory in the Tingle Creek Chase, the sixth Grade One win of her career. “To feel the support of everyone here is huge,” Frost said. “I was nearly in tears coming in.” Around 20,000 would normally be expected at Kempton for the biggest race of the Christmas programme, and while Covid concerns may well see a lower attendance than usual, the prospect of Frodon taking on Minella Indo, last season’s Gold Cup winner, and Clan Des Obeaux, the Kempton winner in 2018 and 2019, will be tough for many to resist. This time around, Frodon is one of the favourites, and Frost’s rivals will be alive to the danger of allowing her a soft lead. But as horse and rider have shown time and again over the last four years, when they are in the zone, it takes a mighty effort to overhaul them. On Sunday, at long last and on her favourite horse, Frost will return to being what she always wanted to be before a weighing-room bully tried to get in her way: an elite jockey in a championship race in front of thousands of fans. And that will make her a winner, no matter what happens on the track.It’s not quite hallelujah time, but the year ends with plentiful reasons for Labour people to be cheerful. Their Christmas cards arrive with scrawled messages of political optimism for 2022, and that’s new. These wilderness years took their toll, with optimism in short supply. Now even Labour’s professional Eeyores are allowing themselves a beam or two of hope: “For the first time, I think we can win,” one tells me, almost surprised to be speaking those words. The poll of polls gives Labour a 6% lead on an upward trajectory. Boris Johnson is plummeting with a 69% disapproval rating against 31% approval and Keir Starmer is now 10 points ahead on who would make the best prime minister with YouGov. Gideon Skinner, Ipsos Mori’s head of political research, points to Starmer now beating Johnson hollow on key measures in their December monitor: best as a capable leader, of sound judgment, understanding the problems facing the country, more honest than most politicians and a good representative for Britain on the world stage. Starmer loses out heavily on “has a lot of personality” and “more style than substance” – but haven’t people had enough of personality and style? On one important measure Johnson still leads by 14 points, as most “patriotic”, so best not to mock the Labour leader appearing in front of a union flag. As for who is “out of touch with ordinary people”, Johnson wins hands down at 63% to Starmer’s 33%. “This is a new landmark,” Skinner says. “Starmer ahead as the most capable leader is the first time for a Labour leader since Gordon Brown before the 2008 crash. Neither Miliband nor Corbyn ever were.” The government is at its lowest approval rating yet on managing the economy, levelling up and immigration, with seven out of 10 people saying it’s doing a bad job on the NHS and three-quarters responding that it’s doing badly on the cost of living. Pause here to breathe in and relish the moment, because of course there is a “but” coming, so hold the Hosannas. Are we nearly there yet? Halfway, maybe – as no one knows when the election will be, in what economic climate or facing which leader. At last Labour has scotched its dark negatives. “But they haven’t been replaced with positives,” says Skinner. YouGov, which likewise puts Starmer 10 points ahead of Johnson as best prime minister, also finds 55% still don’t think he looks like a prime minister in waiting or that Labour is ready for government. Patrick English, YouGov’s research manager, notes that gains for Starmer and Labour “are clearly built on shaky foundations that could quite quickly crumble if Boris Johnson and his government are able to court favour with the British public once again”. But with Johnson’s low scores on inflation, immigration and health, he “may not find the public so quickly forgiving”. As darts and football crowds chant for his downfall, can anyone recover from such a plunge? His ratings now match the lowest ever for any prime minister, back in 1981, says Skinner. Ah, yes, that was Margaret Thatcher at her lowest ebb, before she went on to win another two elections, followed by one more by her successor. It’s frightening to think this law-breaking, proroguing, treaty-reneging prime minister may even now be pondering how she recovered: she went to war on the other side of the world. The problem, the polls find, is a lack of positive reasons to vote Labour. Too many voters are hanging mid-air, poised to switch, possibly, maybe. YouGov finds a full 20% who voted Tory last time are now undecided: 5% would abstain but only 6% say they would vote Labour instead, so far. Yet after the deep blue rural leavers of North Shropshire’s astounding switch to the Liberal Democrats, something seismic is shifting. They figured out tactical voting, leaping over Labour’s second place to understand that despite the Lib Dems only winning 10% of the vote last time, they had the best chance. An enjoyably mad calculation in the Telegraph shakes with angst: that 34% swing replicated in a general election would produce zero Tory seats, none at all. Its poll mirrors others showing Labour’s current lead would win 320 seats, as the biggest party with no overall majority. One fillip for progressive parties in that byelection was the fading salience of Brexit. YouGov records that 60% of respondents think the government has handled Brexit badly, against 29% saying it was done well. Asked in hindsight was it right or wrong to leave, 49% now say wrong, only 38% right. That gives Starmer’s “Make Brexit work” real traction, especially with Liz Truss at the helm of the sinking Brexit ship. The new year starts with Labour on a bounce, with a newly proactive and pugilistic shadow cabinet. The NHS is an open goal for the combative shadow health secretary Wes Streeting: the Tories have no hiding place from blame for the catastrophic effects of their decade of underfunding and undertraining of medics. It’s time now for Labour to plant more flags giving voters positive reasons to switch. The shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, has made a start: her promise that “the broadest shoulders” will pay for reviving public services has doorstep resonance. More of that is needed on every front to signify policy direction and purpose. Famously, Roy Jenkins mocked Labour preparing for its 1997 win as overcautiously tiptoeing across a slippery floor carrying a Ming vase. Starmer needs to worry a bit less about slipping with that vase, and dare a bit more. • Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistMore than 3 million people have been directly affected by the devastation wreaked by Typhoon Rai, which caused widespread power outages and water shortages, and has left some areas completely cut off from relief teams even a week after the disaster. Rai first hit the Philippines last Thursday, and has been described by the Red Cross as one of the worst typhoons to hit the country in December in five decades. The true scale of the destruction is still unknown because of the extensive communication cuts, and damage to roads, ports and airports. More than 200 municipalities were still without power as of Wednesday evening, according to an update published by the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). It warned that children were already becoming ill due to shortages of food and clean water, and said the humanitarian situation may deteriorate further if help is not provided quickly. Alberto Bocanegra, the head of delegation for the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in the Philippines, said the agency had been unable to reach communities in parts of Surigao del Norte, Bohol and Cebu. There was little information about the situation on the ground in such areas due to the network outages. “The wind speeds hit the south-western part of the country at more than 185 km/h [115mph] reaching sometimes even 270km/h [168mph] … So it affected roads, it affected general infrastructure like ports and airports. We have problems [such as] no electricity, meaning no access to water, and then of course no communication,” said Bocanegra. In Cebu city, one of the areas experiencing power cuts, water refilling stations have been forced to rely on generators to process potable water, causing delays and shortages. Local media reported that many convenience stores and supermarkets have sold out of water, while street vendors were selling bottles at inflated prices. Long queues have been reported outside gas stations, and many residents have taken to Facebook to share information about where essential supplies are still available. The president, Rodrigo Duterte, has declared a state of calamity in affected areas, allowing local authorities to impose price caps on commodities such as water, and to access emergency resources. Efforts to provide assistance have been further hampered by funding shortages, as many local governments have already exhausted their annual budgets in responding to the Covid pandemic. The Philippines is especially vulnerable to weather-related disasters and typically experiences about 20 typhoons and storms each year. Rai struck the country unusually late in the year since most cyclones develop between July and October. It has forced hundreds of thousands of families from their homes just days ahead of Christmas. “This is a very important time to be together and to be with relatives,” said Bocanegra. “After two years of pandemic and families being separated, it is a big frustration for them.” The Red Cross has provided residents in affected areas with access to satellite phones, so that they can get in touch with relatives and friends. At least 375 people have been killed by Rai. Around 662,000 people are still displaced, while 418,371 people are in evacuation centres, according to the UN. It raised concern over the possible spread of illnesses in such locations. “Children are starting to catch fever, colds, and coughs. Physical distancing and use of protective equipment such as masks are no longer observed in many evacuation centres,” it said. Initial estimates suggest a total of 159,842 houses are damaged, including 61,918 that are completely destroyed. In some areas, the total destruction is even greater than that caused by Super Typhoon Haiyan, the deadliest cyclone on record in the Philippines. It hit the country in November 2013 and left more than 7,360 people dead or missing. Typhoon Rai, which smashed through the southern and central regions of the Philippines, has devastated the livelihoods of farmers, fishing communities and tourism operators. Early estimates suggest that 23,000 hectares of rice have been damaged, and that 12,750 farmers have been affected so far. The cost of such damage is thought to be around US$67m (£50m).In 1971, Shirley McGreal, who has died aged 87, encountered crates of infant monkeys awaiting export from the cargo area of Bangkok airport. The sight of them piled on top of each other in inhumane conditions, gazing at her with doleful eyes, led her to start reading everything she could about primates and to begin contacting primatologists around the globe. Two years later she set up the International Primate Protection League (IPPL) with the support of Ardith Eudey, a researcher into the stump-tailed macaques that Shirley had seen at the airport. Shirley and Ardith set about investigating the enormous traffic in macaques for use in biomedical research. One of their first initiatives, in 1975, dubbed “Project Bangkok”, involved a team of Thai students monitoring all wildlife exports from Bangkok airport over 10 weeks. They revealed staggering volumes of some 100,000 mammals, birds and reptiles, many in appalling conditions, in violation of international standards. Thailand banned the export of all primates shortly afterwards. Another success followed in 1977 when IPPL revealed that macaques being exported to the US from India were being used in chemical warfare experiments. As a result, India enacted a similar blanket ban on primate exports that is still upheld to this day. A further export ban in Bangladesh, where interest from the US had shifted, followed in 1979, and Malaysia in 1984. Ardith’s studies in Thailand were for her doctorate at the University of California. In 1974 she discovered that gibbons were being illegally smuggled out of an American army medical research facility in Bangkok to a research lab at her own university in the US. IPPL reported the case to the US Fish and Wildlife Service but was eventually told it had been dropped, not for lack of evidence, but because it was “too sensitive”. However, the following year, due to the publicity surrounding the IPPL investigation and an ensuing report by the US National Academy of Science, the lab lost its funding and the remaining gibbons were sent to other facilities. One “metabolically abnormal” gibbon could not be rehomed. Shirley, who was now living in South Carolina in the US, and had already rescued one gibbon, stepped in, beginning her journey towards running what is now a vast gibbon sanctuary on 47 acres of land. Born to Kate (nee Pearson) and Allan Pollitt, a bank manager, in Mobberley, Cheshire, Shirley studied French and Latin at Royal Holloway, University of London, graduating in 1955. Her identical twin sister, Jean, went to the London School of Economics, and it was as young graduates that the twins first became involved in activism, taking part in demonstrations for the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) and the Committee of 100 anti-war group. Though they lived in different countries in later life (Jean settled in Canada), they remained extremely close, often speaking several times a day, with Jean serving on the board of directors at IPPL until her death in 2009. Shirley studied French at postgraduate level at the University of Illinois, where she met John McGreal, an engineer, whom she married in 1960. They moved to the University of Cincinnati for further study, and then to India, where John worked at the United Nations and Shirley on doctoral research in education, until their move to Thailand for John’s work, and her fateful airport encounter. Shirley was a firm believer in grassroots conservation; she had a long legacy of seeking out and nurturing frontline conservationists around the globe. As well as organising and attending primate welfare and conservation conferences, Shirley spent her days investigating cases of illegal trafficking, courageous in pursuit despite the intimidation and death threats that could ensue. Through her extensive network of contacts, she would receive tip-offs that she would then investigate, either through formal means, or undercover. She would often pursue a number of routes to get what she wanted. For instance, in 1975, she uncovered the “Singapore connection”, whereby primates were being smuggled into Singapore and exported from there under falsified permits. After contacting first the Singapore government, then the governments of the countries where the primates were being captured, Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia, to no avail, she wrote an exposé for the Bangkok Post. This was picked up by the Reuters news agency, went global and embarrassed the Singapore government into action. I met Shirley in 2008 when I took over the running of IPPL’s UK branch from Cyril Rosen, and I continued to work with her over the next decade as an IPPL board member and chair. Though then in her 70s, Shirley was still a passionate and hardworking activist. She spoke fluent French, and had wide-ranging interests, from politics and literature to opera and ballet. She was also warm and quick-witted with a keen sense of humour. Of the many awards she received, she was proudest of one from the Interpol Wildlife Crime Group and the Dutch Police League in 1994 for exposing an international ring of primate smugglers. During a related case in 1993, which involved the smuggling of six infant orangutans – four of which died during transit – Shirley was outraged to learn that one of the principal players had been given a misdemeanour plea bargain. She galvanised her network to flood the judge with more than 1,000 letters of protest. The judge insisted on a felony plea, including a jail sentence, and disqualified the trafficker from further international dealing. One of the protest letters was from The Duke of Edinburgh, with whom Shirley carried out a long correspondence from their meeting at a conference in 1981 until his death earlier this year. When Shirley was made OBE in 2008, she also enjoyed a private audience with the duke. In a letter written in 2015, he wrote: “I am glad to know that IPPL continues to flourish and keeps up the good work of pursuing the crooks, rewarding the righteous and caring for 36 gibbons!” Shirley is survived by John and by two nieces, Yvonne and Michelle. • Shirley McGreal, primate conservationist and activist, born 4 May 1934; died 20 November 2021Only six people in the world have won the 100m dash in back-to-back Olympic Games. The first was Wyomia Tyus in 1964 and 1968. Next was Carl Lewis, then Gail Devers, Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce, Usain Bolt (who won three times in a row), and Elaine Thompson-Herah. To many people, the name Wyomia Tyus is less familiar than the others. Tyus was not only the first Olympian to win back-to-back gold in its prestige event – she also made history in other ways. At the 1968 Olympics in Mexico City, when Tyus crossed the line first in the 100 meters, she set a world record of 11.08 seconds. And when she ran, she was wearing dark shorts instead of the team-issued white shorts, a gesture to show her support for human rights. “I was not doing it for any type of glory or anything,” Tyus says. “It was just for me as a person, as a human being, and my feelings and what I thought about what was going on in the world, and how women – Black women especially – were treated.” Tyus grew up in Griffin, Georgia, in the Jim Crow South and became one of the Tigerbelles, a track and field powerhouse coached by Ed Temple at Tennessee State University. In Mexico City, two days after Tyus’s win in the 100 meters, John Carlos and Tommie Smith raised their fists on the podium in what became an iconic image. They were swiftly escorted out of the Olympic Village and sent home for their protest. Tyus also won gold in the 4x100 meter relay, and she dedicated her win to Carlos and Smith. No one really picked up on Tyus’s own demonstration, and she didn’t talk about why she wore the dark blue (almost black) shorts. “They didn’t care about what I did, because I was a woman and I was Black,” she says. Leading up to the 1968 Olympics, the Olympic Project for Human Rights discussed ways athletes might demonstrate. But Tyus says she and the Tigerbelles weren’t included in the plans or asked if they were on board. “No one came to us. The whole movement started, and it was more like, ‘Well, this is what we say, and the women are going to follow,’” she says. “I don’t know if those words were spoken, but those are the words I felt.” So Tyus decided on her own to wear her dark shorts. “I grew up with colored bathrooms, colored water fountains, all those kinds of things. It’s not like I did not know how unfair things were happening to Black people, and especially women,” she says. Martha Watson, a four-time Olympian between 1964 and 1976, was one of Tyus’s Tigerbelle teammates. She remembers other members of the 1968 US team talking about plans to demonstrate if they made it to the medals stand. “We knew what was going on,” Watson says. “I mean, we lived it. I grew up in California, and I went to school in Tennessee. I could go shopping, but I couldn’t try clothes on in Tennessee. That was a rude awakening for me.” People who follow track and field know the names of Tommie Smith and John Carlos – as well as Lewis, Devers, Fraser-Pryce, Bolt, and Thompson-Herah. When Lewis won back-to-back gold in the 100 meters in 1984 and 1988, Tyus remembers people celebrating him for being the first, overlooking her achievement two decades earlier. Why did society skip over her? Maybe people just weren’t paying attention to women’s track in the ‘60s. But that’s not the only reason, Tyus says. “Are they going to give a Black woman that kind of power, to be the first one to do this, ever – in the history of the Olympic Games?” she says. “I mean, I go there with that.” At the time, women – especially Black women – were expected to “just sit back and be quiet, and don’t say very much,” says Tyus’s Tigerbelle teammate and 1964 Olympian Edith McGuire, who came in second to Tyus in the 100 meters. She also won gold in the 200 meters and silver in the 4x100 relay with Tyus. At the 1964 Olympics in Tokyo, McGuire recalls that the coach of the US men’s team wasn’t going to let the women use the starting blocks designated for the US sprinters. Temple was coaching the women’s team, and he had to fight for them to be able to use the blocks, she says. Tyus and McGuire were both from Georgia. After the Olympics, they were honored with a parade through Atlanta, but it only went through the Black neighborhoods. Despite being Olympic champions, both were slighted for being Black, for being women, or both. “To me, Wyomia has still not gotten the due that she should have for winning back-to-back 100 meters in the ‘64 and ‘68 Olympics,” McGuire says. “If she was a man or a white woman, then I think it would have been totally different.” Even in the history of women’s track, among other Black women, Tyus seems to get overlooked. “When people think of female athletes in track and field, Wilma Rudolph is the only person they remember, or FloJo [Florence Griffith Joyner]. There’s a big void in between,” Watson says. She says part of the reason may be that “Tyus was never really flamboyant--she just went out there and did what she had to do.” “I am still surprised that she has to blow her own horn,” Watson says. “Skeeter [Rudolph] didn’t have to do that. FloJo didn’t have to do that.” Tyus grew up on a dairy farm, playing all kinds of sports with her three older brothers, even though girls weren’t really supposed to do that. For girls, “It was a ‘You can go outside and play, but don’t sweat’ kind of thing,” she says. “I wanted to be as good as my brothers, if not better.… In order to play with them and the other boys in the neighborhood, I had to be good. I had to be able to hold my own.” When she was a teenager, her house burned down, and her father died not long after. Tyus had been close to her father, and after his death, she withdrew and didn’t talk much. That’s when she turned to running track. “I was brokenhearted and depressed, and I was not doing anything. My mom kept saying, ‘You know, your dad would not want this. He would like to see you do something with your life,’” she says. “It was more something to do, and also get my mom off my back.” One summer, Temple invited her to a track camp at Tennessee State. Before then, she hadn’t realized she was very good at track, because another girl at her high school always beat her, she says. “That summer, the camp pretty much changed my life,” she says. “It changed the way I looked at myself. I thought maybe I could go to college – because my mom could not send me to college.” The opportunities available to Black women were pretty much limited to becoming a teacher or a nurse, she recalls. Tennessee State gave Tyus a scholarship – a path Temple created for many women who wouldn’t have been able to afford college, Tyus says. Temple’s team consistently developed Olympic champions, including Wilma Rudolph. More than 40 Tigerbelles competed at the Olympics from the ‘50s to the ‘80s, and they won 23 medals. “The whole relay team in 1960 was from Tennessee State,” Tyus points out. Watson says of the Tigerbelles: “I think it’s probably one of the most special things that’s happened with women in sports, and Black women also.” Tyus wrote a memoir called Tigerbelle, in part to celebrate what Temple had done for women who otherwise could not have gone to college. “To convince an HBCU to do this for Black women – he never really got the credit for it. All the things he’s done – he gave all of us chances,” Tyus says. The Tigerbelles were like a sisterhood that has endured through the decades, McGuire says. She and Tyus also developed a close friendship with Temple up until his death in 2016. “He called Wyomia and I the gold dust twins,” McGuire says. Whenever she and Tyus went back to Tennessee State, they’d visit Temple. “We would sit in his living room and talk like three little old biddies.” Although Tyus’s quiet demonstration in 1968 and historic Olympic wins never garnered much public attention, she still paved the way for today’s athlete activists to demonstrate against injustices. It’s not that women weren’t speaking out in previous decades, Tyus says. “Nobody was putting the mic in front of their face to let them talk,” she says. “But now, women have a platform, and people are seeing them totally differently. I think Title IX has a lot to do with that, too.” In recent years, many athletes – particularly Black women – have used their platform to advocate for change. Tyus points to the WNBA. “They were out front before anybody. ... They wanted to reach the masses of people to say, ‘Hey, look, this is what’s happening, we need to make a change.’” In track and field, Gwen Berry and Raven Saunders have advocated for human rights, including racial justice. Berry echoed Carlos and Smith’s protest when she raised her fist on the podium at the 2019 Pan American Games. She was reprimanded and put on probation by the US Olympic and Paralympic Committee, which has since changed its rules. But the International Olympic Committee still prohibits athletes from raising a fist on the podium. In some ways, today’s athletes are advocating for the same issues Tyus did in 1968. “The changes are happening, but they may not be happening fast enough,” Tyus says. “My dad used to say, ‘You always have to stay in the fight,’” Tyus says. “I have tried to maintain that. And I think that all the women, from Gwen Berry on – they are standing for things that will make this a better world in which to live for everybody, not just for one group of people.” And that fight can take different forms, as Tyus has shown, McGuire says. “You don’t always have to be boisterous,” she says. “No one should say, ‘Well, you didn’t get out there and raise your fist.’ Maybe that’s not my way. My way would be different. Everybody should do whatever they want to do in their own way.” After the Olympics, Tyus was part of a group of women, along with Billie Jean King, who helped establish the Women’s Sports Foundation. They connected while speaking on the “banquet circuit” about their experiences in sports, Tyus recalls. “Women would come up to you and say, ‘I just wish someone had encouraged me in this, that, and the other. And I would like to have my daughters really be recognized and be in a sport,’” she says. Supporting that effort was important to Tyus. “Women shouldn’t have to fight for it like this. Women should be encouraged to be in sports. And that was not happening,” she says. Tyus spent 18 years as a naturalist for the Los Angeles Unified School District, working with kids at a weeklong camp, teaching them about the natural sciences and taking care of the planet. She watched some of them who’d never spent much time outdoors before experience what it was like to be out in nature. You could see them grow in the week they were there, she says. And it took her back to her childhood, when she spent time hiking through the woods with her dad and brothers. “I know that she’s touched some people. They may not turn out to be an Olympic athlete, but they’ll be an Olympic person” who exemplifies the Olympic creed that the journey is more important than winning, Watson says. “She’s my example of that.” “She and Wilma, in my eyes, are the greatest, without a doubt,” Watson says. “I’ve known Tyus for over 50 years, and I’ve trained with her. I know that whatever they did on that track came from them. They had no enhancing things to make them run faster. It all came from blood, sweat, and tears on that track, and determination. … And even though she’s not on the Wheaties box, she’s a genuine champion, her heart and her soul.”Shegofa Hassani is leaning up against the inside of the perimeter fence, surveying the blur of moving bodies in front of her. “She’s got a mad boot on her – best kicker in the team,” she says, pointing to one of the taller girls. She is talking about Asma Mohammad Zada, an 18-year-old winger who joined when she was 13. Hassani – the captain – scans the group on the western Sydney pitch. “And she is the youngest,” she continues, redirecting her gaze towards Shafiqa Karimi, who is not yet 16. Another, named Zahra Mogul, receives her own sideline assessment as the “driven superstar” who works all-nighters as a disability support worker and then backs up for extra individual training sessions at 6am. Mogul is one of only two Sydney United Girls squad members who were born in Australia. The rest are mostly first-generation Hazaras whose families fled their native country and who will, in the coming days, contest the Afghan National Cup. Football is obviously the bread and butter of this annual five-day, round-robin tournament but the game itself is also a vessel to community, a bringing together of the diaspora, including some who have recently escaped Afghanistan. It is an excuse for families to travel interstate and renew cultural roots – and make a heap of food. It is, basically, a festival. The men’s tournament has been running since 2003 – every Christmas hopping from Queensland and Victoria to New South Wales and South Australia – but there was no female equivalent until 2015, when teams from Melbourne and Adelaide played each other in the inaugural women’s competition. The following year, Hussain Ramazani created Sydney United Girls. “I encouraged some girls to play,” says Ramazani, a Hazara man and a long-time footballer and coach who arrived by boat in 2010. “Some girls wanted to play football, but in their traditional culture they shame their family or they can’t play among their people – that’s why I encouraged them to come.” During his 20 months in Nauru detention centre, Ramazani set up mini-competitions to help distract fellow asylum seekers from their uncertain and weary circumstances. Once he got out he continued doing the same, establishing pathways for the Afghan Australian community to play football and volleyball affordably. His unofficial role now encapsulates a bit of everything: tournament organiser, team logistics manager, fundraiser, acquirer of sponsorships, mentor. In Auburn he is many things to many people. Tonight he is general overseer, perched on the touchline observing a small-sided training game. The girls, within the confines of witches hats, pass in invisible prisms at a pace clearly not quite quick enough for one of the coaches. “Yallah, yallah,” he directs, then slips into English and calls “come on, come on.” Midweek training is generally scheduled to start at 6pm but the squad, Hassani says, operate on “Afghan time”, which means the warm-up does not realistically get going until 6.30pm. The scene is relaxed, and it’s also pretty quiet at Webbs Avenue Playing Fields, save for a couple of men doing shooting practice a couple of pitches over. “It was really last-minute,” says Nilofar Sadeqi a 22-year-old striker-cum-central defender who started playing football with school friends before joining Sydney United in its infancy – less than a month before the 2016 tournament. “We weren’t amazing, we just had the interest. Shegofa was captain; she was playing state league at that time. That’s where I met her actually, and now she’s my sister-in-law – soccer starts everything.” Throughout the year most of the squad play the regular football season together with local clubs. “We’ve definitely progressed over the years,” she says. “To see that grow from six people to more than a team of us ready to do the training and be committed to playing the games on Sunday and then do the tournament as well, I think that’s incredible.” Sadeqi, who is almost finished a double degree in law and business and works as a clerk, arrived in Australia with immediate family when she was five. She is from the Hazara-majority Jaghori district in south-eastern Ghazni province. “I grew up here,” she says, “but I remember the mountains back home and I really, vividly remember the sunset. “My parents talk about how when they grew up it was very different in terms of it was slower, peaceful, because we were from the countryside. Whereas in Sydney it’s like full on 9-5.” She clicks her fingers. “This appointment, that appointment, you don’t know when you’re sleeping, you don’t know when you’re waking up. “My parents always try to keep my culture in me, and I’m proud of that. I love my my heritage, my food especially. I can’t cook it – I depend on my mum – but I love eating it. I love the colours, the dresses, the dances, the music. I’m very proud of my culture, but I think it does sometimes clash with the Aussie culture. I there’s a few different values at certain times.” She has been back to Pakistan, where she has some relatives, but the rest of her family are in Afghanistan, where the Taliban has returned to power and the country has plunged into a pit of mass poverty, overflowing health facilities and an economy the United Nations says is now in “freefall”. “I think it’s gotten to a point where you just kind of have to accept it,” Sadeqi says. “At the end of the day, it is what it is and they can’t really do anything, and it doesn’t seem like help is coming.” Helplessness is an undeniable sentiment in this community. In Australia, though, life throws up other, less-spoken-about hardships. “There may be a misconception that people who have come here have gone through the most difficult part – for example fleeing the Talibs,” says Bahram Mia, a photographer whose family come from the eastern Laghman province, and who appears to know just about everybody. He is pitchside, on his knees and rolling film. “But in actuality,” he continues, “when you come to a new place as a migrant and you are in a completely new environment, with no family support and you’ve come with nothing, it can be even more challenging. “Especially if you’re a parent, you have those intergenerational conflicts as well, where you’re kind of pulled by your homeland but then you’re also being pulled by your kids here into a different culture and set of values. That can cause you to almost relive the trauma of leaving your homeland, because you feel as though like the sand is moving from underneath the feet of your children in terms of that cultural bedrock they had that’s no longer there. “Everybody’s journey is different. If you are from say, the intelligentsia or the more well-off and privileged and you can speak to English, you’ll probably settle a lot quicker. But that has its own challenges in that, when you were overseas you were something, and then you come here and now you’re nothing.” It is for this reason – this need to “realign perceptions” – that Mia’s mother was among a group of Afghan Australians who Zoomed some members of the women’s national team, coaches and family while they were in hotel quarantine, having been safely extracted from Kabul in August. Hassani sent them food. She doesn’t even mention this until somebody else does because it is just the normal thing to do. The 25-year-old, like Sadegi, is from Jaghori. Her father came alone by boat and subsequently sponsored her, her mother and siblings, who arrived in 2006. “I spoke very little English or little to none,” says Hassani, who now works for Creating Chances, an organisation which promotes youth development through sport in schools. “It’s very difficult … but because I was young I was able to adapt, and football really helped me in that sense because I was able to have fun and play with kids my age and learn the language through that.” She had always loved kicking the football with her brothers, but the cultural barriers around women playing seemed insurmountable. Until they weren’t, and the many initially reluctant parents came around and now whole-heartedly support their daughters. Still, there are other, more confronting challenges in Australia, such as racism. “Last year I got called a terrorist on the field by a player on an opposing team, and it hurt me,” she says. “I mean, we were terrorising them in a way because we were smashing it – I scored two or three goals – and they couldn’t play the game so they resorted to using hurtful words. We reported them to the association.” Mogul – Hassani’s “football superstar” – was born here. Her father is Afghan and her mother Armenian. The 19-year-old midfielder, who lives in Auburn with her brothers, dropped out of school not long before graduating so she could help her mum financially. She was working at Kmart then. Now she is with the NDIS, and will head straight to work after training for an overnight shift, before training again in the morning. There is method to the madness – rehabbing injuries and maintaining fitness in a bid to eventually return to playing at a higher level. In this group she is a bit of a leader. She is vocal, albeit in a few different languages. “There’s Hazaragi, Pashto, Farsi,” she says. “They all kind of sound the same but they’re not. I understand more than I can speak.” Still, the girls are a second family inside a wider second family that is the more than 12,000 Afghanistan-born Australians living in Greater Sydney. It is evident in the way a Lidcombe mosque hosted a dinner to raise funds for the tournament, in the way a local Afghan business is their front-of-shirt sponsor, and in the way Mia jokes he is told to sleep in the garage during the tournament so his household can squeeze in impromptu visitors. The Western Sydney Wanderers are also heavily involved. The A-League Men club will host the event, comprising some 600 players across 24 men’s teams, six women’s and eight youth, free of charge at their elite Blacktown training facility. It is also facilitating donors through the Wanderers Foundation. The overall emphasis is inclusion, a point particularly felt by the female players. “In our culture especially, our people place a lot of emphasis on women in education … but when it comes to sport maybe it’s not as open-minded,” Sadeqi says. “It’s definitely getting better. Now we’ve got our parents seeing us on the field, and you kind of feel their pride. They get into it and they come and support you.”Scientists and engineers have pumped 300 litres of simulated whale poo into the ocean off Sydney as part of efforts to snag a share of Elon Musk’s US$100m prize for capturing and storing carbon. The team, known as WhaleX, carried out its first open-ocean experiment on Sunday about eight kilometres off Port Botany in New South Wales after gaining clearance from the federal government. The 12-strong team are racing to carry out a follow-up experiment using up to 2000 litres of the simulated poo – a mix of nitrogen, phosphorus and trace elements – before the end of January. Tesla and SpaceX founder Musk announced in February he was funding a US$100m competition through the XPrize Foundation to find methods that could safely capture and store carbon dioxide at a scale of a billion tonnes or more a year. Musk said at the time the competition was not “theoretical” but was looking for teams that could “build real systems that can make a measurable impact and scale to a gigaton level.” WhaleX registered for the four-year competition and will send a report before February hoping to be selected for one of up to 15 “milestone” prizes of U$1m each. Whale faeces is known as an ocean fertiliser and a food for phytoplankton. When phytoplankton grow and multiply, they absorb carbon. When they die, they sink to the ocean floor taking much of the carbon with them. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Dr Edwina Tanner, a climate scientist who is leading the WhaleX project, and colleagues said they targeted a 225sq km area off Port Botany where their previous water sampling had shown a deficiency in nutrients. From a small boat, the team aerated the formulation with a gel made from seaweed and mixed that with a dye so they could see from a drone how it dispersed. The formulation, manufactured as an aqua food by a fertiliser company in regional New South Wales, was formulated to match the deficiencies in nutrients in the area where the trial was carried out. The amount released was about the equivalent of a Humpback whale doing two poos, Tanner said. To be successful, she said the aqua food mix needs to stay in the top 20 to 30m for at least a day. “It was incredible. The food stayed buoyant and well within the trial zone location,” Tanner said. The team thinks the experiment, which was to test the method used to disperse the formulation and to see how buoyant it was, will have sequestered about two tonnes of carbon dioxide. Tanner said “a lot of science” would need to be done to make sure the approach is not damaging the marine environment, but she said as it closely mimicked a process that has been happening for millions of years “we’re confident we can do this safely.” A further trial is being planned before the end of January and will see up to 2000 litres dispersed from a larger boat in the same area of ocean. If scaled up, WhaleX would fall into a broad category of carbon reduction efforts known as negative emissions technologies – an approach where more CO2 is sequestered than is used during the process. WhaleX is looking along whale migration routes for suitable sites for further trials, including near Morocco, Oman and Kenya. An area off Western Australia over the north-west shelf has also been selected. Managing director of Ocean Nourishment Corporation (ONC) and one of the partners in the project, John Ridley, said work would continue even if it was not successful in the XPrize competition. He said the process was currently costing about $25 to $30 to sequester a tonne of carbon dioxide. He said investors were being attracted to it because of the potential scale and, he said, it could store carbon securely and for longer than some land-based methods. ONC was actively speaking with more than 10 investor groups from Europe and Australia. He said the world’s climate crisis was pushing the planet close to “several dangerous tipping points”. “We need emissions reductions and carbon removal and we have to escalate both of those really fast, almost at military scale.” This month the US National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine released a report summarising the potential risks and benefits of a range of supposed ocean-based methods to remove and store CO2. The report said there was medium to high confidence that adding nutrients to the ocean to promote phytoplankton growth could be “effective and scalable”. There was less confidence about the potential environmental risks of the method on a very large scale, but the report said “there are deep-ocean impacts and concern for undesirable geochemical and ecological consequences.” The report added: “No matter what the impact of [ocean fertilisation] on the deep sea, it should be noted that what deliberate and large-scale [ocean fertilisation] would do is essentially speed up the natural processes that are already happening, under any current scenario of enhanced CO2 in the atmosphere.” A department of agriculture, water and the environment spokesperson said it was aware of the WhaleX project and the department had confirmed the experiment could go ahead without the need for any permit. A statement said the WhaleX trials were “considered to be genuine scientific research” under the London Protocol that covers dumping at sea as it was considered a “placement” of materials. The statement said: “For future trials involving larger volumes of material, the department has advised WhaleX that additional information would be required for the department to determine whether the activity could still be defined as ‘genuine scientific research’ under the London protocol.” “If the department considers that future trials are of a scale that cannot be considered to be genuine scientific research, the activity would be considered as dumping under the sea dumping Act.” The spokesperson said the government did not have any policies on ocean fertilisation that would regulate future large scale activities. But the spokesperson also said: “However, work is under way with reference to Australia’s obligations under the London protocol to consider ocean fertilisation as a future regulatory area.” In November, teams of Australian university students at Monash University, the University of Sydney and the University of Tasmania each won a $250,000 prize in the competition for proposed carbon projects. Judges were looking for student projects that would make them “competitive applicants” in the overall competition. After four years XPrize judges will pick one U$50m grand prize winner and a U$30m prize to go be shared among up to three runners up.Those England supporters who only pay attention to cricket in Australia every four years might be expecting the third Ashes Test to be a certain kind of game. That would be based on England’s last visit to the Melbourne Cricket Ground in 2017, for a match played on a pitch so dead that the biggest sporting event in Victoria’s calendar was more a state funeral. What we saw that year was a horticultural marvel, in that nobody could get anyone out, but equally nobody could score. The batting oozed along in a slurry of mistimed shots, and the chief mode of occasional dismissal seemed to be deliveries chopped onto the stumps. After days of that, the large sign above the Percy Beames bar bearing the ground’s highest score by a visiting player saw Alastair Cook’s 244 regrettably replace the masterpiece 208 by Vivian Richards. At least they both got knighthoods. This time around, things might be different. English correspondents express bemusement that Australians use the title “curator” for those who prepare the pitch, but of course we do – it is the finest of arts. After 2017, the MCG persuaded Matt Page to move states and give up guardianship of the pitches for the two Perth grounds. In a gradual process that culminated last year, Page managed to bring the drop-in wicket square for the MCG back to life. Thus on Boxing Day in 2020, we saw a slightly green surface that was full of juice and life, giving vigour to the fast bowlers on both sides. India took the honours via Mohammed Siraj and Jasprit Bumrah, Australia bowled well via Pat Cummins, Mitchell Starc and Josh Hazlewood, and it was a true enough wicket for Ajinkya Rahane to dig in for a series-turning century. There was also some bounce and grip for the finger-spinners on both sides, who took 11 wickets between them. It was an enthralling contest, done late on the fourth day. No curator can just roll out the same surface again, but if Page can get something approaching last year’s effort, it will be a fit stage for a contest. As deflated as the whole camp must be, England’s seam attack could yet get something useful out of such a surface and push back in the series. That won’t be of much use though without help from England’s batting, which is as likely to struggle here as anywhere. Personnel changes in the top six are likely, but if there were any potential replacements with good credentials to play, they already would be there. As to which Australian bowlers they will be facing, that is a much more open question. Josh Hazlewood will spend Christmas in Melbourne but apparently won’t play. Mitchell Starc had some back problems last time out and is facing 14 days of Test cricket out of 23. Cameron Green was held back by the fitness staff on the last day in Adelaide. Jhye Richardson put in a big shift there after not playing a Test in nearly three years. Michael Neser has had recent hamstring problems. Into the squad comes Scott Boland, seemingly as cover for everyone. Two days out from the match, Australia’s coach, Justin Langer, said that Starc would probably play and that Green’s treatment was just precaution for a young player. Cummins will return, and surely one of Neser or Richardson will be right. Boland probably won’t play but, if he does, he’s a sharp bowler who hits a hard length, and takes his wickets for Victoria at the MCG at an average of 25. Also different for this visit in 2021 will be the crowd. Facing up while surrounded by 70,000 people is still a rare experience in professional cricket, but it will be less intense than the 90,000 or more who would usually pack out Boxing Day for an Ashes tour. The Covid rate in Melbourne will keep some people at home, because for all of the MCC’s assurances about protocols, there is no way that safety standards can be maintained all day at crush points and bars. For those who do come along though, the last point of difference is a big one: the series is still live. In 2006, 2013, and 2017, the Ashes had been wrapped up 3-0 before the Boxing Day Test. With the revised schedule in 2021, it has become the third Test, which is much more compelling. A fifth Test later in January is also great for the schedule. Cricket Australia should learn and retain that for future years. If the MCG pitch can change, so can anything.Scott Morrison and the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, are both spending Christmas in Sydney but the prime minister is planning to take some leave in January, probably around the middle of the month. The final summer before a federal election would normally give party leaders a chance to recharge before a hard-fought campaign, but the country faces fresh uncertainty as a result of rapidly rising Covid case numbers and debate about bringing forward vaccine booster shots. The prime minister would face political risks if seen to clock off during a crisis, evoking memories of his Hawaii holiday during the bushfires two years ago. Morrison, who has been crisscrossing Australia effectively in election campaign mode in recent weeks, was in Canberra on Wednesday for a previously unscheduled meeting of the national cabinet to discuss how to respond to the rapid spread of the Omicron variant. Morrison is returning to Sydney to spend Christmas with his family and his mother, and is expected to remain on duty until some point in January. “The PM has publicly referred to taking some time off in the new year – when that is confirmed we will advise,” a spokesperson for the prime minister said. There was no word on whether the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, would be acting as prime minister at that point, given the arrangements are yet to be locked in. Joyce has said he will be back in Australia in time for Christmas, after isolating in a hotel in Washington DC after a positive Covid test. After Wednesday’s meeting, Morrison hinted that he was unlikely to take leave until after the next national cabinet meeting, to be held on 7 January and will consider a nationally consistent definition of close and casual contacts of Covid cases. “We will meet again in a fortnight. Obviously, we’ll continue to work through these issues as I will over the next few weeks over Christmas and into the new year, before I take a break,” Morrison told reporters. “And because we really need to get these things sorted over the next couple of weeks as we see Omicron rise.” The government has said the vaccination of children aged five to 11 is on track to begin as scheduled on 10 January. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Like Morrison, Albanese is planning to spend Christmas in Sydney with his family. But Albanese has already taken some time off: the Labor leader holidayed in the Bundaberg region of central Queensland from Friday last week until Wednesday this week. During this time, Albanese asked his deputy, Richard Marles, to serve as acting leader. Albanese cited his recent trip to Queensland during a press conference on Thursday, reflecting on the rise of daily Covid numbers to record highs in New South Wales, and stressing the need for leaders to follow the best health advice. “It is a tale of two states,” Albanese told reporters in Sydney. “In Queensland around the Bundaberg region, people were checking in with their QR codes, people were wearing masks indoors, people were checked in, every place I went into over the five days I spent in Central Queensland, they asked to see the tick on my phone to show that I’ve been vaccinated. And everyone was getting on with life as normal.” Albanese is not planning to take further holidays in the coming weeks, but has said he is planning to travel to South Australia next week. He has also said he wants to visit Western Australia as soon as it opens to domestic travellers. “Well, I’ll be there on the day that WA opens, on 5 February, I’ll be on the first flight,” Albanese told Perth radio 6PR on Thursday. “I was on the first flight to get into Queensland, to get into Brisbane. And I was on the first flight to get into Tasmania, into Launceston.” Federal parliament is scheduled to begin its first sitting of the year on 8 February, with an election due to be held by May. The budget has been brought forward to late March, setting the stage for the election campaign to begin shortly after then, but Morrison retains the option of going to the polls sooner.Two weeks at Stradbroke Island was a Christmas tradition with my Dad. One that I resisted every year because none of my friends were there, leaving me feeling like the lonely older kid hanging out with my little brother’s friends. But this year was different – I was allowed to bring Jenna. My first time with Jenna had been nervous, tentative. In the spare bedroom of our friend whose parents were away a lot, we crossed the threshold while This Year’s Love spun on CD. After that we started doing it whenever and wherever we could. To two teenagers who had just discovered sex, the whole world looked like a bed. It felt thrilling, illicit, each time like lightning. Every space – public and private – was an opportunity. My bed, her bed, behind the pool shed at a party on a surprisingly cold night. The spa in the pool area of the complex where she lived. Standing up in the change rooms at Myer Queen Street. This was how grown ups behave, we figured. It didn’t matter that the sex itself was rushed and messy, we felt warm and excited and alive, stealing moments to press ourselves together at parties while our friends necked Smirnoff Double Blacks and fell into bushes. As our list of secret sex locations grew, so did our ambition. We looked for somewhere to cap it all off. Somewhere thrilling and romantic and beautiful. It was the beach. We had to have sex on the beach. Which is how we came to be standing, at 10pm on New Year’s Eve, on a beach on Stradbroke Island, halfway through my family holiday, Havaianas in our hands and sex in our hearts. We played it cool for a few days, then on 31 December, the most romantic night of the teenage year, we made our move. After all that planning and anticipation, it was … fine. It was hard to make it work around our clothes, and the excitement wore off pretty quickly. And, the sand. Who knew a beach had so much of it? Pervasive and gritty, it quickly hardened under the compacting force of repetitive motion. So once we’d had some kisses and some thrusts, we figured we had achieved our goal and decided to go back to the unit to finish up properly in private. But sand behaves differently in different contexts. Brushed onto skin in a J.Lo music video, it’s sexy and elegant. En masse and at night, it comes to feel like cold concrete. And somewhere between those two extremes, it resembles a loosely organised, militia-like exfoliant. Seemingly everywhere, impossible to detect – until it ambushes you, in the single bed of the holiday room you share with your little brother, where you somehow swallow an entire bucket’s worth. Luckily my little brother was out all night with his nice friends, so while Jenna raced embarrassed into the shower and I gargled 18 glasses of water, we were at least granted the mercy of suffering our humiliations in private. Until now, I guess.Conservationists say a plan to search for oil and gas near Rowley Shoals in north-west Australia is “reckless” and will put one of the world’s healthiest reefs at risk. The area is an isolated archipelago of reefs home to three atolls – Imperieuse, Clerke, and Mermaid – that lie 260km off the coast of the Kimberley in Western Australia. A scientific study published in April recognised Rowley Shoals’ status as a thriving marine ecosystem that has escaped the harm seen in other reef systems around the globe. The area is a biodiversity hotspot, with 96 different protected marine species living or migrating through the area, including 25 species of whales and dolphins, six types of sea turtle, 10 different shark and ray species, and 31 species of fish – including the Western Australian sculpin, a deep sea blobfish considered the ugliest animal in the world. Eighteen of the 96 species are classified as threatened or endangered. Spaced about 30km apart, Mermaid Reef is protected as a marine park under federal law, while the southern Clerke and Imperieuse reefs fall under the protection of the states. But now a Perth-based company, Seismic Searcher, has applied to conduct seismic testing to search for oil and gas across a 8,584km sq area on the doorstep of these protected areas. The proposed test will take place 4.4km from the boundary of the Mermaid Reef Marine Park and 11.9km from the Rowley Shoals Marine Park boundary. Dr Cat Dorey, marine parks campaign manager for Australian Marine Conservation Society said the effect of any testing will “bleed over” into the marine park area. “Sound waves don’t acknowledge human borders in the sea,” Dorey said. “You kind of have to wonder what is the point of a marine park where you can have oil and gas exploration going on with all of its risks?” Seismic testing involves sending regular “sound pulses” under water in short blasts to create a 3D map of what lies beneath the surface. The noise generated can reach 250 decibels as the sound waves generated by the blast penetrate the seabed. In comparison, the loudest whale noises range between 140 and 190 decibels. Seismic Searcher plans to send pulses every 5-to-8 seconds over the course of the 70-day test period. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Seismic testing is bad for marine life and, even worse, it will lead to oil and gas developments which is most definitely a threat to marine life and our environment from a release of too much carbon,” Dorey said. Dr Tony Worby, the chief executive of the Minderoo Foundation Flourishing Oceans initiative, said marine protected areas were vital to safeguard the health and biodiversity of the world’s oceans and that his organisation had considerable concerns about the proposed seismic survey. “Any activity that affects a marine park, including noise pollution, potentially undermines the ability of the ecosystem to function naturally and provide all its much needed benefits,” Worby said. “Minderoo strongly supports the ongoing maintenance of the marine park environments, including no-take zones, and the most stringent of risk management strategies in relation to marine protected areas.” According to the National Offshore Petroleum Titles Administrator (NOPTA), the exploration permits for these areas are held by Santos, Pathfinder Energy and 3D Oil. Public consultation on Seismic Searcher’s application closed on 15 December 2015 and should it be approved, the company will have permission to begin work as early as January 2022 – though they are not the only one. A spokesperson for Nopsema said Seismic Searcher was currently reviewing the public comments received and has yet to submit a revised plan for consideration by the regulation. “Even though the Possum 3D MSS is not planned to be conducted within an Australian marine park … Nopsema’s assessment of this EP will carefully consider the potential impacts on the values of the Mermaid Reef Australian Marine Park,” they said. Fossil fuel companies have been hoping to explore near Rowley Shoals for some time, with conservationists raising alarm in 2012 about efforts by Woodside to look for gas reserves in the region. While they were successful in stopping permits being issued, they have been re-issued in recent years. Japanese oil company Inpex has also received approval to conduct seismic testing nearby in the Kimberley Marine Park area from January in a separate application. Dorey said the federal government had shown it was capable of acting when it recently announced it will refuse an application to develop an area off the New South Wales coast for fossil fuel production known as Pep11. The International Energy Agency suggested in May that limiting global heating to 1.5C, a goal set out in the Paris agreement, meant the exploration and exploitation of new fossil fuel basins had to stop this year.If 2020 was novel – like the virus itself – then 2021 took on a danker, darker tone. The virus and associated restrictions continued to apply a blowtorch to many aspects of our lives. The shapes that emerged from the heat were not always pretty. End to Sydney’s exceptionalism “She’s not going to lock down.” “She won’t lock down.” “There’s no way she’ll lock down.” In the middle of the year, as Melbourne continued to shuffle painfully in and out of Covid restrictions, it looked like Sydney would once again avoid a major lockdown. Gladys wouldn’t do it, people said with the certainty of Moses reading a tablet. It’s just not her style. They booked restaurants and Hamilton tickets and winter holidays to Queensland. But she did do it – ultimately for 107 days. Australia’s richest city, with arguably the most libertarian bent, had to spend almost a third of the year at home. It is also Australia’s most unequal city, so some people had a better time of it than others – ie if you lived within 5km of a beach, or were not one of the LGAs of concern that had harsher lockdown measures. Get back The future’s uncertain, the end to this thing unknown, and the lack of being able to place ourselves at a definite point in the Covid narrative has led to a hunger for the recent past. Jonathan Franzen released Crossroads, the first of a trilogy set in 1971, and part of the pleasure of reading his suburban saga of the Hildebrandt family is the absence of tech as well as huge, global meta-narratives such as coronavirus. The Vietnam war haunts the margins, but it’s in its waning days – and most of the character’s problems are reassuringly small and personal: Does he like me? Am I an OK parent? Do I look good in this coat? I hope I don’t appear foolish trying to impress these people. The three-part Beatles documentary Get Back was celebrated across the globe, not just for lost glimpses of genius in action, but as Adrian Chiles put it, a world that had yet to be degraded by the ubiquitous mobile phone and plastic packaging. “Sandwiches were brought in on actual plates and tea was drunk from actual cups,” he marvelled. And voted the best show of the year was It’s A Sin, a portrait of queer life in 1980s Britain. Over our shoulder is the nicest place to look. Twenty-thousand years of this - seven more to go Meanwhile a sad nihilism has crept into the art that’s being made right now about this historic moment. In it there’s the assumption that the end is not far away. In the literary blockbuster of the year Beautiful World, Where Are You, Sally Rooney writes: “Aren’t we unfortunate babies to be born when the world ended? After that there was no chance for the planet, and no chance for us.” In Bo Burnham’s Netflix special Inside, he sings about how “The planet’s heating up. What the fuck is going on.” And in That Funny Feeling, he drops in “a quiet comprehending of the ending of it all” and “20,000 years of this, seven more to go”, referring to the amount of time we have before catastrophic climate change really bites. In Australia, novelist Emily Bitto told Guardian Australia: “I’m constantly struggling to understand the strangeness of the world right now: the hyper-capitalist, overdeveloped west, this Rome-before-the-fall moment, this onwards-rushing not looking back, this more-more-more moment.” Fatigue Being tired was so hot in 2021. A democratic trend, no one was excluded. You could be young and tired, elderly and tired, working from home and tired, working in a hospital and tired. Part of the reason “tired” was a thing in 2021 was that people gave 2020 their all – and subconsciously thought somehow the virus would end when the clock struck midnight on 31 December 2020. The fact that 2021 was worse meant that already tired people suddenly entered a new, almost previously unexperienced state of fatigue. This fatigue felt like visiting a new planet, where the air was thinner, moving around felt harder, and sleep when it came, was lighter. It was the sort of tired that felt like it might take years to get over. Some of the very tired people joked that they needed a break from holiday socialising, and they got their wish! A fast-spreading new variant came along just in time for Christmas! Luckily one of the best news story of 2021 was Australia’s high vaccination rate after a slow start. Squid Game A combination of everything we love. Korean content. Senseless violent deaths. Games. Tracksuits. Netflix. Work sucks - but what else is there? Author and journalist Sarah Jaffe said in a recent podcast on the great resignation: “What a lot of people realised during the pandemic is that their boss doesn’t care if they die.” The great resignation is occurring – more markedly in the US than in Australia, but still the question is being posed on a million lips: should I really be organising my whole identity around work? And if I don’t – who am I? And how do I afford stuff? Expect more existential angst in 2022. Winter is the new summer Summer 2019-20 was on fire. A billion animals died and from November until January we inhaled their charred corpses, which had been alchemised into fine particles that drifted into the cities and caused asthma. Summer 2020-21 was wet, strange, with snap border closures and Victorians recalled from their interstate holidays – or else forced to remain in Sydney. Summer 2021-22 has La Niña, cyclones, Omicron, and queuing for tests before Christmas because you don’t want to infect family members. But the last couple of winters have been mild. Maybe it’s global heating but winter at the beach over the last few years has been a lot more pleasant than summer. A trend? Not a good one. Property prices are no longer funny, just sad Remember when people used to post pictures in 2018 of literal haunted houses in Marrickville that were a million dollars but had rotting wallpaper and an outside toilet – and just laughed at who would actually spend a million on it? Well, that place is worth $3m and no one’s laughing now. Twitter: a place of toxic quasi-epidemiology Twitter got bad. Like – worse than usual bad. Like in June, July and August where a lot of people wanted whole cities (ie Sydney) to have a rise in case numbers and an increase in suffering and death. There is not enough space on even the most powerful phones to screenshot all the bad, mean, nasty takes. While Twitter can be a powerful spreader of information and news, its tone in 2021 took a markedly nasty turn. Time to log off or limit the Bird in 2022. But a hopeful note: People getting on with it - and getting it on Life doesn’t stop. This year I went to a wedding where the couple had spent the majority of their courtship in lockdown. They met on an app, and their first date was Zoom. Recently they got married in a socially distanced outdoor ceremony after restrictions were lifted. They are having a baby. This is great year two stuff. People will find a way. The most deadly pandemic of the 20th century, the Spanish flu, went through wave after wave and lasted for nearly four years. We have to find a way to live and love, otherwise we’ll all go insane.In the absence of restrictions that would normally accompany Covid case spikes, Australians are being left to their own devices to plan a Covid-safe Christmas. There are measures we can take to reduce the risk of transmission at Christmas gatherings and help protect yourself, your family and friends. Here’s some tips to enjoy a Covid-safe holiday season. 1. Reduce socialising ’Tis the season … to cut back on socialising. Perhaps the most difficult expert advice to heed is to reduce contact with large numbers of people. It’s not something health experts advise lightly, but considering the increased transmissibility of the Omicron variant, it becomes an easy way to reduce your risk of infection. Prof Hassan Vally, an epidemiologist at Deakin University, said socialising was, unfortunately, directly linked to transmission risk. “Instead of attending 10 separate gatherings, maybe you’ll say this is the year where you should just go to two or three that are the most important ones. “There’s going to be a lot of sound judgment that’s going to be required.” 2. Reduce invitees It may seem mean, but maybe you shouldn’t invite your second cousin’s boyfriend’s sister to lunch this year. Health experts are advising that people should avoid large crowds over the holiday break, and that includes family members. Be ruthless with your guest list. That means reducing the number of people invited to parties, gatherings, dinners or barbecues, with many potentially acting as super-spreader events. Vally said it was a “simple relationship between the number of people you interact with and your likelihood of getting infected”. 3. Stay outdoors Health experts estimate that the danger of transmission rises by up to 30% as soon as someone enters an indoor area, especially one with poor ventilation. This becomes particularly relevant during Christmas, with experts advising people to avoid crowds at high-risk venues such as pubs, clubs or boats. Prof Peter Collignon, an infectious disease physician and microbiologist at the Australian National University, told the Guardian the safest Christmas gatherings were ones held outside. “I think you’d get some protection, especially for your older relatives, if you tried as much as possible to hold your gatherings outside,” he said. “The more events you’re indoors, in bars and pubs, those are the super-spreading events. The more you’re in those, the more it increases your risk.” 4. Know the vaccine status of those around you An advantage of keeping to smaller and more intimate gatherings is that you are more likely to be able to keep a track of everyone’s vaccine status. Prof Sarah Palmer, a virologist with the Westmead Institute, emphasised the importance of creating a “vaccine bubble” at gatherings, in an effort to protect people from infection. “Is your whole family vaccinated? If not, there may be some difficult discussions to be had as to who should be getting together and who shouldn’t be.” Palmer was mindful of family gatherings being ruined by difference in vaccine status, but said it was of the utmost importance to keep track. 5. Manage unvaccinated guests Awkward! What to do if a guest or family member is unvaccinated and is insisting on attending a Christmas gathering? Health experts say this is where you should ask them to be socially distant and wear a mask. Blow them a kiss from across the back yard. Vally said unvaccinated people pose a risk to everyone in attendance, and it was reasonable to ask them to take extra precautions to protect others. “That may be getting them to wear a mask, be socially distant where possible, or it may be getting them to do the rapid antigen test,” Vally said. 6. Be booster aware Palmer added that the booster shot was essential in keeping Christmas gatherings Covid-safe. Earlier this month, the booster schedule was changed in light of growing cases, with the gap between second dose and booster now at five months. But Palmer said people needed to be “extra careful” if they were still not due for a third dose. “The booster increases your antibody level, up to 25-fold in fact. If you’re double vaccinated, you do have some protection, but you will probably be at more risk of getting infected.” 7. Wear a mask Masks are still considered essential in reducing transmission. The chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, told reporters on Wednesday that masks do work to reduce transmission. “They do protect yourself, they do protect others. The health advice is wear a mask,” Kelly said. Masks are particularly recommended in indoor settings, especially in retail settings, or in places where social distancing is impossible. 8. Use rapid antigen tests Rapid antigen tests could be a convenient way to protect yourself and protect others, but only if they’re used regularly. But with reports of shortages and varying levels of dependability, they should act more as an added layer of protection, not as a replacement for other preventive measures. Vally said they’d need to be used “very judiciously” and at particular times. “Doing a rapid antigen test in the 24 hours before a gathering, or even immediately before a gathering could give everyone that extra reassurance.” 9. Maintain good hygiene Good hygiene still plays a major role in preventing infection. Victoria Health advises people to continue practising good hygiene during the Christmas break, saying it is still essential. “Cough or sneeze into your elbow. Regularly wash your hands using an alcohol-based hand sanitiser or soap and water, especially after touching surfaces, contact with others and when preparing, serving and eating food.” 10. Enjoy Christmas Finally, after a difficult and turbulent year, experts also advise everyone to try to enjoy the holidays, despite the extra precautions necessary. “I think it’s going to be really important for people to enjoy Christmas this year,” Vally said. “Just do it sensibly and responsibly.”Three intensive care workers share the stories that have remained hidden from public view during the pandemic. Dr Katrina Tonga, respiratory consultant It was an eye opener seeing young people come in with severe respiratory illnesses. We’re used to managing people with respiratory diseases, but not to the extent they were almost on death’s door. We had to talk to patients on the phone, or, if we were in the room, wearing PPE. They couldn’t have family members or friends so it was really tough on them. It was heartbreaking seeing patients with their whole families in hospital, but they were spread throughout Sydney. Sometimes they hadn’t had any contact until a FaceTime or Skype call. Having to talk to family members on the phone and trying to relay how sick their family member was, or tell them they were going to pass away, was a really challenging time. In my culture – I’m Tongan – it’s very family oriented, and seeing Pacific islander families coming into hospital, and knowing that’s what they needed, I think some felt a bit more reassured someone could speak to them in their own language. One of the patients I remember was really quite sick. We were getting him sent to the intensive care unit. He was a young guy, I was on the phone to his wife wheeling him out and he said to me: ‘doctor, am I going to die?’. And I thought in my mind, ‘you could’, but I had to reassure him we were doing everything we could and we were sending him to intensive care to get the treatment he needed. Courtney Lace, Covid nurse manager We had a mixed model on the ward – [first we] utilised the negative pressure rooms, then we installed bubbles, then we transitioned the rest of the patients out, and we went full Covid. It was all staff in full PPE from the minute they arrived. We set up a donning station outside of the ward and had particular nurses supervising the procedure. Their background is neurology, stroke, brain injury and suddenly they were taking patients with respiratory issues – and they just took it in their stride. The acute patients were very unwell, and it is extremely labour-intensive on the nurses working in those areas, particularly in the bubbles. It’s such a different way of nursing, it’s like a tent on the outside of the four-bedded bay so they’d be zipping through two sets of tent to get into the patient … It’s extremely hot, really dehydrating for the nurses because they’ve got the full PPE on and it steams up really quickly. We did a transfer late one night, we had about 32 patients on the ward at the time, it was just a particularly busy day, patients were really sick and they deteriorated quickly with the Delta strain … It really hit home seeing how many patients were in and how sick they were. It was very different to getting on the bus and heading home to what was going on inside the hospitals. The public were protected from that. Dr Priya Nair, director of intensive care When Covid came, particularly with the second wave, our work changed completely. It was really a once-in-career type experience. I’ve never seen anything like it before, and most of my colleagues haven’t either. We went from being a 20 bed ICU which had two pods in it … to suddenly having to expand to a four pod ICU to accommodate our Covid patients. We also provide services for Covid patients with very severe lung problems who can’t be looked after in other hospitals … so even though there weren’t a huge number of Covid patients in our local community who needed ICU, we were seeing patients from all across New South Wales. Our workload increased exponentially … We needed many more nursing staff, more doctors, more equipment and more space and all of this came with its logistical challenges. The moments that stood out were when we had a patient dying without their family being able to be there with them … Having to be their healthcare workers but their family at the same time as well, you really feel that level of humanity comes out at the time.Have you been sold a pup? An increase in pet ownership through the pandemic means there are more than a million extra dogs in Australia than there were in 2019. But the fact that many people are prepared to spend big on their pets has also brought out the snake oil salespeople. You can buy healing crystals for your collie, homeopathic junk for your jack russell, and reiki for your Rhodesian ridgeback. The anti-vaxxers have also entered the kennel. Then there are the purveyors of “natural” diets, vegan lifestyles or raw food; of massage and acupuncture and gourmet human-grade meals that cost as much as … gourmet human-grade meals. Some of what is on sale and promising wellness is total bunkum. Some is an easy way to part you from your cash and spoil your pooch. And some, such as the food, is slightly more complicated. Research from Animal Medicines Australia found the number of pet-owning households went up from 61% before Covid struck to 69% in May 2021. That includes more than a million “new” dogs. The report, Pets and the Pandemic, also found there is a lot of money at play. The average dog costs about $3,237 a year, with $58 of that spent on alternative health treatments, including acupuncture and massage. Nationally that equates to $20.5bn a year, with about $270m on alternative treatments. David Neck, a spokesperson for the Australian Veterinary Association, has been a veterinary surgeon for about 30 years. He says he has seen people lured in by false promises and warns that the market is “ripe” for those pushing unproven treatments and diets. “People believe things they read on the internet,” he says. “We have people who become instant experts in the field – they’re passing on their opinions.” Some dog breeders dig up online information that can be entirely wrong, he says, and hand it over as a guide for new owners. Neck says a breeder may have been breeding five dogs a month for years – for vets, five dogs is a morning’s work. Don’t pay for water A surprising number of websites offer crystals for dogs, spruiking a wide range of entirely unproven claims. If there is no evidence crystals work for Homo sapiens, why would they work for Canis lupus familiaris? Sure, they’re pretty. Humans might find them calming. A dog would, paws down, prefer a stick. Homeopathic products abound as well. Again, there is no evidence homeopathy works. At all. It’s not an “alternative” to anything. It’s mostly, and sometimes exclusively, water. Water is important, just don’t pay for it – fill the dog bowl from the tap. As for reiki, a roundup of studies found no evidence such “therapeutic touch” works. As with many complementary therapies, it may help humans feel better – but there’s no reason to think it would be better for a dog than a tummy rub. There are even people recommending “distance reiki” – basically sending healing thoughts. Neck says vaccinations and diets are more common and much more complicated issues for vets. Like humans, dogs need vaccines to protect against disease. And, as in the human world, some people have fallen prey to misinformation and conspiracy theories about vaccinations for dogs. In one sense, it’s simple. Vaccinations are proven, safe and effective, and side-effects are rare. But there’s a complication in the dog world – some vaccines given yearly may protect for longer than that but they are not approved to be given, say, every three years. So a dog will be considered unvaccinated after one year, unless it has a blood test, known as a titer test, that shows it is still immune. “But taking blood from a dog is done by plunging a needle into the jugular vein,” Neck says. “I’m not sure as a dog I’d like to have that done rather than a little needle.” So many vets will give the one-yearly injection even if the dog may still be immune. Some anti-vaxxers have latched on to this and spread misinformation about “vaccine overload”. The idea of vaccine overload is “questionable”, Neck says, and any concerns about adverse events are something people can talk to their vet about. The vet will also be able to say if the deadly parvovirus is in the area, for example, making vaccination more urgent. There are myriad places that advertise “alternatives” to vaccination – largely diet-based – but there is no evidence any of them work. Green tripe and penises With all the wellness palaver come, of course, diets. All sorts of them. Seafood and insect-based diets are being marketed as sustainable options for dogs. There are also vegan diets, which can be hard to get right and may be catastrophic if done badly. The biggest food trend for dogs is “raw”, which can cover fresh, freeze-dried, dehydrated, homemade or store-bought. Raw food usually has a high ratio of meat, bones and offal to vegetables, and is often marketed as “grain-free”. Producers spruik green tripe and animal penises, fat and edible bones. Raw food diets sometimes incorporate a fasting day (good luck with that). Proponents of raw food say it can do everything from giving your dog better skin and hair to better reproductive power and reduced body odour. It’s touted as more “natural”. But there is no evidence it’s any better than commercial or homemade cooked food, according to the World Small Animal Veterinary Association. Neck says if a patient comes through his door there is no way to tell whether it eats a raw or cooked diet. “I cannot measure anything on the patient … it doesn’t change anything in a measurable way,” he says. “Raw food will always run the risk of parasites and bacterial contamination.” WSAVA also warns about those risks, and earlier this year European researchers found that all the raw dog food samples they tested had bacteria, some of it antibiotic-resistant. There was also a chance the superbugs could infect humans. This year more than 20 dogs died and 44 were seriously sickened by contaminated pet meat. The RSPCA recommends against feeding dogs raw meat or bones. Commercial dry dog food that complies with voluntary Australian standards is recommended by the RSPCA, although occasionally both vegan and meat-based products have been recalled because of potential links to toxins that cause the potentially fatal condition megaesophagus. The federal government has resisted pressure for mandatory standards in the pet food industry. Neck says if owners want to feed a raw diet, they should “make it yourself, know the quality of the ingredients and how they’re handled”. And, he says, get to know your vet. That goes for vaccinations as well. Find a vet you trust, who will then know your dog’s history. Anne Chester, the chief veterinarian at RSPCA Queensland, echoes that advice. “They should develop a relationship with their vet clinic and get all their advice from the local vet,” she says. “With all things, it’s buyer beware, there’s an awful lot of information out there on the internet which is not always from reputable sources.” And Chester warns about household foods that are dangerous for doggos, with a specific Christmas warning – ham. “People need to be really careful about feeding dogs the fat off the ham. It can cause [life-threatening] pancreatitis.” In fact, be careful around any stray food this Christmas in case your beloved dog just wolfs it down.Bernard and the Genie, a 1991 British made-for-television fantasy-comedy, is a Christmas sleeper with an impressive pedigree. The script, written by a young Richard Curtis, is a rollicking tale of good versus evil delivered by an impressive cast of comedians including Lenny Henry, Rowan Atkinson and Alan Cumming. The opening scene takes place 2,000 years ago in an era of vengeful sorcerers, evil spells and, confusingly, Jesus of Nazareth. Bethlehem circa AD30 is not the kind of place you would normally associate with magic lamps and flying carpets but, if it’s cinéma vérité you’re after, this is not the film for you. A wizard’s curse on man-mountain Josephus (Henry) transforms him into a tiny genie who must remain in a magic lamp for eternity. Or at least until a heartbroken Bernard Bottle (Cumming) finds the lamp, his last remaining possession after his two-timing girlfriend has cleared out their apartment and moved in with his best friend. Earlier that day Bernard, a fledgling art dealer, discovered some priceless works belonging to a couple of naive old ladies. His workmates fete him with flowers, champagne and kisses on his arrival that morning to the accompaniment of a song titled Mr Success, memorable for its classic 90s line “From the shine on his shoe to the star in his eye / If he were a girl he’d be Princess Di.” To Bernard’s dismay, his honest intentions to compensate the women result not in an expected promotion from his boss, Charles Pinkworth (a superbly waspish Atkinson), but in a direction to get his “philanthropic little arse” out of the gallery. And so we find an unemployed Bernard at day’s end, stripped of flowers, champagne and worldly possessions, rubbing a lamp with the cuff of his shirt – thus causing it to explode – and winding up in an emergency ward with a bang to the head and one slightly scorched testicle. On his return to his apartment, he’s greeted by a shadowy presence that turns out to be a sabre-wielding, two-metre-tall genie with murder on his mind. “Your wish is my command,” snarls the genie. “Beware, oh short one. You smell of peppermint and it is time to die.” Once Bernard has confirmed that his wish is indeed the genie’s command, they call a truce and introduce themselves. On discovering that Josephus has been in the lamp for 2,000 years, Bernie introduces him to Mozart, Barry White (“What colour is this guy?” asks a besotted Josephus) and Big Macs. And Josephus introduces his diminutive master to his two kittens, fantastic pants and flying carpet rides. Bernard and the Genie alternates between buddy movie and parable as the two friends discover 1990s London at the height of the festive season, with all its rampant commercialism and material excess. “Tell me about this Christmas thing,” says Josephus. Bernard begins with the birth of Jesus. “But I knew this guy!” Josephus exclaims. He is horrified that such a “wonderful guy” was crucified. Together, he and Bernard decide to right some wrongs and “make some wishes for Big J”. They start with Pinkworth, then move on to Bernard’s ex-girlfriend and her new beau. In between, Bernard grants wishes to children in the Santa queue and a lottery win to the doorman at his apartment block. Bernard’s final grand gesture is to grant Josephus a wish. In return Josephus gives his friend a surprise gift designed to give Bernard the merriest of Christmases. It works of course – it’s from Richard Curtis, after all. Bernard and the Genie is dated, the production values are rough and the special effects are laughable. But throw in a cheesy soundtrack that includes Slade’s Merry Xmas Everybody and Bowie’s The Jean Genie and cameo appearances by 90s celebrities including Melvyn Bragg and Bob Geldof and you’ve got yourself a real cracker of a film. • This article was amended on 24 December 2021. An earlier version incorrectly stated that Bernard and the Genie was streaming in Australia.The Syncettes began in 2019 as a group of five swimming friends who met in the “latte lane” of their local swimming club in the Darwin suburb of Fannie Bay. Inspired by the British comedy film Swimming with Men, this fun-loving bunch of masters swimmers are now a retro-focused, synchronised swimming team of nine who are launching into a series of Christmas performances. “Like the movie, it was an inspiration to have people who were all different shapes and ages who could bond and have fun,” says one of the original members, Corinne Fabian. “When we are strutting poolside in our cossies we feel really good. When the music starts and there is an audience … woohoo! We love it.” Aged between 30 and 66, the group initially trained to YouTube clips before they found 85-year-old Elaine Edwards, a synchronised swimmer in Canada in 1950. Their first performance was during the morning coffee break at the final masters swimming session in Darwin. “Up until now we have only done YMCA Christmas events but people are asking us to do private parties,” Fabian says. “And we have been approached to perform at the Darwin Waterfront and Mecure Resort. We are in demand and have developed quite a fan club.” Another Syncette, Helen Gould, says: “When we first teamed up with Elaine we did some great sessions learning the basics: sculling, floating, turning, holding your breath and swimming in a line. Elaine has been our biggest supporter and mentor.” Says Fabian: “We train all year to get a performance together and ramp it up in the last month or so. We aren’t restricted to women, we are happy to have blokes along but the only criteria is they need to attend our practices – they can’t be irregular.” The women enjoy the vintage appeal of old-style synchronised swimming, now called artistic swimming, and put a lot of work into costume selection and music. “Synchronised swimming makes us feel youthful, you get really strong in the core and it’s great for ‘tuck shop arms’,” Fabian says. “This year we were joined by a 30-year-old and we had a lot of interest but we need to find a new coach because Elaine is finding it a bit hard standing poolside. Our struggle will be to find someone to teach us the moves and technique.”The billionaire US hedge fund boss Dan Loeb has launched a scathing attack on activist investors targeting his London-listed fund, calling them “juvenile” and “underhanded” after its chair resigned. Loeb’s New York-based Third Point is one of the most prominent and aggressive activist hedge funds, which take stakes in companies to push for changes that they believe will make them more valuable. Loeb has tussled with companies ranging from Sony to Sotheby’s and Prudential, and he is now agitating for a break-up of Shell. However, in an unusual twist, it is Loeb’s London fund that is now the target of activist investors, triggering an extraordinary public spat between investment firms. Steve Bates, the chair since 2019, stepped down after claiming that he had received “personal threats” from a shareholder in a meeting who said they would “attack him in other business areas”, Third Point said. Third Point Investors was listed in 2007 to give UK investors easy access to returns from Loeb’s main hedge fund. It had a market value £680m on Wednesday, but Asset Value Investors (AVI), the largest shareholder after Loeb with a 10% stake, says poor management meant it was undervalued compared with its holdings. Third Point said in a statement to the stock market on Thursday that it had held meetings with AVI and other investors, including a firm called Staude Capital. It did not identify the source of the alleged threat. Third Point said the threat raised a “business conflict” for Bates if he continued as chair. Loeb, who is worth $4bn (£3bn) according to Forbes magazine and who has himself been criticised for his hard-driving activism, used the same stock market notice to attack his adversaries. He said: “The behaviour by these so-called ‘activists’ is a stain on institutional investors who attempt to engage constructively with boards and management teams. Being a successful activist requires moving on when shareholders reject your plans rather than resorting to underhanded tactics. These juvenile antics smack of desperation and inexperience.” Tom Treanor, a director at AVI, said in a statement the firm had supported Bates’s original appointment to the board, and it was “unfortunate that he has now chosen to resign”. He claimed that Bates had “felt under pressure from the manager”, Loeb, and also accused Third Point of putting out “misleading narratives”. This included Third Point’s description of a victory earlier this month in a vote over one of the London fund’s directors that was brought by AVI. Treanor said the vote was won only because a Third Point company controlled voting rights. He said that raised “serious questions around governance at the company”.Flutter, the gambling company that owns Paddy Power and SkyBet, has agreed to buy the Italian operator Sisal in a £1.6bn deal that could have a significant bearing on the competition to run the UK’s national lottery. In a statement to the stock market, Flutter said it had struck a deal with the private equity group CVC Partners to buy Sisal, a major Italian gambling and betting firm which also operates lotteries in Italy, Turkey and Morocco. The Flutter chief executive, Peter Jackson, said buying the Milan-based firm would give the company a “gold medal position” in Italy, the second-largest regulated gambling market in Europe, after the UK. Flutter said Sisal was fast-growing, particularly in online gambling, which increased by 20% in Italy as the Covid-19 pandemic drove punters to migrate online. The takeover puts Flutter, whose brands include Betfair, Paddy Power and SkyBet, in contention to take over the UK national lottery. Sisal is one of four firms bidding for the next 10-year licence to run the lottery. The Gambling Commission is expected to make a decision in February 2022 after a competition that has been prolonged several times, with the new licence due to start in 2024. Sisal is up against Camelot, which has run the Lottery since its inception in 1994, and the media tycoon Richard Desmond, who already owns the Health Lottery. The biggest threat to Camelot’s 27-year incumbency is thought to be the Czech operator Sazka, which is bidding via a special purpose vehicle set up in the UK called Allwyn. All of the bidders have submitted their final proposals and are waiting for the Gambling Commission’s decision. However, Flutter did not mention the UK lottery in a statement attached to the announcement of its takeover of Sisal. The Guardian understands that Flutter has not factored the bid into its plans. The takeover is not due to complete until April, by which time the national lottery decision will have been made. While the Gambling Commission oversees all gambling activity in the UK, including lotteries, sports betting and casino games, it has typically treated the national lottery as a separate entity with specialist staff devoted to it. Flutter is also the subject of an investigation by the commission, after the Guardian revealed that its SkyVegas brand offered “free spins” to recovering addicts. If Flutter is not considered a suitable firm to run the lottery, that would leave Camelot, Sazka and Richard Desmond fighting it out for the lucrative 10-year licence. Camelot has faced criticism, including from a parliamentary public accounts committee (PAC) report in 2018, that charitable donations have not always risen as fast as profits under its tenure. In the first year of the current lottery licence, Camelot booked an after-tax profit of £31.5m after ticket sales amounted to £5.45bn, raising more than £1.5bn for good causes. In the year that so exercised the PAC, 2016-17, Camelot’s profit was more than twice as high at £70m but it raised only a little more for good causes, about £1.6bn. Since then, Camelot has rebalanced things somewhat. After-tax profits for the year to March 2021 were £78m, on the back of record sales of £8.37bn, with good-cause money also hitting an all-time high of £1.88bn. In the first half of the current financial year, to 30 September, Camelot recorded sales of £3.9bn, up 2.7% compared with the same period in 2020. The amount Camelot returned to good causes was £884.5m, up 2.4% on the previous year.Allowing women to give birth in hospital with their pet dog by their side could ease their anxiety, one of the first women to use a “birth dog” has said. Charlotte Beard, 24, who suffers from non-epileptic seizures, was supported through her 50-hour labour by her aid pet Flump, who is trained to detect seizures before they happen. The fluffy-haired Maltese was prepared for the birth by being played audio tracks of babies crying at home and being introduced to staff at the maternity ward in Poole hospital. “I would say you can’t really do a practice run,” Beard joked. “He was visiting the maternity hospital on a very regular basis, getting to know staff, getting to know the different rooms and the setups. Even things like the different equipment that was going to be used, he would see that used on a regular basis.” Flump, two, attended every scan and every appointment alongside Beard. It is a legal requirement that assistance dogs are allowed into hospitals, but Beard said a lot of hospitals were not aware of this. “It would have caused high levels of anxiety if Flump was not there,” she said. “I would have certainly been more concerned about my safety. “I am not suggesting that if I were to have a seizure, staff would not have been able to look after me. But no staff member can detect beforehand whether you are going to have a seizure or not. That is something that Flump can do that nobody else can, and it gives them such valuable time to make sure that I am safe and have the right support in place before it happens. Prevention is always much better than treatment.” Beard gave birth to her son Alfie, weighing 6lb 10oz, after two days with Flump. Her partner and full-time carer, Ash Phoenix, 29, was present. Beard, a former wildlife rehabilitator who had to stop work due to her health, said Flump sat patiently at the end of the bed during the birth and then took in his stride the following days spent in the maternity ward. “We would regularly hear quite distressing noises and he was absolutely fantastic,” she said. “He slept through [a] lot of other people’s labours.” Beard said she was not sure whether she was the first woman in the UK to have an assistance pet present during birth, but the hospital where Alfie was born had certainly never allowed it before. Staff had to do lots of research and set up risk assessments before Flump could attend, she said. The idea of having a dog present had been put to Beard, who had studied animal behaviour and training, by a doctor. It was thought that having a dog at her side might give her more confidence. Beard had had three miscarriages previously and worried about having traumatic memories on her return to hospital. Beard got Flump at 10 weeks and has trained him since then. “From a human standpoint I cannot help but think how lovely it is that Flump was there. He was one of the first to see Alfie,” Beard said. “Obviously hormones play a great part in it. Being present there from the birth and meeting Alfie within moments of him being born, whether it has increased the bond or not, it was such a lovely experience for everyone. Flump was absolutely besotted with Alfie from the moment he first saw him.”Boris Johnson entered the fraught festive period with his authority in tatters after a string of self-inflicted crises, and with colleagues warning that cancelling Christmas could be the final straw for the exasperated British public. So early, tentative evidence that the Omicron variant may result in less severe health outcomes is the best Christmas present the prime minister could have hoped for. Downing Street sources expressed caution about over-interpreting the data, with experts continuing to warn that the sheer size of the Omicron wave could still put severe pressure on the NHS, even if a smaller proportion of those infected end up in hospital. But there is now hope that at the very least, the decision on whether to impose strict new restrictions after Christmas may not be cut and dried. The devolved administrations in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have each announced a package of new rules from Boxing Day, ranging from limits on the largest outdoor events to the return of social distancing. Johnson was under pressure from Labour and the Liberal Democrats to give families and businesses in England similar clarity by setting out his plans for the post-Christmas period. But ministers have said they do not yet have the data to act, and the cabinet has not been reconvened since a lengthy, inconclusive meeting on Monday. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, has confirmed there will be no further announcements from the government this week. This wait-and-see approach received the endorsement of the former Labour prime minister Tony Blair, who told Times Radio on Wednesday that he would not have introduced restrictions over Christmas. Blair argued that from a purely public health perspective the case for curbs was strong, but Omicron was so transmissible that only a full lockdown would be likely to have much effect, and this was too much of a “blunt instrument” to apply across the board to different categories of people, including the triple-jabbed. Johnson will now be hoping hospitalisations and other data provide a sufficient glimmer of hope to avoid a new year circuit breaker or other measures, such as limits on mixing. Having promised MPs the opportunity to vote on any restrictions, he would only be likely to get them through with the backing of Labour. That would delight the new shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, whose tactic has been to offer staunch support for government measures while highlighting the Tories’ divisions. Even if the data falls the right way and Johnson is able to avoid imposing fresh restrictions in the new year, however, Tory backbenchers appear unlikely to credit him for standing firm. Instead, the lockdown sceptics believe the prime minister was left with little room for manoeuvre after the historic rebellion against his plan B measures last week, which strengthened the arm of sceptical cabinet ministers. At the height of the Covid crisis in 2020 there was little cabinet consultation, with key decisions on draconian lockdown measures being made by an inner circle of Johnson, senior ministers and close advisers, while the full cabinet acted as little more than a rubber stamp. But Johnson’s power over his party is now considerably less secure, so that – as during Theresa May’s troubled premiership – the content of cabinet meetings is readily leaked, with jockeying rivals briefing their contributions to the press. Johnson will be sincerely relieved if England can start the new year free of harsh restrictions that could further batter his popularity, and he may even hope that, as with last year’s vaccine bounce, the end of the Omicron wave boosts the public mood. And it will certainly save him a fresh confrontation with battle-hardened backbenchers. But the pressure from within Johnson’s party over everything from political mismanagement to lockdown-busting parties, and from MPs looking at the North Shropshire result and fearing for their own future, is unlikely to abate.Time to wrap up, with just one trading session to go in the City before Christmas. Here’s today’s main stories. UK private sector growth has slowed to its weakest pace since lockdowns were lifted in the spring, with service sector firms hit by uncertainty over Omicron. Growth is expected to keep slowing in the next few months. UK car production slumped again last month, with fewer cars built than in any November since 1984 due to supply chain shortages. Output of engines also fell. Dining out numbers have tumbled, as people avoid restaurants and pubs for fear of catching Covid, as infections hit record levels. Spending at Pret branches has also dropped, as more workers stay at home. British consumers have been warned that energy bills could rise by 50% next April, intensifying the cost of living crisis. In the US, the PCE measure of consumer inflation has jumped to 5.7%, the highest in almost 40 years. But jobless claims remain low, and consumer confidence has risen this month. European markets have hit one-month highs, as fears that omicron would badly hurt global growth faded. On Wall Street, stocks are near record levels. And the Turkish lira has continued to rally, after a new ‘savings scheme’ was launched, and the central bank moved to prop up the currency. In other news: Good night.... GW The billionaire US hedge fund boss Dan Loeb has launched a scathing attack on activist investors targeting his London-listed fund, calling them “juvenile” and “underhanded” after its chair resigned. Loeb’s New York-based Third Point is one of the most prominent and aggressive activist hedge funds, which take stakes in companies to push for changes that they believe will make them more valuable. Loeb has tussled with companies ranging from Sony to Sotheby’s and Prudential, and he is now agitating for a break-up of Shell. However, in an unusual twist, it is Loeb’s London fund that is now the target of activist investors, triggering an extraordinary public spat between investment firms. Steve Bates, the chair since 2019, stepped down after claiming that he had received “personal threats” from a shareholder in a meeting who said they would “attack him in other business areas”, Third Point said Here’s the full story: In the City, shares have closed near to their highest levels this year. The blue-chip FTSE 100 index has ended nearly 32 points higher at 7373 points, up 0.4% today. That’s only 11 points shy of the pandemic closing high set six weeks ago. European stock markets also rallied, hitting one-month highs, as investors welcomed two studies suggesting people infected with Omicron are at less risk of being hospitalised than people infected with Delta. Airline group IAG was the top riser on the FTSE 100, gaining 2%, as travel and hospitality stocks gained ground. Edward Moya of OANDA says: Omicron is looking more like a short-term disruption to the economic outlook and not a destructive headwind that knocks the economy off its course. A wrath of US economic data, which was mostly pre-Omicron painted a picture that showed the economic was moderating, but growth and inflation remained strong. Jobless claims continue to head into the right direction, higher prices dragged down both incomes and spending, and the Fed’s preferred inflation measure came in much hotter-than-expected. If the US was not battling the Omicron variant, US stocks would be dancing higher as the Santa Clause rally would have kept the climb going into uncharted territory. It is too early to say for sure if we will get a Santa Claus rally, but given all the short-term risks of Fed tightening, Chinese weakness, fiscal support uncertainty and COVID, Wall Street is not complaining as the S&amp;P 500 is less than a percentage point from record highs. Gas prices have dropped back sharply from this week’s record highs. The next-day price of UK gas is down 20% today at 320p per therm, having hit an all-time high of 457p on Tuesday. That’s still remarkably expensive - gas cost under 60p per therm at the start of the year, but it will bring some relief to suppliers who are facing unprecedented pressures. News that some ships carrying gas are rerouting from Asia to Europe, lured by record prices, may be helping. But Europe still faces a severe energy crunch this winter. Kozovo is to start rolling two-hour blackouts for most consumers from Thursday, electricity distributor KEDS says. More here: The drop in indoor dining and spending at Pret branches last week has fuelled concerns that the UK economy could shrink in December and January. The latest high-frequency data on mobility, retail footfall and credit card transactions, showed “much lower levels of activity in consumption sectors in December”, said Andrew Goodwin, chief UK economist at Oxford Economics. More here on the FT. Get next year’s diary out... UK chancellor Rishi Sunak has asked Britain’s independent budget office to produce new economic and fiscal forecasts for Wednesday March 23. That rather suggests he is planning to deliver his mid-year Spring Statement update on that day. Back in the UK, celebrity makeup artist Charlotte Tilbury’s company has repaid £3.2m in furlough money after sales soared during the pandemic as shoppers switched to buying online. Accounts filed at Companies House also reveal that Tilbury sold her business for £1.3bn – considerably more than the up to £1bn previously thought – to the Spanish cosmetics and fragrance group Puig last year. The scale of the deal means that Tilbury, who personally held a controlling stake in the business of between 50% and 75%, is likely to have received hundreds of millions from the takeover of the company in which she remains a minority shareholder. US consumer confidence has ticked up this month, although the Omicron variant may yet depress morale. The University of Michigan’s consumer confidence index rose to 70.6 this month, up from November’s 67.4. Americans said economic prospects had improved, while current conditions were slightly better -- although both measures were weaker than a year ago. Surveys of Consumers chief economist, Richard Curtin, says the gains were driven by poorer households, who are anticipating wage increases (to help keep up with inflation). Indeed, the bottom third expected their incomes to rise during the year ahead by 2.8%, up from 1.8% last December, and the highest level since 2.9% was recorded in 1999. There have only been five times in the past half century that income expectations among low income households have exceeded the December 2021 level. The announced increase in Social Security payments of 5.9% in 2022 was partly responsible for the gain, and 5.0% increases in expected wage among the youngest workers. Curtin cautions, though, that too few interviews were conducted to capture the impact of the rapid spread of the Omicron variant in the U.S. Confidence and spending are likely to be depressed in January, but it is too early to know the eventual impact of Omicron on the economy. One-in-four households specifically cited the negative impact of inflation on their living standards, Curtin adds -- showing how surging consumer prices hits families. Wall Street has opened higher, as anxiety over the omicron variant eases. The Dow Jones industrial average has gained 0.6%, or 206 points, to 35,960, led by chemicals firm Dow Inc (+2.5%), American Express (+2%), Cisco (+2%) and Caterpillar (+1.7%). Here’s Robert Frick, corporate economist at Navy Federal Credit Union, on the US weekly jobless report: “Weekly unemployment insurance claims held steady at 205,000, and it appears we may have finally settled into a normal, pre-pandemic level. The rapid rise of Omicron cases may cause a temporary increase in claims, but hiring is strong and employers continue clinging to workers who are tough to hire and quick to quit. Also, continuing claims hit their lowest level since March of 2020, and while this is partially a measure of those who have left the labor force, it shows many long-term unemployed Americans are back at work.” More reaction to the jump in America’s PCE inflation measure: November’s jump in the PCE index shows that US inflation shows no sign of slowing down anytime soon, warns CNN: Here’s their take: A key measure of US inflation rose 5.7% in the 12 months ended in November, the Bureau of Economic Analysis said Thursday. It was the fastest increase in the consumer spending price index since July 1982. For anyone hoping there would be an end to the exorbitant climb in prices before year-end, this was a disappointment. Prices rose 0.6% last month, less than the 0.7% increase from October. Excluding volatile food and energy costs, prices rose 0.5%, unchanged from the prior month. American incomes also rose last month, but not as quickly as prices. Total incomes rose by 0.4%, or $90.4 billion, while disposable incomes also increased by 0.4% last month, corresponding to $70.4 billion. More here: A key inflation measure just hit a nearly four-decade high US consumer prices rose at the fastest pace in 39 years, as inflation continues to ripple through America’s economy. The US personal consumption expenditures index, which tracks price changes in consumer goods and services, jumped by 5.7% per year in November. That’s the fastest rise since 1982, up from 5.1% in October. The PCE is the Federal Reserve’s preferred inflation measure. This surge will reassure the Fed it was right to speed up the tapering of its stimulus programme last week. In a pre-Christmas splurge of data, the Commerce Department reports that consumer spending rose by 0.6% in November. That follows a 1.4% rise in October when consumers started their Black Friday and Christmas shopping early. Durable goods spending jumped 2.5% in November. But personal incomes lagged behind both inflation and consumer spending, rising 0.4% in the month. The number of Americans filing new jobless claims held steady last week, as a tight labour market saw firms hold onto workers. There were 205,000 new ‘initial claims’ for unemployment support filed last week, the same as the previous seven days, having dropped back to pre-pandemic levels this autumn to hit a 52-year low. This suggests that the omicron variant hasn’t yet led to an increase in layoffs among US firms. The number of continuing claims (people receiving support for at least two weeks) dipped by 8,000 to 1.859m, a pandemic low. Here’s some reaction: The US chipmaker Intel has apologised for telling its suppliers not to source products or labour from Xinjiang, a province that human rights groups and governments including the US allege uses forced labour, after facing a backlash across China. Intel, which derives more than a quarter of its $80bn (£60bn) in annual revenues from the Chinese market, apologised to the people of China and its local partners on Thursday for telling suppliers to avoid the region in accordance with restrictions imposed by “multiple governments”. “We apologise for the trouble caused to our respected Chinese customers, partners and the public,” said Intel in a post on the social media site WeChat, hours after its annual letter to suppliers was made public, prompting fury across China. “To clarify, the paragraph about Xinjiang in the letter is only for expressing the original intention of compliance and legality, not its intention or position.” The US and Amnesty International have accused China of widespread human rights abuses in Xinjiang against the province’s majority Muslim Uyghur population, including forced labour, mass internment and torture, which Beijing denies. More here: The UK public’s appetite for eating out has plunged to its weakest since the spring amid growing evidence of the impact of the Omicron variant on the hospitality sector during its crucial pre-Christmas period. The number of seated diners fell by 14 percentage points in the week ending 20 December to 88% of the level in the same period of 2019, before the start of the pandemic, according to the weekly digest of flash economic indicators from the Office for National Statistics (ONS). Using data from the online restaurant booking site OpenTable and other sources, the ONS said Britons were eating out less and working from home more in response to rising infection rates and the government’s plan B measures. Amid widespread reports of bookings being cancelled, the drop in the number of diners in the latest week was the sharpest since early September and the lowest level since restaurants reopened indoors in England, Scotland and Wales in May after last winter’s lockdown. It was also the first time the weekly comparison with 2019 has dropped below 100% since May. Here’s the full story: Last-minute Christmas shoppers are being warned that scam delivery text messages are on the increase, PA Media reports. With many people ordering online this Christmas, huge numbers of parcels are being expected by households in the coming days. UK Finance, a trade association representing banks and other financial firms, said just over half (55.94%) of all reported “smishing” text messages in the final three months of this year have claimed to be from parcel delivery firms. This has more than tripled since the same period in 2020, when 16.37% bogus texts were about parcels. UK Finance obtained the figures from cybersecurity company Proofpoint, which operates the 7726 text message system on behalf of mobile phone operators. The system allows customers to report suspect texts. The reports are being used by the National Cyber Security Centre to take down fraudulent website URLs and prevent further losses to scams. Fake texts often claim the courier has been unable to make a delivery and ask the recipient to pay a fee or provide additional details in order to rearrange delivery. There is then a link to a fake website asking for personal and financial information. UK Finance is also warning shoppers to look out for purchase scams. It said social media platforms and auction websites are increasingly being used by criminals to carry out these scams, in which a customer pays in advance for goods or services that are never received. Turkey’s lira has surged in value today, adding to big gains this week after the government announced a new lira savings scheme to encourage people to hold the national currency. The lira has jumped up to 14% this morning, to 10.2 against the US dollar, with Turkish government bonds also rallying hard. Before this week, the lira has shed over half its value during 2021, after a series of interest rate cuts had weakened the economy. But it all turned around this week after president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan announced savers would be compensated for exchange rate losses if they hold their money in lira. The unorthodox scheme was dubbed a stealth rate hike by analysts, and one which could threaten Turkey’s currency reserves and undermine the public finances. Refet Gurkaynak, a professor of economics at Ankara’s Bilkent University, described the new scheme as “in effect, a powerful interest rate hike”, the FT explains. He said that it could bring stability to the currency but warned that it could also have “dangerous consequences”. Interactive Investor’s Victoria Scholar warns that the lira will remain volatile while Turkey sticks to its policy cutting interest rates despite soaring inflation. The Turkish lira is surging once again against the US dollar by nearly 15%, extending gains to a rally of almost 40% this week alone. It has now retraced almost the entirety of its 60% slump seen since 17th November on its fourth consecutive day of significant gains, sparked by proposals from President Erdogan and Turkey’s central bank to stem its freefalling currency. However stability is yet to be restored with one-month implied volatility for the lira hitting record highs this week. The government wants to restore confidence in the lira and encourage its citizens to hold more domestic currency once again after many shifted their wealth into foreign currency and gold. However as long as President Erdogan decides to defy basic economic policy by sticking with ultra-low interest rates in the face of spiralling inflation, volatility for the lira shows no signs of abating amid the ongoing FX crisis. Currency market interventions by the Turkish central bank also supported the lira this week: Another blow to the UK manufacturing -- engine production has falls for sixth consecutive month. UK factories turned out 132,555 engines in November, down -30.2% on a year ago, the SMMT reports. It means engine production so far this year is 9.5% lower than in 2020, when the pandemic hit factories, and 36.3% below the five-year average. Mike Hawes, SMMT chief executive, says the drop underscores the severity of the current situation, alongside the drop in car production reported earlier. The global shortage of semiconductors continues to devastate production of both finished vehicles and engines, with knock-on effects into the supply chain threatening the viability of many companies. Hawes reiterates his concerns about the new customs checks coming in next month: With ongoing uncertainty over the likely impact of the pandemic and possible disruption to trade with the EU with the implementation of full border controls from 1 January, confidence is extremely low, so Government must undertake all actions to maintain both the viability and international competitiveness of this valuable sector.” Back in the markets, travel and leisure stocks are leading the gains across Europe on optimism that omicron will be milder than earlier Covid-19 strains An index tracking the sector is now higher for the year, Bloomberg reports: The Stoxx 600 Travel &amp; Leisure index added as much as 2.7% to reach a one-month high after researchers in Scotland found omicron was associated with a two-thirds lower risk of hospitalization compared to the delta variant. British Airways-owner IAG and Wizz Air Holdings Plc were among the best performers, rising more than 4%, while hotelier Accor SA tour operator TUI AG were also boosted. Here’s Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, on this morning’s UK economic indicators: Transactions at Pret a Manger have become a closely monitored fast indicator of UK economic activity as a gauge of the levels of workers commuting into city centres. They have fluctuated significantly during the pandemic with many office employees working from home to shield from Covid-19. Fears about the transmissibility of Omicron coupled with the festive holiday build up resulted in a sharp drop in Pret a Manger sales across six out of seven urban locations, hitting the lowest levels since before the pandemic in January 2020, according to the latest ONS data. The latest figures show that overall retail footfall was below normal levels at 81% of the pre-pandemic levels seen in the same week of 2019 with the South-West retaining the highest level of footfall. In restaurants, the level of UK seated diners in the run up to Christmas is above the same period last year, but has been falling as a percentage compared to the equivalent day in 2019. While urban hubs and shopping centres are undoubtedly quieter than normal, Covid hasn’t stopped us from spending either online or in the stores. Overall credit and debit card purchases are consistently higher than this time last year, with many families keen to enjoy an abundant Christmas together having missed out last year. Painkillers and frozen turkeys are in short supply at around a quarter of UK shops. The ONS reports that paracetamol, and frozen turkeys, were out of stock at 6% of stores surveyed between 17th and 20th December, and with low stocks at another 19% and 18% of shops respectively. Ibuprofen, chocolate selection boxes and fresh pork stocks were also in relatively low, along with multipack crisps where production problems at Walkers hit supplies recently. Seated diner numbers this Christmas are still higher than in 2020, despite falling in recent weeks. The ONS explains: The level of seated diners saw a strong recovery from the start of December 2020 as national restrictions were eased, while over the equivalent period in 2021 the level has remained above that of 2020. Despite this, the level of daily seated diners has continued to decline over recent weeks, with four days in the week to 20 December 2021 dipping below 80% of the level in the equivalent week of 2019 – the first time this has occurred since Sunday 16 May 2021, at 61%. Restaurants and pubs in the capital were hit particularly hard by the drop in people eating out. Seated diner numbers in London fell by 18 percentage points in the week to Monday, to just 57% of the level seen in the equivalent week of 2019, the ONS reports. That’s the lowest since 17 May 2021 when it was 43%, just before indoor dining resumed. In Manchester, seated diner numbers fell by 8 percentage points, the sixth weekly fall in a row, but was still 4% higher than in 2019. UK restaurants suffered a plunge in customers last week, as concerns over omicron led people to avoid restaurants and pubs and Christmas parties were cancelled. The number of UK seated diners tumbled by 14 percentage points in the week to Monday 20th December, to just 88% of the same week in 2019, the Office for National Statistics reports. That’s that lowest reading since the week ending 17 May 2021, when indoor dining resumed in the UK, down from 102% last week, according to weekly data from OpenTable published by the ONS. It shows the damage being suffered by hospitality firms, who normally rely on busy December trading to tide them through the quieter months. The ONS’s weekly economic indicators also show that transactions at Pret A Manger stores fell at six of the seven urban locations tracked, as the pandemic hit commuter and visitor numbers. In London City, where many employees are now working from home, stores transactions decreased 29 percentage points to the lowest level since the week ending 2 September 2021. That left them at just 52% of the level seen in January 2020. And footfall at UK shops dipped to just 81% of its pre-pandemic levels. Energy bills could rise as much as 50% in the spring as the UK faces a “national crisis” over soaring wholesale gas and electricity prices, the energy industry has warned. The trade body Energy UK has called on the government to intervene to help cut the cost of bills as soaring wholesale prices drive dozens of energy companies out of business. “Domestic energy prices are going to go up 45% to 50% in the spring,” warned Emma Pinchbeck, the chief executive of Energy UK, speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Thursday. “It is looking pretty serious for the spring. This is a system-wide issue now. We are asking for the Treasury in the UK to intervene as others have [in Europe],” Pinchbeck said. The pound has hit its highest level against the US dollar in a month. Sterling has gained 0.25% this morning to $1.339 for the first time since 23th November, two days before the UK placed six Southern African countries on its travel red list due to concerns over the B.1.1.529 variant (now called Omicron). Lee Hardman, currency analyst at MUFG Bank, says encouraging news over Omicron’s severity is encouraging risk taking, pulling money out of safe haven assets like the dollar. The recent improvement in global investor risk sentiment reflects less concern over the potential disruptive impact from the rapid spread of the new Omicron COVID variant on the outlook for global growth next year. A number of studies have been released in recent days analysing healthcare data from South Africa, Denmark and the UK that show that a lower share of people infected with Omicron are likely to require hospital treatment. Spain’s economy grew faster than thought over the summer, in a boost to the eurozone just as omicron slows its recovery. Spain’s economy grew 2.6% in the third quarter, faster than an 2% initial estimate, statistics body INE reports, due to higher-than-expected household consumption. Spain’s economy had been badly hit by the pandemic in 2020, with tourism slumping, so this suggests its economy gained momentum in July-September. UK car factories suffered their weakest November since 1984 last month, despite a surge in demand for battery electric vehicles. Industry body the SMMT reports that car production tumbled by -28.7% year-on-year in November to 75,756 units, the fifth monthly decline in a row as UK car makers continue to wrestle with the worldwide shortage of semiconductors. Production for domestic customers fell 18.8%, while cars for overseas markets slumped over 30%. The SMMT says: Exports accounted for more than 80% of all cars produced last month, reinforcing the need for smooth international trade, especially with the EU, as new customs controls with the bloc come into effect on 1 January 2022. Six-in-ten (60.3%) cars shipped overseas in November headed into Europe. Asia, meanwhile, took 15.6% of UK car exports, the US 13.4% and Australia 1.2%. British production of battery electric, plug-in hybrid and hybrid cars made up almost a third of production in November, which is a record, with battery electric vehicle output jumping nearly 53% year-on-year. Mike Hawes, SMMT chief executive, warned that car makers could suffer from delays at borders next year when full custom checks between Great Britain and the EU come in: “These are incredibly worrying figures, underscoring the severity of situation facing the automotive industry. Covid is impacting supply chains massively, causing global shortages - especially of semiconductors - which is likely to affect the sector throughout next year. With an increasingly negative economic backdrop, rising inflation and Covid resurgent home and abroad, the circumstances are the toughest in decades. With output massively down for the past five months and likely to continue, maintaining cashflow, especially in the supply chain, is of vital importance. We have to look to government to provide support measures in the same way it is recognising other Covid-impacted sectors. “The industry is as well prepared as it can be for the implementation of full customs controls at UK borders from 1 January but any delays arising from ill-prepared freight or systems will place further stress on businesses that operate ‘just in time’. Should any problems arise, contingency measures must be implemented immediately to keep cross border trade flowing smoothly.” Shares in betting group Flutter have jumped 2.6% this morning, after it announced it’s buying Italian online gaming operator Sisal for €1.9bn. The acquisition will give Flutter a bigger foothold in the Italian market. But it could also potentially lead to Flutter, which owns Paddy Power and Betfair, running the UK National Lottery. Sisal is bidding to win the UK’s lucrative National Lottery contract, when Camelot’s license expires in 2023, and formed a strategic partnership with telecoms firm BT earlier this year to bolster its bid. Travel and hospitality companies are leading the risers on the London stock market, as omicron fears fade. British Airways owner IAG has gained 3.2%, with budget airlines easyJet (+3.6%) and Wizz Air (+3.5%) also rallying, with investors cheered by those two research studies suggesting Omicron’s hospitalisation risk was lower than Delta. Engineering groups Rolls-Royce and Melrose, whose aerospace divisions have both been hit by the pandemic, are up 1.6%. Hotel operators Whitbread (+1.8%) and InterContinental Hotels (+1.5%) are also higher, along with pub chains Mitchells &amp; Butler (+3.9%) and JD Wetherspoon (+3.3%) and retail property group Hammerson (+1.9%). European stock markets have opened higher, with Germany’s DAX, France’s CAC and Spain’s IBEX all gaining 0.3%, and the UK’s FTSE 100 up 0.15%. Jeffrey Halley, senior market analyst at OANDA, says the encouraging news about Omicron hospitalisations has lifted the markets, along with better-than-expected US growth data yesterday: A cocktail containing better US Q3 GDP data, along with positive omicron headlines further inoculated financial markets against a year-end sell-off overnight. Mostly, it was Scottish and Imperial College London’s studies that back up preliminary South African data, suggesting that omicron is far more contagious than delta, but much less likely to put you in hospital. Nurses, care home staff and police officers working on Christmas Day will be thousands of pounds worse off than they were a decade ago as a result of wages failing to keep pace with prices, Trades Union Congress analysis has shown. Urging the government to raise the minimum wage to £10 an hour, the TUC said the key workers expected to keep Britain going on 25 December had taken real pay cuts since 2010. Police sergeants and constables have had the biggest reduction, with inflation-adjusted pay £5,595 a year lower than a decade ago. Nurses have had an effective wage cut of £2,715 and local authority care workers a cut of £1,661, the report found. A chef would be earning £1,050 more a year this Christmas had pay kept pace with price rises, while a waiter would be £859 better off, the TUC said. More here: Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Economic growth across the UK has slowed to its weakest point since last spring’s lockdowns, as the omicron variant of Covid-19 hits confidence. The CBI’s latest survey of private sector growth, released this morning, shows that growth in the three months to December dipped to its lowest since April. Its index of private sector growth fell to +21% vs +32% last month, with business and professional services, consumer services and distribution firms all reported slower growth. The slowdown coincided with the discovery of Omicron, and the introduction of measures to slow its spread which have hit hospitality and retailers hard. And looking ahead, growth is expected to keep slowing, with consumer services firms expecting activity to decline in the next three months. That would drag on the economy, which is still 1.5% below its pre-pandemic levels, and was already slowing over the summer before Omicron hit: Alpesh Paleja, CBI Lead Economist, says the UK’s growth outlook has deteriorated - and struggling firms may need more help. “Substantial challenges remain for businesses heading into Christmas: labour and materials shortages, rising costs and new Covid measures are restricting business’ ability to trade during this crucial period. “With uncertainty rising – associated with the sharp rise in Omicron cases – it’s no surprise that the near-term growth outlook has dampened. The new support measures announced by the Chancellor provided welcome breathing space to boost confidence and will help hospitality and leisure businesses to keep their doors open. “But with the potential of further measures still weighing on firms, the Government must monitor the situation closely and ensure that any new restrictions go in lock-step with further targeted cashflow support to those struggling firms.” Yesterday, Ryanair more than doubled its annual loss forecast and cut its January traffic capacity by 33%, warning that the latest travel restrictions have hit takings. But investors are hopeful that this latest variant may be less virulent than feared, after two studies indicated that people with Omicron are less likely to be hospitalised than those with the Delta variant. In what was described by scientists as a “qualified good news story”, two studies on Wednesday pointed to a lower risk of hospitalisation with Omicron. A UK study showed that Omicron has a 20%-25% reduced chance of a hospital visit and at least a 40% lower risk of being admitted overnight. A separate, preliminary analysis of Omicron cases in Scotland concluded that the risk of hospitalisation may be 70% lower with Omicron than Delta. Shares have rallied in Asia-Pacific markets today, following gains on Wall Street and in Europe last night. Japan’s Nikkei has jumped 0.8%, while China’s CSI 300 is 0.6% higher, and South Korea’s Kospi has gained 0.5%. European markets are set to open higher too. Europe’s energy crisis is deepening too, with suppliers warning that “stratospheric” wholesale gas and power prices threaten a “national crisis” in Britain (more on that shortly). The agenda 9am GMT: Italian business confidence for December 9.30am GMT: Economic activity and social change in the UK, real-time indicators 1.30pm GMT: US weekly jobless claims 1.30pm GMT: US Personal Consumption Expenditure index of price rises in November 3pm GMT: University of Michigan survey of US consumer confidenceA hardship charity once chaired by Charles Dickens says shop workers are seeking its help due to the financial pain caused by the end of the universal credit uplift, fewer hours and the absence of sick pay. The Fashion and Textile Children’s Trust (FTCT) steps in to assist children whose parents work in the fashion industry but are struggling to make ends meet. Anna Pangbourne, the charity’s chief executive, said the drop in visitors to stores and shopping centres this Christmas and speculation about new Covid restrictions were causing fresh anxiety about job security. The withdrawal of the £20-a-week universal credit top-up, which was introduced after the first lockdown, had been a shock for families, some of whom had got into debt during the pandemic said Pangbourne. “The effects of the initial lockdown are going to be felt for a long time,” she said. “We are continuing to reach out to industry families who don’t have the safety net of sick pay or savings.” In 2021 the charity received nearly 2,500 applications for grants, after a record 3,516 inquiries in 2020 when the high street was rocked by the failure of big employers Debenhams and Sir Philip Green’s Arcadia and the first wave of pandemic store closures. Families told the charity that the cut to universal credit had been felt keenly because most had started claiming it when the uplift was in place. Others said they had not received sick pay when off isolating or their children were ill or quarantining. This week, as part of a £1bn package of emergency financial support for hospitality and leisure businesses, the government reopened the statutory sick pay rebate scheme, which refunds companies with up to 250 employees for payment to staff. The rapid spread of the Omicron variant has led the union Usdaw to call on the government to review sick pay provisions. Staff who qualify for statutory sick pay receive £96.35 a week, but the retail workers’ union wants the payment to be based on normal earnings. The FTCT said the end of the furlough job support scheme meant people had returned to work but were often receiving fewer hours, and the accompanying reduction in pay was affecting their ability to pay bills and replace broken household appliances at a time when the cost of living is soaring. The charity, which was founded in 1853 by a group of philanthropic textile merchants to support the bereaved family of a colleague, helped 713 families in its last financial year. Its average grant is about £500, which Pangbourne said was used to provide children with “hot meals, comfy beds and warm clothes”. The work of the charity, originally called the Purley Children’s Trust, attracted the attention of Charles Dickens who chaired its appeal board from 1856 to 1857.Evidence that infections caused by Omicron may be less severe than other Covid variants is good news but is likely to make little or no difference to the duration of the pandemic, according to experts. Several pieces of research published this week suggest that people infected with Omicron are much less likely to require hospitalisation. Those with the variant are estimated to be between 31% and 45% less likely to attend A&amp;E compared with the Delta variant, and 50% to 70% less likely to be require admission to hospital, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said on Thursday. Separately, researchers at the University of Edinburgh studied infections from the Delta and Omicron variants since November and said the results “suggest that Omicron is associated with a two-thirds reduction in the risk of Covid-19 hospitalisation when compared with Delta”. But experts warned that the results suggested no change in the level of infection. In the UK, the huge surge in cases – with another 119,789 new infections reported on Thursday – means that even if only a small proportion of people with Covid need to attend hospital, it could cause difficulties for the NHS. Mark Woolhouse, a professor at the University of Edinburgh and one of the co-authors of the Scotland study, said the weight of new research meant that projections would be less pessimistic, although Omicron’s rapid spread meant there were still dangers ahead. “It’s good but it doesn’t get us out of the woods. Severity of infection is clearly very important but it is only one factor in terms of the public health burden,” Woolhouse said, speaking in a personal capacity. “The other thing is the sheer size of the wave. The simple way of looking at that, according to our data in Scotland, is an Omicron infection is about one-third as severe or likely to put you in hospital as a Delta infection. But if there are three times as many cases, then we are back where we started. “We should still be worried about the sheer size of the wave, the very fast growth rates, very fast doubling time. These peak numbers of cases that we have seen in the UK are still climbing, so it is the size of that wave that is worrying people most at the moment.” Dr Raghib Ali, a senior clinical research associate at the University of Cambridge, told Reuters that the hospital data was encouraging and “may help justify the government’s decision not to expand restrictions on social gathering over Christmas in England”. Another scientist, who did not want to be named because of involvement in ongoing research, said Omicron infections were going to be “hugely disruptive” because of the numbers needing to self-isolate “There’s a tremendous impact on the NHS because of the workforce getting infections,” they said. “But obviously it’s good news if a smaller fraction of those infections lead to severe illness.” Separate research published by scientists at Imperial College London found a reduction in hospital visits between Omicron and Delta cases, and estimated that those infected with Omicron were 40%-45% less likely to be hospitalised overnight than those with Delta. But the study also suggested that two doses of a Covid vaccine were not enough to combat Omicron alone. Prof Neil Ferguson, one of the co-authors of the Imperial study, said: “Given the high transmissibility of the Omicron virus, there remains the potential for health services to face increasing demand if Omicron cases continue to grow at the rate that has been seen in recent weeks.” Woolhouse said there remained substantial gaps in scientists’ knowledge of Omicron, such as how the UK’s booster campaign would affect the spread of infection. “Particularly, whether [boosters] not only stop people getting ill but also stop them getting infected and passing the infection on. That would also be very helpful – at the moment we don’t know that it has much impact on the spread of these cases,” Woolhouse said. “If it did have an impact on the spread of cases that would be further good news, and that would affect the size of the wave and therefore the public health burden.”Joan Didion, the eminent journalist, author and anthropologist of contemporary American politics and culture – a singularly clear, precise voice across a multitude of subjects for more than 60 years – has died at her home in Manhattan, New York. She was 87. The cause of death was from complications to Parkinson’s disease, according to Paul Bogaards, an executive at Didion’s publisher Knopf. Known for her pioneering blend of the personal and the political in her journalism and essays, Didion became a household name with her writing on US society. As a standout female figure in the male-dominated “new journalism” movement alongside Tom Wolfe, Truman Capote and Gay Talese, Didion cast her precise, coolly detached eye over both American society and her own life in writing that was collected in books including Slouching Towards Bethlehem, her journey through the promise and dissolution of California’s 60s counterculture, and The White Album, which began in typically economic style, with: “We tell ourselves stories in order to live.” “We have kind of evolved into a society where grieving is totally hidden. It doesn’t take place in our family. It takes place not at all,” she told the Associated Press in 2005 after publishing The Year of Magical Thinking, an account of losing her husband John Gregory Dunne. Didion spent her later years in New York, but she was shaped by her native state of California, which she called “a hologram that dematerialises as I drive through it”. “A place,” she once wrote, “belongs for ever to whoever claims it hardest, remembers it most obsessively, wrenches it from itself, shapes it, renders it, loves it so radically that he remakes it in his own image.” Famous for her detached, sometimes elegiac tone, Didion returned to the themes of alienation and isolation throughout her career, whether she was exploring her own grief after the death of Dunne in the Pulitzer-finalist The Year of Magical Thinking, the emptiness of Hollywood life in the novel Play It As It Lays, or expats caught up in Central American politics in her novel A Book of Common Prayer. She was highly protective of her work, never telling even close friends the subject of her writing until it was ready to publish. “Nobody writes better English prose than Joan Didion,” literary critic John Leonard wrote. “Try to rearrange one of her sentences, and you’ve realised that the sentence was inevitable, a hologram.” On her most recent collection of selected essays, Let Me Tell You What I Mean, the Guardian’s reviewer wrote: “Didion has established a way of narration that focuses not so much on events as on subtexts, atmospheres and perceptions. She is usually present in her essays as a voice rather than a character, observer rather than participant – though the boundaries regularly blur.” After her death was announced, tributes poured in from across the spectrum of politics and literature. California governor Gavin Newsom said Didion was “peerless in her capacity to write about life, loss, love and society – easily the best writer in California. Her ability to put the tapestry of California and the times into words made her a treasure for her generation and generations to come.” Author Susan Orlean called Didion “my idol and inspiration”. “Didion was one of the country’s most trenchant writers and astute observers,” Penguin Random House and its imprint Knopf said in a statement. Shelley Wanger, Didion’s editor at Knopf since the early 90s, told the Guardian the author was masterful and fearless. “She always seemed able to hear and see what other journalists missed and her range was broad, from California, rock ’n’ roll, to US culture and politics, Central America to memoir. Her writing is timelessly original, prescient and unexpected.” Born in Sacramento in 1934, Didion spent her early childhood out of school, with her father’s job in the Army Air Corps taking the family all over the country. Didion was a a “nervous” child with a tendency to headaches but began her path early, starting her first notebook when she was five. In a 2003 interview with the Guardian, she recalled an incident when she was 10: while writing a story about a woman who killed herself by walking into the ocean, she “wanted to know what it would feel like, so I could describe it” and almost drowned on a California beach. She never told her parents. (“I think the adults were playing cards.”) In 1956, after majoring in English literature at the University of California, Berkeley, she won Vogue’s writing contest aged 21, which led to a seven-year stint working at the magazine’s offices in New York. There she met Dunne – they would marry when she was 29 – and between New York and Los Angeles, she began to mix with many famous contemporaries who would become friends, colleagues and rivals: Sylvia Plath, Roman Polanski, Janis Joplin (who crashed a house party), Christopher Isherwood (who called her “Mrs Misery” in his diaries), Warren Beatty and Natalie Wood (who shared her clothes with Didion). In 1963, her first book was published: the novel Run, River. In 1966, Didion and Dunne relocated to Los Angeles and adopted a baby girl, Quintana Roo, named after the Mexican state. Her first collection of essays, Slouching Towards Bethlehem, was published in 1968: with its title essay about Haight-Ashbury’s hippy community, the collection established Didion’s voice as exceptional. Reviewing it for the New York Times, Dan Wakefield called Didion “one of the least celebrated and most talented writers of my own generation”. Didion followed it up with her novel about life in Hollywood, Play It As It Lays, which she later adapted into a screenplay with Dunne; the couple often worked together on screenplays, including the 1976 film A Star Is Born. A smattering of fiction would follow over the next two decades – A Book of Common Prayer (1977), Democracy (1984) and The Last Thing He Wanted (1996) – but non-fiction dominated. Her second essay collection, The White Album (1979), contained her most famous line: “We tell ourselves stories in order to live.” In 1983, came Salvador, a book-length essay about a trip she took to El Salvador with Dunne; Miami (1987), about the city’s Cuban expat community; After Henry (1992), a collection dedicated to Didion’s editor Henry Robbins; and Political Fictions (2001), which spanned the elections of US presidents George HW Bush, Bill Clinton and George W Bush. Over decades, the diminutive Didion built her own mythology; more than one interviewer noted her quietness and frail frame with surprise. Her elegant style and interest in fashion, fostered at Vogue, also saw her revered as a symbol of cool; at the age of 80, she became the face of French fashion house Céline. From the 80s onwards, Didion focused on politics, coining the term “the permanent political class” to describe the fraternity of media, politicians and strategists that shape the self-image of the US. After Clinton’s impeachment, she wrote: “No one who ever passed through an American high school could have watched William Jefferson Clinton running for office in 1992 and failed to recognise the familiar predatory sexuality of the provincial adolescent.” Among Washington journalists, she wrote, “what ‘fairness’ has often come to mean is a scrupulous passivity, an agreement to cover the story not as it is occurring but as it is presented, which is to say as it is manufactured.” When Dunne died of a heart attack in 2003, Didion began writing The Year of Magical Thinking, an exploration of her grief at his death while their daughter, Quintana, was severely ill in hospital. Unsparingly documenting Didion’s habits of mind, such as keeping Dunne’s shoes for when he “came back”, the book won her a Pulitzer prize. Months after it came out in 2005, Quintana died from acute pancreatitis, aged 39, which Didion would write about in her 2011 reflection on ageing and parenting, Blue Nights. When she was presented with her National Medal of Arts and the National Humanities medal in 2012, Barack Obama told guests: “I’m surprised she hasn’t already gotten this award.” In her later years, Didion wrote less. Her most recent project was as the subject of Joan Didion: The Center Will Not Hold, a 2018 Netflix documentary made by her nephew, Griffin Dunne. Her final book of original material, South and West, was a collection of her notes while travelling around Mississippi, Alabama and Louisiana in the 1970s. When it was released in 2017, it was marketed as a take on Donald Trump’s voter base. Talking to the Guardian, Didion said: “I suppose the crisis in American politics was behind everything I was thinking, whether or not I knew I was thinking it. These things have a way of creeping in. I think we are living through the scariest of times.” • This article was amended on 24 December 2021. An earlier version said that The Year of Magical Thinking had won a Pulitzer prize. Regarding South and West: this was Joan Didion’s last book of original material; the subsequent Let Me Tell You What I Mean comprised reprints of articles. It was further amended on 29 December 2021 to clarify that Didion’s publisher gave the cause of death as due to complications from Parkinson’s disease.The Brooklyn Nets have enough players to fly to Los Angeles and play their Christmas showdown against the Lakers, though Kevin Durant might not be among them. Coach Steve Nash said Thursday that James Harden has cleared the NBA’s health and safety protocols, but he said the Nets don’t expect any of their players still in the protocols to come out in time for the game. That would include Durant, the NBA’s leading scorer. Brooklyn planning to play on Saturday is an obvious positive sign, as was Chicago coach Billy Donovan announcing after practice Thursday that the Bulls no longer have any players on the protocols list. The Bulls had as many as 10 on that list last week, when the league postponed two of their games as a result. The Nets have had their last three scheduled games postponed – among the NBA’s nine postponements thus far – when a coronavirus outbreak left them with a league-high 10 players in protocols. Nash said Harden, Paul Millsap and Jevon Carter had also cleared protocols, though rookies Cam Thomas, Kessler Edwards and David Duke Jr had since entered. Teams need a minimum of eight players to start a game. Nash said the Nets have more than enough to do that. But it’s unclear if they will have another practice before the game Saturday. Nash said it’s only in the last day that healthy players have been able to return to the practice facility for individual workouts. “It’s tricky,” Nash said. “We haven’t been able to do a lot, but we do what we can and we’ll continue to just adapt as the rules and mandates come in.” By late Thursday afternoon, based on team injury reports or similar disclosures, there were more than 90 NBA players dealing with a virus-related issue — often a positive test, though not always. The list included stars such as Giannis Antetokounmpo, Luka Doncic and Trae Young. All three are scheduled to be part of the NBA’s five-game holiday schedule. Later Thursday, the Washington Wizards announced star Bradley Beal would miss that night’s game at the New York Knicks because of health and safety protocols. Beal, who missed out on the chance to play in the Olympics last year after testing positive, said before this season he was unvaccinated. The Detroit Pistons said on Thursday evening they had added four players to the protocols, where they joined rookie Cade Cunningham, the team’s leading scorer. It is important to note that players can enter and exit the health and safety protocols list quickly in some cases, some teams do not release updated numbers except when mandated by league rule, and not everyone on the list has tested positive for Covid-19. Also important: NBA commissioner Adam Silver said earlier this week in an interview with ESPN that positive-testing players who have received booster shots tend to show, at worst, very mild symptoms. The league says 97% of players are fully vaccinated; the National Basketball Players Association says 65% are boosted, and it is a top priority of the union right now to get that number much higher. Meanwhile, a person with direct knowledge of the matter said the NBA and the NBPA are continuing discussions on whether to change the current protocols about returning to play after a positive test – something that typically has taken 10 days or more in most cases. The person spoke to the Associated Press on condition of anonymity because nothing had been finalized. Durant was placed in protocols last Saturday along with Kyrie Irving, a day after the Nets said they were bringing the point guard back to play in road games. There’s still time for him to return two negative tests 24 hours apart to be cleared, though Nash said the Nets weren’t expecting that. With the Lakers’ Anthony Davis already sidelined with a sprained left knee, Durant’s absence would remove another superstar from what was expected to be one of the marquee games of the regular season when it was scheduled. The Nets have the best record in the Eastern Conference, but Nash said it’s going to be difficult to pick up where they left off after not playing for a week. “We’re one of the few teams around that league that’s had a pause, so to jump back into the rhythm of the league is a difficult task,” he said. “But we have to approach it with excitement and opportunity, and also not put too much pressure on ourselves to re-enter.” Along with Durant, starters LaMarcus Aldridge and DeAndre’ Bembry remain in the protocols, along with Bruce Brown, James Johnson and rookie Day’Ron Sharpe. Nash said all of the players were experiencing nothing more than mild symptoms. Teams are being allowed to sign players to replace those sidelined by positive tests, and at least 40 such hardship contracts – which won’t count against a team’s salary cap or luxury tax numbers – have been executed in the last few days. Some of the players are relative unknowns or new to the league; others, like Boston’s Joe Johnson, Atlanta’s Lance Stephenson and the Lakers’ Isaiah Thomas, have largely been out of the league for years. The 40-year-old Johnson played on Wednesday, his first NBA game since 2018. Stephenson also debuted for the Hawks on Wednesday, his first NBA game since 2019.Pep Guardiola has suggested players should consider going on strike to demand a reduction in their workload, as player welfare moved to the heart of the debate over the Premier League’s Covid crisis. With a number of top-flight matches postponed and league officials meeting with club captains and managers to discuss their concerns, temperatures continued to rise even as the various parties agreed to muddle on with the traditional festive programme. Guardiola took the most provocative line, suggesting direct action may be required before the game’s authorities heeded concerns over demands placed on players. “Should the players and the managers be all together and make a strike?” Manchester City’s manager said. “Just through words it’s not going to be solved. For Fifa, the Premier League, the broadcasters, the business is more important than their welfare. The simplest example is all around the world they have five substitutions; here it’s still three. Tell me one argument to take care of players’ welfare than this one? Here, where everyone decides for themselves, we didn’t do it.” Guardiola’s words were picked up by the chief executive of the Professional Footballers’ Association, Maheta Molango, who demanded that authorities take the concerns of elite players more seriously. “I’ve spoken with many senior players on this issue,” he said. “I can tell you that it isn’t going away. Players don’t choose to speak out on issues like this without having given it a lot of thought. Now it’s up to those who run the game at all levels to begin to take this seriously so it’s an issue that can be addressed constructively with players at the heart of the conversation. That has to happen now. ” Top-flight players are understood to feel aggrieved with the Premier League over a lack of direct communication. Regular meetings held with club captains during Project Restart have not continued and this week’s meeting had been postponed from Monday until Thursday. There are also concerns a new player welfare department within the league has not been proactive enough. The rescheduled meeting ended with captains and the league agreeing to engage in more frequent dialogue. This week the Liverpool captain, Jordan Henderson, told the BBC that “nobody really takes player welfare seriously”. Among elite players there is concern not only over playing a condensed fixture list during a Covid outbreak but also over upcoming changes to the professional calendar that will mean an expanded Champions League and potentially a World Cup every two years. Three Boxing Day games – Burnley v Everton, Liverpool v Leeds and Wolves v Watford – have beenpostponed because of Covid outbreaks. Henderson’s concern was echoed by Rafael Benítez. The Premier League rejected the original request to postpone Everton’s Boxing Day game at Burnley despite five positive Covid cases and six injuries in Benítez’s squad, although agreed to call it off on Friday. Despite airing the possibility of a strike, Guardiola does not believe there is appetite for one. “No I don’t think so, because we want to play, we want to continue,” he said. Although the Premier League has been the object of much of the criticism from managers over scheduling, it was the clubs who voted to reintroduce the three substitutes rule, making the league Europe’s only top-flight competition not to take advantage of relaxed rules. Clubs voted against the measures twice but they can be put back on the agenda by a club at a shareholders’ meeting. One suggestion for clearing space in the calendar was staging one-leg semi-finals in the Carabao Cup. After progressing to the final four on Wednesday, Liverpool’s Jürgen Klopp and Tottenham’s Antonio Conte suggested that home and away ties for the semis should be scrapped, but this proposal is unlikely to be considered by the competition organisers, the EFL, because it would cost an estimated £20m in lost revenue from sponsorship and broadcast rebates. Manchester United’s interim manager, Ralf Rangnick, went further on Thursday, suggesting that the League Cup could be abolished to ease the congested schedule. “England is the only country in the top five leagues in Europe that plays two cup competitions,” he said. “This is something we could maybe speak about and discuss. I know the reason for that: the League Cup is kept for the third and fourth division teams to improve the financial situations of those clubs. But I still think if we talk about a tight calendar, maybe having to play too many games, this could be something where we speak and discuss.” Rangnick also acknowledged, however, that he was looking forward to being in charge at Old Trafford during the Christmas period. “You know better than I do what a big tradition it is to play on Boxing Day and the 27th,” Rangnick said before a game at Newcastle scheduled for 27 December. “I think we should stick to this and respect this tradition. I’m looking forward to that for the first time in my coaching career.”More than 800 faith leaders have called on the Biden administration and Senate Democrats to pass voting rights legislation next year. “We cannot be clearer, you must act now to protect every American’s freedom to vote without interference and with confidence that their ballot will be counted and honored. Passing comprehensive voting rights legislation must be the number-one priority of the administration and Congress,” faith leaders said in a letter addressed to the president and Senate members on Wednesday. The letter, organized by Martin Luther King III and his wife, Arndrea Waters King, was signed by various faith organizations, including the African American Christian Clergy Coalition, Bend the Arc: Jewish Action and Faith in Public Life. Signatories include those who come from Muslim, Christian and Jewish communities, including Reverend Canon Leonard L Hamlin Sr of the Washington National Cathedral and Rabbi Danya Ruttenberg of National Council of Jewish Women. “The communities we represent will continue to sound the alarm until these bills are passed. While we come from different faiths, we are united by our commitment to act in solidarity with the most vulnerable among us,” the letter added. The letter comes after Republicans successfully filibustered voting rights bills on four different occasions this year. Most recently, on 3 November, Republicans in the Senate blocked the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Acts – one of two major pieces of voting rights legislation that Democrats have championed in Congress in attempts to prevent Republicans from eroding easy access to the vote. Republicans blocking the key voting rights bill in November was a move seen by many as a breaking point in the push to eliminate the filibuster, the Senate rule that requires 60 votes to advance most legislation. Despite numerous Democrats calling for the elimination of the filibuster, they lack the votes to end the rule due to not only a slim majority but also opposition within their own party. Two Democrats, Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, are strongly opposed, arguing that the rule forges bipartisan compromise. Chuck Schumer, the Senate majority leader, described the filibuster on 3 November as a “low, low point in the history of this body”. In Wednesday’s letter, faith leaders said, “Nothing – including the filibuster – should stand in the way of passing the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act, both of which have already passed the House and await Senate action and leadership.” According to a tally by the Brennan Center for Justice, nineteen states have enacted nearly three dozen laws between January and the end of September that make it more difficult to vote. Wednesday’s letter is a reflection of the growing pressure on Democrats to pass voting rights legislation that aims to outlaw excessive partisan gerrymandering and would require early voting, no-excuse mail-in voting, in addition to automatic and same-day registration. “It’s time to stop lamenting the state of our democracy and take action to address it,” the letter said.Vladimir Putin has deployed his troops to the border with Ukraine, delivered impossible demands on Europe and appears ready to launch a new offensive to establish his domination over Kyiv. Putin is said to feel a “historical mission” to reverse Ukraine’s drift towards the west, despite his own role in creating a rift by annexing Crimea and fuelling a war in Ukraine’s south-east. But his current fast pace raises questions of why he appears to feel the moment to act is now, as if he is running out of time. From Putin’s perspective, he may look to recent events in Ukraine and believe it’s all downhill from here. His attempt to force Ukraine to reintegrate the eastern Donbas region, a poison pill that could give him a veto over the country’s geopolitical path, has failed as the Minsk agreements that would have steered it come close to collapse. His proxies may control a sliver of Ukraine’s south-east but the rest of the country has drifted further from his control. At the same time, Putin is alarmed by growing military cooperation between Ukraine and the west, including military assistance and prospective arms sales from the UK, joint military drills with Nato countries, deliveries of US Javelin anti-tank missiles, and purchases of Turkish drones. He argues that the country is de facto becoming an “unofficial” member of Nato, an “anti-Russia” that he claims could one day host western troops or even missiles. “They came to the conclusion that trends weren’t heading in their direction, that they were heading toward geopolitical defeat,” said Samuel Charap, a senior political scientist at the Rand Corporation. The Kremlin’s early plan of “waiting it out”, for Ukrainians to lose patience with their new government and for the west to lose interest in Ukraine, was no longer viable. The Kremlin “decided that the status quo was intolerable and it needed to be changed”. To do that, Putin has said he is open to negotiations and has demanded a new treaty with Nato to roll back its expansion by removing troops and infrastructure from countries that joined after 1997, a non-starter in much of eastern Europe. At the same time, Putin has made it clear he is impatient to obtain his “security guarantees” immediately and has treated his potential negotiating partners with open disdain. Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the president of Ukraine, who ran for office on a peace platform, has come “under the influence of radical elements,” Putin said on Thursday. Negotiations with his government have basically ceased. Last month Russian diplomats leaked their communications with their French and German counterparts, essentially scuttling chances for further negotiations with European powers. That leaves Joe Biden, a politician whom Putin may grant more respect but has made clear he does not trust. Even his promises, Putin says, may as well be written in sand. “You and I know well that even they, legal guarantees, cannot be trusted because the United States easily withdraws from all international agreements it loses interest in for one reason or another while explaining it somehow or giving no explanations whatsoever,” he told his top commanders on Tuesday. That leaves Putin the option of military force, a contingency that he appears ready to use. The Russian president appears consumed with the Ukraine question – this summer he published a 6,000-word essay on the topic under his own name – and Russian analysts have proposed that solving his dilemma could determine his own timeline as Russia’s leader. “It appears that what he manages to achieve in Ukraine will be the deciding factor in whether or not Putin stays on after 2024,” wrote Alexander Baunov, a senior fellow at the Carnegie Moscow Center, this month. While it is difficult to imagine Putin stepping down after 24 years in power, it is also possible that his desire to regain Ukraine as a “brotherly” nation could be one factor compelling him to stay on into the future. “If victory hasn’t yet been achieved, perhaps it’s not the time to step down,” wrote Baunov.David Gerrard bemoans the appalling fare laid on by the BBC for Christmas Day (Letters, 19 December). Might I humbly suggest the antidote: Curb Your Enthusiasm series 11. Tracey Ullman as Irma Kostroski is off-the-scale funny – Larry David is the king of comedy. Max Bell Thame, Oxfordshire • Despite a very difficult year, the delivery of the Guardian to my home every day has kept my spirits up no end. Thank you to all your staff for continuing to inform and amuse your readers during the pandemic. Matthew Ryder Buckden, Cambridgeshire • In the same hymn where the unfortunate Painsy appears (Letters, 17 December), for many years as a little boy I wondered why a green hill would require a city wall anyway. Christophe Pritchard Wakefield, West Yorkshire • As a child, I thought the three wise men in the Christmas carol were called Off, Orry and Tarr. John Couper Budleigh Salterton, Devon • Being ancient, we shall be hibernating over Christmas, as we decided with the family that it is too dangerous for everyone to meet. So we’re going to make marmalade. Christina Naylor St Andrews, Fife • I don’t think I’m ready to risk my life to keep the tills ringing in Wetherspoons, and if rebellious backbench Tory MPs wish to, it’s just Darwinism in action. Happy Christmas! Dr Richard Miller Addlestone, Surrey • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.As a dermatologist I am delighted to hear that Beano’s Spotty is now to be known as Scotty (Cripes!Spotty becomes Scotty as the Beano reflects modern thought, 19 December). Probably Jacob Rees-Mogg will find this “comically woke”, as he did when Beano’s Fatty was renamed Freddy. But this is serious progress. Trivialising skin conditions with nicknames and representing villains as those with skin conditions legitimises the stigmatisation of those suffering, adding to the impact on young people’s mental health. I am all for exposure and normalisation of skin conditions in all forms of media, so I am really glad that characters like Scotty are in the Beano. Even more important is that we are now moving away from defining people by their appearance. Well done the Beano for moving with the body-positivity times. And maybe Jacob would be a nicer man if he had grown up with more “comically woke” comics? Dr Tess McPherson Consultant dermatologist, Oxford • The editors of the Beano are in danger of jumping out of the frying pan into the fire with the renaming of Spotty as Scotty, if Scotty retains his appearance. All Scots will have to deny they are prone to plooks; swearing that we don’t all eat deep fried Mars bars is a burden enough. Margaret Squires St Andrews, Fife • It’s good to see that the Beano is finally moving with the times. Fatty is now Freddy and Spotty has just become Scotty. But what of poor Plug? With his large overbite, protruding ears and two buck teeth, his sobriquet is clearly a reference to “plug ugly”. The fact that his full name is Percival Proudfoot Plugsley is surely no justification for this terrible case of face-shaming. Alan Woodley Northampton • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.At my grammar school in the 1960s, girls took domestic science while boys studied civics/local history (Letters, 17 December). DS lessons began with the making and embroidering of a gingham apron; for the practical lessons, we were bussed to the kitchens of a secondary modern school 15 miles away as our grammar school did not have a DS “laboratory”. The boys used to eat our lemon meringue pies on the bus during the return journey to school. One report of mine read: “Her results are fair but she shows little enthusiasm for washing up and cleaning sinks.” I failed to earn my washing-up badge at Brownies, not surprisingly. At university in the late 60s (where I studied politics/sociology), a frequent chat-up line from male students (who had had no DS lessons) was “show me how to boil an egg/fry bacon”. In my first job in the 70s as a teacher of politics and sociology at a comprehensive, there was a “school flat” with a kitchen. The girls had to clean and serve a weekly meal to the headteacher and staff. One male colleague regularly slept in the flat as he lived miles away from the school – he was often spotted by amused students having breakfast in a nearby cafe. I recall seeing a question on a GCE exam paper at the time that clearly saw DS as a female activity: “Your brother arrives home late after a school football match. Describe how you would wash, launder and iron his PE kit ready for the next day, taking into account that some items were muddy and torn.” By the 90s, when my sons were in secondary education, “food technology” had replaced cookery and domestic science and, thanks to equality legislation, all students studied the subject. Instead of washing up, students had to produce a design folder showing every stage involved in making a pizza. My sons probably learned more from Ready Steady Cook on TV than from these lessons, but they are both excellent cooks today (they can wash up as well). Stephanie Garrett Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Dorothy Wordsworth’s rare achievement as the other great writer in the Wordsworth family and an early environmentalist (Editorial, 19 December) is the focus of a year-long celebration of her life in the town where she was born on Christmas Day 250 years ago – Cockermouth in Cumbria. The centrepiece of the project, supported by our local councils, the National Lottery Heritage Fund and others, is a unique Portrait of Dorothy light installation artwork that this year is part of the town’s much loved Christmas lights. Commissioned by the local charity that I chair, Kirkgate Arts and Heritage, from the Cumbrian arts practice ArtFly, the “statue in light” stands on a temporary plinth woven from Cumbrian willow and hazel. Our town is not only known for its associations with Dorothy’s brother William but also with the scientist John Dalton, the mutineer Fletcher Christian and a colonial viceroy of India, Lord Mayo, whose huge statue has dominated our Main Street since 1875 following his assassination. Standing alongside Mayo, albeit more modestly and temporarily, Dorothy’s portrait is a reminder of her talent and her values, which resonate so strongly in our own times. She remains an inspiration for overlooked women everywhere. Marion Bowman Chair, Kirkgate Arts and Heritage • I would recommend two books by the poet-scholar Lucy Newlyn, who was mentioned in your editorial: William &amp; Dorothy Wordsworth: “All in Each Other” (2013) and Vital Stream (2019); they are more than perfect Christmas presents. In the earlier book, Newlyn invokes Marcel Mauss’s observations “that bonds are created through gifts, in a mutual interdependence of giver and receiver”. In Vital Stream, Newlyn gives us 135 sonnets covering the lives of William Wordsworth and his sister Dorothy through the spring and summer of 1802. In his introduction to Vital Stream, Richard Holmes quite rightly argues that Newlyn’s extraordinary sonnets should be read out on the radio. What about on TV, in Grasmere? That really would be something! Bruce Ross-Smith Oxford • In the British Library there is a copy of AS Cottle’s The Edda of Saemund (1797). It is bound in a beautiful green fabric, with white horses, like the one at Uffington, dancing about. I wish someone would reproduce it. It is said to be made from a piece of one of Mrs Wordsworth’s old gowns. The English poet Robert Southey mentions the “good lady’s bookbinding propensities”. I wonder if the gown had been Dorothy’s rather than Mary Wordsworth’s, who seems to have dressed in a rather more sombre fashion. Eyke Shannon Westleton, Suffolk • Your editorial refers to Lucy Newlyn’s argument that Dorothy and William were “equal partners in writing”. If, according to legend, and as depicted in the 2000 film Pandaemonium, William’s “I wandered lonely as a cow” was redrafted as “cloud” at Dorothy’s behest, hers may have been the defining spirit of Wordsworth. Austen Lynch Garstang, Lancashire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.A fan-led attempt to return Bury FC to life has taken a great step forward after the government pledged £1m towards a bid to buy back Gigg Lane. The funding, announced as part of the Community Ownership Fund run by the Department for Levelling Up, will be matched against money raised by a consortium of bidders led by two supporters’ groups and the US-based benefactor Peter Alexander. Sources close to the deal say they hope it will now be completed imminently. The purchase of Gigg Lane would herald the possibility of Bury returning to competition at the start of the 2022-23 season, three years after the club went into liquidation. It would also see the stadium transformed into a community hub with an all-weather pitch and gym installed for public use and the redevelopment of the Manchester Road stand to accommodate NHS services. Matthew Pickup of the Est 1885 supporters’ group, which has helped drive the proposed deal, said a return to Gigg Lane was “agonisingly close”. “This funding will allow us the opportunity to complete the purchase of Gigg Lane in order to bring football back to its historic home after a nearly three-year hiatus,” he said. “There are still a few steps left in the process and we hope to provide a further update in the coming days when the legalities have been completed but we thank all the fans for their continued support.” Michael Gove, the secretary of state for levelling up said: “The collapse of Bury FC is a stain on English football and the result of the game being ripped out of the hands of the supporters and communities who made it what it is by big business and corporate interest. “I pay enormous tribute to Bury’s supporters, who have shown incredible resolve in their fight to bring their beloved club back to life. By helping rescue the historic Gigg Lane stadium, we are helping to put power back into their hands and securing a cherished asset for the wider community.” Further negotiations over the bid will now take place between the bidders and Bury council, which has committed to contributing funds to the deal. Tamoor Tariq, the deputy leader of Bury council said: “This is an important day but we need to renew our efforts to get over the line.” If a deal is done an application must then be submitted to the Football Association for a return to competition, and a specific division agreed for the club to compete in.Here is a round-up of all today’s top Covid and politics stories from the UK: There have been 119,789 new Covid cases and 147 more coronavirus-related deaths registered in the past 24 hours in the UK. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said there had been 16,817 additional confirmed cases of the Omicron variant of Covid reported across the UK. The Omicron variant of Covid is less likely to result in severe disease and hospital admission, government public health experts have said. Publishing preliminary findings of its research into the new variant, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said Omicron appears to result in less severe disease for those infected with it. Nicola Sturgeon has warned against getting “carried away” with the latest Omicron data, as she again rejected pressure to reduce the 10-day Covid isolation period in Scotland. There is “no doubt that if you are unvaccinated you are hugely at more risk of hospitalisation, severe illness and even death,” a scientist has said. Prof Anthony Harnden, of the Joint Committee of Vaccination and Immunisation, told BBC News this is backed up by the “proportion of patients that are unvaccinated that are ending up with severe illness in hospitals around the country”. The NHS is preparing to expand capacity in case a “surge” of healthcare is needed, but will be able to manage increased hospital cases. The number of NHS staff off sick because of Covid is soaring, new figures show, raising fresh fears about how hospitals will be able to respond to any Omicron-driven surge in patients needing care. Latest estimates from the Office of National Statistics (ONS) have found that around one in 45 people in private households in England had Covid in the week to 16 December, up from one in 60 the previous week. Nightclubs in Scotland are to close from 27 December for a three-week period, the deputy first minister, John Swinney, has announced. More than six in 10 care home staff in England have not received a booster jab, figures suggest, despite the ramping up of the vaccine rollout as Omicron spreads. A decision on whether all children aged five to 11 might get the jab “is still under very active consideration”, a member of Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation has said. A total of 2,097 people were in hospital in London with Covid as of 8am on 23 December, according to new figures from NHS England. This is the highest number since 27 February and is up 44% from a week earlier. During the second wave of coronavirus, the number peaked at 7,917 on January 18. A total of 840,038 booster and third doses of Covid vaccine were reported in the UK on Wednesday, new figures show.The is the lowest daily figure since 15 December. Some people may need a fourth dose of Covid vaccine to remain protected, a government scientific adviser has said, with a decision expected shortly after the Christmas and new year holidays. Two Premier League games scheduled for Boxing Day have been called off because of Covid outbreaks at Leeds and Watford. The Prince of Wales and the Duchess of Cornwall will be with the Queen on Christmas Day, a Clarence House spokesman has confirmed. People crossing the Channel in small boats to claim asylum could be tagged on arrival under Home Office plans, it has emerged. The home secretary, Priti Patel, is expected to announce the plan early in the new year as part of her overhaul of the immigration system. Foreign Secretary Liz Truss has urged Russia to enter talks in January over its military build-up on the border of Ukraine. That’s it for today from me, Tom Ambrose, and indeed from the UK politics and Covid blog. You can still keep across all breaking news in the global coronavirus blog here. Goodbye for now. Evidence that infections caused by Omicron may be less severe than other Covid variants is good news but is likely to make little or no difference to the duration of the pandemic, according to experts. Several pieces of research published this week suggested that those infected with Omicron were much less likely to require hospitalisation. People with the variant are estimated to be between 31% and 45% less likely to attend A&amp;E compared with the Delta variant, and 50% to 70% less likely to be require admission to hospital, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said on Thursday. Separately, researchers at the University of Edinburgh studied infections from the Delta and Omicron variants since November, and said the results “suggest that Omicron is associated with a two-thirds reduction in the risk of Covid-19 hospitalisation when compared with Delta”. In non-Covid related news from Westminster today, the Foreign Secretary Liz Truss has urged Russia to enter talks in January over its military build-up on the border of Ukraine. Ms Truss’s call for dialogue comes after Russian troops have reportedly been massing along the border with Ukraine over the last few months, with the Foreign Secretary also warning that any “incursion” would be a “massive mistake”. The Foreign Secretary said: I condemn the Kremlin’s aggressive and inflammatory rhetoric against Ukraine and Nato. Nato is a defensive alliance and Ukraine continues to show commendable restraint in the face of Russian provocation and aggression.” Russia’s military build-ups on the border of Ukraine and in illegally-annexed Crimea are unacceptable. Any Russian incursion would be a massive strategic mistake and would be met with strength, including coordinated sanctions with our allies to impose a severe cost on Russia’s interests and economy. The UK’s support for Ukraine is unwavering. The Omicron variant of Covid is less likely to result in severe disease and hospital admission, government public health experts have said. Publishing preliminary findings of its research into the new variant, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said Omicron appears to result in less severe disease for those infected with it, the Press Association reported. However, the agency warned that the new strain is more transmissible than previous variants such as Delta, and could still lead to significant numbers of people needing hospital treatment over coming weeks. Health Secretary Sajid Javid welcomed the latest data as “promising” but urged the public to remain cautious over the Christmas break, adding it was “still too early to determine next steps”. The results of the research are consistent with that of two other early studies into Omicron by Imperial College London and the University of Edinburgh, both released on Wednesday. According to analysis by the UKHSA, the risk of hospital admission for an identified case with Omicron is reduced compared with a case of Delta. Someone with Omicron is estimated to be as much as 45% less likely to attend A&amp;E compared with Delta, and as much as 70% less likely to be admitted to hospital. However, Omicron is believed to be infecting more people who have previously had Covid, with 9.5% of people with Omicron having had it before. Vaccination is also believed to give less protection against Omicron, although a booster jab provides more protection against symptomatic disease compared with the first two doses alone. Data suggests protection starts to wane 10 weeks after booster vaccination. Mr Javid said: This new UKHSA data on Omicron is promising - while two doses of the vaccine aren’t enough, we know boosters offer significant protection against the variant and early evidence suggests this strain may be less severe than Delta. However, cases of the variant continue to rise at an extraordinary rate - already surpassing the record daily number in the pandemic. Hospital admissions are increasing, and we cannot risk the NHS being overwhelmed. This is early-stage analysis and we continue to monitor the data hour by hour. It is still too early to determine next steps, so please stay cautious this Christmas and get your booster as soon as possible to protect yourself and your loved ones. A total of 2,097 people were in hospital in London with Covid as of 8am on 23 December, according to new figures from NHS England. This is the highest number since 27 February and is up 44% from a week earlier. During the second wave of coronavirus, the number peaked at 7,917 on January 18. Across England, 7,114 patients were in hospital with Covid on 23 December, the highest number since 4 November and up 11% week-on-week. The second-wave peak for England was 34,336 on 18 January. There were 307 Covid admissions recorded by hospitals in London on 21 December, NHS England said. Motorways brought to a standstill and cancelled trains marred the first Christmas getaway in two years. Millions of people are embarking on trips to spend the festive period with friends and relatives, after coronavirus restrictions forced many to miss out on such visits 12 months ago. A survey of nearly 2,000 people in Britain for watchdog Transport Focus indicated that 44% plan to travel to spend Christmas with loved ones, the Press Association reported. There was a three-mile-long traffic jam on the M5 northbound between Junction 20 for Clevedon and Junction 19 for Bristol after a vehicle fire caused the closure of two lanes at around 9am on Thursday. National Highways said there was also severe congestion on several motorways in England, including the M25, M4 and M6. An estimated 5.3 million journeys by people embarking on overnight stays or day trips will take place on Friday with major roads busiest between 11am and 2pm, according to RAC analysis. Although demand for rail travel is at around 50% of pre-pandemic levels, thousands of people are travelling by train to spend Christmas with loved ones. A person being hit by a train between Stockport and Manchester Piccadilly caused major disruption to operators including Avanti West Coast, Northern and TransPennine Express. CrossCountry is warning it will run a “very limited service” on Friday and New Year’s Eve due to strikes by train managers and senior conductors who are members of the Rail, Maritime and Transport union (RMT). The firm will not operate any trains on Friday between Aberdeen and Edinburgh; Glasgow Central and Edinburgh; Derby and Nottingham; Leicester and Stansted Airport; Cheltenham Spa and Cardiff Central; Newton Abbot and Paignton; or Plymouth and Penzance. Hundreds of trains have also been cancelled across Britain due to pandemic-related staff shortages. Affected operators include CrossCountry, Avanti West Coast, Northern, ScotRail, TransPennine Express and Greater Anglia. More than six in 10 care home staff in England have not received a booster jab, figures suggest, despite the ramping up of the vaccine rollout as Omicron spreads. Some 37.6% of staff in care homes for older residents and 33.5% of staff in homes for younger adults had received a booster as of December 19, according to the latest figures from NHS England. This leaves more than 340,000 staff who have not been recorded as having had their booster, without which they do not have the optimum protection against the rapidly spreading Omicron variant. The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) has asked care home staff to come forward as soon as possible, the Press Association reported. The proportion of residents who have been boosted is much higher, standing at 82.3% of older residents and 68.7% of younger residents. It comes as government figures showed a total of 51,617,091 first doses of Covid vaccine had been delivered in the UK by 22 December, representing a rise of 39,309 on the previous day. Some 47,210,053 second doses have been delivered, an increase of 53,154. A combined total of 31,684,926 booster and third doses have also been given, a day-on-day rise of 840,038. Separate totals for booster and third doses are not available. Prime Minister Boris Johnson has said 70 million lateral flow tests were dispatched across the UK last week. He wrote on Twitter: “Thank you to everyone across the country involved in our national testing mission. “We have the largest testing capacity in Europe, and last week over 70 million lateral flow tests were dispatched. “Only through testing can we fundamentally track infections &amp; understand COVID-19.” There have been 119,789 new Covid cases and 147 more coronavirus-related deaths registered in the past 24 hours in the UK. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said there had been 16,817 additional confirmed cases of the Omicron variant of Covid reported across the UK. This brings the total confirmed cases of the variant in the UK to 90,906. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have now been 173,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid was mentioned on the death certificate. In Northern Ireland, the Stormont health minister, Robin Swann, has warned against Covid complacency following research indicating that the Omicron variant may be less severe than Delta. The minister said Omicron, which is now the dominant variant in Northern Ireland, still posed a significant threat to health and social care services. He said: There remains a great deal of uncertainty about Omicron. Some early research from Great Britain suggests it may be less severe than the Delta variant in terms of the proportion of infected people who require treatment in hospital. More information is still required and the findings are not definitive. I must emphasise that this early research definitely does not mean that Omicron should be taken any less seriously. It is much more infectious than Delta and will therefore lead to much greater levels of infection. Even with a lower proportion being hospitalised, if the number of cases rises to very high levels, the number of Covid in-patients will increase as well. Pressure on our hospitals could therefore be significantly increased. The number of NHS staff off sick because of Covid is soaring, new figures show, raising fresh fears about how hospitals will be able to respond to any Omicron-driven surge in patients needing care. One health service leader said the NHS was now facing “a double emergency” of growing numbers of people hospitalised with Covid alongside increasing sickness absence on the frontline. The number of staff days lost to Covid across the NHS in England hit 124,855 last week, a 38% jump on the 90,277 the week before, according to the latest “winter sitreps” data published by NHS England. The total number of staff absences for any medical reason – such as a cold, flu or mental health problem – also increased, though less steeply, from 416,995 to 457,135, a rise of 10%. Here’s a slightly bewildering story from the Press Association about a group of anti-vaxxers trying - and failing dismally - to serve papers on the former England and Newcastle United footballer Alan Shearer. The hapless protesters attempted to “serve papers” on ex-footballer Alan Shearer but comically dropped them off at the wrong house. The former England captain and Newcastle United hero last week had urged people to get the booster in a video promoted by the Premier League. In the clip, Shearer said: “We all want to keep safe on a matchday and the best way we can protect ourselves and other people is to get vaccinated.” His stance led anti-vaccination protesters to film themselves on Wednesday outside an address near Newcastle which they believed to be his family home. In the video they shared on social media, three men and a woman, plus someone recording the scene, gathered outside a gated property and after pressing an electronic buzzer, one of them posted documents into an external letterbox. It is unclear what the papers contained, but anti-vaccination protesters routinely share templates of supposed legal documents which they film themselves depositing. But a commenter on the group’s Facebook post suggested Shearer no longer lived at the property. And a local person who has seen the video told the PA News agency: “That’s an old address they have for him.” Northumbria police said it had no involvement in the incident. Lawyer Adam Wagner, a human rights expert and commentator on Covid legislation, poured scorn on the anti-vaccination protesters’ claims of using the law. The Doughty Street barrister said: It is difficult to overemphasise how spurious it all is. It is wrong and should not be indulged by anyone. This is so far down into the depths of legal fantasy, people should not be doing it, no-one should be sharing it. Power cables are believed to have been stolen from a vaccination centre in the middle of a surge in Omicron cases. The leads, used for a generator at a site in Tonbridge, Kent, were reported missing by the local MP Tom Tugendhat on Twitter on Thursday. Tugendhat took to the social media site to try and source new cables to get the centre up and running for the day, the Press Association reported. The Tonbridge and Malling MP, who has served as chairman of the foreign affairs committee since 2017, said: Someone has stolen the leads to the generator of the vaccination centre on Sovereign Way, Tonbridge. We need to replace them urgently. Shortly before 10am, Tugendhat confirmed the site was operational again and vaccines were going ahead. He said on Twitter: “Thank you for all the offers. I’m delighted to say NHSuk is back up and running and vaccinating in Tonbridge. Thank you for pulling together – Tonbridge is a fantastic community and I hope we’re about to see kent-police at their best..! Merry Christmas... to most people!” Kent police said they were “sending a patrol to the scene to try and establish more details”. A total of 840,038 booster and third doses of Covid vaccine were reported in the UK on Wednesday, new figures show. The is the lowest daily figure since 15 December. More than 31.6m booster and third doses have now been delivered in the UK, with 6.2m in the past seven days. The figures have been published by the UK’s four health agencies. Covid infection levels have reached a record high in the UK, new data shows, as the health secretary maintained no further restrictions would be set out before Christmas. An estimated 1.4 million people in the UK had the virus in the week ending 16 December, the highest number since comparable figures began in autumn 2020, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) said. The data emerged within hours of Sajid Javid telling broadcasters the government was not planning to make any more announcements on restrictions in England this week. It follows a warning from the NHS England national medical director, Prof Stephen Powis, that the service is on a “war footing” as the Omicron variant sweeps through the country. Some people may need a fourth dose of Covid vaccine to remain protected, a government scientific adviser has said, with a decision expected shortly after the Christmas and new year holidays. Prof Adam Finn said: I think there may well be people who received their boosters early who are in the older more vulnerable age groups who may need a further jab. That has not been decided yet. It is still under review and discussion, and we will be providing recommendations on that at some point in the new year. Finn, a professor of paediatrics at the University of Bristol and a member of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), told LBC Radio on Thursday: “I think there will be people probably who will receive a fourth jab. Whether that will be everyone, I think, is still very much in doubt … We do need to see how things go through this wave and beyond.” On Tuesday, Israel became the first country to announce it would offer a fourth dose of vaccine to people over 60 and healthcare workers, in an effort to increase protection against the Omicron variant. Healthcare workers around the world have been on the frontline of the coronavirus pandemic for almost two years, which put them through the darkest days of their careers. Five doctors who have worked in hospitals in Uganda, New Zealand and the US, India, England, and Brazil told the Guardian about how the pandemic has tested them personally and professionally, but how they continue to find hope and resolve to keep working. People crossing the Channel in small boats to claim asylum could be tagged on arrival under Home Office plans, it has emerged. The home secretary, Priti Patel, is expected to announce the plan early in the new year as part of her overhaul of the immigration system. According to a government source familiar with the plan, ministers believe that making working-age people wear tags while their asylum claims are processed would make it harder for them to work illegally during this period – reducing the UK’s “pull factor”. Ministers also believe that tags would stop people absconding during the application process. The government wants more people whose asylum applications fail to be removed from the country, although absconding is only one factor and there are significant legal reasons why removal numbers are low, including the UK’s post-Brexit withdrawal from the Dublin agreements, which enabled people to be returned to EU countries they had travelled through. More than 27,000 people have arrived in the UK this year by crossing the Channel on small boats, up from 8,500 in 2020, and Patel has faced strong criticism, particularly from within the Conservative party, for not doing more to curb these numbers. Two Premier League games scheduled for Boxing Day have been called off because of Covid outbreaks at Leeds and Watford. Leeds’ game at Liverpool and Watford’s at Wolves have become the 11th and 12th top-flight matches postponed as a consequence of the virus. The affected clubs made postponement requests that were accepted by the league’s board. The Premier League said: “The league is aware that the decision to postpone these two matches will disappoint supporters and understands their frustrations at a special time of year when fans look forward to attending and watching football games. The league aims to provide as much clarity as possible, but unfortunately postponements sometimes have to be made at short notice, as safety is the priority. The league will endeavour to keep supporters updated if games become at risk on a matchday. “The board concluded that Leeds United will not be able to fulfil their fixture this weekend due to the number of players with Covid-19, injuries and illness. The club’s training ground has also been closed after consultation with the UK Health Security Agency and the Premier League. “Watford FC continue to have an insufficient number of players to field a team after their game against Crystal Palace FC last Saturday was postponed following a Covid-19 outbreak. Due to players coming out of isolation, it is fully expected Watford will be available for their fixture on Tuesday 28 December, against West Ham United.” It is proving to be a bumper day for anyone interested in coronavirus data and statistics. Latest estimates from the Office of National Statistics (ONS) have found that around one in 45 people in private households in England had Covid in the week to 16 December, up from one in 60 the previous week. One in 45 is the equivalent of about 1.2 million people and is the highest number since the ONS began estimating infection levels for England in May 2020, the Press Association reports. In Wales, around one in 55 people is estimated to have had Covid in the week to 16 December, unchanged from the previous week and below the recent record high of one in 40. In Northern Ireland, the latest estimate is one in 50 people, also unchanged from the previous week and slightly below the record high of one in 40 in mid-August. For Scotland, the latest estimate is one in 70, up from one in 80 the previous week and below September’s peak of one in 45. All figures are for people in private households. Meanwhile, the percentage of people testing positive in the latest week is estimated to have increased in all regions of England except the north-east, south-west and West Midlands, where the trend is uncertain, the ONS said. In London, around one in 30 people was likely to test positive in the week to 16 December - the highest proportion for any region. Yorkshire and the Humber had the lowest proportion, at around one in 65. When modelling the level of Covid infections among different age ranges in England, the ONS said rates have increased in the latest week for all groups except those from school year 7 to 11 and for people aged 70 and over, where the trend is uncertain. Rates were highest for those aged two to school year 6, at 5.9%. The UK public’s appetite for eating out has plunged to its weakest since the spring amid growing evidence of the impact of the Omicron variant on the hospitality sector during its crucial pre-Christmas period. The number of seated diners fell by 14 percentage points in the week ending 20 December to 88% of the level in the same period of 2019, before the start of the pandemic, according to the weekly digest of flash economic indicators from the Office for National Statistics (ONS). Using data from the online restaurant booking site OpenTable and other sources, the ONS said Britons were eating out less and working from home more in response to rising infection rates and the government’s plan B measures. Amid widespread reports of bookings being cancelled, the drop in the number of diners in the latest week was the sharpest since early September and the lowest level since restaurants reopened indoors in England, Scotland and Wales in May after last winter’s lockdown. It was also the first time the weekly comparison with 2019 has dropped below 100% since May. Restaurants in London have been especially hard hit by Omicron, with the number of diners in the latest week falling 18 points to 57% of the level in the same period of 2019. In Manchester, despite an eight-point drop on the week, the number of diners stood at 104% of the level in the run-up to Christmas 2019. The number of people waiting for treatment from NHS Wales has reached record levels, with the Welsh government admitting they are likely to continue to rise. There are now 680,000 patients on the waiting list - the highest recorded figure since comparable data was first collected in 2011. Although waiting list figures were high prior to the Covid-19 pandemic, the number typically varied each month between 400,000 to 500,000 and tended to be highest in late summer and lowest in January. However, since April 2020 the number has steadily increased every month. In October, the latest available data, the number of people yet to begin treatment was over 45% higher than in the same month before the pandemic in 2019. The percentage of people receiving treatment within the target 26-week period from point of referral remains extremely low. A Welsh government spokesperson said: Our NHS is facing its toughest winter ever and our hardworking staff continue to show unwavering commitment to delivering high-quality care to hundreds of thousands of patients each month. We have committed £1bn this Senedd term to helping the NHS recover from the pandemic and to treat patients as quickly as possible. This week we have also committed funding to deliver the Real Living Wage for social workers, who are critical to helping people out of hospital and freeing up bed space. However increasing challenges from Covid pressures mean waiting times have and will continue to rise. The Welsh government announced on Wednesday an extra £34m for ambulances, including extra staff, non-urgent patient transport and increased military support. The Welsh Conservative shadow health minister, Russell George, said: Although coronavirus and the pent-up demand from previous lockdowns is obviously a huge factor in today’s damning statistics, there has to come a point when things get better. However, Labour’s record over two decades is one where things have gotten perpetually worse: doubling the waiting list in the year before Covid struck, experiencing its worst-ever A&amp;E waits the year before the pandemic, and removing conditions like strokes from the red-call ambulance criteria. Nicola Sturgeon has warned against getting “carried away” with the latest Omicron data, as she again rejected pressure to reduce the 10-day Covid isolation period in Scotland. At the final session of first minister’s questions before the Christmas recess, the Scottish Conservative leader, Douglas Ross, criticised Sturgeon for remaining overly cautious despite the latest studies reported yesterday suggesting that the Omicron variant is less severe than Delta. Ross said that to protect essential services and the economy from a surge in isolation-related absences, adding: “These rules are forcing whole families to self-isolate for 10 days, even if they have tested negative.” On Wednesday, the UK government reduced the Covid self-isolation period to seven days in an attempt to ease mounting staff shortages. Sturgeon pointed out that sector-based exemptions to self-isolation rules had been published earlier today, but said she would not make changes to the self-isolation rules until the public health benefits outweighed the risks, explaining: “If we act rashly right now we risk a counterproductive effect …. these studies are really positive but they are also early data. Even the authors are saying ‘don’t get carried away yet with what these studies are telling you’.” Covid antibody levels among adults in the UK are estimated to have reached a record high. Some 95% of the adult population of England is likely to have tested positive for antibodies in the week beginning 29 November, along with 95% in Scotland, 95.3% in Northern Ireland and 93.6% in Wales, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). These are the highest figures for all four nations since the ONS began estimating antibody levels in December 2020. There has been an increase in antibody positivity in those aged 65 years and over across the UK since early October 2021, which the ONS said was “likely as a result of the vaccination booster programme”. The figures do not include people in hospital, care homes or other communal establishments. Sajid Javid also said he welcomed studies which have suggested the Omicron variant may cause less severe illness than earlier strains but warned it could still lead to “significant” hospital admissions. “That is, of course, good, encouraging news. They are not very clear yet though by how much that risk is reduced,” he said, adding: We do know with Omicron that it does spread a lot more quickly, it is a lot more infectious than Delta, so any advantage gained from reduced risk of hospitalisation needs to be set against that. If a much smaller percentage of people are at risk of hospitalisation, if that is a smaller percentage of a much larger number, there could still be significant hospitalisation. The first UK data of its kind found that the Omicron variant of coronavirus does indeed appear to be milder, with a 20%-25% reduced chance of a hospital visit and at least a 40% lower risk of being admitted overnight. In what was described by scientists as a “qualified good news story”, two studies on Wednesday pointed to a lower risk of hospitalisation with Omicron. An Imperial College outbreak modelling team led by Prof Neil Ferguson analysed hospitalisations and vaccine records among all PCR-confirmed Covid cases in England between 1 and 14 December. The dataset included 56,000 cases of Omicron and 269,000 cases of Delta. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, has said there will be no further announcements on Covid restrictions in England before Christmas. He told broadcasters on Thursday: We are not planning any further announcements this week. Despite the caution that we are all taking, people should enjoy their Christmases with their families and their friends – of course, remain cautious. We will keep the situation under review. We are learning more all the time as we have done from this new data. We will keep analysing that data and if we need to do anything more we will, but nothing more is going to happen before Christmas. He added that staff absences due to Covid were adding to pressures on the NHS but said the easing of self-isolation rules would help. He said: The NHS workforce was already under pressure before Omicron came along. There is increased pressure in many workforces at the moment, especially if someone needs to isolate if they have a positive case,” he told broadcasters. Some of the recent moves we have had, moving from 10-day to seven isolation if you take a test in the last two days, I think all of that will help. The Prince of Wales and the Duchess of Cornwall will be with the Queen on Christmas Day, a Clarence House spokesman has confirmed. The Queen is to celebrate Christmas at Windsor Castle, breaking with the tradition of spending festivities at Sandringham in Norfolk for a second year. Sources stressed that all appropriate guidelines would be followed and sensible precautions would be in place. It is understood that the decision was a personal one taken after careful consideration and that it reflected her precautionary approach during the pandemic. Downing Street has been informed of her decision. Unlike at Sandringham, where members of the royal family gather and walk to St Mary Magdalene church, greeting members of the public outside, there is not expected to be any public church visit on 25 December. Following the news that nightclubs in Scotland are to close from 27 December for a three-week period, the Scottish Tories have called for extra financial support for businesses. The Scottish Tory Covid-19 recovery spokesman, Murdo Fraser, said also described the latest news as a “further setback to a sector already on its knees as a result of previously-announced restrictions” as Scotland looks to tackle to fast-spreading Omicron variant. He added: I understand that this is a fast-moving situation but, when announcing this enforced shutdown, John Swinney should have spelt out the exact details of the support package that will be given to nightclub businesses, rather than merely promising an update on allocation ‘as soon as possible’. That’s not good enough - businesses on the brink need to know now exactly what financial support they will receive, and when. The SNP government has been given an extra £440m in assistance from the UK government. They need to get that money out the door and into the hands of beleaguered Scottish businesses immediately. Wait times for patients arriving by ambulances at hospital A&amp;Es in England fell slightly last week, according to the latest figures. One in five patients waited at least half an hour to be handed over from ambulance teams to hospital staff, with a total of 16,410 delays of 30 minutes or more were recorded across all acute trusts in the week to 10 December. It represented 20% of all arrivals, according to NHS England figures, down slightly from 23% of arrivals in the week to 12 December. Some 7% of arrivals last week (6,124) took more than 60 minutes to be handed over to A&amp;E teams, down from 10% in the previous week, the Press Association reported. A handover delay does not always mean a patient has waited in the ambulance. They may have been moved into an A&amp;E department, but staff were not available to complete the handover. There is “no doubt that if you are unvaccinated you are hugely at more risk of hospitalisation, severe illness and even death,” a scientist has said. Prof Anthony Harnden, of the Joint Committee of Vaccination and Immunisation, told BBC News this is backed up by the “proportion of patients that are unvaccinated that are ending up with severe illness in hospitals around the country”. He said: We are talking about a three, four, five-fold increased risk of developing severe illness if you are unvaccinated. There is absolutely no doubt that the worrying group of people are the 5 million or so adults who are unvaccinated in this country. I really plead for them to come forward. Interestingly, in my own practice I have started to notice that some of those unvaccinated people are starting to come forward now. “I think it is the worry about Omicron and the realisation that it is so infectious and they are so much more likely to be exposed to it than the variants previously. People are starting to come forward, I just hope they come forward in larger numbers. Evidence the Omicron variant is less severe than originally feared does not remove the threat to the NHS this winter, a health service leader has warned. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents hospitals and other NHS trusts, said two studies showing that people infected with Omicron were at less risk of being admitted to hospital than those infected with the Delta variant were good news. But he stressed that it was still not clear exactly what impact the rapid rise in Omicron cases would have on hospital numbers, and said the NHS remained under “incredible pressure”. Commenting on the studies published on Wednesday, Hopson told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: We still don’t have conclusive data in terms of what impact Omicron could have in terms of level of hospitalisations. We have some very early studies, but it’s a bit like trying to predict the result of a football game when you’re only a third of the way through. A study by Imperial College London using data from England suggests that Omicron patients are 40% less likely to need overnight hospital care than Delta patients. A separate report from Scotland found that the risk of hospitalisation could be 70% lower with Omicron than Delta. Good morning. Tom Ambrose here. I’ll be bringing you all the latest UK politics and coronavirus news from now until 6pm today. We start with the news that the NHS says it is once again on a “war footing” as it readies itself to battle a rise in hospitalisations related to the highly transmissible Omicron variant of Covid. The NHS national medical director, Prof Stephen Powis, said: The NHS is on a war footing and staff are taking the fight to Omicron, by boosting hundreds of thousands of people each day, treating thousands of seriously ill Covid patients and delivering urgent care for other conditions, all while seeing a worrying, high and rising increase in absence due to Covid. We are once again ramping up to deal with the rise in Covid infections and, quite rightly, staff are making every possible preparation for the uncertain challenges of Omicron, including recruiting thousands of nurses and reservists, but while we’ll leave no stone unturned to get the NHS battle-ready, it remains the case that the best way to protect yourself and others is to follow guidance and to come forward and get your first, second and booster jabs. It comes as a total of 3,874 NHS staff at acute hospital trusts in London were absent for Covid reasons on 19 December, more than double the number a week earlier (1,540) and more than three times the number at the start of the month (1,174), according to new figures from NHS England. The total includes staff who were ill with Covid or who were having to self-isolate, according to a Press Association report. Across England as a whole, 18,829 NHS staff at acute trusts were absent due to Covid reasons on 19 December, up 54% from 12,240 a week earlier and up 51% from 12,508 at the start of the month. The NHS is preparing to expand capacity in case a “surge” of healthcare is needed, but will be able to manage increased hospital cases. Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, the NHS Providers chief executive, Chris Hopson, said: What we’re trying to do is at the moment is just what we always do in the NHS, which is to prioritise care based on medical need We will and we are identifying places that would be needed if we really really needed to surge. Hopson added that the NHS had handled around 40,000 simultaneous Covid hospital cases last January and would be capable of handling the current rise in admissions, which stands at around 7,000 nationally. “We can do this, but the issue is, we’re in incredible pressure right the way across the health system,” he said. New figures from NHS England show 3,874 NHS staff at acute hospital trusts in London were absent due to Covid on 19 December. This is more than double the number a week earlier (1,540) and more than three times the number at the start of the month (1,174). The total includes staff who were ill with Covid-19 or who were having to self-isolate. Across England as a whole, 18,829 NHS staff at acute trusts were absent due to Covid-19 reasons on December 19, up 54% from 12,240 a week earlier and up 51% from 12,508 at the start of the month. Nightclubs in Scotland are to close from 27 December for a three-week period, the deputy first minister, John Swinney, has announced. It follows similar moves in Wales and Northern Ireland. The nightclub measure in Scotland is in addition to further hospitality guidance announced on Tuesday. This included the reintroduction of table service in venues serving alcohol and 1-metre distancing between groups. Speaking to Holyrood’s Covid recovery committee on Thursday, Swinney said that, having engaged with the sector, the opinion was “closure...combined with financial support may reduce losses and help these businesses weather what we hope will be a short period before they are able to operate normally again”. A decision on whether all children aged five to 11 might get the jab “is still under very active consideration”, a member of Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation has said. On Wednesday the committee recommended vaccinations for about 330,000 vulnerable younger children. But Adam Finn, a professor of paediatrics at University of Bristol, said the panel had yet to decide about jabbing all younger children. He told LBC Radio: There are a number of moving parts to that decision. We see very, very few severe cases in this young age group, happily, so there is not much serious disease to be prevented. The factor that persuaded the government to introduce vaccination for older children was the disruption of their education and the ability of vaccines to reduce ... transmission of infection among children as well as between children and adults. With the Omicron variant, in particular, the ability of the vaccines to do that will be reduced. Many of these children will now already have had the infection. We just need to weigh up all of those things and make sure that a decision to move forward would benefit those children and actually do some good. Finn also said it is possible that people may need to get a fourth dose of the coronavirus vaccine. He said: I think there will be people probably who will receive a fourth jab - whether that will be everyone, I think, is still very much in doubt. We do need to see how things go through this wave and beyond. I think there may well be people who received their boosters early who are in the older more vulnerable age groups who may need a further jab - that has not been decided yet. It is still under review and discussion, and we will be providing recommendations on that at some point in the new year. Dr Nick Davies, from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and a member of the government’s Spi-M modelling group that advises Sage, warns against misinterpreting the new studies on Omicron. In a Twitter thread he says the data shows “Omicron wave will tend to infect *relatively* more vulnerable older people than the Delta wave.” ‘IHR’ referred to in his tweets, stands for infection hospitalisation ratio. The NHS could still be under huge pressure despite the possibility that the Omicron variant may cause milder disease, another scientist has said. Prof Paul Elliott, director of the React-1 programme and chair in epidemiology and public health medicine at Imperial College London, said “there are many many cases and sadly some of those people may get severe illness and end up in hospital”. Speaking to Sky News, he said: From the beginning of December we saw this very dramatic rise in prevalence across the country, but particularly across London with the R number now substantially above one. This exponential increase in infections is absolutely being driven by the Omicron variant. Prof Elliott described it as “encouraging news” that perhaps the infection when you get it might be less severe in terms of hospital cases, but he added: Of course, with this very very rapid rise and increase in cases - and we have seen the national cases go above 100,000 - then more cases means more pressure (on the health service). Even though a smaller proportion (of people) might get severe disease or go into hospital, that could still result in many cases and, of course, that could give pressure on the health service. Welcome to our UK politics live blog. New research suggesting that that those with the highly-infectious Omicron variant are at lower risk of being admitted to hospital than those with previous variants has been welcomed in the press. “Ho, Ho, Hope,” says front page of the Sun over a picture of Boris Johnson giving a thumbs up sign. The Times say the new studies offer support for Johnson’s decision to pause further restrictions in England. The Daily Mail goes as far as saying they “vindicate” the prime minister’s decision to “hold fire” on more restrictions. The Telegraph reckons cabinet ministers say the research weakens the need for more restrictions. It quotes one saying: “If hospital numbers don’t grow, it could represent a killer blow against those in government who support more rules.” But Prof Andrew Hayward, director of the UCL Institute of Epidemiology and Healthcare and a member of Nervtag, is more cautious about the research. Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s he said: It’s undeniably good news, but I think we’re definitely not out of the danger zone - I think perhaps we can downgrade this from a hurricane to a very severe storm ... I think it does make the public health messaging tricky - I think some of the things that we need to remember is that if you’ve got a halving of severity but in the context of case numbers of Omicron doubling every two or three days, that doesn’t buy you much extra time, you know, maybe less than a week in terms of relieving the pressure on the NHS, if you like. I think the other thing is to kind of explain (that) even if your personal risk is low, then you can still do a lot to protect the most vulnerable, the elderly, those with chronic diseases - you can do a lot to protect the NHS, and you can do a lot to protect services by being much more cautious in terms of the amount of close contact we have. Prof Hayward said events such as “mass parties” that might take place on new year’s eve would “provide a big further boost” to the Omicron variant. He added: We still need to be cautious about Christmas - I think in many ways the best present you could provide an elderly relative this year is the negative lateral flow before you go, so we need to still think about protecting the vulnerable, we need to think about protecting the NHS and that will require some sacrifices.British construction company Balfour Beatty will pay $65m (£49m) in fines after pleading guilty to fraud committed against the US military. The company’s US arm was one of the biggest providers of privatised military housing to the US army, navy and air forces at 55 bases across the states of Georgia, Oklahoma and Texas, but it lied about repairs in order to increase bonus payments, the US Department of Justice said on Thursday. The company, a member of the FTSE 250 index of mid-sized companies, had to meet various maintenance and resident satisfaction targets to qualify for the bonuses. But employees deliberately altered data in its property management software and falsified resident comment cards to reach the required levels. The payout includes a $34m penalty plus nearly $32m in restitution, and the company will also be supervised for three years by an independent compliance monitor. It is not the first time that Balfour Beatty has been censured for defence-related work. In the UK in 2019 MI6 sacked the company as a contractor during refurbishment work after it lost sensitive plans of the layout of its headquarters in London’s Vauxhall, which are famously featured in several James Bond spy films. The deputy head of the FBI, which was also involved in the recent fraud inquiry, said it was a “disgraceful” crime. Two former Balfour Beatty managers, Stacy Cabrera and Rick Cunefare, have already pleaded guilty to fraud charges related to the case this year. The fines are more than Balfour Beatty’s entire profit before tax for 2020 of £48m, although they are only a small proportion of revenues of £8.6bn during that year. The company, valued at £1.6bn, is struggling with other problems in its main UK building business, which counts Hinkley Point nuclear power station and the HS2 and Crossrail rail developments among its major projects. The chief executive, Leo Quinn, who was paid £2.1m in salary and bonuses in 2020, warned in August that the company would not take on any new property construction projects in central London after it was forced to prop up failing subcontractors. The US deputy attorney general, Lisa Monaco, said: “Instead of promptly repairing housing for US service members as required, Balfour Beatty lied about the repairs to pocket millions of dollars in performance bonuses. “This pervasive fraud was a consequence of Balfour Beatty’s broken corporate culture, which valued profit over the welfare of service members.” The fraud meant that crucial maintenance was delayed, harming military personnel and their families, the Department of Justice said. Balfour Beatty said it had appointed a chief compliance officer for the US after carrying out a review when the fraud was first discovered, as well as adding further ethics and compliance training for all employees. “The wrongdoing that took place is completely contrary to the way the company expects its people to behave,” Balfour Beatty said in a statement to the stock market on Thursday. “The company apologises for the actions of communities to all its stakeholders. It has been made clear to all employees that breaches of policies, procedures, or law will not be tolerated.”Joe Root feels ready to “bang out” a seventh Test hundred in 2021 and has tipped England’s angry batting inquest to spark a wider response on Boxing Day. A rejigged lineup that is expected to see Zak Crawley replace Rory Burns at opener heads into the must-win third Ashes under instructions to get ruthless. It follows the decision by the head coach, Chris Silverwood, to make his players rewatch their dismissals from the 275-run defeat in Adelaide together. Even Root, sitting only 158 runs away from Mohammad Yousuf’s Test record of 1,788 in a calendar year, has revisited his approach. On Thursday he batted with a fourth stump behind him in the MCG nets, having put his failure to turn his eighth half-century in Australia into three figures down to a lack of discipline outside off. Speaking before the third Test of five, with his team 2-0 down, Root said: “I’m confident I can bang out a hundred in these conditions. I feel in a really good place with my batting. I know that’s a brave thing to say but that conversion rate, this year, it’s not been an issue at all. I just need to put myself in those positions, have the bit between my teeth, [and think]: ‘Over my dead body.’” Asked whether, as a captain who is usually soft-spoken, it felt easy to dispense some harsh words to the underperforming batting unit, Root replied: “It did at the end of the last game because of the situation we’re in and the manner in which we lost. “I’ll always try to look at things with a level, pragmatic approach but I don’t think you could after the way we’ve played those last two games. I expect a response from everyone this week. “There’s no motivation needed, really. Just the state of the series, what’s at stake and what we need to do, quite simply. I would like to bring a nice Christmas present home for everyone who stays up [to watch on TV back in the UK]. We are doing everything we can to make sure it is 2-1 by the time we leave here.” Despite a personally golden year with the bat, Root has recently been replaced as No 1 in the Test batting rankings by Australia’s Marnus Labuschagne, a batsman held up as the template for the bloody-minded approach required in Australia. “I’ve never been one for [the rankings] but it would be nice to have it back for Christmas,” said Root. When asked if his captaincy is on the line this week, Root replied: “I’ll worry about that at the end of the series, all I can control is the next game. Those decisions are above my head but I’ll make sure from a team point of view we’ll show a lot more this time.”Boxing Day at the MCG is one of Australia’s most iconic days of sport and for the first time in 10 years, through a quirk of the schedule rather than England’s fortunes, its Ashes Test remains a live contest. Just. In 2010 the tourists were a confident, well-drilled side under Andrew Strauss hunting retention of the urn, a mission they completed handsomely. By contrast, their modern equivalents will walk out on in front of 70,000 spectators needing to prove the lessons they always speak of after defeat have been learned. These in part revolve around a discipline outside off stump, the lack of which afflicted Australia back then. When bowled out for 98 by Jimmy Anderson, Tim Bresnan and Chris Tremlett, all 10 wickets were caught between wicketkeeper and gully. Melbourne’s mighty coliseum was practically deserted by the time England reached 157 for no loss by stumps. Expecting a repeat this year requires the optimism of Dr Pangloss but Joe Root’s men, fresh from the dressing room lock-in staged by their head coach, Chris Silverwood, after their slump to 2-0, can really only improve. Nearly every decision taken so far has backfired, be it selection or strategy, while non-negotiables such as catching or no-balls have been costly. For Root, these have exacerbated the situation. “There was a lot of frustration [after Adelaide],” said Root. “Purely because of the basic mistakes that we’ve been making. And we’ve done it twice in a row. And, as I said to the group, I don’t think they’re that much better than us in these conditions. “The scoreline would suggest they’re absolutely a far better team than us and I don’t think they are. If we perform anywhere like we can, we’ll put them in an uncomfortable position and find ourselves in a very different situation leaving this ground.” Which players can achieve this was still up in the air three days out from the toss. The expectation is that Zak Crawley will resume his Test career, a call based on a belief that the 6ft 5in right-hander will be suited to Australian conditions rather than any tangible form on a tour without state games. Rory Burns, whose first-ball dismissal in Brisbane was war-gamed by the coaching staff before the series yet still proved defining, may make way. If Haseeb Hameed is backed over Burns as expected, despite little more by way of output from the top of the order, it may be a reflection of the approach espoused during the truth session rather than a sign of looking to the future. After all, another late call comes at No 6, a choice between a struggling star of the future in Ollie Pope and Jonny Bairstow, who would boomerang back for a 79th Test cap. Then there is the seam attack, publicly criticised by Root for not bowling full enough in Adelaide. It was a move which led Ricky Ponting to question the captain’s authority and, more recently, Steve Harmison to claim he would be “waiting at the top of the stairs” had Michael Vaughan said the same back in the day. Given time to reflect, Root tried to explain he simply wanted bowled and lbw to be in the equation a touch more often. And not least against Marnus Labuschagne and Steve Smith, two insatiable batting tragics who happily leave all day and do so with a flourish which, however ridiculous it looks, makes this a win for them rather than a stalemate. “I think what I was trying to say was as soon as we [went full to Labuschagne and Smith], we showed how dangerous we could be and how many problems we caused them,” said Root. “And we know those two players in particular, [if you] dismiss them for not many runs it will cause all sorts of panic. We saw it this time last year when Australia lost to India, it has a massive effect on the rest of the batting group.” A moribund drop-in pitch at the MCG had become a source of angst, with the Ashes Test here four years ago, when Alastair Cook ground out an unbeaten 244 in a match of just 24 wickets, arguably the nadir. But last year’s Test suggests improvement, even if local nerves were betrayed when a decent surface for a Sheffield Shield match this season still made for front page news in Melbourne. India’s dominant win 12 months ago saw seamers encouraged but the dual spin of Ravichandran Ashwin and Ravindra Jadeja claim eight of the 20 Australian wickets. It may be that, along with the pace of Mark Wood, Jack Leach is back. If so, Anderson and Stuart Broad could start to rotate for one spot in this series, while Ollie Robinson’s bowling should see him preferred to Chris Woakes. To sum up England’s time, this would mean dropping their third highest run-scorer. Australia meanwhile welcome back Pat Cummins as captain after the elite honesty that followed his close contact with a positive Covid case, while the struggling opener Marcus Harris has been backed for one more chance by Justin Langer. Despite a surprise triumph in the T20 World Cup, Australia’s head coach began this series under pressure for his position after a year of grumbling from inside the dressing room about an apparently suffocating style. Yet on Thursday, Langer was speaking openly about his desire to secure a contract renewal next year. Instead it his English equivalent, Silverwood, who goes into Boxing Day needing his methods to translate into immediate results.The chair of West Suffolk hospital trust has resigned over a whistleblowing scandal exposed by the Guardian, as fresh questions are asked over why the trust continues to pay at least £270,000 a year to its former chief executive. Sheila Childerhouse was criticised by an independent NHS report for her failure to question senior executives who had hounded Dr Patricia Mills after Mills had raised concerns about a colleague seen injecting himself with drugs while on duty. Childerhouse has announced that she will step down in January after consultants at the Bury St Edmunds hospital told her last week that her position was “untenable”. The NHS report, by Christine Outram, found that Childerhouse failed to take up Mills’ concerns when she was sent a “confidential” email in 2018 expressing alarm that the self-injecting doctor was being allowed to continue to treat patients. When the email was passed to the chief executive, Steve Dunn, Mills was accused of trouble-making, libelling the doctor and trying to undermine the hospital’s medical director, Nick Jenkins. In the report Childerhouse was also criticised for failing to question the “extremely ill-judged” decision by executives to demand fingerprint samples from Mills and others as part of a hunt for an anonymous letter writer who alerted a grieving family to a potentially botched operation. In her resignation statement, Childerhouse said: “I recognise and take personal accountability for the failings identified in the independent review into whistleblowing, and believe it is in the best interests of the organisation, our staff, patients and community that I do.” It is understood that Childerhouse had wanted to retain Dunn, described by the former health secretary Matt Hancock as a “brilliant leader”, as chief executive. She accepted Dunn had to go only in June, when two newly appointed non-executive directors resigned over the issue. Dunn was also roundly criticised in the report. As part of his leaving deal, the trust agreed to continue to pay Dunn’s salary and perks, between £270,000 and £275,000 last year, according to the trust’s accounts, while he was on secondment to the Nuffield trust thinktank. Mills said doctors were alarmed to discover the terms of the deal. She said: “We were all really surprised to find out that Steve Dunn is in fact still employed by West Suffolk and will be until September 2022. That fact was opaque in the communication that came out when he left in July.” Separately, the trust has disclosed to Mills, under freedom of information rules, that it paid a private company, Vista Investigations, £57,388 to investigate her conduct during the affair, including £3,015 in hotel bills for the investigator. The cost of a previous external investigation into her has yet to be disclosed. Outram said the investigatory process against Mills lacked “fairness, balance and compassion”. A spokesperson for the Nuffield trust said Dunn “has accepted the failings and shortcomings around the handling of events leading up to and surrounding the whistleblowing”. Dr Jenny Vaughan, chair of the Doctors’ Association UK, said: “What is deeply concerning to us is why lead members of the executive, who were responsible, are still on the trust payroll on apparently the same terms.” She backed Mills’ calls for the managers involved to be held to account: “Without hounding people, in the way Dr Mills was treated by them, there must be accountability by management for this debacle. Saying that they ‘accept the failings and shortcomings’ in no way makes up for the damage done. Continuing to take a full pay packet while clinging to their position after such a devastating report speaks volumes about the seriousness with which these findings are being taken.” A source at the trust confirmed that Dunn was “working out the remainder of his employment, which includes his contractual notice period, at the Nuffield trust”.More than 600,000 people will be forced to isolate with Covid across the UK on Christmas Day after a record 119,789 tested positive, the highest daily figure since the pandemic began. The surge triggered by the Omicron variant means that 608,000 people who have had Covid confirmed since 18 December in England and 15 December in the rest of the UK will still be in their isolation period on 25 December, Guardian analysis shows. If daily cases remain high or rise further, in the region of 750,000 people could be barred from leaving their homes to see relatives, take a Christmas Day walk or work in vital services such as the NHS. New guidance for England issued on Wednesday cut the isolation period from 10 to seven days for those who get the all-clear from lateral flow tests. It remains at 10 days for the rest of the UK. The record 119,789 cases for the 24 hours to 9am on Thursday represents a 139% rise on the 50,023 new cases recorded two weeks ago and a 53% week-on-week increase. Wednesday was the first time the UK recorded more than 100,000 Covid cases, with Omicron the most transmissible variant so far. A further 147 people died of Covid-related causes, taking the overall number of people in the UK with Covid on their death certificate to 171,801, the seventh highest in the world. The number of daily deaths remains relatively stable. Daily hospitalisations jumped to 1,004, up from 813 the previous day and a 4.4% rise this week compared with the previous seven days. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said on Thursday that the risk of being admitted to hospital was up to 70% less for people with Omicron compared with those infected with the Delta variant. Concerns have been raised, however, about the impact of high case rates on staff numbers in sectors such as health, transport and retail. NHS England’s national medical director, Stephen Powis, said the health service was “on a war footing and staff are taking the fight to Omicron”. The number of staff days lost to Covid across NHS England hit 124,855 last week, a 38% jump from 90,277 the week before. “We are once again ramping up to deal with the rise in Covid infections and, quite rightly, staff are making every possible preparation for the uncertain challenges of Omicron,” Powis said. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said ministers would not announce any further restrictions in England before Christmas. His comments came after days of leaks and speculation about whether Boris Johnson would impose measures after Christmas. “We can’t rule out any further measures after Christmas” with Omicron moving at an unprecedented pace, the prime minister said on Tuesday. The number of people in London hospitals also reached its highest level since 27 February, figures from NHS England show, with 2,097 people as of 8am on Thursday. Across England as a whole there are 7,080 patients in hospital with Covid, compared with a peak on 18 January of 34,336. Another 16,817 cases of the Omicron strain were detected after sequencing in the past 24 hours, the UKHSA said, taking the country’s tally to 90,906. The majority of PCR tests are not sequenced, meaning the actual number is likely to be significantly higher.Virginia Woolf pinned it to “on or about” December 1910: the date at which human nature changed. “All human relations have shifted,” she wrote. “And when human relations change there is at the same time a change in religion, conduct, politics, and literature.” With less hyperbole, we might suggest that it was in the late 1950s that Black America transformed – not just with the civil rights movement, but across the whole spectrum of creativity and conduct. Aspects of this revolution have been well documented: the Birth of the Cool in jazz; the writers Ralph Ellison, James Baldwin, Richard Wright. But some of the most quotidian parts have gone underexamined. Such as clothes. Look at photos of Black American men in the 1950s and 1960s and what stands out is a coherence and growing confidence in their appearance. Here is the saxophonist John Coltrane in a soft-shouldered jacket and knitted tie, while over here is the writer Amiri Baraka in a button-down shirt and a shawl-collar cardigan. The look is smart, yet relaxed – no heavily padded suits or repp striped ties here. As the varsity jackets and penny loafers suggest, it is a style inspired by privileged white students at Ivy League colleges. You might even say it has been appropriated – and then bettered. The colour palette widens, the finishing touches are bolder: tie clips, collar pins, capped brogues. Later, this look will become known as Black Ivy. This insurgency is documented and celebrated in a new book called Black Ivy: A Revolt in Style. In his introduction, Jason Jules describes the look as “a kind of battledress, a symbolic armour worn in the nonviolent pursuit of fundamental change. Making society treat them differently meant making the mainstream see them differently first.” Think of the tenor saxophonist Sonny Rollins in a button-down shirt playing Freedom Suite, or Billy Taylor in a tweed jacket composing I Wish I Knew How It Would Feel To Be Free. The goal wasn’t merely to join the elite, it was to redefine it. However subtly done, the style was a challenge to authority. Dressing like a university student wasn’t an affectation, but a crucial part of the struggles around desegregating America’s education system. After the assassinations of Martin Luther King and Malcolm X, the political mood changed – and so did street style. Stokely Carmichael went from working alongside John Lewis in sports jackets and ties to leading the Black Panthers in dark glasses and a black leather jacket, clutching a rifle. While the term “gesture politics” is always intended as an insult, we are right now rewriting what counts as a political gesture: just consider the rows both here and in the US over the taking of the knee. Historians have long argued that enslaved people and indentured labourers showed resistance by dragging their feet or feigning incomprehension of barked orders. Something similar needs to happen with fashion, which is too often discussed as either catwalk creations or what’s in the January sales. Yet it can also be about expressing one’s self-image and beliefs. Black Ivy was about young Black Americans changing how they saw themselves – starting with the mirror by the wardrobe.Spending time with family matters enormously to human beings. There was a spectacular reminder of that truth this week. DNA from the bones and teeth of 35 people who were buried more than 5,700 years ago in a neolithic tomb in the Cotswolds showed that, fully 700 years before work began on Stonehenge, 27 of the 35 were biological relatives from five generations, including small children. The realities of neolithic life are mostly unimaginable to us today. In their care for family, on the other hand, these otherwise distant communities seem vividly relatable. What was true in prehistory is also true now. This weekend will be its annual embodiment. For most people, the Christmas holiday is the pre-eminent family occasion of the year. Its religious significance has long been secondary to its social importance. For both good and ill, this is a family time. There will be many lonely and hungry people this weekend, and there is invariably a frightening spike in domestic violence. Yet, in spite of Covid curbs, the spread of Omicron and disruptions on road and rail, around half of Britain’s population still plans to visit relatives. After the enforced isolation of Christmas 2020, this is no surprise. But, simultaneously, it is hardly a shock that greater caution than normal abounds in people’s shopping, socialising and travel behaviours. This year has been very different from the typical pre-pandemic Christmas, partly because so many staff in all parts of the economy have gone down with Omicron, but also because the combined effect of the past 20 months and the new variant’s high transmissibility means that the public is rightly cautious. The possibility of a renewed lockdown and a repetition of the last-minute disruption of 12 months ago has added to the collective restraint. The impact on some sectors of the economy has been devastating. It is a huge relief that Christmas is going ahead across the whole of Britain. Individuals need their break. So do families, communities and nations. The pressure on children has been damaging. The stress for elderly people is particularly palpable. Yet the holiday go-ahead has been a close-run thing. News that there will be no further announcements of new Covid rules in England was only confirmed by the health secretary, Sajid Javid, less than two days before the holiday. Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland have all been compelled to tweak and tighten their post-Christmas arrangements right up to the last moment. Future restrictions remain very possible. Any idea that all this is a political triumph for Boris Johnson is untrue. In the context of his past mishandling and rule-breaking, and the human losses that have flowed from his approach, the suggestion is immoral. Politically, Mr Johnson has been desperate for Christmas to go ahead, partly because he is a hedonist, partly to avoid a repetition of 2020, partly because it is a tabloid campaigning issue, but also because an intimidatingly large part of his party is recklessly opposed to any restrictions at all. Even Mr Johnson knows that the real issue here is whether, and to what extent, the economy and society can be kept going without the NHS buckling under the strain. Much of his party does not care. In this context, the possibility that the impact of Omicron on individuals may be less severe than feared is good news, if confirmed, but it is not a vindication of Mr Johnson’s handling of the pandemic. If a large section of the Tory party had had its libertarian way, Britain’s record infections, deaths and hospitalisation tallies would be larger still. It is great that the Christmas holiday is here, but the credit for that belongs to the good sense of the majority of the British public, not to the folly of their incompetent and divided government.The risk of being admitted to hospital is up to 70% less for people with Omicron compared to those infected with Delta, according to the first UK government study of its kind. People with Omicron are estimated to be between 31% and 45% less likely to go to A&amp;E compared with those with Delta, and 50% to 70% less likely to require admission to hospital, according to the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA). The early findings, described as “encouraging” and “promising”, are consistent with analysis published on Wednesday by Imperial College London and the University of Edinburgh. However, health leaders also warned that cases in the UK continued to increase at an “extraordinary rate” and that the sheer numbers of people becoming infected could still result in a significant number of people becoming seriously ill, and the risk of the NHS becoming overwhelmed. The Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) told ministers that Omicron would have to be about 90% less severe than Delta for hospital admissions not to reach previous peak levels “unless the wave peaks early for other reasons”, according to minutes published on Thursday. Scientists and health officials remained concerned that any benefit of Omicron being milder could be wiped out by large numbers of people becoming infected. The UKHSA said the new variant was more transmissible than previous ones such as Delta, and could still lead to significant numbers of people needing hospital treatment over the coming weeks. At the same time, the preliminary UKHSA data suggests that protection against Covid starts to wane 10 weeks after a booster jab, raising the prospect that a fourth dose of vaccine may be required for some in 2022. It has already been established that protection against symptomatic disease wanes after a second dose of vaccine, and then improves after a booster. However, the new UKHSA data suggests this extra protection starts to decrease more rapidly against Omicron than Delta, being about 15% to 25% lower from 10 weeks after the booster dose. Health officials stressed that although there were insufficient numbers of severe cases of Omicron yet to analyse vaccine effectiveness against hospitalisation, this was more likely to be sustained, particularly after a booster. One official said the “vast majority” of over-60s received their booster between eight and 10 weeks ago. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, the body that would decide on whether a fourth dose is required, has begun assessing the UKHSA data. One health official suggested that a first dose of a new vaccine specially targeted at Omicron might be a better option than a fourth dose of the same vaccine. The new data emerged after the UK experienced yet another record-breaking number of daily reported Covid cases, with 119,789 reported as of 9am on Thursday. The UKHSA said Omicron now accounted for 76% of Covid cases in England, making it the dominant variant. The areas with the highest rates of Omicron are London (90.2%) and the east of England (80%), while the lowest are the north-east (56.8%) and Yorkshire and Humber (71%). Dr Jenny Harries, the chief executive of the UKHSA, said: “Our latest analysis shows an encouraging early signal that people who contract the Omicron variant may be at a relatively lower risk of hospitalisation than those who contract other variants. However, it should be noted both that this is early data and more research is required to confirm these findings. “Cases are currently very high in the UK, and even a relatively low proportion requiring hospitalisation could result in a significant number of people becoming seriously ill. The best way that you can protect yourself is to come forward for your first two doses of vaccine, or your booster jab and do everything you can to stop onward transmission of the infection.” The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said: “This new UKHSA data on Omicron is promising – while two doses of the vaccine aren’t enough, we know boosters offer significant protection against the variant and early evidence suggests this strain may be less severe than Delta. “However, cases of the variant continue to rise at an extraordinary rate – already surpassing the record daily number in the pandemic. Hospital admissions are increasing, and we cannot risk the NHS being overwhelmed.”Stella McCartney took a near £2.7m salary from her fashion company last year, up more than £220,000 on the year before, while the business claimed almost £850,000 in support from the government’s furlough scheme. The designer’s pay went up despite a 26% fall in sales to £28.4m in the year to 31 December 2020, as sales in the UK more than halved, while the company recorded a pre-tax loss of £31.4m, according to accounts for Stella McCartney Limited filed at Companies House. The group made a £33.4m pretax loss the year before. The accounts show McCartney’s label, in which she sold a minority stake to the French luxury goods conglomerate LVMH in 2019, said it was dependent on additional funds being provided by its new shareholder in order to remain a going concern. LVMH, which owns a suite of high-end brands including Louis Vuitton, Christian Dior and Givenchy, had already provided additional loans of £26.3m last year, taking its total lending to the group to just over £66m. Stella McCartney Limited said the directors of Anin Star Holding, LVMH’s investment vehicle, had “indicated their intention to continue to make available such funds are needed by the company” but there could be no certainty that support would continue. The London-based fashion company, which prides itself on its environmental and ethical credentials, said its aim for 2021 was to increase sales by 4% and “significantly reduce” losses. However, the business is likely to have continued to be affected by further high street lockdowns and limits on socialising imposed during the Covid-19 pandemic. LVMH bought into McCartney’s label in 2019 just over a year after she ended her 17-year business partnership with its rival conglomerate Kering, and bought back its 50% stake in her brand. McCartney, the daughter of the former Beatle Sir Paul and the late photographer and animal rights activist Linda, designed her first jacket as a teenager. After work experience at Christian Lacroix she rose to become the creative director of the Parisian fashion house Chloé, before starting her own label in a joint venture with Kering, the owner of Gucci, in 2001. A spokesperson for Stella McCartney Limited said: “During the lockdown senior management including Stella took a salary reduction. The 2020 accounts relate to a year of transition and the effects of the pandemic on the retail sector, yet given these challenges the brands sales have remained strong. “In common with all companies within our sector, we are currently dealing with one of the most challenging periods faced by a generation, and are conducting a review in order to adapt our business to the changing economics of our industry. “Our mission to end animal cruelty and to help embed sustainability as core principles in corporate conduct has delivered real progress. We are confident we can emerge stronger and better equipped to continue the vital work towards a more sustainable future for all.”More than 35,000 British retailers and 20,000 bars and restaurants are facing significant financial distress, according to new data, while shoppers are forecast to spend almost a quarter less in physical stores this Boxing Day than before the pandemic. If fashion and footwear shops, furniture businesses and other “non-essential” retailers are allowed to remain open from 26 December, £3.94bn is expected to be spent in stores and online that day, 10% less than before the pandemic and 1% lower than last year. Spending in physical stores alone is expected to fall by 23% compared with 2019 as many shoppers avoid high streets, shopping centres and retail parks amid fears over the Omicron variant of coronavirus. The forecast for the whole post-Christmas week is not much brighter, according to a report by GlobalData for Vouchercodes. A total of £13.9bn is expected to be spent between 25 and 31 December, down 9% on 2019 and up just 1% on 2020 when many high streets were in lockdown. Online retailers will be the big winners, with over £1bn expected to be spent on Christmas Day alone as shoppers snap up bargains while digesting their festive meals. Angus Drummond, a director at VoucherCodes, said fears of a lockdown had pushed shoppers to buy before Christmas rather than waiting for discounts, a trend that he said would “negatively impact the performance of Boxing Day sales”. Meanwhile, data released by the insolvency firm Begbies Traynor revealed the parlous financial position of 55,000 retailers, bars and restaurants across the UK amid reduced footfall and cancellations during a key trading period. The figure represents an improvement on the same quarter of 2020, but a 2% rise in retailers facing financial difficulty versus the period between July and September, as inflation and supply issues continue to bite. Julie Palmer, a partner at Begbies Traynor, said: “While many bars, restaurants and hotels have flourished since the summer as the UK has reopened … many now face the prospect of trading through what is typically the leanest part of the year with the double whammy of falling trade and very limited government support.” The disappointing sales for the post-Christmas week are likely to pile pressure on businesses that have suffered because of the pandemic and months of high street lockdowns. Cancelled holidays, parties, weddings and other events have also put a dampener on clothing sales, which account for a large chunk of the retail market. City centres appear to have been hit particularly hard by advice to work from home and nervousness about sharing public transport. Data from the retail intelligence firm Springboard on Wednesday showed a 17.3% drop in footfall in central London compared with the same day last week, and regional cities have recorded a 3.4% drop. Ailing finances could lead to a wave of business failures around the latest quarterly rent day, on Christmas Eve. Creditors often step in to secure their cash before the rental bill payouts at a time of the year when businesses are likely to be more flush with cash because of festive spending. Often administrators are not called in until the new year, however, as many leases have a “Santa clause”, which gives leeway on rent payment until after the Christmas holiday. Retailers have not been included in the government’s latest £1bn bailout package, which focused support on hospitality and leisure businesses. Hospitality businesses say that up to £6,000 in grants for each outlet is not enough to make up for lost takings.Postal delivery deadlines have well and truly passed, and the window of time for a last-minute gift run has just about shut. Add rising Covid-19 cases to the mix, and a hasty trip to the mall on 24 December feels very much like panic buying. While browsing for digital presents is something we “often don’t consider” because of “the tradition of having something physically wrapped up,” professor in consumer behaviour from Queensland University of Technology, Gary Mortimer, says the pool of virtual gifting options has dramatically deepened. “Being able to sit quietly one evening and go through a whole range of virtual gifts and experiences for loved ones certainly mitigates the stress of having to battle busy shopping centres,” he says. Gifting your virtual product “I actually give a lot of virtual presents to my friends and family,” says Yulia Saf, blogger behind Miss Tourist, who spends much of her time travelling. “I do not think it ever feels like a last minute, ‘I-didn’t-have-time-to-buy-you-a-real-present’ present.” She says it is “really important” to consider what the person likes. Then it’s a matter of searching the web for “virtual gifts by interest”. Once you’ve found something that works, gifting it digitally is easy. How to gift an app on your phone There’s an app store pre-installed on most smartphones, and while most people use the store to download purchases on their own devices, you can also buy an app as a gift for someone else through them. Here’s how. On an Apple iOS device – like an iPhone or iPad – start by browsing the store for the app you’d like to gift. Once you’ve found what you want, tap the app to arrive at its detail page. There, you should see a rectangle with an arrow pointing up; that’s the action button. Tap it, and scroll through the pop-up menu until you see the “Gift App” option, then select it. From there, follow the directions to send the app as a gift, which will involve entering the contact details and a message for your recipient, setting a delivery date, and choosing a visual theme for your gift presentation. If you’re an Android user, Google Play doesn’t offer the same gifting service. But don’t worry, there is a workaround. In the Google Play Store app, tap on the Menu button. From there, select “Send gift”. Google Play allows you to gift credit for an app, rather than gifting an individual app alone. You’ll be able to enter the amount you would like to gift, and follow onscreen instructions to deliver that credit to your recipient. How to gift a subscription or experience From Netflix to Spotify, Audible, and Amazon Prime, many online streaming services and subscriptions can be sent as gifts. For most, you can find a dedicated gifting page built into a streaming product’s website. But before you buy, Andrew Zeng, digital marketer and e-commerce expert, urges you to “read the fine print”. “Many platforms will only allow you to gift a subscription to new users,” he says. The Disney+ one-year gift subscription, for instance, cannot be added to a recipient’s existing subscription. Other services do “allow gifting additional months to pre-existing users”. Just be sure to double check the terms of the gift before you place your order. Mortimer also suggests perusing virtual travel experiences. “As a result of the pandemic, we saw a lot of travel agencies doing virtual tours of places,” he says. “Jordan, Petra, all the places you’d love to get to, but can’t.” Airbnb offers virtual experiences, from trip planning sessions to tours of famous movie sets; closer to home, Indigenous travel site Welcome to Country also has digital travel sessions on offer. Zeng’s personal favourite digital present is the gift of an online class. “A friend of mine gifted an online course subscription recently, around photography and branding, as I continue to grow my business,” he says. “I found it extremely thoughtful and endearing.” Making it special You aren’t limited to sending your gift to its recipient in a trite email with a link and activation code. Saf says there are plenty of ways to make giving the gift more fun. An easy option that will personalise the gift is a video. “Just record a simple, short video of yourself with a personal message,” Zeng suggests. “As if you were to give the gift in person.” Saf also says using video can be a helpful way to teach a not-so-tech-savvy recipient how to activate their virtual gift. She recommends using Loom video, which supports recording your screen and face simultaneously. For the camera-shy, Zeng suggests pairing your virtual gift with an e-card. Easy to find for free online, some e-card sites offer digital versions of classic printed cards, featuring quirky quotes and designs you’d pick up from the local news agency. Others offer animated video cards. Both are a ribbon on top of your virtual gift which you can upload into an email and shoot over to the recipient instantly. Finally, beyond the apps, subscriptions, vouchers and e-cards, Zeng recommends gifting custom digital art. “You could use a marketplace like Etsy, find an artist and have them hand draw a self-portrait, or something of significance,” he says. “It’s all about personalisation when it comes to virtual gifts, that makes it extra special.”The government has announced that the long-awaited Afghan citizens resettlement scheme will start in January 2022. The programme will provide support for up to 20,000 Afghans, prioritising women, children and others at risk. The government says those who stood up for women’s rights, freedom of speech and the rule of law will also be prioritised under the scheme. It added that some of those already evacuated, including women’s rights activists, journalists and prosecutors, will be the first to be resettled under the scheme and will be granted indefinite leave to remain, which gives them the right to work and study. Those who worked for the British Council and the security firm Gardaworld, and alumni of the Chevening scholarship programme, will also be considered for resettlement. However, charities working with refugees have asked the government to provide more clarity about how the scheme will work. Louise Calvey, head of services and safeguarding at Refugee Action, said: “It’s vital for the thousands of Afghans stuck in hotels in the UK and the thousands more in fear of their lives in and around Afghanistan that the resettlement programme starts immediately and is properly funded. Yet ministers remain concerningly tight-lipped on crucial details, such as how many of the 20,000 people they’ve pledged to help are already in the UK, and how many additional refugees stuck overseas will be welcomed. “The government must also provide urgent clarity on how it intends to back local councils and international organisations to make sure people fleeing the Taliban quickly receive the life-saving protection and support they desperately need.” A British Red Cross spokesperson said: “We welcome the news that the UK government is set to open the resettlement programme that was promised to people within Afghanistan who need protection. “We know that resettlement programmes can be lifelines for people fleeing persecution and violence, especially when the right support is in place when they arrive in the UK. Our experience supporting a previous programme – for people from Syria – is that for these schemes to work well it has to be a real partnership between national and local government, charities like our own, but also the communities themselves, who play a vital role in welcoming those who seek safety here. “When that’s in place, the benefit [for] people affected by the crisis and the communities that welcome them is huge. We look forward to hearing more about the plan and how this will work in practice.”Energy bosses are dialling up the pressure on ministers to shield consumers from soaring gas and electricity bills, with calls on the government to set up a multibillion-pound scheme to help spread the cost to households over a number of years. Amid warnings that energy bills could rise by 50% next year, triggering a “national crisis”, suppliers such as EDF have called on the Treasury to follow other European countries by cutting VAT and green levies to bring down bills. One idea gaining traction within the industry, including at the trade body Energy UK, involves a government-administered scheme to smooth the impact across multiple years so that consumers aren’t hit all at once. Under plans sketched out by energy suppliers, one or more commercial lenders – such as banks – would cover the immediate cost that they are incurring to buy energy on wholesale markets at record prices, with a sum of at least £7bn required. The loans would not require a government guarantee, but officials would be responsible for ensuring repayments. Fans of the plan believe this could avert the need to pass on the huge increase in gas prices with an immediate hike in the energy price cap that limits what suppliers can charge bill payers. The cap is forecast to rise from £1,277 to nearly £2,000 in April without intervention. With lenders shouldering the upfront cost of wholesale energy prices, suppliers would then be able to stagger tariff increases across multiple years, repaying the lenders through an industry-wide scheme overseen by the government. Ministers and officials are understood to be considering the proposal. One industry chief executive told the Guardian this would avoid extra spending or loan guarantees from the Treasury. “The mechanism could be funded by industry, the government would just need to make sure everyone paid back their part of it and that there were no free riders,” he said. “It just needs enforcement. We need to make sure we don’t slam households with all the costs in the single year.” Dan Alchin, the deputy director of retail at Energy UK, said the plan was among a number of options that could help ease the crisis. “Italy has stepped in and helped suppliers through loan facilities to spread increases out over longer periods of time,” he said. “We’re still working through how this could work in practice but that’s one way it could be facilitated. You don’t hit people with price increases all at once, you spread it out. “We need government to be thinking about these sorts of options and to take action to mitigate the worst impacts.” On Thursday the shadow energy minister, Ed Miliband, called on the government to stop families being “clobbered” with the increased cost of heating and powering their homes, by removing VAT on bills for six months. Spain has cut energy taxes, while Germany has slashed green levies on household bills, designed to support the development of renewable energy. But Energy UK said measures like these would save less than £300, significantly less than the £600 expected rise in the average annual bill when the price cap goes up next year. Since 1 October, the cap – set by the industry regulator Ofgem – has been set at a record £1,277. It is due to change on 1 April when Ofgem is expected to raise it significantly, prompting predictions that the cap will hit £2,000 in 2022. One industry source said bills would be closer to £3,000 if energy suppliers were able to pass on the full cost of gas prices. “As it is, the price cap is hugely limiting the impact on households,” he said. “That’s a dam that will burst at some point. You can only hold the pressure for so long.” He said scrapping green levies and VAT “wouldn’t touch the sides” but that an industry-wide loan facility could have a larger impact. “We’ll still have to pay it but we’re not trying to pay off a one-in-30-year event in a single year.” EDF, the UK’s fourth biggest energy supplier, said the situation was “critical” and the government must “act now to support energy customers”. Philippe Commaret, the managing director for customers at EDF Energy, said that by next October the UK’s energy price cap “could easily exceed £2,000”. A government spokesperson said: “The energy price cap is insulating millions of customers from record increases in global gas prices and will remain in place, and at the same rate, this winter. We continue to support those most in need through our £500m household support fund, the warm home discount and winter fuel payments.”The jury in the manslaughter trial of former Minnesota police officer Kim Potter, who shot dead 20-year-old Daunte Wright during a traffic stop in April 2021, has found her guilty. The former police officer, who is white, had maintained that she made a tragic mistake when she grabbed her gun, instead of her Taser, and shot Wright, who was Black, when he was pulled over while driving in the Minneapolis suburb of Brooklyn Center. But on Thursday the jury found Potter guilty of both of the charges she faced, of first-degree and second-degree manslaughter. Potter’s bail was revoked and she was led from court in handcuffs. Sentencing is due on 8 March. Shouts of “justice” rang out outside the courthouse in Minneapolis on Thursday afternoon as protesters who had braved freezing temperatures for days awaiting the outcome praised the verdict. Almost two hours after the conviction, Daunte’s parents, Katie and Aubrey Wright, who had sat holding hands and gulping in deep breaths as they waited for the jury’s pronouncement, emerged, accompanied by Minnesota attorney general Keith Ellison, who led the prosecution of the case. Aubrey Wright began to speak, as if to thank prosecutors, but choked up after two or three words and fell silent. Katie Wright described how she “sort of let out a yelp” when the verdict came down. Asked by reporters how she felt, she added: “That moment that I heard guilty on manslaughter one [in the first degree] – every single emotion that you could imagine running through your body.” Ellison pointed out how there would be “an empty chair” at the dinner table of Daunte’s family over the holidays, after the loss of the 20-year-old, who also had a baby son called Daunte Jr. Ellison said the young man had had his whole life ahead of him and was proud to be a new father and loved his mother and siblings and “his whole beautiful family”. The attorney general chose to describe the verdict as “a degree of accountability”, rather than justice, because a life lost could not be brought back. But demonstrators outside the courthouse, braced for the possibility of yet another acquittal after a fatal police shooting, became celebratory, with a brass band showing up and a man playing When the saints come marching in on a trombone as people danced. Wright was killed while the former police officer Derek Chauvin was on trial, in the same Minneapolis court house where Potter was just convicted, for the murder of George Floyd in May 2020, sparking the biggest anti-racism uprising in the US since the civil rights movement. Floyd’s death, for which Chauvin was convicted, had become a symbol for the estimated hundreds of people killed by police in Minnesota and the wider US, and eventually for racially biased policing around the world. The sudden and violent killing of Wright in the middle of that trial ramped up tension and grieving in local communities. Unlike Chauvin’s drawn-out torture of Floyd as he died, Potter was seen on body-camera footage shocked and traumatized after killing Wright with a single shot. After shouting “Taser, Taser, Taser”, while she trained a new officer and was accompanied at the traffic stop by another officer, Potter fired at Wright, but it was her gun she was holding. She apologized while appearing on the stand as the final trial witness, testifying in her own defense, but prosecutors accused her of a “blunder of epic proportions” in Wright’s death and said a mistake was no defense, and that she was a highly-trained officer schooled in the use of both stun gun and firearm, and avoiding mix-ups. Prosecutor Erin Eldridge called Wright’s death “entirely preventable. Totally avoidable.” Potter’s attorney, Earl Gray, argued that Wright was to blame for trying to flee from police, after he tried to get back into the car to drive away as the rookie officer Potter was training was about to handcuff him. Wright’s killing prompted angry but non-violent protesters to gather in Brooklyn Center demanding justice. Demonstrator and mother Bethany Hemrich told the Guardian at the time: “They didn’t have to kill him. I feel like if it was a white person, they wouldn’t have shot him.” On Thursday afternoon, one demonstrator outside court told CNN, without disclosing her name, that “the world has changed” since Floyd’s murder. “The world can change for the better, for us Black people, I have a Black son growing up in this world,” she said, adding that it was tough to live wondering “who is the next man who is going to be killed?”Local authorities will be expected to offer “safe and appropriate” accommodation to thousands of people sleeping rough in England this winter, even where they have restricted eligibility because of immigration status, the government has confirmed. A ministerial letter sent this week instructs councils to offer accommodation and a Covid vaccination to people currently sleeping rough – and makes it clear this includes those living on the streets who have no recourse to public funds. The move was welcomed by homeless charity Shelter, which said a number of asylum seekers were refused help by some authorities during lockdown last year because they were supposedly ineligible for homelessness assistance. Polly Neate, the chief executive of Shelter, said the letter “finally” clarified the law and gave councils a clear mandate to provide accommodation for everyone sleeping rough during the current wave of Omicron infections and cold winter weather. A government programme at the start of the pandemic had been designed to halt rough sleeping while the virus was circulating. “Despite the ‘Everyone In’ scheme helping thousands off the streets and undoubtedly saving lives at the start of the pandemic, not everyone was helped,” said Neate. “We know from our own services that overstretched councils were, and are, still turning some people away”. Earlier this year a court ruled in favour of a destitute former asylum seeker, Timon Ncube, who was refused accommodation by Brighton and Hove city council during the pandemic on the grounds that he was not eligible for homelessness help. The court said the council was lawfully able to help him during a public health emergency. Separately, new data mapping the scale of destitution among migrants during the pandemic has found that thousands of people slipped through the safety net provided by the Everyone In scheme during the first 14 months of the pandemic – often because they distrusted government and were afraid to ask for help. The data was compiled by the No Accommodation Network (NACCOM) whose 138 frontline member organisations support destitute asylum seekers, refugees and migrants with no recourse to public funds across the UK. 2,771 people approached NACCOM members due to homelessness between April 2020 and June 2021, despite unprecedented levels of emergency statutory provision during Covid-19. A group of NACCOM community researchers looked at the challenges for homeless migrants during the pandemic. “You are wrestling with need for shelter, but afraid to ask for support as you do not know who you can trust,” they wrote. The research found charities provided a vital help to people who fell through gaps in government support, including 1,886 with no recourse to public funds, 829 who were refused asylum and 564 with refugee status. Another 493 with no recourse to public funds included migrants from the European Economic Area. NACCOM members provided 413,089 nights of accommodation during this period. Bridget Young, NACCOM’s director, said: “No one should have to face homelessness and destitution at any time, but for thousands of people to struggle to access safe accommodation during the Covid-19 crisis, when there was emergency support in place, is truly shocking. “While the government’s emergency support for people experiencing homelessness during Covid-19 was needed and welcomed, our data shows that people still fell through the gaps because of their immigration status, and were put at much greater risk of harm from Covid-19 as a result.” Ewan Roberts of Asylum Link in Merseyside, which helps homeless asylum seekers and others with accommodation, said some of the people they work with are too frightened to access mainstream support. “Evictions resumed in September and are continuing despite the rise in Covid infections,” Roberts said. “We had a client ring late yesterday, in a real panic saying he was being evicted: with the Christmas shutdown in place he potentially will be street homeless and outside any mainstream service”. Lauren Scott, director of Refugees at Home which provides hosts to accommodate homeless asylum seekers, refugees and others, said that she believed the hostile environment was a barrier to people with precarious immigration status seeking support from the government during the pandemic. “Work needs to be done to build up relationships of trust. But it’s hard to establish these relationships while pushing hostile environment policies.” A Government spokesperson said: “Councils should exhaust all options within the law to support those unable to access statutory homelessness assistance as a result of their immigration status. As well as working with voluntary partners, this should also include having the power to accommodate rough sleepers in a public emergency – such as if there is a risk to life. “The Everyone In scheme launched during the pandemic has helped 37,000 vulnerable people, including those not from the UK, and we are providing £2bn over the next three years and £800m this year to tackle rough sleeping and homelessness.”An absence of deal-making is one reason why Flutter Entertainment, the £20bn gambling conglomerate that encompasses Paddy Power, Betfair, Sky Bet, PokerStars and more, has been one of the worst share price performers in the FTSE 100 index this year. The stock is down by a quarter. Investors had expected the liberalising US market, where Flutter looks well-placed with its FanDuel operation, to deliver the adrenaline rush of highly priced consolidation, but it never quite happened. Two US firms made tentative offers for Entain, the Ladbrokes and Coral operator that is also big stateside, but both pulled back. It may be that the leading global players will have to compete harder with each other in the US, which is a less exciting short-term investment prospect (though probably a better one for American punters). Still, here comes Flutter with an opportunistic pre-Christmas deal to remind its shareholders that life isn’t all about US excitement. It is paying £1.62bn to buy Italian group Sisal, the country’s leading online gambling operator with a 12% share, which also has a large chain of betting shops and runs regulated lotteries in Italy, Morocco and Turkey. The purchase, says Flutter chief executive Peter Jackson, who loves his podium metaphors, will secure “a gold medal position” in a market that had been near the top of the target list. What he probably means is that it is tricky for outsiders to gain a decent online foothold in Italy because virtually all betting advertising is banned, a set-up that favours incumbents with shops. Naturally, Flutter is having to pay a pretty price – almost eight times Sisal’s expected pre-interest and pre-depreciation earnings of €248m (£211m) this year – but bagging the business before the current owner, private equity firm CVC, could float it looks a sound strategic play. The UK group will be able to inject its undoubtedly slick online expertise. What the purchase of Sisal does not do, one trusts, is signal that Flutter has ambitions to run the UK national lottery. Sisal is pitching for the job, but ownership by a leading UK bookie ought to bring disqualification. This newspaper’s recent revelation of how Sky Vegas, another Flutter operation, offered free “spins” to recovering addicts is fresh in the memory. You don’t get a medal for such mistakes. Keep online casino games and the lottery under separate roofs. Britain’s restaurants may need more than a billion, chancellor Unsurprising Omicron finding of the day: regional infection data is roughly reflected in the decline in restaurant-going. So, within the national fall of 14 percentage points in the number of seated diners in the week ending 20 December, according to the flash figures used by the Office for National Statistics, London was down 18 points and Manchester by eight. The only slight source of consolation was that Manchester diners were (marginally) more numerous than in the same period in pre-pandemic 2019. But it’s not much to cling to. Rishi Sunak should still prepare to be more generous with his support package for the hospitality sector – £1bn may not cut it.For Steven Bergwijn, it comes down to a single issue, which involves a question for Antonio Conte. Does the Tottenham manager intend to play him? If he does, then Bergwijn would be a happy man – as he was on Wednesday when Conte started him in the Carabao Cup quarter-final against West Ham. The Netherlands winger, who scored one and set up the other for Lucas Moura in Spurs’s 2-1 win, wants to succeed at the club. It is his priority. Not every player can make the step from the Eredivisie to the Premier League and Bergwijn wants to prove that he can do it, having moved from PSV Eindhoven for an initial €30m in January 2020. It has been a struggle, Bergwijn’s attempts to find his groove not helped by injuries and the club changing the manager three times. The 24-year-old has five goals and nine assists from 63 appearances – not the return that he or anybody had hoped for. But if Conte cannot grant him his minutes for whatever reason – it is too hard to find the room; he does not rate him; he does not trust him – then Bergwijn wants to be allowed to leave in January. It is an open secret that Ajax would take him on loan with an obligation to buy – they tried and failed with a move for him last summer – and clubs from Italy, Spain and Germany have contacted Spurs in recent weeks to inquire about the situation. With the World Cup looming at the end of next year, Bergwijn – who has 16 caps – is under no illusions as to the importance of regular football and the signs, so far, under Conte have not been encouraging. Before the West Ham cup tie, Bergwijn had made two substitute appearances totalling 13 minutes across seven games. He was unavailable for one of them because of illness: the Europa Conference League match at Mura. Bergwijn’s previous start – under Nuno Espírito Santo – had been in the Carabao Cup win at Burnley on 27 October and, while it is lovely to play in the tournament, it is a long way from being enough. To repeat, it is all about the league. His situation is mirrored elsewhere in the Spurs squad – most notably with Joe Rodon, Harry Winks and Dele Alli – and it will provide a litmus test for the club’s managing director of football, Fabio Paratici, in the January transfer window. Conte wants to upgrade the squad, with his biggest wishes being a centre-half and a player for the right flank, and the starting point for Paratici is that sales will be vital to the size of the budget. Conte has always been aware of this. So what can Paratici generate to spark the renewal or, to ask the question a more pertinent way, to what extent can he persuade the chairman, Daniel Levy, to cut his losses in certain areas? Take Bergwijn. He is no longer worth €30m because of the deflationary effect of the pandemic and, more to the point, because he has scored five Spurs goals in two years. It is one thing for Levy to tell clubs to forget about a loan for the player because, as everybody knows, there is next to no value in that for Spurs. A loan with an obligation to buy means that the bulk of any money raised would not be immediately available, which is not ideal and, plainly, a straight sale would be preferable. But it stands to be about compromise, realism – and that takes in the fact buying clubs are working in the same market and under the same constraints. The former Spurs manager Mauricio Pochettino became frustrated in the summer of 2019 – his last at the club – when outgoing business was slow, with stalemates taking hold and some players sitting on their contracts, their appetite for the project not as great. The dynamics were heavier; things felt clogged. Those who know Paratici describe a pragmatist who will pay more for a player he deems essential. When he was at Juventus, he did so to secure the €100m purchase of Cristiano Ronaldo in 2018. Javier Ribalta, who worked alongside Paratici at the club from 2012 to 2017 as head of scouting, noted that when needs must “you cannot lose the player for a few million”. Paratici’s mentality, he said, was to “pay and move on”. It is no great leap to see the approach extending to the sale of players. Can Paratici un-Levy Levy? It could hold the key not only to Bergwijn’s future but Conte’s tenure at Spurs.Anti-vaccination protesters who attempted to serve spurious legal papers to the former England football captain Alan Shearer delivered the documents to the wrong house, it has emerged. The former Newcastle United and Blackburn Rovers striker had encouraged people to get a Covid booster jab in a video promoted by the Premier League last week. His stance prompted anti-vaccination protesters to film themselves on Wednesday outside an address near Newcastle that they believed to be his home. In the video shared on social media, three men and a woman gathered outside a gated property and after pressing an electronic buzzer, one of them posted documents into an external letterbox. Anti-vaccination activists routinely share templates of supposed legal documents that they then film themselves depositing. However, a person who lives locally and saw the footage told the PA news agency: “That’s an old address they have for him.” In the video, the man who posted the documents says: “Everyone is going to get this, every celebrity, sick of yous. Just causing more trouble for us, lies, all lying. “That’s the truth in that letterbox there, in Alan Shearer’s fucking house.” Northumbria police said it had no involvement in the incident. In response to the video, Shearer’s fellow Match of the Day presenter Gary Lineker wrote on Twitter: “Wrong house, wrong cause, all kinds of wrong.” It is not the first time that anti-vaccine protesters have gone to the wrong location for a demonstration. In August, a group stormed what they thought was a major BBC building – unaware that the corporation had largely moved out in 2013. Rather than target the BBC’s news operation, which they held responsible for promoting Covid-19 vaccines, a handful of protesters gained access to Television Centre in west London, which is predominantly rented by ITV. In October, anti-jab demonstrators targeted the home of the TV and radio presenter Jeremy Vine and tried to serve what it called an “anti-vaxx writ” while he was out, instead handing it over to his wife. In the same month, protesters gathered for a demonstration at the home of the GP and broadcaster Dr Hilary Jones.Joan Didion, who has died aged 87, inspired writers and readers for decades. Her journalism, memoirs, and cultural and political commentary made her a unique chronicler of 20th-century culture. Here are 23 quotes that encapsulate her writing: On life We tell ourselves stories in order to live. – The White Album (1979) Character – the willingness to accept responsibility for one’s own life – is the source from which self-respect springs. – Slouching Towards Bethlehem (1968) I write entirely to find out what I’m thinking, what I’m looking at, what I see and what it means. What I want and what I fear. – Why I Write (essay originally published in the New York Times Book Review in 1976) To free us from the expectations of others, to give us back to ourselves – there lies the great, singular power of self-respect. – Self-respect: Its Source, Its Power (essay originally published in Vogue in 1961) You have to pick the places you don’t walk away from. – A Book of Common Prayer (1977) The fancy that extraterrestrial life is by definition of a higher order than our own is one that soothes all children, and many writers. – The White Album (1979) [O]ne of the mixed blessings of being twenty and twenty-one and even twenty-three is the conviction that nothing like this, all evidence to the contrary notwithstanding, has ever happened to anyone before. – Slouching Towards Bethlehem (1968) There’s a point when you go with what you’ve got. Or you don’t go. – a The Paris Review interview (1978) I did not always think he was right nor did he always think I was right but we were each the person the other trusted. – The Year of Magical Thinking (2005) On loss Life changes fast. Life changes in the instant. You sit down to dinner and life as you know it ends. – The Year of Magical Thinking (2005), which explores grief following the death of her husband We forget all too soon the things we thought we could never forget. We forget the loves and the betrayals alike, forget what we whispered and what we screamed, forget who we were. – On keeping a notebook, from Slouching Towards Bethlehem (1968) I know what the fear is. The fear is not for what is lost. What is lost is already in the wall. What is lost is already behind the locked door. The fear is for what is still to be lost. – Blue Nights (2011) There is no real way to deal with everything we lose. — Where I Was From (2003) We are imperfect mortal beings, aware of that mortality even as we push it away, failed by our very complication, so wired that when we mourn our losses we also mourn, for better or for worse, ourselves. As we were. As we are no longer. As we will one day not be at all. – The Year of Magical Thinking (2005) Grief turns out to be a place none of us know until we reach it. – The Year of Magical Thinking (2005) On literature and writing In time of trouble, I had been trained since childhood, read, learn, work it up, go to the literature. Information was control. – The Year of Magical Thinking (2005) I am still committed to the idea that the ability to think for one’s self depends upon one’s mastery of the language. – Slouching Towards Bethlehem (1968) I think we are well advised to keep on nodding terms with the people we used to be, whether we find them attractive company or not. Otherwise they turn up unannounced and surprise us, come hammering on the mind’s door at 4 a.m. of a bad night and demand to know who deserted them, who betrayed them, who is going to make amends. – Slouching Towards Bethlehem (1968) You get the sense that it’s possible simply to go through life noticing things and writing them down and that this is OK, it’s worth doing. That the seemingly insignificant things that most of us spend our days noticing are really significant, have meaning, and tell us something. – The Paris Review interview (2006). On places Los Angeles weather is the weather of catastrophe, of apocalypse, and, just as the reliably long and bitter winters of New England determine the way life is lived there, so the violence and the unpredictability of the Santa Ana affect the entire quality of life in Los Angeles, accentuate its impermanence, its unreliability. The wind shows us how close to the edge we are. – Slouching Towards Bethlehem (1968) New York was no mere city. It was instead an infinitely romantic notion, the mysterious nexus of all love and money and power, the shining and perishable dream itself. – Slouching Towards Bethlehem (1968) A place belongs forever to whoever claims it hardest, remembers it most obsessively, wrenches it from itself, shapes it, renders it, loves it so radically that he remakes it in his image. – The White Album (1979) I’m not telling you to make the world better, because I don’t think that progress is necessarily part of the package. I’m just telling you to live in it. Not just to endure it, not just to suffer it, not just to pass through it, but to live in it. To look at it. To try to get the picture. To live recklessly. To take chances. To make your own work and take pride in it. To seize the moment. And if you ask me why you should bother to do that, I could tell you that the grave’s a fine and private place, but none I think do there embrace. Nor do they sing there, or write, or argue, or see the tidal bore on the Amazon, or touch their children. And that’s what there is to do and get it while you can and good luck at it.” – UC Riverside commencement address (1975). Which are your favourite Didion quotes or books? In what ways did her work inspire you? Share your thoughts in the comments below. • This piece was amended on 23 December 2021 to remove some text that had not been edited before launch.Doctors have made an urgent plea to keep Christmas celebrations small as scientists said mounting evidence that the Omicron variant of coronavirus is milder may not be enough to stop the NHS being overwhelmed. In the first government study of its kind, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) found that the risk of being admitted to hospital is up to 70% less for people with Omicron compared with those infected with Delta. But the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) warned ministers that the new variant would have to be about 90% less severe for hospital admissions not to reach previous peak levels, “unless the wave peaks early for other reasons”, according to minutes published on Thursday. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, welcomed the UKHSA findings as “promising” but said cases were rising at an “extraordinary rate” and it was still “too early to determine next steps”. The Scottish government announced on Thursday that nightclubs would close for three weeks from 27 December, the latest in a series of Covid curbs introduced by the devolved governments in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The UK government has said no further measures in England will be announced before Christmas. Official data on Thursday showed there were 119,789 new Covid infections across the UK in the previous 24 hours – a record number – meaning more than 600,000 people will be in isolation on Christmas Day. A further 147 coronavirus deaths were recorded on Thursday, with daily deaths relatively stable. With millions of Britons now already with their Christmas companions or travelling to spend the weekend with family or friends, Dr Nick Scriven, a past president of the Society for Acute Medicine, told the Guardian: “I personally would advocate caution, especially as the Omicron variant seems so transmissible, even if only for a few days. “What I mean by this is doing lateral flow tests before any gatherings and perhaps limiting the numbers people mix with over the next few days. [And] if you are not fully vaccinated with a booster, I would be very cautious about mixing outside your family circle.” In a pointed reminder of revelations of rule-breaking get-togethers involving Downing Street last Christmas, Scriven, a senior doctor in Yorkshire, said: “We are really relying on people doing what experts suggest and not using politicians as role models.” Dr Andrew Goddard, the president of the Royal College of Physicians, acknowledged that while people may find it hard to avoid being in a large group, they should do so to help limit soaring sickness absence among NHS staff. “While we are all looking forward to time with loved ones this year, we need to think very carefully about the number of people we mix with over the next couple of weeks. That’s not a message people want to hear and not one that’s easy to deliver. But if we aren’t cautious, we risk the number of available health and care staff falling to very dangerous levels,” Goddard said. NHS England data released on Thursday showed that the number of health service staff days lost to Covid in England soared by 38% last week, to 124,855. Hospital bosses privately voiced deep unease that the sharp rise, coming on top of the service’s almost 100,000 vacancies, could hinder its ability to cope with a feared wave of hospitalisations driven by the new variant. Prof Stephen Powis, NHS England’s national medical director, declared that the NHS was “on a war footing”. Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said the service was facing “a double emergency” of a growing number of staff off sick at the same time as hospitalisations because of the virus were rising sharply. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, cautioned that despite Omicron being milder, the health service could still come under very serious pressure. “We still don’t have conclusive data in terms of what impact Omicron could have in terms of level of hospitalisations. We have some very early studies, but it’s a bit like trying to predict the result of a football game when you’re only a third of the way through,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. The leader of Britain’s family doctors also advised restraint in personal behaviour in the face of Delta and Omicron fuelling a new surge in Covid cases. “Even if vaccinated, it’s important that people behave cautiously while new cases remain high,” said Prof Martin Marshall, the chair of the Royal College of GPs. As well as wearing a mask, washing their hands and practising social distancing, people should be prepared to isolate over Christmas if they test positive in order to not spread Covid to others, he added. According to the UKHSA research, people with Omicron are between 31% and 45% less likely to go to A&amp;E compared with those with Delta, and 50% to 70% less likely to require admission to hospital. The early findings are consistent with analysis published on Wednesday by Imperial College London and the University of Edinburgh. Lockdown-sceptic Conservatives have seized on the analysis as fresh evidence to support the idea that more restrictions are unnecessary. “It does look like it’s less severe,” said Mark Harper, the chair of the backbench Covid Recovery Group. “I just don’t buy the idea you’re going to have immense numbers of people in hospital, given that most people have been boosted now. You might want to have some guidance, but I can’t see much of a case for restrictions, to be honest.” Harper was among the 100 Conservative MPs who voted against the introduction of compulsory Covid passes this month. Boris Johnson has promised to recall parliament if he decides stricter rules are needed in the coming days, but he would be likely to face a fierce backlash from his own MPs, including in cabinet. One minister told the Guardian they believed the UKHSA analysis, together with “people’s self-control” and higher immunity from the booster campaign, supported the idea that “draconian” restrictions could be avoided.Tributes have been paid to Jon Snow, known to TV viewers for his loud ties and calm anchoring of Channel 4 News for more than three decades, as the 74-year-old journalist signed off on his last programme. Snow, whose memorable appearances have ranged from grilling government ministers to reports from war zones, will continue to work with Channel 4 on long-form projects and spend more time focusing on his charitable work. On Thursday night, in his emotional closing remarks, he paid tribute to his colleagues and the regulators “that have given us an hour of independent news in primetime”. He also praised “all the people who have trusted me with their stories, all over the world, often in appalling circumstances,” and the viewers, saying: “It has been the greatest privilege of my life to bring you the news.” The show closed with him walking through the newsroom saying farewell to colleagues. It ended with credits with his name next to the titles of Voice, Mentor, Leader, Inspiration, Driving Force, Moral Compass and Friend. Krishnan Guru-Murthy, a member of the Channel 4 News presenting team, described Snow on Twitter as an “extraordinary human being, who’s been there at some of the most amazing moments of history.” He wrote: “He’s always been the most energetic, enthusiastic, committed and questioning TV journalist – who has brought compassion and humanity to his reporting wherever he goes. Viewers love him. And even those politicians who disagree and get angry with him respect him.” The Channel 4 News correspondent Ciaran Jenkins shared a video of Snow performing a sea shanty that went viral on TikTok earlier this year. “The legendary @jonsnowC4 presents @Channel4News for the last time tonight. A superb journalist, unique communicator and an inspiration to so many of us,” he said. Referencing the lyrics of the shanty, Jenkins added: “‘One day when the tonguing is done we’ll take our leave and go.’ “We’ll miss you so much Jon.” The ITV News presenter Lucrezia Millarini described Snow as a legend, adding: “Wow. A constant on-screen presence in my household growing up. Then I was lucky enough to work in the same building.” Snow, whose father was the bishop of Whitby, started his career in journalism at LBC in 1973 and moved to ITN in 1976, where he served as Washington correspondent and diplomatic editor. He became the main presenter of Channel 4 News in 1989. Channel 4 has previously said Snow will now “focus on his charities and some of his many passions in life, people’s stories, inequality, Africa, Iran and the arts”. The veteran broadcaster spoke last month to the Observer about becoming a father again at 74, and of being thought of as “a mad, bonkers, lefty oddity”.• Owing to a production error, the solution to Monday’s Word wheel was given as HYDRAULIC instead of REDUNDANT (21 December, G2, p12). Also, the target scores for Tuesday’s puzzle should have been: “Excellent-32. Good-27. Average-20.” • Public bill committee debates are open to the public, contrary to what a column on parliamentary reform said (Crumbling and weak – that is Johnson, but it’s also parliament, 17 December, Journal, p3). • Other recently amended articles include: The Guardian view on Boris Johnson: pandemic authority draining away Lady Hallett to chair spring public inquiry into Covid pandemic Star Hobson: victim of an ‘immature’ mother and her violent partner Hurrah for Barbados! Can the UK be next? ‘It’s hypocrisy, pure and simple’: growing public anger over No 10 party The JCB heir with big money in green energy EU working to amend genocide denial law that is blamed for Bosnia crisis Silent hike, holy hike: a thoughtful country walk in Sussex to ease the soul China riveted by public row between pop star and former wife Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.Everyone has a favourite ghost in Ghosts. Mine, in direct opposition to my feelings in the bloodless world of the living, is Julian. Simon Farnaby’s Teflon-coated sleazy Tory (distinguishing feature: no trousers) died mid-shag with an MP called Lindsay during a 90s fundraiser. He is such a blowhard that he is the only ghost in Britain’s friendliest haunted house who can move things – if he concentrates really hard and makes a ridiculous amount of noise. With his pants down. Anyway, Julian is on top form in the Christmas special (BBC One), which is as much of a hot-water bottle for the heart as you would expect it to be. He rails against the rough sleeper who has pitched his tent on Button Hall’s land: “I don’t want to sound all not-in-my-back-yard, but you really don’t want one in your own back yard.” Then he does a U-turn. Which, of course, is really a lie: “I’m no liberal, but ejecting a vagrant at Christmas? I would never, ever stoop so low!” Most yuletidey of all, Julian teaches the other ghosts how to lie. Who knew that nothing would get me more in the mood for Christmas 2021 than a gentle, family-friendly, completely on-the-nose jibe about dissembling Tories? “There is nothing that can’t be lied about,” he brags, smashing his knuckles into his palm. “Or rather, there is no truth that cannot be avoided.” When lying, Julian concludes, it is best to answer a question with another question. “Does that actually work?” asks Pat whose questions tend more towards the annual Christmas quiz. “Do you want it to work?” Julian bats back. “See!” This is everything you want from a Christmas special. It is funny, festive and features Jennifer Saunders channelling Mrs Bennet as Lady Fanny’s overbearing mother, which is without a shadow of a doubt the most sparkly sentence I have written this season. It is also perfect casting; Martha Howe-Douglas’s Fanny, with her chin-wattling expressions and overstated grandeur, is clearly modelled on vintage French and Saunders sketches. Ghosts, which rose like the dead from Horrible Histories, has always done a fine line in backstories and this one is a doozy. Fanny, it turns out, was a young mathematical genius (check out her yorkshire pudding long division if you don’t believe me) who desperately wanted to help her father escape penury. But her Edwardian mother – Saunders – was more interested in keeping up appearances and marrying her off to the next rich sod. When their house was repossessed at Christmas, Fanny was forced to marry the wayward son of rich cousins the Buttons to save them from the streets. We know how that one turned out, what with her being thrown out of the window by her gay husband and all. My only criticism of this tragic tale? The missed opportunity. Dawn French would have been the perfect bailiff. The old-fashioned – indeed, Christian – message entwined through it all like tinsel is about helping those less fortunate than ourselves. Everyone reacts to the homeless man differently. Alison wants him to stay and microwaves him a cottage pie (which he gives to his dog because “I lost my house, not my tastebuds”). Mike fears he will ruin their “quiet Cooper Christmas” and toys with calling the police. Then we learn his backstory. He is ex-navy (“civilians with fancy hats!” exclaims the Captain), his name is Nicholas, he makes a mean haricot bean stew, he has a dog called Rudy and he wears a red beanie. No wonder Kitty, who is basically festive spirit in the spectral form of a Georgian noble, thinks he is Father Christmas. All she wants for Christmas is a tiny, singing-and-dancing Santa with a saxophone reduced online from £14.99 to £11.24. It is in such pathetic details that Ghosts scales the heady – or should I say headless? – heights. Ghosts is like the best roast potatoes – soft on the inside and Christmassy all year round. Partly, it is the subject matter: ghosts have been festive since Dickens sent one to sort out Ebenezer Scrooge. But it is also the feelings this classic British sitcom – and how many of those do we have at the moment? – induces. Three gloriously silly series in, Ghosts remains hilarious, erudite and sweet, with a gag ratio so high, and of such consistently high quality, that even a joke about lying politicians can make you feel all warm, fuzzy and – sorry, there is no other word for it – irreparably British inside. Yes, I experience curious and long-latent feelings of pride when I watch Ghosts. Indeed, Button Hall may be among the last safe spaces in this country where it is OK to resurrect long-dead feelings of nostalgia (even if it is plagued by ghosts who never shut up). How spooky is that?At least three arts organisations have pulled out of Sydney festival over a sponsorship deal with the Israeli embassy, amid calls for a boycott. The protests, backed by a coalition of Arab and pro-Palestinian organisations and assorted artists and academics, are over a $20,000 sponsorship deal to stage a production of the Israeli choreographer Ohad Naharin’s Decadance by the Sydney Dance Company. So far, Blake Prize-winning artist Khaled Sabsabi, Malyangapa and Barkindji rapper Barkaa, South Asian dance company Bindi Bosses, the Arab Theatre Studio, the Bankstown poetry slam and comedian Nazeem Hussain have pulled out of the 2022 festival. According to a statement released on Wednesday by the Palestinian Justice Movement Sydney, the sponsorship deal was sealed in May, the same month Israeli armed forces launched a series of air attacks on Gaza, killing a number of Palestinian civilians. “Palestine advocates call on all opponents of apartheid to boycott the 2022 Sydney Festival,” the statement said. “By partnering with Israel, Sydney festival will … contribute to the normalisation of an apartheid state.” In an open letter published on the Meanjin website on Thursday, a coalition of artists and writers said that they considered the Sydney festival’s continued partnership with the Israeli embassy was “disgraceful” and accused the festival of “creating a culturally unsafe environment for Arab artists and audiences who want to be part of the festival but who now cannot, in good conscience, participate as they bear witness to the slaughter, occupation and oppression of Palestinians”. Naharin has stated on a number of occasions his support in principle for the Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions (BDS) movements’s agenda on human rights for the Palestinian people. But, responding to request from Brian Eno to cease using his musical works in an Israeli embassy-sponsored Batsheva Dance Company production in Tel Aviv in 2016, the choreographer described such boycotts as “lazy” and “essentially useless”, adding he believed there were more effective ways of helping the Palestinian cause. In a statement provided to Guardian Australia on Thursday, a festival spokesperson said it would not be terminating its agreement with the Israeli embassy. “The festival is unwavering in its commitment to ensuring a culturally safe space for all artists, employees and audiences,” the statement said. “[The festival] will be reviewing all funding arrangements with embassies and cultural organisations to ensure that any continuance of these partnerships are compatible with maintaining a welcoming and culturally safe environment moving forward.” In an earlier statement this week, the Sydney festival board said it was unable to support the BDS movement as requested by the coalition (which includes the Arab Australian Federation, Greens for Palestine, Independent Australian Jewish Voices, Jews against the Occupation Sydney, the Sydney representative for BDS and United Australian Palestinian Workers) because the festival was a nonprofit, non-political organisation. One of the co-authors of the Meanjin letter is writer Michael Mohammed Ahmad, who was due to join the festival board later this year and has now rejected the appointment. The open letter described the festival’s position as “a hollow claim given the Festival is politically aware enough to platform First Nations and ‘minority’ or ‘diverse artists’. “How is it that the festival can reconcile its commitment to Indigenous solidarity here while legitimising and normalising relations with a settler colonial apartheid state that maintains a system of racism, subjugation and land theft against Palestinians?” the letter asked. Writer and academic Anita Heiss tweeted: “For an arts festival to claim they are apolitical is embarrassing to say the very least.” A statement from the Israel embassy in Canberra sent to the Guardian on Thursday said: “Israel has always and will continue to promote cultural exchange and engage in cultural dialogue in numerous countries including Australia. “Culture is a bridge to coexistence, cooperation and rapprochement and should be left out of the political arena.” Earlier this year the Melbourne Queer film festival faced a similar backlash for screening an Israeli state-funded film.The writing of Joan Didion, who has died 87, was mantra-like, mannered, even “set in its own modulations” (that was Martin Amis’s snipe). It was also unique and remarkable. Even the shape of her books was uncommon, the sentences spaced on pages as tall and narrow as king-sized cigarette packets. She had practised that incantatory style since her mother had presented her, aged five, with a notebook and a suggestion that she calm her anxious self by writing. Her family had long been settled in California, then chiefly an agricultural state, a location that mattered to Didion’s story, and to her story-telling. She was born in Sacramento, the daughter of Eduene (nee Jerrett) and Frank Didion, a finance officer with the US army, poker player, and, after the second world war, a real estate dealer. Joan was an army brat on her father’s stations, and her juvenile fantasies set out in that notebook were doomy – death in the desert, suicide in the surf. The only printed influence on her work she ever cited was Ernest Hemingway, as she had typed out his prose in order to master the keyboard and his syntax: the exact placement of words was the basis of her style as it had been of his. “Grammar is a piano I play by ear,” she claimed. Studying English literature at the University of California, Berkeley, taught her to audit meaning, dissect language and triangulate evidence, and modified her original ambition, acting, into writing as performance. Didion won Vogue’s Prix de Paris contest in 1956, and was rewarded with a copywriter’s job, dogsbodying with proximity to glamour, in New York, rising to associate features editor over eight years at Condé Nast. She said later that she had been in love with the city’s promise, excited by meeting whoever was in town — models, millionaires, magnates — but had remained an exiled westerner not at home in New York. With a portable typewriter perched on a chair in her almost empty apartment, she wrote a novel about the Californian rivers she so missed. Those waterways are the real lead in her first novel, Run River (1963). John Gregory Dunne, a staffer on Time magazine and also a self-declared outsider, edited it. They married in 1964, and moved to Los Angeles temporarily, sure that his older brother, the producer Dominick Dunne, would be their entree to screenwriting. That scenario did not quite play out, and both had to turn to magazine journalism for an income. Didion categorised some of her essays, with their first-person viewpoint and fiction-like fine detail, as “Personals”, but in fact they were about the world as seen by a social and political conservative from the last American generation to identify with adults. A tiny, unnerved and unnerving figure behind vast dark glasses, she was derisive of lax language and dismissive of unformed thought on both the left and right. She did not care to negotiate interviews with stars via their press agents. She believed she could pass unnoticed anywhere: among the residue of the Hollywood studios and the creatives of the new music business; in arid valley towns and LA’s dustier districts; around the coagulating hippy counterculture in San Francisco. Her descriptions of her crippling social anxiety, her inability to make a phone call to get an assignment under way, did not accord with others’ memories of her taking laps of the room at swelegant parties. Didion’s first book of collected journalism, Slouching Towards Bethlehem, published in 1968, the year in which she had a breakdown, established her reputation for cool and very slowly became a cult: as the writer Caitlin Flanagan remembered, Didion “had fans – not the way writers have fans, but the way musicians and actors have fans – and almost all of them were female”. That coolness was confirmed by her second novel, Play It As It Lays (1970), with its zomboid leading woman on Hollywood’s perimeter, so chilled a fiction that Didion’s editor, Henry Robbins, called her to ask if she was all right. Possibly not, but she was getting by. The next year the couple had their first script onscreen, The Panic in Needle Park, and then their 1972 adaptation of Play It As It Lays flopped. Didion’s literary identity became clearer than that of her husband, with whom she shared preoccupations and phrasing, which added edge to their joint 1976 refettling of A Star Is Born to Barbra Streisand’s specifications. Didion continued the essays, more personal yet, collected in 1979 as The White Album, and developed an idea she had had when trapped by paratyphoid in a hotel room during a Colombian film festival into A Book of Common Prayer (1977), her first fictional engagement with the role and image of the US in Central and Latin America. At that point all the elements were in play that recurred in her fact and fiction. There was her concentration on the Americas – she had visited Europe and Israel, but disclaimed interest in them – and on the Hispanic influx into the US, which, as a Californian, she was aware of very early. Her books of reportage, El Salvador (1982) - “One morning at the breakfast table I was reading the newspaper and it just didn’t make sense,” she wrote of US press coverage of Salvador’s internal war, and immediately flew there to inspect the body dumps – and Miami (1987), were descriptions of equal and opposite cultural misunderstandings. She felt that the US political process had become self-contained, exclusive of the electorate and, from the presidency of Ronald Reagan onwards, of reality itself – as depicted in the essays anthologised in After Henry (1992) and Political Fictions (2001) and her occasional 21st century pieces. This perception also fed into her best and most successful novel, Democracy (1984), which could be read as a romance, or – as was also true of her 1996 novel The Last Thing He Wanted – as an exploration of private connections to public power. The political could not have been made more personal. The greater constant in Didion’s work, though, was the intersection of public and private mood with place – Hawaii febrile in tropical rain, Los Angeles fractious as the Santa Ana winds blew through. Readers came to know the homes she had passed through – the Malibu beach premises on the edge of the fire season burn zone, the “house in a part of Hollywood that had once been expensive and was now described as a ‘senseless killing neighbourhood’”, the Manhattan apartment with the Cy Twombly artwork, plus a travel itinerary of grand hotels. They became even more familiar with the older California that she kept recalling all the way up to her memoir Where I Was From (2003), in which she finally admitted that her apprehension of her native state had been a misapprehension, an “enchantment under which I lived my life”. It was not the place she had thought it, and it never had been, all the way back to the settlers’ wagon trains and their encounters with rattlesnakes. By then, she seemed to feel that reality was dispelling all enchantments from her life. The lives of Didion and Dunne had been mostly funded by their remunerative rewrites for the screen, although their joint “implied promise of quality” had been delivered in the adaption of Dunne’s novel True Confessions (1981), and rather less so in a prolonged project, Up Close and Personal, filmed in 1996 as a vehicle for Robert Redford. They supported each other in public over their career compromises, but there had been fights and near-splits in the marriage. They once holidayed in the Royal Hawaian hotel “in lieu of filing for divorce”, and Dunne left to live alone in Vegas for a while when it was his turn for a breakdown. But it had survived, stronger than a mutual defence pact. Dunne died of a heart attack at their dinner table in Manhattan in 2003, a sudden exit that Didion described in The Year of Magical Thinking (2005), her book of grief and disbelief. It was critically admired for its honesty and clarity, and adapted for the stage. Didion delayed Dunne’s funeral until their daughter Quintana had recovered from the pneumonia and septic shock that had put her into hospital intensive care. But her recovery was brief and Quintana died just before the book’s publication. Didion and Dunne had adopted the baby on the day of her birth in 1966, and called her after a Mexican state. She became a familiar player in their pieces, often quoted, described as an insouciant user of hotel room service when accompanying her mother on book tours. In Blue Nights (2011), Didion suggested quite another story of Quintana as a Hollywood child who feared abandonment, was suicidal, diagnosed as manic depressive, and in adulthood had had difficult encounters with her birth family. However, the true subject of Blue Nights was Didion, alone and a long way from California; there could be no going back to places so changed. Her last works, South and West (2017) and Let Me Tell You What I Mean (2021) collected her “field notes” and early writing. • Joan Didion, novelist and essayist, born 5 December 1934; died 23 December 2021Trying to keep a lid on the hype that surrounds Alfie Barbeary is like swimming against the tide. Wasps’ head coach, Lee Blackett, has done his best – railing at how even before he made his Premiership debut it was considered a matter of when, not if, he toured with the British &amp; Irish Lions – but a hat-trick on his first league start last year, aged 19, blew the lid straight off. He has since been included in England squads – he had been into camp even before that match against Leicester last September – and his raw potential, his eye-catching ball-carrying for someone so young has been evident whenever he has taken the field since. The trouble is, that has happened all too infrequently because Barbeary has been blighted by persistent injuries ever since bursting on to the stage. Wasps’s last match – the European defeat by Munster this month – was only his seventh start since that hat-trick, and his third appearance of the season, amid syndesmosis near the ankle and hamstring injuries. They have been all the more frustrating because there have been brief comebacks along the way and as Blackett, whose side host London Irish on Boxing Day, recently lamented: “His last two games he’s played in, he’s got injured in the warmup.” Still he has managed to show why he is so highly-rated – he scored within four minutes of coming on against Gloucester in November and he was impressive against Munster before being withdrawn at half-time due to a tight hamstring. His willingness to accept that decision, however, is a sign of his growing maturity. Barbeary has an endearing love for his sport – put simply, he is desperate to be on the field and never happier bulldozing defenders backwards. As far as his recent injury troubles are concerned he has, at times, been his own worst enemy but after a decision was taken, in consultation with Eddie Jones, to permanently relocate from hooker to the back row it feels like the 21-year-old is beginning a new chapter. “I always say centre and a bit fluffy round the edges,” says Barbeary. “Right now I’m going to focus on back-row, that’s where I can do the best for Lee at Wasps. We’ll see what happens but I’m going back-row for the future. I hadn’t really played at hooker for about a year – since before Covid – so I had played more at back-row, was really enjoying it and getting in the team. “And in terms of going back to hooker, there was uncertainty about getting in the team. I spoke to my mum and dad; Dad has always seen me as a back-row. I was enjoying it a lot more, there was more freedom, so I decided to go ahead and stay there. Hopefully it’s the right decision. “[Eddie and I] had a discussion in terms of what I was thinking. But I think it was more my decision more than anything else in terms of where I saw myself and where I wanted to play, rather than his [decision]. It was more about what I was thinking to let him know more than anything else.” If Barbeary comes across as brash in telling Jones how things will be – rather than vice versa – there is roguishness to him that England’s head coach will no doubt embrace. As difficult a decision as it may have been to switch positions, the logic is pretty simple – in the back row Barbeary can get his hands on the ball more and given he can be box office when he does it seems a no-brainer. “I’ve got lots of enjoyment out of my ball-carrying and trying to beat defenders,” he adds. “At hooker it’s a lot harder to get on the ball. At set-piece you’re either throwing into the lineout or in the middle of a scrum, so being in the back row I can be part of that but very easily get on to the ball in terms of second phase. It is just easier for me to get into the game when I get those first few carries but at hooker it could take a while. Back-row flows a bit easier.” It may mean that the England team is that little bit harder to get into but Barbeary demonstrates the maturity that Blackett lauds when assessing whether that came into his thinking. “You look at the back row in England and there are so many talents and it does make you wonder but I know I play my best rugby if I’m in the position I want to play in. I could go all right at hooker but I might not enjoy it as much and that might show in my game play so I thought, ‘I’ve got to do this for me’, and if things happen, things happen.” The key now is keeping the persistent injuries at bay. Barbeary admits he is learning how to better manage his body now and under the tutelage of Joe Launchbury and Jack Willis – both of whom are still out with long-term injuries – he has stuck to his rehab regime. Beneath his lighthearted demeanour is a fierce competitor – someone who would flip the Monopoly board if they were losing, says Blackett – and the penny appears to have dropped that he has to manage his body as well as putting it on the line to such devastating effect. “I’ve never been too keen sat watching in the crowd so you can imagine how much these last eight months have killed me,” Barbeary says. “[But] I’ve just got to keep being positive and if things don’t always go the right way, just remember that we’re lucky to be in this as a job and try and take everything from it. I think Lee and I are similar in terms of how competitive we are. I’m not one who likes losing, I’m not sure anyone is, but it does ruin your weekend when you don’t get a win. I’d say Lee is more the one who flips the board, I’m the one picking up the money after he’s flipped it!”Steve Clarke has dropped a heavy hint that Ryan Fraser will not feature for Scotland any time soon. Fraser irked the Scotland coaching staff by withdrawing from the squad for crucial matches against Moldova and Denmark last month citing a calf problem, but was subsequently pictured on the training ground of his club, Newcastle United. Clarke has revealed that he has not spoken with Fraser and has no apparent desire to do so. “He wasn’t involved through his own choice in the November games,” the manager said. “To be honest I don’t think we missed him. I thought the team was good in both games so Ryan could have his work cut out to be back in the squad. That’s just the nature of the competition for places. It’s not a squad that you want to give up your place in lightly.” The manager reaffirmed his earlier position of not “pestering” his players between international camps in respect of whether he should hold a meeting with Fraser. It is clear, though, that he demands firm commitment from all squad members. “It’s a conversation for March [before Scotland play Ukraine],” Clarke said. “He has to get into his team. He doesn’t play regularly at Newcastle, he is in and out of the team. “I wouldn’t like to think the whole year ends up speaking about someone who’s chosen not to be in the squad rather than the boys who have. Lyndon Dykes came to play when his ankle was hanging off. He came and he tried a training session. He wanted to fly to Moldova just to watch. He joined us in Glasgow and took part in a training session and five minutes into the session you could see the boy was injured. But he didn’t want to admit it because he wanted to be part of the team and he wanted to play against Denmark. That’s the type of player I want.” Having originally been confident of an amnesty regarding bookings and potential suspensions carried over from qualifying groups into World Cup play-offs, Clarke now believes the existing scenario will stand. “We will have eight or nine on a yellow card against Ukraine with the threat of missing the final if we got there,” he said. “That’s a shame.”Mikel Arteta knows time is ticking on Arsenal’s efforts to resolve the futures of their senior strikers, several of whom enter the second half of the season with their next career moves in serious doubt. Alexandre Lacazette and Eddie Nketiah are out of contract at the end of the campaign, with little headway having been made in keeping them on. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, usually the first-choice centre-forward, is currently frozen out after a string of misdemeanours that lost him the captaincy, and the promising Folarin Balogun is likely to see his suitability for senior football assessed in a loan move. It leaves the in-form Gabriel Martinelli, contracted until at least 2024, as the only striker whose prospects appear secure. Asked about the cloud hanging over his front line, Arteta said: “We have a cloud and the cloud is there and, at the moment, we’re not able to change it. We’re working on it to try to make it as small as possible and as clear as possible, but it’s the situation we are in because contracts have details, the timing of them is tricky and we are trying to resolve it.” The situation is particularly uncertain given Nketiah and Lacazette, who might once have been considered dispensable, have impressed Arteta in recent weeks. He is delighted with the way Lacazette has stepped up since taking the armband from Aubameyang, and he reiterated that he would like Nketiah to stay after the 22-year-old scored a hat-trick against Sunderland in the Carabao Cup on Wednesday. At 30, Lacazette is unlikely to be a viable long-term option and would be more expensive, and Nketiah wants regular top-flight football and has turned down a new deal. Arteta admitted he may have to make tough calls about players whose contracts are running down. “It depends on every single case, depends on the player’s situation, the minutes he’s playing, his willingness or the offer that you have,” he said. “But it’s something that you have to consider.” Arteta gave short shrift to the suggestion Aubameyang had carte blanche to depart, saying he would not discuss individuals. He did not explicitly rule out a return to action for the former captain in the Boxing Day fixture at Norwich, although that would appear unlikely. Aubameyang’s exile has, accurately or not, drawn parallels with Mesut Özil’s omission from the squad last year. Arteta was asked whether the two episodes owed to an overly uncompromising approach to different characters. “I don’t establish my authority by being dictatorial or being ruthless,” he said. “I just ask for one thing: respect and commitment. At this level, if I don’t get that I pack my bags and go somewhere else because that is the minimum I can ask for. “I am going to expect that from everybody who works for the club, first of all myself. To be successful you have to be passionate about something and, if you want to represent a club of this size, that is the minimum standard you have to bring. I am not going to ask anybody to put the ball into the top corner every time they hit it, but I will ask them to do the right things every single day for this club.”The Duke and Duchess of Sussex have released the first picture of their daughter, Lilibet, with Meghan holding up the laughing child in an image on their Christmas card. The photo, which also shows Prince Harry with curly haired Archie on his knee, was taken by Alexi Lubomirski this summer at the couple’s home in Santa Barbara, California. No images of six-month-old Lilibet, named after the Queen’s childhood nickname, have been released before now, and her two-year-old brother’s face has rarely been seen in public. The message on the card reads: “This year, 2021, we welcomed our daughter, Lilibet, to the world. Archie made us a ‘Mama’ and a ‘Papa’, and Lili made us a family. As we look forward to 2022, we have made donations on your behalf to several organizations that honor and protect families – from those being relocated from Afghanistan, to American families in need of paid parental leave: Team Rubicon, Welcome.US, Human First Coalition, Humanity Crew &amp; Paid Leave For All, PL+US, Marshall Plan for Moms. Wishing you a happy holiday season and a prosperous New Year, from our family to yours! As ever, Harry, Meghan, Archie &amp; Lili.” A statement from Harry and Meghan’s Archewell foundation confirmed that the couple had made contributions to the charities, including Welcome.US, which helps Afghan refugees settle in the country, and Team Rubicon, which mobilises military veterans for disaster response. The couple will celebrate Christmas with their children at their US home, to where they relocated from the UK in March 2020. Clarence House has confirmed the Queen will spend Christmas Day with the Prince of Wales and the Duchess of Cornwall. The monarch had said she would remain in Windsor for Christmas amid the rapid spread of the Omicron Covid variant. The Queen normally hosts her large family at Sandringham in Norfolk, where they are usually watched by crowds as they attend church on 25 December, although Covid meant this did not happen last year. The Queen also cancelled a traditional pre-Christmas lunch with her extended family, which had been scheduled for Tuesday. Buckingham Palace announced on Thursday that a service of thanksgiving for the life of the Duke of Edinburgh would take place in spring 2022 at Westminster Abbey. The Queen’s Christmas Day message, to be broadcast at 3pm, is expected to be a particularly personal one this year, as she prepares for her first festive period since the death of the duke. A photograph released by Buckingham Palace ahead of her televised address shows the Queen sitting behind a desk in the White Drawing Room at Windsor Castle, accompanied by a single, framed picture of the couple taken in 2007 at Broadlands country house, Hampshire, to mark their diamond wedding anniversary. The handout from the palace shows the Queen wearing an embossed wool shift dress in Christmas red, by British designer Angela Kelly, as well as a sapphire chrysanthemum brooch which the then-Princess Elizabeth wore for a photocall on her honeymoon, also to Broadlands, in 1947, and for the couple’s diamond wedding celebrations. This year’s message follows the death of the duke in April aged 99, while coronavirus restrictions at the time meant the Queen was memorably and poignantly forced to sit alone in St George’s Chapel for his funeral service.A fourth woman has come forward to accuse Chris Noth of sexual assault, days after the actor best known for his character Mr Big on Sex and the City was fired from the CBS TV drama The Equalizer. Singer-songwriter Lisa Gentile gave an account on Thursday that Noth had forcibly kissed and groped her in her New York apartment after she met him at Da Marino, a restaurant in midtown Manhattan where another of Noth’s accusers has said she was assaulted by the actor. Gentile said she met Noth in 1998, when they were both regulars at the restaurant. One night in 2002, he gave her a ride home and asked to see her apartment. Gentile said he pushed her against a countertop, forcibly kissed her and groped her breasts. “He was slobbering all over me, and I quickly became uncomfortable. He became more aggressive, put both hands on my breasts and began squeezing them very hard over my shirt,” she said on Thursday at a press conference. Gentile, who alleges Noth then put his hands under her shirt, said she tried to push him off. “I kept pushing his hands down while he was pushing mine up. I was trying to get him to stop. Then he pushed my hands down toward his penis.” After she managed to push him away, she recalled “he became extremely angry and started screaming and calling me a tease and a bitch. He stormed out of my apartment.” The next morning, Gentile added, Noth called, warning her that “if I ever told about what happened the night before that he would ruin my career that I would never see him again and that he would blacklist me from the business.” “I was afraid to come forward because of Noth’s power and his threats to ruin my career,” Gentile said, adding that she was going public now to support the women who spoke out before her, anonymously, and to call for laws to extend legal limitations on adult claims of sexual assault. The new account follows claims by three other women who say the actor sexually assaulted them between 2004 and 2015. Noth has previously described the allegations as “categorically false”. “These stories could’ve been from 30 years ago or 30 days ago – no always means no – that is a line I did not cross,” he told The Hollywood Reporter. “The encounters were consensual,” he added. “It’s difficult not to question the timing of these stories coming out. I don’t know for certain why they are surfacing now, but I do know this: I did not assault these women.” Noth’s co-stars in Sex and The City and its sequel And Just Like That – Sarah Jessica Parker, Cynthia Nixon, and Kristen Davis – jointly voiced their support for his accusers. Noth could not be immediately reached for comment on Gentile’s allegations. Representatives for the actor had no comment on Thursday. Reuters contributed reporting.The head of the Department of Home Affairs, Michael Pezzullo, was kept out of the loop on the Aukus pact, as new documents show Australia’s initial investigation into nuclear-powered submarines was to be handled on a “strictly need-to-know basis”. The announcement of Aukus – described by the Biden administration as the “biggest strategic step that Australia has taken in generations” – triggered a diplomatic rift with France, objections from China, and a mixture of support and concerns among south-east Asian nations. Based on documents obtained under freedom of information laws, other public records and conversations with informed sources, Guardian Australia can report new details about how the “forever” partnership with the US and the UK fell into place. The secretive talks were first driven by the Morrison government’s pursuit of nuclear-powered submarines – the first Aukus project – but evolved into a broader pledge to “significantly deepen cooperation on a range of emerging security and defence capabilities”. When Aukus was finally announced in September, the government said the cooperation would include “cyber capabilities, artificial intelligence, quantum technologies, and additional undersea capabilities”. A tightly held secret Despite the emphasis on cyber and emerging technologies, the Department of Home Affairs – a key national security agency with responsibility for domestic cybersecurity – appears to have not played any significant role in landing the Aukus pact. Pezzullo has had a high public profile this year, in part because of his controversial comments in April warning that “free nations again hear the beating drums” and were “bracing again, yet again, for the curse of war” to protect “our precious liberty”. There was also speculation earlier this year that he might follow his former boss, Peter Dutton, into the defence department, where Pezzullo served earlier in his career. It is not mentioned in the documents but Guardian Australia has established that Pezzullo was first briefed about Aukus on 16 September 2021. That was the same day the prime minister, Scott Morrison, announced the deal with his UK counterpart, Boris Johnson, and the US president, Joe Biden, in a video conference at 7am Canberra time. The revelation Pezzullo was not part of the Aukus deliberations shows the extent to which the highly sensitive talks with the US and the UK were kept to a small group. Within the public service, the Department of Defence played the leading role, while the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade was also part of a small taskforce that negotiated the still-secret agreements in the US in August this year. The prime minister’s office and several key officials in his department were also involved. A spokesperson for the Department of Home Affairs said Aukus activities were “being led and coordinated by the Department of Defence” – but signalled it was now involved with delivery. “The Department of Home Affairs is working with the Department of Defence to support whole-of-government efforts to deliver Aukus initiatives.” Who, how and when? On 25 May 2020, the chief of navy, Vice Admiral Michael Noonan, signed the terms of reference for a “nuclear submarine feasibility study taskforce”. The details were for “limited distribution” only. While it has been previously reported Commodore Timothy Brown led this taskforce, more details about his initial assignment can now be revealed as a result of an FOI application. The taskforce’s main purpose was to “understand the feasibility of Australia acquiring, operating and sustaining nuclear submarines in the short to medium term”, according to a heavily redacted document obtained from the defence department. Despite the “short to medium term” focus, Morrison has since said he expects the first of the new submarines to be operating by about 2040. The taskforce’s key principles included that it should collect and assess information “that both supports and contests the capability options presented” and operate on a “strictly need-to-know basis”. The taskforce was also asked to incorporate “whole of government considerations, including strategic, industrial and international relations assessments and implications” – in other words, to weigh up the potential fallout. The questions about Australia accessing nuclear-propelled submarine technology included: “Who could it be obtained from, how, and when?” Another question was how Australia could operate and sustain nuclear submarines, and what industrial base would be required to support such an acquisition – questions that remain open. A flowchart suggests Brown’s reporting line was to Noonan, the navy chief, but ultimately the work was conducted with the knowledge of and oversight by the defence secretary, Greg Moriarty, and the chief of the ADF, General Angus Campbell. The report was due by December 2020. ‘Australian Eyes Only’ The month after that report’s completion, the foreign minister, Marise Payne, was first briefed about the submarine-related reviews Morrison had commissioned, according to evidence to Senate estimates. Then, on 11 February 2021, Moriarty and Campbell wrote to Vice Admiral Jonathan Mead to launch a defence capability enhancement review – in line with a direction from the then defence minister, Linda Reynolds. The three-page letter, originally marked SECRET AUSTEO (Australian Eyes Only) but also obtained under FOI, said Australia’s strategic circumstances had deteriorated and warned that “the rapid introduction of more advanced submarines, sensors and weapons will further complicate the subsurface threat environment over the coming decades”. “Submarines are fundamental to the nation’s maritime security. They secure Australia’s strategic advantage and underpin Australia’s credibility and influence as a modern military power.” Moriarty and Campbell asked Mead to report back on changes in the maritime threat environment against the backdrop of “faster than envisaged” military modernisation in the Indo-Pacific – an obvious reference to China. The letter cited “intensifying” major-power competition and the undermining of confidence in the rules-based order. “Your review is afforded the highest priority and you are to advise us as to the resources you require,” Moriarty and Campbell told Mead. The chief defence scientist was made aware of the government’s interest in acquiring nuclear submarines on 10 March 2021 – the same month the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation was first consulted. But the Australian Radioactive Waste Agency “was not consulted in the lead up to the announcement on 16 September 2021”, a response to a Senate question on notice reveals. Aukus driven at political level The Morrison government formed the view by about April 2021 that the idea of Australia receiving US help to acquire nuclear-powered submarines could advance into the American political system, sources said. That is the same month Andrew Shearer, a foreign policy hawk now serving as the head of the Office of National Intelligence and who is an influential source of strategic advice to Morrison, met with Biden’s top Indo-Pacific adviser, Kurt Campbell. The precise details of the 30 April meeting in Washington DC have not yet been publicly disclosed, but the talks were evidently important: Moriarty told Senate estimates he was “aware of that meeting either on the day or shortly after”. Australian officials have drawn a distinction between the original submarine capability-driven talks and the broader idea of trumpeting a wider security partnership under the “Aukus” banner. The latter appeared to have been driven at a political level, including by Morrison. Moriarty said he was first aware of the idea of a formal partnership in May or June, “as the prime minister was thinking about the framing”. The new secretary of Dfat, Kathryn Campbell, was briefed on the Aukus “package” on 27 July, the day after she started in the top foreign affairs role, although a number of her officials were aware earlier. After Morrison, Biden and Johnson sketched out the broad parameters of a deal in a meeting on the sidelines of the G7 in June, officials from the three countries gathered in Washington DC in mid-August to negotiate two key documents. These memoranda of understanding – one related to the submarine project and the other to the broader Aukus partnership – have never been released. The Australian negotiating team was led by Mead – the one who oversaw the earlier capability review, and who is now in charge of yet another taskforce that will spend 18 months figuring out the “optimal” pathway to deliver these submarines. Nuclear proliferation fears anticipated Newly released White House visitor logs for that month show Mead was among four Australian officials who dropped in to the Eisenhower Executive Office Building in Washington DC on 17 August. The other Australian officials included Australia’s ambassador for arms control and counter-proliferation, Amanda Gorely, and the Australian embassy’s naval attache, Commodore Mathew Hudson. Also in attendance was Scott Dewar, who earlier this year was listed as the director of the Australian Geospatial-Intelligence Organisation. Sources familiar with the matter said the group met with Kurt Campbell, and it should not be a surprise that such meetings were held in the run-up to the Aukus announcement. Guardian Australia has established Gorely was also a member of the interagency negotiating group, along with a small number of other Dfat officials, in a sign Canberra anticipated the implications of Aukus for nuclear proliferation could become contentious. Australia would be the first non-nuclear weapons state to acquire nuclear-powered submarines. Indonesia and Malaysia later raised concerns Aukus could pose non-proliferation issues, and China is pressing for the International Atomic Energy Agency to launch a special committee to review the matter. “Australia has made clear it is committed to meeting all of its nuclear non-proliferation obligations and to maintaining the strongest possible non-proliferation standards in relation to Australia’s acquisition of conventionally-armed nuclear-powered submarines,” a Dfat spokesperson said. Payne travelled to the region last month in a bid to reassure Indonesia and Malaysia. French pique The diplomatic ramifications continue to reverberate, with the French government still furious with the Australian government over its handling of the scrapping of the $90bn deal for 12 conventionally powered submarines, claiming it was deliberately kept in the dark. Letters from the Australian defence department to France’s Naval Group a week before the Aukus announcement, and also hours before, released under FOI, painted a positive picture of progress being made against technical issues with the French plans. Naval Group was informed of the cancellation the night before the announcement. The department confirmed that defence leadership had received written advice from the section managing the then-project “regarding progress on the Attack class submarine program” – but it has not released that. As for the new submarines, it remains the government’s “intention” to build them in Adelaide – but nothing has been locked in yet, nor the costs and delivery dates, as Mead’s taskforce continues talks with American and British counterparts. All of these are not due to be finalised until after the federal election. “Defence is not ruling any design option out at this time, however the design that is selected must be mature at the time of build,” the Defence Department said in response to a Senate question on notice. “This includes current and potential future UK and US designs.”