It is audacious of Rupert Goold to stage a flamboyantly morose alt-rock musical about teenage repression and rebellion for a Christmas show. Based on Frank Wedekind’s 1891 play – banned or censored across the ages – it does not have many fuzzy edges and its staging now feels more refreshing for it. Set in a provincial German town dominated by a cheerless Lutheranism, the story revolves around adolescents dealing with sexual desire, homosexuality, rape, suicide and back-street abortions. Their teen angst was originally set to song by Duncan Sheik and Steven Sater, partly sparked by the aftermath of the Columbine shootings, and became a big hit on Broadway in 2006. This revival is marked for the abundant talent in its young cast: Laurie Kynaston, as the troubled Melchior, looks like a young Eddie Redmayne and is intense, edgy and passionate in his part. Amara Okereke, as his girlfriend Wendla, performs a clever push-and-pull between shy apprehension and brazen confidence. Their on-stage chemistry travels the scale from awkward innocence to illicit pleasure and erotic charge. Goold’s direction is dynamic, too, on Miriam Buether’s expressionistic set, designed as a staircase climbing the length and breadth of the stage; these steps change from classroom to graveyard and assembly hall. Together with Jack Knowles’ lighting and Finn Ross’s luminous video design, they gesture towards modernity despite the 19th-century setting and resemble high-school bleachers, like those on the set of Jamie Lloyd’s recent Evita. The problem, though, are the emo, rock and pop songs with music and lyrics that sound repetitive, banal and ultimately soporific. They come at quite a pace too, impeding the narrative flow so the first half feels episodic with songs that strive towards musical inner monologues, but which only convey a generic sense of these characters. And the musical refrain “O, I’m gonna be wounded … O, I’m gonna bruise you” sounds tinny rather than dangerously edgy in its sadomasochism. Visually, the use of a glass box at the front of the stage is effective, especially in its staging of a suicide. But the semi-circle of glass framing the back of the stage never quite delivers in its purpose beyond looking slick. Sometimes, illuminated projections seem to go into overload, with graffiti appearing across the steps repeatedly during the song Totally Fucked which feels like it is channelling a Pink Floyd vibe. In this bygone world of draconian religiosity, the teachers wear masks which effectively render them sinister grotesques. The children, though, are largely in contemporary dress and this creates a deliberate inner tension: characters controlled by repressive social and sexual codes look as if they have stepped out of a teen Netflix drama and dance in boy- and girl-band formations, with choreography that seems to have been adopted from a reality TV contest or high-school musical. More of an orchestration than an emotionally enveloping drama, the plot between Melchior and Wendla does build power in the second half, and the production has some striking moments, such as Melchior’s atmospheric number The Bitch of Living, about desire and anxiety, and a masturbation fantasy excellently performed by Nathan Armarkwei-Laryea as Hänschen. The performances are all striking and the leads seem on their way to becoming tomorrow’s stars. At the Almeida, London, until 22 JanuaryThe number of FTSE 350 companies with a director of colour has jumped 108% over the past year, as companies face greater pressure to increase diversity across top leadership roles. The increase means that 123 of the largest listed firms now have a black, Asian or minority ethnic director (BAME) on the board, up from just 59 last year, according to Thomson Reuters which compiled the data. That accounts for nearly half of the FTSE 350, at 45%. “It is important that companies continue to make improvements in this area, as there seems to be no slowing in the drivers for increased board and leadership diversity, including pressure from politicians and regulators,” Hilary Owens Gray, a director of practical law at Thomson Reuters said. “Evidence shows that more diverse businesses can be more successful businesses and ultimately deliver better long-term returns for shareholders.” The increase in representation comes as companies race to meet voluntary deadlines to appoint at least one BAME director to their boards as part of the government-backed Parker review, which tracks ethnic diversity across stock market-listed companies. The review, which launched in 2017, gave FTSE 100 firms until the end of 2021 to appoint at least one BAME board-level director. The same target was set for the FTSE 250 companies, but with a deadline of 2024. It also follows the UK regulator’s plans to require listed companies to either achieve targets for ethnic and gender representation on their boards, or publish an explanation as to why they continue to lag behind. The proposals, which would require changing the UK’s listing, disclosure and transparency rules, would also force listed companies to publish data on the gender and ethnic composition of their boards, as well as across senior executive roles. Currently, women make up 39% of all directorships across the FTSE 100, up from 35% last year, holding a total of 402 roles, Thompson Reuters research also found. About 46 companies now have boards where women hold at least 40% of the roles, compared with 31 in 2020 and just 25 in 201, suggesting “significant strides” had been made towards gender parity at board level, the report said. However, representation at the executive level was far lower, with women making up just 14% of positions across the UK’s 100 largest listed firms. “FTSE 350 companies are taking great strides to increase diversity at board level. However, there is more progress to be made,” Gray said.The UK’s failure to create safe routes for vulnerable Afghans is forcing thousands to make the “gut-wrenching” decision to embark on “perilous, life-threatening journeys” to seek safety in Britain, the Refugee Council has warned. Four months since the fall of Kabul to the Taliban in August, causing mass displacement of hundreds of thousands, the government’s Afghan citizens resettlement scheme was not yet up and running, the charity said. Official data showed asylum applications from Afghanistan to the UK tripled from 435 between April and June to 1,093 between July and September, it added. The UK government had committed to bringing another 5,000 Afghans to the UK this year and a further 15,000 in future as part of the resettlement scheme, the charity said, calling for its urgent implementation. It also called for an expansion of the family reunion rules so relatives were not torn apart and the prioritisation of all asylum cases from Afghanistan, with Home Office data showing more than 4,000 Afghans are awaiting a decision on their asylum claims, with nearly 2,500 waiting more than six months. The charity said it wanted a rethink on the nationality and borders bill so Afghans and other people seeking asylum were not treated differently based on how they reached the UK. “Last month 27 refugees tragically lost their lives whilst trying to cross the Channel in a small boat to reach the safety of UK shores,” it said. “It was reported that people fleeing Afghanistan were sadly involved in this tragedy.” As well as providing a safe and legal route for people from Afghanistan, it said the government must provide extra financial support for councils to successfully settle them. Enver Solomon, the chief executive of the Refugee Council, said: “Afghans have been left with a heartbreaking choice. Either they stay in a country where they fear for their lives every day or take the gut-wrenching decision to leave and embark on a dangerous journey in an attempt to reach safety. “It is critical the government brings forward the scheme they promised and help provide the safe routes and support these people both desperately need and deserve.” Solomon added that under the nationality and borders bill, “anyone reaching the UK from Afghanistan who does not arrive under a resettlement scheme could be prosecuted and sent to prison for having entered the country unlawfully”. “The government must rethink its proposals and ensure all Afghans can be given protection irrespective of how they arrived in the UK.”Hongkongers have snubbed a legislature poll taking place under new “patriots only” rules imposed by China, with the lowest turnout since residents started electing lawmakers three decades ago, according to official figures released on Monday. Only 30%, or 1,350,680 of the 4,472,863 registered voters, cast their ballots for city lawmakers in Sunday’s election, Hong Kong’s top election official, Barnabas Fung, told reporters. The latest results showed almost all of the seats being taken by pro-Beijing and pro-establishment candidates. Some of those candidates cheered on stage at the central vote-counting centre and chanted “guaranteed win”. Results were still pending in some seats. The polls, in which 153 candidates competed for 90 seats, were the first to be held since Beijing overhauled the city’s electoral processes earlier this year, reducing the ratio of directly elected seats and introducing a two-tiered candidate-vetting process by national security police and officials to ensure only “patriots” could administer the city. The previous record low for turnout in a legislative election held after the city’s return from British to Chinese rule was 43.6% in 2000. Low turnout came despite the city’s officials repeatedly urging residents to vote. The city’s largest opposition party, the Democratic party, fielded no candidates. “The situation is critical,” Starry Lee, the head of the largest pro-Beijing party, DAB, said in a recorded loop played on a loudspeaker in the working-class Wong Tai Sin district. “I urge everyone to vote.” The city’s second top official, John Lee, warned that candidates who had been banned from running for failing the “patriots” criteria would try to thwart the elections. “People who have been excluded under the principles of patriots administering Hong Kong will be trying their best to make today’s election not be a success. We have to make sure that they will not succeed,” Lee told reporters after casting his vote. He added that the candidates were “broadly representative” of Hong Kong’s society. But Kenneth Chan, the director of the Comparative Governance and Public Policy Research Centre at Hong Kong Baptist University, said the low turnout was a message pro-democracy voters were sending to authorities. “Of course, the government won’t admit this is a referendum of sorts on their performance, but voters also know this election isn’t really about who gets the seats,” Chan said. “The low turnout rate indicates to what extent people here are pleased with the state of affairs [in Hong Kong].” Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, told reporters after casting her vote that neither Beijing nor the local government had set targets for the voter turnout rate. Instead, Lam said her target was for the elections to be as efficient as possible. More than 10,000 officers were deployed across the city to “ensure a smooth process”, according to police chief Raymond Siu. Residents were given free public transport rides on election day as part of the government’s push to encourage them to vote. Polling stations were also set up at checkpoints at the city’s borders with mainland China to allow those living on the mainland to cast a vote. Opinions over the polls were divided in the semi-autonomous Chinese territory. Yu Wai-kwan said he saw the election as a chance to vote for a better future. “I am voting to choose a new bunch of people to make Hong Kong a better place,” Yu said. “I am a patriot, and I just hope for peace and quiet, and to have a good livelihood.” Other residents said they would not be voting, expressing anger at the changes that some said had turned the poll into a “selection” and the legislature into a “puppet”. “Refusing to vote is apparently the only way for us to express our grievances,” said Peter, 21, a university student. Unlike previous polls, pro-democracy candidates were largely absent, having declined to run, gone into exile or been jailed. Some overseas activists and foreign governments, including the US, say the electoral changes have reduced democratic representation in the city. Only four of the 35 candidates running for the 20 directly elected seats mentioned “democracy” or “universal suffrage” in their campaigns. The new system has reduced the proportion of legislators voters can directly elect from 53% to 22%. The election rollout was also beset by early hiccups, with an online service to inform the public of expected queueing times at polling stations offline an hour after the polls opened because of “excessive usage”, according to a spokesperson for the Registration and Electoral Office.Today’s Covid blog will be shutting down but please join us here for all the latest coronavirus developments. UK ministers continue to debate whether measures should be introduced before or after Christmas in order to curb the spread of Omicron. British prime minister Boris Johnson is mulling urging the public to limit household mixing at Christmas, the Telegraph reports. Johnson has been presented with three options by officials for further restrictions to curb the spread of Omicron, out of which the lowest level of action would see families asked to limit indoor contacts, without legal enforcement, the report said. The prime minister is also weighing mandate curbs on household mixing, the return of social distancing and an 8pm curfew on pubs and restaurants, it added. Option three is a full lockdown. Britain’s finance minister Rishi Sunak is one of 10 cabinet ministers who are resisting the introduction of new restrictions before Christmas to curb the spread of the Omicron variant, the Times reports. The UK government’s chief scientific adviser Patrick Vallance told ministers over the weekend that new restrictions should be introduced as soon as possible to stop the NHS being overwhelmed, the newspaper said. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, yesterday refused to rule out a “circuit breaker” that would ban household mixing and said the government might need to act before the data was clear. “If we wait until the data is perfect, it may be too late,” he said. It’s Samantha Lock here taking over from my colleague Jem Bartholomew. As I’m reporting to you from Sydney, here are some Covid numbers out of Australia. There were 1,302 new coronavirus cases recorded in Victoria with no deaths. NSW recorded 2,501 new local Covid-19 cases. The numbers are nearly double that of Victoria, a reversal of a weeks-long trend of more infections below the border. Today after months of strict border restrictions the Northern Territory is opening up to the rest of the country. Travellers from all around Australia will now be able to travel anywhere in the territory as long as they avoid remote communities where less than 80% of the eligible population is vaccinated. Arrivals must also record three negative PCR tests, one before crossing the border and two in the days afterwards. In other news, the federal government has committed to spending another $78m to help Australia’s aviation sector recover from the Covid-19 pandemic. Here’s a round-up of Sunday’s developments from around the world on Covid and Omicron. The Netherlands entered a strict lockdown that meant the closure of non-essential stores, restaurants, hairdressers, gyms, museums and other public places until 14 January to push back the new wave. Germany followed France and tightened restrictions from Britain, mandating a 14-day quarantine for incoming travellers to avoid an Omicron wave. Pressure builds on UK prime minister Boris Johnson after the Guardian published a picture of him with wine and cheese in the No 10 garden, suggesting a social event, during a strict UK lockdown. No 10 insists the meeting was for work. Poland confirmed seven Omicron cases in total as an official warned the variant is spreading at “unprecedented rate”. A further 15,976 Covid cases were recorded. Peru, the country with the highest Covid deaths per capita and sixth-highest total death toll, detected its first four Omicron cases. The UK recorded above 80,000 new daily cases for only fourth time since pandemic began, and clocked another 12,000 Omicron cases – taking the tally to over 37,000. Health secretary Sajid Javid refused to rule out new restrictions on the Sunday broadcast round. Cases are up 72% in one week. Anthony Fauci, the top US infectious diseases expert, said the Omicron variant has “extraordinary spreading capabilities” and is “raging through the world”. Ireland said Omicron is now the dominant strain of Covid after an estimated 52% of its cases – 5,124 new cases on Sunday – were from the highly mutated variant. The head of Germany’s domestic intelligence agency warned of political violence from the country’s anti-vaccine movement with its connections to the far-right. Iran detected its first case of Omicron. Israel’s prime minister, Naftali Bennett, said on Sunday the country is in a fifth Covid wave and urged people to step up vaccinations. US Senator Elizabeth Warren tested positive for Covid after a routine test. She has mild symptoms. 30,000 people in Vienna, Austria commemorated the country’s 13,000 people who have died from the virus with a “sea of lights” march. Italy detected 24,259 new Covid infections, a 62% climb on the 15,010 new cases on Sunday two weeks ago. Sri Lanka will require Covid vaccine certificates for entry to public places from New Year’s Day. Russia recorded 27,967 new Covid infections, a 13% slide on the 32,031 new cases on Sunday two weeks ago. France reported 48,473 new Covid infections, a 15% climb on the 42,252 new cases detected on Sunday two weeks ago. Brazil’s health regulator Anvisa asked for greater law enforcement protection on Sunday after a flurry of threats following its decision to approve Covid vaccines for children aged five to 11. President Jair Bolsonaro, who has played down the virus’s risks, has publicly pressured the agency over the decision. That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew in London, and I’ll be back on Wednesday. Do get in touch via email or on Twitter with tips and stories for then. I’m particularly interested in hearing from clinically vulnerable people in the UK about their experiences during the Omicron wave, so far without government support. Now, over to my colleague Samantha Lock in Australia. On Sunday a chain of 13,000 candles stretched out along the baroque streets of Vienna, Austria. Then, 30,000 people went silent. Tens of thousands of people in Vienna on Sunday took part in a “sea of lights” commemoration for the people who have died during the pandemic. They observed a moment of silence in a demonstration intended to show solidarity with healthcare workers after weeks of anti-lockdown protests. “We are simply people from civil society who want to send a signal,” organiser Daniel Landau told newspaper Kurier. Austria has recorded 13,000 deaths from Covid-related illness. Another 24 people were added to the country’s toll on Saturday. Austria experienced rising Covid cases in late November, with daily infections often above 15,000. They have since declined, with 2,167 people on Saturday receiving confirmation they’d been infected. “Thousands of people gathered in Vienna this evening to commemorate all those who were torn from their lives by the virus with a #Lichtermeer &amp; thank our health workers,” said chancellor Karl Nehammer on Twitter. US Senator Elizabeth Warren said she’s tested positive for Covid and is experiencing mild symptoms. Warren, the 72-year-old Democrat for Massachusetts, said she is vaccinated and boosted. The Senator, who ran to be the Democratic nominee for president in 2020, said: “I urge everyone who has not already done so to get the vaccine and the booster as soon as possible – together, we can save lives.” The New York Times has this sobering report on the scale of the global challenge to tackle the new mutated variant: Most of the World’s Vaccines Likely Won’t Prevent Infection From Omicron. Severe disease can still be prevented, which is good news. But the costs of infection mean not just strain on health systems around the world, the Times’s Stephanie Nolen reports, but could lead to further variant escapes. For instance, global vaccine program Covax has delivered 67 million Oxford-AstraZeneca doses, much of it across sub-Saharan Africa, and 90% of people in India got the AstraZeneca shot. One study showed it had no ability to stop infection after six months. All vaccines still seem to provide a significant degree of protection against serious illness from Omicron, which is the most crucial goal. But only the Pfizer and Moderna shots, when reinforced by a booster, appear to have initial success at stopping infections, and these vaccines are unavailable in most of the world. The other shots — including those from AstraZeneca, Johnson &amp; Johnson and vaccines manufactured in China and Russia — do little to nothing to stop the spread of Omicron, early research shows. And because most countries have built their inoculation programs around these vaccines, the gap could have a profound impact on the course of the pandemic. A global surge of infections in a world where billions of people remain unvaccinated not only threatens the health of vulnerable individuals but also increases the opportunity for the emergence of yet more variants. The disparity in the ability of countries to weather the pandemic will almost certainly deepen. And the news about limited vaccine efficacy against Omicron infection could depress demand for vaccination throughout the developing world, where many people are already hesitant or preoccupied with other health problems. Read the full story here. Peru detected its first four cases of the Omicron variant on Sunday, a health ministry official said. Minister of health Hernando Cevallos told reporters that four cases of the variant had been detected. “One is a traveller arriving from South Africa to our country, while three of them have been detected within Peru and we are taking the necessary measures to follow up and carry out contact tracing,” he said. Peru reported 3,559 new infections on Saturday, alongside 78 new deaths. The Omicron news raises concerns as the highly-mutated variant reaches a nation already ravaged by the pandemic. Peru has recorded 202,000 deaths from Covid-related causes, the world’s sixth-highest tally, and is the country with the worst per capita death toll. Adding to our post on the impact of the Netherlands’ snap new lockdown (10.39am GMT), The Guardian has a report on the impact on Dutch shopkeepers, who say they have been “broken” by the measures amid the busy Christmas shopping period. As of Sunday, all non-essential stores, bars and restaurants in the country are closed until at least 14 January, and schools and universities shut until 9 January. Retailers that weathered the first rounds of lockdown say they are crushed without a compensation scheme for the new restrictions. “Nowhere in Europe is there such a strict regime as in the Netherlands,” said Jan Meerman, the director of INretail, the Dutch retailers association. He added: “From a health perspective, I understand that something needs to be done, but then it is important that the cabinet also makes a grand financial gesture and generously reimburses entrepreneurs. As far as we are concerned, 100% compensation. Many colleagues are still heavily indebted from the first lockdowns, they can’t take this any more … They are broken by these harsh measures.” Full report available here. Israel’s prime minister, Naftali Bennett, said on Sunday the country is in a fifth Covid wave and urged people to step up vaccinations. In a televised address, Bennett said he expected a surge of sickness within weeks, despite the strict travel measures Israel took in recent weeks to keep out the Omicron variant. He told citizens to take precautions such as working from home. Israel has detected 134 confirmed Omicron cases and another 307 suspected cases. 167 are symptomatic. “The time we bought [with travel bans] is running out,” Bennett said. “The numbers are still not high but it’s a very contagious variant, doubling itself every two-three days, as we see around the world. It’s possible to say that the fifth wave has begun.” Meanwhile, a health ministry advisory committee recommended Israel add the US to its red-list countries, where citizens cannot fly without special permission. Israel banned the entry of foreigners on 25 November and has imposed three to 14-day quarantine orders for Israelis returning from abroad. Israel reported 696 infections on Saturday, according to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University. The country experienced rising cases last September, recording upwards of 7,000 cases a day, before new infections dropped to the hundreds in October. The health regulator in Brazil, Anvisa, asked for greater law enforcement protection on Sunday after a flurry of threats following its decision to approve Covid vaccines for children aged five to 11. The right-wing president, Jair Bolsonaro, is putting pressure on Anvisa over the decision, and has repeatedly sowed doubts about the dangers of the virus and the value of getting vaccinated, saying he is not vaccinated himself. After Anvisa’s decision to approve vaccination for children this week, on Thursday Bolsonaro said he’d asked for the names of the officials involved and threatened to make their identities public. It continues a months-long political storm between Anvisa and Bolsonaro over the agency’s ability to approve vaccine shots. The regulator said threats had jumped in the past 24 hours, and it was giving details to law enforcement agencies. “Anvisa is firm in its mission to protect the health of citizens,” it said. In October Brazil’s Senate accused Bolsonaro of crimes against humanity for his handling of the pandemic, during which more than 617,000 people died from Covid-related causes, the second-highest death toll in the world behind the US. Bolsonaro’s popularity has dropped this year. France reported 48,473 new Covid infections on Sunday, a 15% climb on the 42,252 new cases detected on Sunday two weeks ago. A further 75 people died from the virus, down from 162 on Friday. (Reported figures tend to be lower at weekends.) Over 121,000 people in France have died from Covid-related causes, the 12th highest global total. France restricted travel to and from Britain on Thursday in an attempt to block entry of the Omicron variant, a move followed by Germany tightening its restrictions on travel from Britain on Sunday. The prime minister, Jean Castex, asked mayors on Friday to cancel New Year’s Eve firework displays and festivities as cases rose. He urged people to get tested before Christmas celebrations. Paris town hall cancelled one of its public parties on Saturday. Castex also announced France will change its health pass into a vaccination pass, meaning from January it can only be used by double-vaccinated people. FRANCE 24 has been reporting on the impact of cancelled plans: Jonathan Clark, chaplain at Saint Michel’s Church in Paris, said: “We’ve had to cancel our social events and they’re important to people, particularly the lonely, so it’s really hard.” By now safety protocols have become a habit. “We wear masks the whole time. We distance, we separate groups of people, we halve the number of people at a service, and we have to ventilate so we keep doors open.” “The services are running as normal, because for some people, it’s the only social contact they’re going to get to come to church and see some people,” Clark said. “And we can sing behind masks. Last year we couldn’t sing – that was much harder.” Pressure continues to build on Boris Johnson after the Guardian revealed an image of him in the garden of Downing Street, the UK prime minister’s official residence, with cheese and wine on 15 May 2020, suggesting a social event when the country was in a hard lockdown. No 10’s insistence the event constituted a “work meeting” has been called into question by the presence of wine and cheese and 19 people in groups. Bottles of wine are in evidence, there is a lack of social distancing and 19 people are gathered in groups across the Downing Street terrace and lawn. At the time social mixing between households was limited to two people, who could only meet outdoors and at a distance of at least 2 metres. In workplaces, guidance said in-person meetings should only take place if “absolutely necessary”. Angela Rayner, the deputy leader of the Labour party, described the picture as “a slap in the face of the British public”, adding: “The prime minister consistently shows us he has no regard for the rules he puts in place for the rest of us. Alleged drinking and partying late into the evening [at No 10] when the rest of us were only recently getting one daily walk.” The prime minister has faced a string of allegations of partying and socialising in No 10 while Covid restrictions were in place. He was forced to order a civil service inquiry, though its head stepped down on Friday over allegations of his own Christmas party. A Downing Street spokesperson said people drinking at work was not against regulations at the time. “Downing Street is the prime minister’s home as well as his workplace. The prime minister’s wife lives in No 10 and therefore also legitimately uses the garden,” they said. Read the full story here. Poland has detected a total of seven Omicron cases, the deputy health minister, Waldemar Kraska, said on Sunday, jumping from one case on Thursday. The Omicron mutation is “highly contagious” and it “is spreading at an unprecedented rate”, Kraska said, according to Polskie Radio. The infections include a seven-year-old girl from Gdańsk, who was tested on 10 December and confirmed with Omicron on Sunday, after sequencing, and a three-year-old girl from Warsaw. Poland only sequenced its first Omicron case on Thursday, when a 30-year-old woman who had recently traveled from southern Africa was confirmed to have the highly mutated variant. In response, ministers introduced new measures this week. Nightclubs are closed until further notice, and other entertainment and leisure centres are at a maximum capacity of 100 people until 31 January. Poland recorded 15,976 new cases on Sunday, a 29% decrease on the 22,394 new cases recorded on Sunday two weeks ago. Poland experienced rising cases in late November and early December and saw a gradual decline in recent weeks. It’s unclear whether cases will climb again amid Omicron’s spread or the recent wave will provide a barrier of antibodies in recently recovered people. A further 70 people died with the virus in the past 24 hours, down from 566 on Friday. (Reported figures tend to be lower at weekends.) Russia recorded 27,967 new Covid infections in the past 24 hours, a 13% slide on the 32,031 new cases two weeks ago on Sunday. After daily cases jumped in early November, Russia is on a downward trajectory with its epidemic. But daily deaths remain high. A further 1,024 people died from Covid-related causes on Sunday, with deaths largely above 1,000 a day since late October. It’s unclear whether Omicron will send cases skywards again. After researchers at the University of Washington and Swiss pharmaceutical firm Humabs Biomed found the Russian Sputnik V vaccine provided “no neutralizing activity against Omicron” this week, Russia rejected the findings. Sputnik has not been approved by the World Health Organization. Italy detected 24,259 new Covid infections on Sunday, a 62% climb on the 15,010 new cases on Sunday two weeks ago. A further 97 people died from Covid-related causes in the past 24 hours, a 126% rise from 43 two weeks ago. (Reported figures tend to be lower at weekends.) As of 16 December, arrivals from other European Union countries must take a negative Covid test before entering Italy, in a move ministers hoped would block the Omicron strain circulating. But Omicron is spreading quickly in Italy already, the national health institute said on Saturday, with cases rising in the north and south of the country. Germany’s health minister ruled out a Christmas lockdown but said mandatory vaccination was the only way to stop the pandemic. “There will not be a lockdown before Christmas here. But we will get a fifth wave – we have crossed a critical number of Omicron infections,” Karl Lauterbach told broadcaster ARD. “This wave can no longer be completely stopped.” Germany banned unvaccinated people from entering non-essential places at the start of December amid rising cases. About 70% of the population is double-vaccinated. “I believe we can defeat this if we close the gaps in vaccination with mandatory vaccines. That is my clear conviction,” Lauterbach said. Germany reported 55,603 new Covid infections on Saturday, jumping 142% from 22,945 cases on Sunday two weeks ago. A further 426 people died with the virus on Saturday, up from 81 two weeks ago. (Reported figures can be lower at weekends.) Germany is also tightening restrictions on travel from Britain, which has detected a total 37,000 Omicron cases, which will require travelers from 11pm GMT on Sunday to quarantine for a mandatory 14 days, even the double-vaccinated. Here are those latest UK case numbers in context throughout the pandemic. This has been a record-breaking week with Omicron pushing daily figures above the record three days in a row. This is the barometer scientists and ministers will be looking at very closely over the next week: the speed at which hospitalisations jump, and whether it’s in line with new cases. If admissions tick up significantly it may be difficult for policymakers to ignore implementing further restrictions, which UK health secretary Sajid Javid did not rule out on Sky News today. This is Jem Bartholomew in London for the next eight hours covering the international Covid blog. Do get in touch with stories or tips from around the world. Email me here. Message me on Twitter here. The UK detected 82,886 new Covid cases on Sunday, a 72% jump on the 48,071 new infections recorded last Sunday. A further 45 people died from Covid-related reasons, down from 111 on Friday. Sunday’s figures are slightly lower than recent record-breaking daily case rates – it was above 90,000 on Thursday. Reported figures tend to be lower at weekends. It comes after the UK reported 12,133 new cases of the highly transmissable Omicron variant, taking the total tally to 37,101. (The majority of cases are not sequenced.) • Britain’s health secretary, Sajid Javid, has made clear that tougher Covid restrictions could be imposed in England before Christmas, after the government’s Sage committee warned that hospitalisations could peak at between 3,000 and 10,000 a day unless action is taken. Javid acknowledged that data about the Omicron variant remained incomplete – but suggested it might be necessary to make decisions before a full picture is available. • Shops in the Netherlands were closed and people’s Christmas plans were in disarray as the country began a lockdown on Sunday aimed at limiting an expected Covid-19 surge caused by the rise of the Omicron variant. Thousands of peaceful protesters demonstrated in central Brussels on Sunday for a third time against reinforced Covid-19 restrictions imposed by the Belgian government to counter a spike in infections and the emergence of the worrying omicron variant. • Ministers in Britain have been accused of failing to protect the most vulnerable people from rising Covid cases after it emerged that people with blood cancer now account for a higher proportion of coronavirus deaths than earlier in the pandemic. With daily case numbers at record highs as a result of the Omicron variant, charities warn that people with suppressed immune systems who had been helped to shield at the start of the pandemic felt obliged to put themselves at risk at work, were confused about how to access treatments and less likely to have protection from vaccines. • Omicron is now the dominant strain of Covid-19 in the Republic of Ireland, according to authorities, who said that recent measures had slowed down the spread somewhat. The deputy first minister of Northern Ireland’s power sharing executive, Michelle O’Neill, has warned that Omicron will hit the community there “like a ton of bricks” • Iran has detected its first case of infection by the new Omicron variant of the coronavirus, state TV has reported. The United Arab Emirates has moved to limit entry to government institutions to people who have been vaccinated. • The easily transmissible Omicron variant is “raging through the world, ”the US infectious disease expert, Anthony Fauci, has warned. He also cautioned that travelling will increase the risk of infection, even among vaccinated people, in an interview with NBC’s Meet the Press. Concerns about a new impact on mental health are being expressed in the Netherlands, which has become the first European state to implement a nationwide lockdown. “Because people have no view or feel control, they experience a ‘learned helplessness,’” the Dutch news channel, NOS, was told by Andrea Evers, a professor of health psychology at Leiden University. She saw the announcement of the latest Dutch lockdown as a missed opportunity on the part of Mark Rutte, the Dutch prime minister, to provide more perspective about future plans that might help people to make sense of the situation. Unlike other lockdowns in the past, this one differed in that Covid-19 looked set to remain for the time being and there was not the same optimism around the arrival of vaccines. Saturday’s announcement of the lockdown, which starts today, came as a shock to many Dutch people as they headed into the Christmas and New Year period. Many people rushed out on Saturday to stock up on presents and food and to get a last-minute haircut. Entry to all government-run institutions in the United Arab Emirates will be restricted to people who have been vaccinated, according to the state news agency. Sri Lanka will require the showing of a Covid-19 vaccination certificate compulsory for entry to public places starting from New Year’s Day, in a renewed attempt to prevent another spike in infections. Tourism minister Prasanna Ranatunga made the announcement on Sunday in an abrupt switch from the gradual ending of restrictions put into place after the country was confronted with a third wave of infections in April caused by the Delta variant. Ranatunga said health officials were drawing up arrangements on implementing the decisions, the Associated Press news agency reported. Covid-19 related staff absences will affect all sectors in the UK including the health services, education, police, transport and key national infrastructure unless transmission is not reduced, a leading public health expert has warned. Sir Jeremy Farrar, who resigned in November from a national advisory body in disagreement with the government’s approach, said on Twitter today that Covid-19 and the highly infectious new Omicron variant was not just health issue but also an “economic, education, national infrastructure issue even a security issue.” Like other healthcare experts and practitioners, Farrar has been picking up on a report on Saturday in the Health Service Journal (HSJ) that the number of National Health Service (NHS) staff in London absent due to covid has more than doubled in four days. One in three of the workforce would be absent by New Year’s Eve if the growth rate continues, it added. The UK reported more than 12,000 further confirmed cases of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus in the latest daily figures provided by health authorities on Sunday. The UK Health Security Agency said on Twitter there had been an additional 12,133 confirmed cases of Omicron over the previous 24 hours, taking the total number of confirmed cases to 37,101. The first case of Omicron was announced on 24 November by South Africa, with the first positive sample dating back to 9 November. Since then it has been found in multiple countries around the world, including the UK, where the first cases were reported on 27 November in two people in England with links to travel to southern Africa. But the first known case is not the same as the first infection. Echoeing the views of other experts, Prof Oliver Pybus, the co-director of the Oxford Martin school’s programme on pandemic genomics, said that, in his reading, Omicron has likely been circulating for at least a month. Thousands of peaceful protesters demonstrated in central Brussels on Sunday for a third time against reinforced Covid-19 restrictions imposed by the Belgian government to counter a spike infections and the emergence of the worrying omicron variant. A strong police presence was deployed on the streets in anticipation of the crowds, given how previous protests had sometimes descended into violence, arrest and injury. The marchers – some with placards reading “free zone”, “I’ve had my fair dose” and “enough is enough” – came to protest against the government’s strong advice to get vaccinated, and included Belgian healthcare workers who will have a three-month window in which to get vaccinated against coronavirus from 1 January or risk losing their jobs. On Sunday, the Brussels-based European Commission agreed with Pfizer-BioNTech to accelerate the delivery of vaccines starting in a few weeks. The pharmaceutical giant will deliver an additional 20m doses from January to March to European Union member states. The Belgian protest comes one day after similar protests in other European capitals, including Paris and London. A Brussels demonstration last month spiralled into violence as several hundred people started pelting police, smashing cars and setting garbage bins ablaze. Police responded with teargas and water cannon. Omicron is now the dominant strain of Covid-19 in the Republic of Ireland, according to authorities, who said that recent measures had slowed down the spread somewhat. As Ireland’s Department of Health confirmed that there had been 5,124 new cases of Covid-19, it said that it an estimated 52% of reported cases are as a result of the Omicron variant. Chief Medical Officer Dr Tony Holohan told RTE News: “It has taken less than two weeks for Omicron to become the dominant strain of Covid-19 in Ireland, revealing just how transmissible this variant is. The deputy first minister of Northern Ireland’s power sharing executive, Michelle O’Neill, has warned that Omicron will hit the community there “like a ton of bricks”. She said that modelling presented to her and other officials suggested that, in a worst-case scenario, it could be facing 30,000 Omicron cases a day. Americans have been urged to get their booster shots and continue to wear masks by the US infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci. Fauci said on Sunday that the easily transmissible Omicron variant is “raging through the world”. According to Reuters, he also cautioned that travelling will increase the risk of infection, even among vaccinated people, in an interview with NBC’s Meet the Press. Omicron will hit Northern Ireland “like a ton of bricks”, the deputy first minister, Michelle O’Neill has warned. PA Media reports that O’Neill said modelling presented to Stormont ministers suggests that in a worst-case scenario, the region could be facing 30,000 cases a day. Executive ministers are involved in discussions about the situation ahead of a formal meeting on Wednesday, when it is expected new restrictions to be applied after Christmas will be announced. O’Neill told the BBC Sunday Politics programme that ministers will act before then if it is deemed necessary. She said: “In terms of what we know, we know that this is going to hit us like a ton of bricks. “We know that by the end of the year this will be the dominant strain of Covid, we know that we will peak in the middle of January, we know it is going to spread rapidly. “What we don’t yet know is the impact in terms of our hospital situation, and we expect to understand that a bit more tomorrow and that is when we will engage again. “Then we decide when to intervene and what is the appropriate intervention.” In England, the NHS was given a target to administer 1m vaccine shots a day to beat Omicron. And on Saturday they were getting pretty close, as our political editor Heather Stewart tweets: Queues to get booster shots were long again on Sunday, with people lining up to get their jabs at the Wembley Stadium vaccination site: New York state has reported that nearly 22,000 people tested positive for Covid-19 on Friday – eclipsing Thursday for the highest single-day total for new cases since testing became widely available. Amid fears over the new Omicron variant of the coronavirus, more than half of the positive results were in the city. The Rockettes on Friday cancelled remaining performances of the Radio City Christmas Spectacular, citing “increasing challenges from the pandemic”. Saturday Night Live taped without an audience and with reduced crew. Lines at some testing sites stretched around the block and at-home tests remained hard to find or pricier than usual. But new hospitalisations and deaths are averaging well below their spring 2020 peak and even where they were this time last year, during a winter wave that came as vaccinations were just beginning, city data shows. The Kremlin is convinced that the World Health Organization (WHO) will recognise Russia’s flagship Sputnik V Covid-19 vaccine within a few months, the Interfax news agency cited Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov as saying on Sunday. The Kremlin on Tuesday said Russia had still not handed over all the information needed for the vaccine to be approved by the WHO because of differences in regulatory standards. The British government’s health minister, Sajid Javid, has made clear that tougher Covid restrictions could be imposed in England before Christmas, after the government’s Sage committee warned that hospitalisations could peak at between 3,000 and 10,000 a day unless action is taken. Javid acknowledged that data about the Omicron variant remained incomplete – but suggested it might be necessary to make decisions before a full picture is available. Asked to rule out new measures pre-Christmas, he said: “We are assessing the situation; it’s very fast-moving,” adding, “There’s a lot of uncertainty, there are gaps in the data, but we must work with the data we’ve got, we mustn’t let perfection be the enemy of the good.” Speaking on the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show, Javid stressed that it was already clear that Omicrom spread very quickly, adding that there were likely to be many more cases than official data is showing. In minutes published this weekend, the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) urged the government to reintroduce “more stringent measures … very soon”, warning that cases were set to reach between 600,000 and 2 million a day by the end of the month if action was not taken immediately. Israel’s prime minister has warned citizens against the spread of the new, highly infectious variant of coronavirus on Sunday and urged them to vaccinate. Naftali Bennett told ministers that there was already community transmission of the omicron variant in Israel and a rise in the country’s coronavirus infection rate. He called the omicron variant “very infectious”. “It must be understood that the collective and national protection that the state provides is not enough,” Bennett said at the start of the weekly Cabinet meeting. He urged Israelis that “every citizen must see to themselves, their family, and their children. Don’t rely on the neighbours to vaccinate themselves and their child. It won’t help much.” Israel rolled out a world-leading vaccination campaign, and more than 4.1 million of Israel’s 9.3 million people have received a third dose of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine. The country’s health ministry has reported at least 134 confirmed cases of the omicron variant since its emergence in late November. French education minister Jean-Michel Blanquer has said on BFM television that the government has no plans to extend the Christmas school holidays because of the rapid spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant. Some European countries have brought Christmas holidays forward, and French conservative presidential candidate Valérie Pecresse has called for an extension of them in order to help ensure any infections caught over year-end holidays are discovered before children return to school. Piers Corbyn, a leading Covid-19 denier, has been arrested on suspicion of encouraging people to burn down MPs’ offices. The Metropolitan police said a man in his 70s – whom it did not name – was arrested in Southwark, south London, in the early hours of Sunday. “The arrest relates to a video posted online in which people were encouraged to burn down MPs’ offices,” the force said. Earlier, the Met said it was assessing a video that appears to show Corbyn, 74, calling for MPs’ offices to be burned down. The video, shared on social media, shows Corbyn, a prominent anti-lockdown protester and brother of the former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, criticising politicians who voted for Covid restrictions. After urging the crowd to “hammer to death those scum who have decided to go ahead with introducing new fascism”, Corbyn appears to tell a crowd in the video: “You’ve got to get a list of them … and if your MP is one of them, go to their offices and, well, I would recommend burning them down, OK. But I can’t say that on air. I hope we’re not on air.” Spain’s prime minister has called on the country to keep its guard up as the Omicron variant spreads and as the number of cases per 100,000 people in Spain rose to 511, writes the Guardian’s Sam Jones in Madrid. “Although the incidence is still lower than in neighbouring countries, it isn’t good because it’s a clear and real warning of the threat to the health of our fellow Spaniards and as such, it must compel us to intensify our actions as the virus grows,” Pedro Sánchez said in a televised address on Sunday morning. The prime minister said Spain’s regional presidents would attend an online emergency meeting on Wednesday afternoon to discuss next steps. “The virus is still among us and fighting it must continue to be a priority for all the authorities,” said Sánchez. “But I would urge people to remain calm and confident. We have come through the most painful part of this together and we will come through this by protecting the health and lives of our fellow citizens.” However, he said that the situation appeared far better than a year ago: “It’s worth pointing out that the characteristics of this new wave are different. Although the infection numbers are higher, our hospitalisation and ICU admission figures are lower than last year. The first conclusion that should be drawn is that the vaccines work.” To date, 89.7% of those aged over 12 in Spain have received two doses of the vaccine, and the rollout to children under 12 began earlier this week. Shops in the Netherlands were closed and people’s Christmas plans were in disarray as the country began a lockdown on Sunday aimed at limiting an expected Covid-19 surge caused by the rise of the Omicron variant. Prime minister Mark Rutte announced the sudden shutdown on Saturday evening, ordering the closure of all but the most essential stores, as well as restaurants, hairdressers, gyms, museums and other public places from Sunday until at least 14 January. The news came as a shock to many Dutch people as they headed into the Christmas and New Year period, Reuters reports. Many people rushed out on Saturday to stock up on presents and food and to get a last-minute haircut. Hospitality workers demanded compensation for lost income in the holiday season, while gym owners stressed the importance of exercise during a health crisis. “Closing all bars and restaurants in such an important month is incredibly painful and dramatic. We need compensation and an exit strategy”, the Dutch association for hospitality services said. All schools will close a week early for the Christmas break on Monday and will remain shut until at least 9 January, while households are recommended to receive no more than two visitors and gatherings outside are also limited to a maximum of two. Coronavirus infections in the Netherlands have dropped from record levels in recent weeks after a night-time lockdown was put in place late last month. But cases involving the Omicron variant have increased rapidly since the beginning of December and the strain is expected to become dominant before the end of the year. This will pose a big problem for hospitals, which have been cancelling regular care for weeks as they try to avoid running out of beds due to the high numbers of Covid patients on their wards. Mass lateral flow testing cut the number of people needing hospital treatment for Covid by 32% and relieved significant pressure on the NHS when the measures were piloted last year, a study in north-west England has shown. Liverpool conducted the first city-wide testing scheme using rapid antigen tests in November last year, amid debate about whether or not lateral flow tests (LFTs) were accurate enough to detect the virus in asymptomatic carriers. It expanded the project to cover the whole of the Liverpool region, offering people LFTs whether or not they had symptoms. Key workers did daily tests before going to work to show they were not infectious. Fresh analysis has shown that it was more successful than Liverpool’s scientists and public health teams had anticipated, after they compared Covid cases and outcomes in the region with other parts of England. The head of Germany’s domestic intelligence agency has been talking about the potential for serious acts of political violence coming from the country’s anti-vaccine movement, in which organised far right activists are increasingly involved in some regions. Thomas Haldenwang, the president of the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution, said in an interview with journalists from the Funke media group: “It is true that there is a difference between talking about violence and committing it,” But he cited the case of a 49-year-old German citizen who was arrested in September on suspicion of shooting dead a petrol station worker who refused to serve him while he was not wearing a mask. Asked about possible murder plots in future, he replied: “With violence-oriented rightwing extremists and in the radicalised corona protest milieu, no scenario can be ruled out.” Most of the parties he had planned to go to have been cancelled or scaled back and he wont’t be having the same number of hugs with his elderly mother, Britain’s health minister has told the BBC. “It’s time to be more cautious. We know this thing is spreading rapidly,” Sajid Javid told broadcaster Andrew Marr. He was not ruling out a new “circuit breaker” increase in restrictions coming in even before Christmas. “There are no guarantees in this pandemic. At this point, we just have to keep everything under review.” Iran has detected its first case of infection by the new omicron variant of the coronavirus, state TV reported on Sunday. The announcement comes as the variant spreads around the globe less than a month after scientists alerted the World Health Organization to the concerning-looking version. Iran has vaccinated 60% of its population of roughly 85 million people with two doses of coronavirus vaccines. The coronavirus has killed more than 131,000 people in Iran, the worst fatality rate in the Middle East. On 24 August alone, 709 people died of the illness. The number of deaths has decreased in recent months due to the vaccination, experts say. Iran accelerated vaccinations in recent weeks. More than 50 million Iranians have received their second shots, and 3.5 million have received a third jab. New restrictions in England that would governing social distancing and household mixing are “inevitable”, the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, has said. “If we don’t bring in restrictions sooner rather than later you are going to see even more positive cases and potentially public services like the NHS (National Health Service) on the verge of collapsing if not collapsing,” he said in an interview on the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show. The UK health minister, Savid Javid, also came under pressure on Sky News to say whether the government would implement stronger restrictions, in line with what experts have been recommending. Parliament would be recalled if this was necessary, he said. “We have shown in the past that we will do what is necessary, but it has got to be backed up by the data,” he added, though he insisted that the UK was in a “different place” in terms of the defences that vaccines and new treatments could provide. He also faced questions about whether the public would follow any new rules – particularly in England – given recent allegations about the apparent flouting of pandemic restrictions during 2020 by staff at Downing Street, other departments and in the governing Conservative party. “I believe the British people will respond in the same way as they have done throughout this pandemic, where if they understand the issues, know just how important it is for their families, they will respond accordingly,” said Javid. Britain’s health minister, Sajid Javid, has said unvaccinated people are “taking up hospital beds” that could be used for someone else. Speaking on Sky News, Javid said 10% of the population – more than 5 million people – still had not received their jabs, and about nine out of 10 of those needing the most care in hospital were unvaccinated. He added: “I just cannot emphasise enough the impact that they are having on the rest of society.” “They must really think about the damage they are doing to society by … they take up hospital beds that could have been used for someone with maybe a heart problem, or maybe someone who is waiting for elective surgery.” “But instead of protecting themselves and protecting the community they choose not to get vaccinated. They are really having a damaging impact and I just can’t stress enough, please do come forward and get vaccinated.” UK government ministers have been accused of failing to protect the most vulnerable people from rising Covid cases after it emerged in England and Wales that people with blood cancer account for a higher proportion of coronavirus deaths than earlier in the pandemic. With daily case numbers at record highs as a result of the Omicron variant, charities warn that people with suppressed immune systems who had been helped to shield at the start of the pandemic felt obliged to put themselves at risk at work, were confused about how to access treatments and less likely to have protection from vaccines. More than 3,000 people with blood cancer – just over one in 100 of all those who have the disease in England and Wales – have died of Covid, according to analysis of official data by Blood Cancer UK. This is despite these patients having spent long periods shielding to avoid contact with the virus. Large swathes of England, including several major cities, have no vaccination walk-in centres, it has emerged, sparking fears the government will miss its target of offering all adults a booster jab by the end of this month. As the tide of Omicron cases surges, thousands seeking a third vaccination without having to wait days or weeks for an appointment are driving miles to neighbouring counties. People without transport and those for whom a walk-in centre is the only option – because they do not have a GP or an NHS number – have no access to Covid booster jabs. Several cities, including Norwich, Peterborough and York, have no walk-in centres. And there are no walk-in boosters available in entire counties, including Oxfordshire, Hampshire and Buckinghamshire, although some offer third doses for people with weakened immune systems. The reimposition of new Covid restrictions in England have been cited as one of the reasons for the resignation of a key UK government minister. The departure of Lord Frost, who was the government’s ‘Brexit’ minister in charge of overseeing the continuing difficulties surrounding Britain’s departure from the European Union, presents yet another political setback for the increasingly beleaguered prime minister. It comes after month in which one after another has popped up like – as one minister put it – a “bad advent calendar.” Conservative MPs were already warning Boris Johnson that he must regain control of the government to survive as leader until the next election when it emerged on Saturday night that Frost is to leave the government after frustrations over Brexit negotiations and broader concerns over the government’s Covid policies and tax increases. The peer has been vocal in recent weeks about his concerns over tax increases and the reimposition of Covid restrictions. He is understood to have spoken out against a rise in national insurance to pay for health and social care spending. He also has concerns about plan B Covid measures, which provoked the largest Tory rebellion under Johnson’s leadership. At a conference last month he said: I am very happy that free Britain, or at least merry England, is probably now the freest country in the world as regards Covid restrictions. No mask rules, no vaccine passports, and long may it remain so. Hello and welcome to coverage of all Covid-19 related news, internationally and here in the UK, where the scale of the threat posed by the Omicron variant has been laid bare by government scientists who warned that there are now hundreds of thousands of infections every day in Britain. They warned daily number could reach between 600,000 and 2 million by the end of the month if new restrictions are not brought in immediately. In other developments: • Nations across Europe moved to reimpose tougher measures to stem a new wave of Covid infections, with the Netherlands leading the way by imposing a nationwide lockdown. • Germany is tightening restrictions on travel from the UK in an attempt to curb the spread of the Omicron variant. • The World Health Organization reported on Saturday that the Omicron variant of the coronavirus has been detected in 89 countries, and Covid cases involving the variant are doubling every one-and-a-half to three days in places with community transmission and not just infections acquired abroad. • Kamala Harris has conceded that the Biden administration was blind to the emergence of the Delta and Omicron variants of Covid-19, and said she fears “misinformation” over vaccines will prolong the pandemic well into a third year in the US. • Australia’s federal health minister has said it is unlikely the country will follow the Netherlands and impose significant lockdowns to suppress surging Omicron infections, although the deputy chief medical officer, noted that the new variant was highly transmissible This is Ben Quinn in London. You can flag up any news that we should be aware of on Twitter at @BenQuinn75 or email me.In a year that began with the US Capitol attack, continued with the fall of Afghanistan and is ending with the rapid spread of Omicron, the global news cycle has at times felt overwhelming. But while 2021 has been another fraught year, not all the news has been negative. Here are a few of the funniest and weirdest stories and headlines published this year. Animals Sabrina Imbler wrote a perfectly headlined piece in the New York Times about moray eels: At long last, justice for the naturally beautiful, filler-free camels: Feral pigs also caused a stir, perhaps wistful for the dizzying attention of their viral moment in 2019. (They also happen to have a climate impact, we learned this year, equivalent to the greenhouse gas emissions of 1.1m cars.) The AV Club had fun with the news that authorities in Puerto Rico were investigating YouTuber Jake Paul for driving on beaches that were turtle nesting areas: The critically endangered California condor garnered attention when a group of the birds took up residence at the home of Cinda Mickol one weekend. Also on the theme of indifferent beasts: people expressed class solidarity with capybaras who infiltrated a rich gated community in Argentina. Surreal stories from the pandemic … not least from Nicki Minaj, who tweeted that her cousin’s friend in Trinidad had to cancel his wedding because he developed swollen testicles after the Covid vaccine – which the Trinidad and Tobago health ministry then had to waste time investigating and debunking. Generation wars The age-old tradition of pouring scorn on younger people continued healthily in 2021: Although at times it appeared to be warranted. Social media In September, leaked documents suggested Instagram made body image issues worse for teenage girls. Instagram boss Adam Mosseri’s comments defending the social network backfired: The following month, Mark Zuckerberg announced that Facebook would be changing its name to Meta: And finally A Spanish bishop found love but lost his powers.On Sunday afternoon, a former Western Sydney Wanderers player and coach accused club management of overseeing “the most toxic environment I’ve seen in 20 years of football”. “How can 60 odd players and four coaches over five years be wrong,” tweeted Dean Heffernan, who made nine appearances for the men’s team between 2013 and 2014 before becoming coach of the women’s team in 2019. “I rejected a third year due to the above. “I was an empty shell in that place mate. It was a slow football death over three years of coaching … it’s not the players. This has been happening for years now, most former players that walk in there say somethings not right here anymore. It an energy and you feel it, and can smell it from the car park. It slowly seeps into you without even knowing.” A couple of hours later Macarthur FC, the incumbent Sydney represent for off-field disarray, staged another exhibition of togetherness on the pitch (and not a great pitch at that) compelling enough to win while playing with 10 men for more than 70 minutes. That come-from-behind 2-1 result against Newcastle, which keeps them top of the table, played out just before the ostensibly floundering dynasty that is Sydney FC finally recorded its first green tick of the season at the expense of Wellington. There is something going around in the harbour city – and it’s not just Covid-19. Things in the league north of the Victorian border are … weird. A bit kooky and off-kilter, and throwing up surprises. Not that the Wanderers’ slide is at all surprising; it is, merely, continuing. The surprise is the people speaking out about it. Heffernan’s very public censure of the club was accompanied by that of Patrick Zwaanswijk, who was briefly on the club’s coaching last season. Heffernan and Zwaanswik’s criticisms were not directed at the club’s coaches. The Wanderers declined to comment. “Thank you Dean,” Zwaanswijk tweeted in one of a number of posts. “I know 100% I wasn’t the only one … we will keep our heads up but won’t be silenced anymore. Truth hurts but is healing at the same time.” Both followed the Wanderers’ 2-0 loss to Central Coast on Saturday. The former powerhouse now sit eighth and on track to miss the finals for a fifth successive season. The club’s on-field performances mean Carl Robinson’s tenure as head coach is surely unsustainable, in the same way as those of his predecessors Jean-Paul de Marigny, Markus Babbel and Josep Gombau. The guy before Gombau, of course, was Tony Popovic, whose recent presence in Melbourne seems to be a key contributor to Victory’s A-League Men reawakening. Him and the other new local, John Aloisi. Between the pair of former Socceroos teammates-turned-managers both Melbourne Victory and Western United have regained a pulse. Victory, the reigning wooden-spooners with a proneness to conceding 13 goals and scoring none over two games against City, now sit third. Two points above them in second are United – the same club that lost their last eight matches of 2020-21 to place 10th. Their home win over Adelaide was achieved on the same day as a second and third squad member tested positive for Covid. Of course, it is more straightforward to muster victories against the odds when the whole team is not stuck in a Queensland hotel room for 14 days – the obstacle currently encountered by Perth Glory. “We knew this could happen... training had to change times, you’re not sure if you’re going to play the game or not play the game,” Aloisi said. “But the club worked tirelessly in the background, the players remained focused and showed their character because we had to fight ... we did have to adjust … it’s probably going to happen all season. We just have to be ready for it and make sure we adapt well and the group did.” Melbourne City, granted, have thus far appeared somewhat skittish by the champions’ high standards but Saturday’s 2-2 derby draw with Victory was still just about everything the season-opening Sydney derby wasn’t. The goals were one thing. The high-quality, helter-skelter nature of the contest was another. Another entirely was the genuinely outstanding pettiness of supporters that makes such ties sing. Original Style Melbourne – the Victory active fan base which replaced the disbanded North Terrace – accused the owners of home team Melbourne City, the City Football Group, of being “an enemy of our game” for apparently not allowing them to bring their full tifo to AAMI Park (reports indicate both sets of supporters were allowed one banner each and OSM had requested a second). “See you on Saturday you rats,” the group wrote on Facebook during the week. “Now you’ve started a real rivalry.” Popovic was seemingly cool with said rivalry. “We want passion, we want noise, we want a derby not just on the field but also off the field,” he said on the eve of the game. “We know that our fans will bring that to the game and what they’re allowed to do is out of my hands, I can’t control that. But I know that nothing will stop the passion from our fans tomorrow.” The almost 20,000 in attendance matched the forecast, and made for an atmosphere very much needed by the Australian Professional Leagues and broadcasters Ten and Paramount+ who are in the midst of rebuilding the game’s wider popularity. Right now, at least, Melbourne are winning the interstate battle of the brands.At least 208 people have been killed in the devastation caused by Typhoon Rai, the most powerful typhoon to hit the Philippines this year. More than 300,000 people were forced to flee their homes by the storm, which barrelled into the country on Thursday with wind speeds of 195km/h (120mph). The typhoon smashed through the southern and central regions of the Philippines, destroying homes and infrastructure and causing flooding that has affected millions. The death toll surged on Monday to 208, the national police said, making Rai one of the deadliest storms to hit the country in recent years. At least 239 people were injured and 52 missing. Arthur Yap, the governor of Bohol, an island province in the central Visayas region, on Sunday confirmed at least 74 fatalities. Communication cuts had prevented officials from sharing information. In a message posted on Facebook, Yap said: “It is very clear that the damage sustained by Bohol is great and all-encompassing”. He warned of shortages of food and drinking water, and appealed for hundreds of generators. Floodwaters rose rapidly in Bohol’s riverside town of Loboc, where residents were trapped on their roofs and trees. They were rescued by the coast guard the following day. The government said about 780,000 people were affected, including more than 300,000 residents who had to evacuate their homes. At least 39 other typhoon deaths were reported by the disaster-response agency and the national police. Officials on Dinagat Islands, one of the southeastern provinces first pounded by the typhoon, separately reported 10 deaths just from a few towns, bringing the overall fatalities so far to 112. President Rodrigo Duterte flew to the region Saturday and promised 2bn pesos ($40m) in new aid. Aides said the president will visit Bohol on Sunday. Thousands of military, police, coast guard and fire personnel are being deployed to assist in search and rescue efforts in the worst-affected areas of the vast archipelago. Heavy machinery – like backhoes and front-end loaders – are also being sent to help clear roads blocked by fallen power poles and trees. Charities and emergency services have appealed for donations. About 20 storms and typhoons batter the Philippines each year. The archipelago is located in the seismically active Pacific “Ring of Fire” region, making it one of the world’s most disaster-prone countries.The Philippines – ranked among the globe’s most vulnerable nations to the impacts of climate change – is hit by an average of 20 storms and typhoons every year, which typically wipe out harvests, homes and infrastructure in already impoverished area Many of the dead were reported to have been killed by falling trees and collapsed walls, drowned in flash floods or buried in landslides. Officials on Dinagat Islands, one of the south-eastern provinces first hit by the typhoon, separately reported 10 deaths from a few towns, according to Associated Press. The Dinagat governor, Arlene Bag-ao, said damage to the island’s landscape was “reminiscent if not worse” than that caused by Super Typhoon Haiyan, the deadliest cyclone on record in the Philippines. It hit the country in November 2013 and left more than 7,360 people dead or missing. “I saw how Typhoon Odette tore the provincial capitol apart, piece by piece,” Dinagat PIO Crisostomo told the radio station DZBB, using the local name for Rai. Thousands of military, police, coastguard and fire personnel were deployed to assist in search and rescue efforts. However, relief work, and efforts to determine the scale of the damage, have been hampered by the destruction caused by the storm, which has blocked highways and cut off phone lines and electricity in many areas. Angeli Cantillana, a communications campaigner for Greenpeace South-east Asia, who spoke from Butuan after visiting Surigao, both badly affected areas, said communities she had met were yet to receive assistance. “The situation right now is heartbreaking,” she said, describing the scenes along the 125km drive from Surigao to Butuan. “Just along the way you can see the houses are really damaged – both partially and fully damaged. A lot of houses don’t have roofs any more and a lot of families are staying outside their homes.” All major phone networks in Surigao were yet to be restored, Cantillana said. “Coordination is really hard right now.” The chairman of the Philippine Red Cross, Richard Gordon, said in a statement that its staff were reporting “complete carnage in the coastal areas”. “Homes, hospitals, school and community buildings have been ripped to shreds,” he said. The Red Cross, which has launched an emergency appeal to fund relief and recovery efforts, said the storm had caused widespread flooding, affecting millions of people, and described Typhoon Rai as one of the most powerful storms on record to hit the southern Philippines. Typhoon Rai is the strongest of 15 typhoons to hit the country this year. The archipelago, which is located in the seismically active Pacific “Ring of Fire” region, is especially vulnerable to natural disasters and climate change. It experiences an average of 20 typhoons a year, usually between July and October. Scientists have warned that such storms are becoming increasingly powerful as global temperatures rise. “Disasters are getting worse and what the scientists have been saying in the IPCC [intergovernmental panel on climate change] – it has already been happening in the Philippines,” said Cantillana. The speed with which Typhoon Rai intensified was a particular concern, she said. The local government response to such disasters had improved but the storms were becoming stronger.If a week is a long time in politics, three years is a geological age. Long-held assumptions can change dramatically in that time. Just ask the Business Council of Australia. In 2018, before the last federal election, the lobby group representing 100 of the country’s biggest businesses described a Labor pledge to cut greenhouse gas emissions by 45% by 2030 as “economy wrecking”. The Coalition’s more modest and less scientifically based goal of a 26-28% cut was deemed “appropriate and achievable”. (To its credit, the business council has chosen not to delete its incriminating tweet.) Three years of worsening science news and a once-in-a-century pandemic later, the BCA has turned on its heel. It believes Labor’s new, fractionally reduced 2030 target – a 43% cut compared with 2005 levels – and the policies that support it are a “sensible and workable plan”. Remarkably, given its history of opposing a national carbon price, it recently called on both major parties to do more. The BCA is not the only establishment heavyweight to have embraced greater ambition and offered support for Anthony Albanese and his climate change shadow minister, Chris Bowen, since the ALP emissions policy was released earlier this month. The Australian Industry Group – the country’s largest employer group – said Labor’s target could be delivered with “sensible policy reforms, greater collaboration and a close focus on industry competitiveness”. The Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry said it offered “a pathway to achieve the economic and technological transition towards a more sustainable future”. And the Australian Automobile Association said it was a “win for consumers”. This response is not a complete surprise. Most major corporates are persuaded the world will inevitably move on climate and that it is in their interests to do the same – or at least be seen to. But the support from business for Labor’s more ambitious stance reflects a sea change in the battle-weary world of Australian climate politics. Some observers have wondered if this is how the “climate wars” end, having helped bring down multiple political leaders on both sides and held back policy for more than a decade. Political disagreements and attacks will continue, but will the potency of a dishonest campaign over emissions policy have diminished by the time next year’s election rolls around? ‘There’s no going back’ Analysts mostly say: let’s not get ahead of ourselves. But they also say people should not underestimate what it means that the Coalition has promised the country will reach net zero emissions by 2050. Scott Morrison’s net zero plan, released shortly before the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow, includes no new policies, largely relies on unproven technology and does not actually get the country to net zero, but the long-delayed decision to set the target means for the first time Australia’s major political parties agree on the destination. It narrows the scope for political attack. “I think the war is over in the sense the fundamental differences about doing anything about climate change is over,” says Tony Wood, the energy program director with the Grattan Institute. “There is a rump of people on both sides who don’t want there to be bipartisan support for climate change and who see benefit in differentiation, but I think the question is whether we’re now entering a stage of cold wars and skirmishes.” Frank Jotzo, professor of climate change economics at the Australian National University Crawford School of Public Policy, says the centre of debate has shifted and bipartisan support for a net zero target opened “many, many opportunities and really changes the tone of the debate”. “There’s no going back on that,” he says. “Now that a conservative government that had a ‘no-action’ point of view supports a net zero target, there’s really no room for saying we shouldn’t be doing anything. “If you went just by what business says and what civil society says, then you would say there’s really nothing that could hold back a shift to effective and sensible climate policy in Australia. Large parts of the spectrum now agree on the fundamentals – they want ambitious targets and meaningful policies of some kind.” Of course, things are not that simple. “This agreement doesn’t necessarily translate into how elections are campaigned,” Jotzo says. “The preconditions for an end to the climate wars are there, but I think it’s too early to call.” Unanswered questions about the 2022 campaign include whether News Corp newspapers, which have run misleading campaigns against the cost of climate policies and attacked the scientific consensus, have moved on since launching a “mission zero” series on climate before the Glasgow summit or will return to their old ways. To date, the response has been more muted than some in Labor expected. There have been news stories describing the ALP policy as targeting big emitters – which is true, with the important caveat that it is gradual and has the support of business groups. Others have raised doubts about whether it would create more than 600,000 jobs and the extent to which it would lead to a reduction in energy bills – though it was not disputed that they would be cut. The most aggressive media attack was on the front page of News Corp’s Brisbane daily, the Courier Mail, which quoted backbencher Matthew Canavan creatively describing a plan to use an existing Coalition policy – the safeguard mechanism – to start to cut emissions from big industry as “Labor’s revenge” on Queensland. Morrison and his ministers have not gone as hard and the initial attack was quickly over, but it’s early days, and campaign lines have been tested. The prime minister claimed Labor’s policy would be bad for coal regions and manufacturing, and several MPs described the promised changes to the safeguard mechanism as a “sneaky new carbon tax”. In reality, Labor is proposing a more gentle use of the safeguard than promised by its architect, Liberal cabinet minister Greg Hunt, back in 2015. In response, Albanese said the Coalition was “frozen in time while the world warms around it” and that he expected the government to lie about Labor’s policy. Closing the climate policy gap Analysts expect Coalition criticism to be more targeted than in previous campaigns, reflecting not only the shared net zero target, but that the government is under pressure from climate-focused independents in heartland Sydney and Melbourne seats. A differentiated campaign – trying to convince inner-city residents the government is acting, while telling some parts of Queensland and New South Wales a Labor government would be devastating for them – is not impossible, but harder to land than in the past. Labor’s policy was designed with this in mind. There is a gap between the parties on 2030 targets, but it is relatively narrow once the government’s rhetoric is factored in. The prime minister still backs a target set under Tony Abbott six years ago, but claims official projections show the country would cut emissions by 35%. Whether you accept this or not – and there is reason not to – it leaves Labor promising just eight percentage points more than the Coalition. Albanese accurately described the ALP’s target as modest. The gap between the parties on renewable energy is similarly difficult to exploit. The government forecasts that 69% of electricity in the national market will be zero emissions by 2030, largely due to the tumbling cost of solar energy and incentives offered by state governments. Labor says it would lift that to 82% just by bringing forward construction of transmission lines to planned renewable energy zones. Richie Merzian, the climate and energy program director for the Australia Institute, says Labor has gone out of its way to avoid any area where it was at risk of being wedged by the government or other opponents. “It means the animosity and ridiculous scare campaigns about climate change that we’ve seen are unlikely to dominate this election,” he says. If this proves correct, it may leave the biggest battleground where those who believe the debate should be led by climate science say it should have always been – over what Australia has to do to live up to its global commitment to try to limit global heating to 1.5C. Politically, they include the Greens, who want a 75% cut by 2030 including a rapid phaseout of coal power, and some independent candidates. Merzian, a former diplomat representing Australia at climate talks, is among those who believe this is where the debate is finally headed, saying: “The battle will not be over until we have a decent climate policy that reflects the reality of what’s needed.”The first death of a child with Covid-19 in New Zealand has prompted calls for Māori children to be prioritised in the next stage of the vaccine rollout, as the country grapples with racial inequalities compounded by the pandemic. A Māori boy, under the age of 10 and who had tested positive for the virus, died last week, becoming the youngest New Zealander to die with Covid, the Ministry of Health confirmed. It is unclear whether Covid-19 was the cause of the boy’s death, as New Zealand records all deaths of people considered active Covid cases in its official count. It is the country’s 49th death of a Covid-positive person since the start of the pandemic. Māori make up an estimated 17.1% of the population but they have accounted for 32% of all Covid-19 related deaths. New Zealand has hit its 90% double vaccination milestone for the eligible population (those 12 years and older), making it one of the most vaccinated countries in the world, but the rates for Māori and Pasifika are yet to catch up. According to the Ministry of Health, 77% of Māori are double vaccinated, and 88% of Pasifika. Combined, these groups have made up 75% of Covid cases. The government has faced criticism for not prioritising Māori and Pasifika in its vaccine rollout, and for failing to adequately consult Māori over accessing hard-to-reach groups. But with provisional approval granted for children aged 5-11 years to be vaccinated, now is the opportunity to do right by those communities, health experts say. “We must not repeat the failures that led to the existing vaccination inequities for Māori, inequities that are not a matter of chance but the result of structural racism and inequity by design,” six health experts – Dr Owen Sinclair, Dr Jin Russell, Dr Danny de Lore, Dr Erik Anderson, Dr Teuila Percival and Dr Siouxsie Wiles – wrote in an editorial. The group said the government’s rollout for the adult population focused too heavily on age and pre-existing conditions, failing to take into account the younger age structure of the Māori population, the greater burden of Māori disease, the significant barriers for Māori accessing healthcare and their justified distrust of the health system. According to the 2018 census, 32% of Māori are under 15 years of age, compared with 19.6% of the total population. Because of this younger age structure, fewer Māori are currently eligible for vaccination. Russell, a developmental paediatrician, said Māori health and community leaders had advocated for strategies to prevent inequities since the start of the pandemic and now it was critical to listen to them. “These are the people who understand the communities best. They’re on the ground, they know how to reach families.” Māori children carry a higher burden of pre-existing conditions including diabetes, respiratory conditions, and obesity, she said. “If you design a vaccine rollout that doesn’t specifically reach those families who are hardest to reach, you will inevitably end up with an inequitable vaccine rollout.” In the week leading up to Friday, there were over 280 Covid cases in children nine years and under. Russell said the vast majority of children do not become unwell but there is some evidence that the Omicron variant is reproducing more efficiently in younger age groups, which poses an ongoing risk to the health of Māori communities. Significant resourcing must to go towards Māori community and health organisations before the rollout begins, Russell said, adding that one of the best approaches would to enable vaccinations at schools. “It’s really important for families to know that their child won’t be vaccinated without their explicit consent, but by making vaccines available at schools this enables everyone to reach the vaccine easily,” Russell said. New Zealand has so far reported 13,125 Covid cases since the start of the pandemic, with 10,289 of those from the current outbreak. Weekly case numbers are beginning to trend downwards as the country’s vaccination rates continue to climb and public health measures prevent unvaccinated people from attended some venues, or gathering in large groups. On Monday, the country reported its second probable death related to an extremely rare reaction to the vaccine. The Covid-19 vaccine independent safety monitoring board said a 26-year-old man died within two weeks of his first dose of the Pfizer vaccine and a post-mortem has identified myocarditis as the probable cause of death. The man developed symptoms in the days following his vaccine but did not seek treatment. The board noted that Covid-19 infection can itself be a cause of myocarditis, as well as other serious illnesses, and it remains safer to be vaccinated.Poles have staged nationwide protests including a thousands-strong rally outside the presidential palace to demand the head of state veto a law they say would limit media freedoms in the European Union’s largest eastern member. Unexpectedly rushed through parliament on Friday, the legislation would tighten rules around foreign ownership of media, specifically affecting the ability of news channel TVN24, owned by US media company Discovery Inc, to operate. The bill, yet to be signed into law by president Andrzej Duda, has soured ties between Nato-member state Poland and the United States at a time of heightened tension in eastern Europe amid what some countries see as increased Russian assertiveness. It has also fuelled wider fears about attacks on media freedoms that have been running high since state-run oil company PKN Orlen said last year it was taking over a German-owned publisher of regional newspapers. “This is not just about one channel,” the Warsaw mayor and a former opposition candidate for president, Rafal Trzaskowski, told the crowd on Sunday. “In a moment [there will be] censorship of the internet, an attempt to extinguish all independent sources of information – but we will not allow that to happen.” At demonstrations outside the president’s palace, 38-year-old Emilia Zlotinska told Agence France-Press: “We need free speech. I would like the president not to sign it.” TVN24 footage showed protesters in Warsaw waving Polish and EU flags and chanting “free media”. “We have to be here today because free media are a pillar of democracy,” said Beata Laciak, a member of the crowd and a sociology professor. Demonstrations took place across the country. Pictures from the southern city of Krakow showed protesters brandishing banners with slogans like “Hands off TVN” and “Free Poland, free people, free media”. As of 8.20pm local time, more than 1.5 million people had signed a petition in TVN24’s defence, the channel said. The ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party has long said that foreign media groups have too much power in the country and distort public debate. Critics say the moves against foreign media groups are part of an increasingly authoritarian agenda that has put Warsaw at loggerheads with Brussels over LGBT rights and judicial reforms. Last week, the US state department called on Duda to protect free speech, freedom to engage in economic activity, property rights and equal treatment. “The United States is deeply troubled by the passage in Poland today of a law that would undermine freedom of expression, weaken media freedom and erode foreign investors confidence in their property rights and the sanctity of contracts in Poland,” state department spokesperson Ned Price said in a statement on Friday. The European Commission said the new law sent another negative signal about the respect of rule of law and democratic values in Poland. “Once this bill becomes a law, the commission will not hesitate to take action in case of non-compliance with EU law,” commission vice-president Vera Jourova said in a statement. Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this reportImagine entering an art gallery empty-handed, and leaving with a Picasso. It sounds unfathomable, but that’s exactly what happened in Melbourne a few decades ago. In 1986, the National Gallery of Victoria (NGV) made headlines for all the wrong reasons: Pablo Picasso’s painting Weeping Woman vanished one evening from the gallery’s wall. It’s an incident some remember, but few know the full story. For this reason, journalist Marc Fennell and the team behind SBS’s new must-see documentary Framed decided to dive deeper. News footage from the time shows Tom Dixon, the then NGV chief conservator, releasing a statement confirming the theft. Dixon is one of the subjects interviewed for Framed. As he and the other subjects explain in the series, the wildest part of this crime was the anonymous letters sent by the thieves. “We have stolen the Picasso from the National Gallery as a protest against the niggardly funding of the fine arts in this hick State and against the clumsy, unimaginative stupidity of the administration and distribution of that funding,” the first letter begins. The thieves, who called themselves the Australian Cultural Terrorists, sent multiple taunting letters to the media, Fennell says. “It meant the crime was playing out in newspapers over the course of many weeks, where the thieves were literally taunting the police minister and the gallery, in the press, day after day,” he says. “It was just … bonkers!” There are few examples outside fiction where criminals engage so brazenly with their victims. Dixon says in Framed: “As I read it now, it’s hard to take it very seriously. But at the time, we were shaking in our boots.” Authorities from all over were summoned to bring this group to justice – even Interpol got involved. But this was no straightforward investigation. The story just got wilder, as pressure mounted. That pressure was intensified by the fact that the thieves weren’t just sending insults in these letters. They were sending demands. “Two conditions must be publicly agreed upon if the painting is to be returned,” the self-professed terrorists stated. As ransom notes go, the demands were unusual. They sought not a briefcase full of cash, but more funding for the arts. Incredibly, the minister responsible for the arts at the time was also the minister of police, Race Mathews. Journalist Virginia Trioli tells the Framed team that it was “a ridiculous association of portfolios in any circumstance. But lo and behold, here comes an art theft and [Mathews] is parachuted right in the middle of it!” The group was clear about the conditions of its demands. “Because the Minister of the Arts is also the Minister of Plod, we are allowing him a sporting seven days in which to try to have us arrested while he deliberates. There will be no negotiation.” And if these demands weren’t met? The group was clear: the $2 million Picasso would be destroyed. This story hooks you from the start, and just gets bigger and bigger. Fennell says: “We found so many things that have never been uncovered before. But there are still a lot of questions.” The thieves, who called themselves the Australian Cultural Terrorists, sent multiple taunting letters to the media. The team reached out to a wide range of subjects in an attempt to find answers, and received conflicting reports. The events are remembered very differently depending on who you hear from. The police, the NGV, the arts community, journalists: everyone has their own understanding of what actually went on. “There’s a multiplicity of experiences within this crime,” Fennell says. “And they’re actually all valid. They don’t cancel each other out … they simply coexist.” It’s easy to get swept up in the bizarre elements of this story and forget that this isn’t just a yarn. It was a crime, and like all crimes, there were victims. The team at Framed discovered there were very real, ongoing impacts, and was interested in showing the humanity that is sometimes overlooked in the true crime genre. For some people, the effects were catastrophic. One man, in particular, was falsely accused. “It was a commonly held secret in the arts community that he had done it,” Fennell says. “But he didn’t know the community believed that, and it had a devastating impact on his career.” As well as the human story behind the heist, the themes at the heart of it remain relevant today: cultural cringe, underfunding of the arts, a confused national identity. The theft of Weeping Woman may raise more questions than answers, as Fennell suggests, and speaks more broadly to issues of cultural identity. “Who gets to decide what is ‘good’ art?” he says. “Who gets to decide what it means to be Australian? Who gets to paint that story, of that history? “And if someone was to paint a story of ‘being Australian’ … would we even notice its value?” The story starts in the arts community, but opens a conversation about society on the whole, and indeed, national identity. Ultimately, we are reminded that museum plaques are woefully inadequate at telling the full story. By listening to and spotlighting the voices we rarely hear from, a much-needed dialogue can begin. The series is sure to be this Boxing Day’s most thought-provoking and unmissable binge watch. Prepare to be stunned, and reminded that truth is always stranger than fiction. Stream the complete four-part series Framed this Boxing Day, 26 December, on SBS On Demand. Also available with simplified Chinese and Arabic subtitles.Four months ago, 35-year-old Gabriel Boric confounded the polls to claim victory in a presidential primary he had barely been old enough to compete in. But on 11 March next year, he will now be sworn in as Chile’s youngest ever president – having amassed more votes than any presidential candidate in history. Boric is the driving force behind Chile’s abrupt changing of the guard. He belongs to a radical generation of student leaders who are grimly determined to bury dictator Augusto Pinochet’s bitter legacy once and for all. “Chile was the birthplace of neoliberalism, and it shall also be its grave!” he shouted from a stage the night of his primary win, his forearm tattoo peeking out from beneath a rolled-up sleeve. General Pinochet’s brutal dictatorship bestowed Chile with its extreme economic model, and Boric and his influential cohort of student leaders have taken it upon themselves to dispose of it. “I know that history doesn’t begin with us,” he declared on stage on Sunday night as president-elect before a baying crowd. “I feel like an inheritor of the long trajectory of those who, from different places, have tirelessly sought social justice.” Boric was born in Punta Arenas in 1986 and is fiercely proud of his home region, Magallanes, below the Patagonian ice fields. In 2011, as he entered the final year of his law degree, Boric became a leader of education protests across the country, in which thousands of students took over their campuses and faculties across a long, cold winter, spilling out into the streets to demand free, high-quality education for all. The protests were quelled with a modest compromise, allowing some students to study for free. Several of the movement’s young leaders later ran for office and joined the country’s congress or took up positions in local government. Boric never completed his degree, instead winning election to Chile’s congress in 2013 and serving two terms as a deputy, becoming one of the first congresspeople to come from beyond Chile’s two traditional coalitions in the process. But since narrowly losing the presidential first round to José Antonio Kast, a far-right supporter of General Pinochet, he has moderated his programme markedly, appealing to the centrist voters who have now propelled him into La Moneda. Unlike his firebrand days at the front of the marches, Boric is now neatly groomed, humble and serious – while he often wears a smart blazer covering his tattoos. His girlfriend Irina Karamanos joined him on stage on Sunday night after the results. He has pledged to decentralise Chile, implement a welfare state, increase public spending and include women, non-binary Chileans and Indigenous peoples like never before. But it is Boric’s ultimate goal of extricating the country from the binds of Pinochet’s dictatorship that will define his legacy. The next four years will see this process begin, as the 2011 student generation led by Boric, take on an even more important role than before.“Being an Aboriginal person and stepping into the business space is a huge decision,” Jarin Baigent, co-founder of Trading Blak, said at Meta for Business’s recent #BuyBlak Summit. But social media and going digital have helped foster a pathway for a number of Indigenous business owners to take their companies to new heights. Two such business owners are Laura Thompson, co-founder of Clothing the Gaps, and Emma Hollingsworth, artist and founder of Mulganai. Both women started their businesses on Instagram and have built a large social media presence. But while they are finding success now, it wasn’t easy at the start. Emma creates artwork for Mulganai in her home studio in Meanjin. Hollingsworth recalls having just 50 followers on the Mulganai art Instagram account when she started. “And most of them were my family and close friends.” For the first two years Hollingsworth didn’t get much traction on her account, despite seeing other accounts like hers grow. But family and friends told her to stick it out and she did. Then the Black Lives Matter (BLM) movement happened. “That is when I noticed a huge influx of people following me,” Hollingsworth says. “I feel like there’s more of an awareness now, with people wanting to know about my culture and about the art.” Emma Hollingsworth, artist and founder of Mulganai Thompson recalls how BLM also kickstarted her majority Aboriginal-owned business on Facebook. “During the first Covid lockdown we realised that content would be king and that lots of people would be spending a lot of time on their phones and something we could do to help was to provide good content. We thought a lot about what we’re going to post and what issues we’re going to talk about – this was at the same time as the Black Lives Matter movement was really starting to gain momentum here in Australia as well. So we firstly used the platform to educate and the t-shirts definitely came second after that. Instagram and Facebook’s been phenomenal in not only allowing our business to flourish, but also to campaign for causes that are close to our heart.” Along with their websites, Hollingsworth and Thompson rely on their Instagram and Facebook shops to sell their products. But they both say that in order to sell something, you have to build a following first. And the best way to build a community of followers is to be your authentic self. “A hundred per cent you need to be yourself,” Thompson says. “Show the people who are behind the brand and continue to use your Instagram stories. You know, show your bloopers, show the moments you’re proud of, show the funny things that happen. I think people really love getting to know the people [behind the business] … The difference between the smaller brands and some of the bigger brands is you don’t know who are running the bigger brands.” Laura Thompson, co-founder of Clothing the Gaps Hollingsworth also says her followers wanted to know more about her. “I’ve always stuck to the mantra to just be myself, be authentic,” she says. “People wanted to see that authentic self. They wanted to see what I was doing with my day. They wanted to see my process. They wanted me to be real.” A huge benefit of running your own social media accounts is having control over what you post. As Baigent said at the #BuyBlak Summit: “I have full control over my voice and how I want my business to be seen online.” Another big benefit is having access to a community of people who are interested in what you do. Leesa Watego, who started Black Coffee, a networking event for Indigenous business owners, talked about this at the #BuyBlak Summit. “So many Indigenous people don’t have people in their family who are in business,” she said. “[We thought that] well, if we don’t have people in our family who have done that, why don’t we create a family – an Indigenous business family … We started having those conversations on social media.” Both Thompson and Hollingsworth say how important their communities of followers are to them. For Thompson, the community determines what clothes her business makes next. “In many ways, the narrative and the conversations that are happening in community determine what our next collection is going to be,” she says. “So it’s very much organic in the way we produce clothes.” “The narrative and the conversations that are happening in community determine what our next collection is going to be,” says Laura Thompson, co-founder of Clothing The Gaps. Hollingsworth, meanwhile, gives back to her followers by running special promotions on social media just for them. “I try to do giveaways. I try to do sales, and then I’ll create more collections and just bring out little things that they can purchase.” Listening to your followers is crucial, Thompson says. “I’ll check my Instagram messages before I check my emails every day,” she says. “Because Instagram and Facebook, both those places will give you instant feedback about whether your product or your message is being received in the way you want it to.” Creating products and building community, not to mention the many other things that go into running a business, is hard work. Hollingsworth says: “I wear a lot of hats!” But neither she nor Thompson would have it any other way. Thompson says: “This business has allowed us to self-determine our future. We talk about self-determination a lot in Aboriginal community and I come from working in Aboriginal community-controlled spaces. But in all honesty, since we’ve been part of a social enterprise, I really feel like we’re truly able to self-determine our futures and that’s because we’re not funded by governments.” Hollingsworth says a big reason she started Mulganai was so she could be her own boss. “I like that I can build something and I can make it as big or as little as I want and I can expand Mulganai until the day I die,” she says. “There’s so much freedom in it.” This holiday season, Meta is encouraging everyone to shop with First Nations-owned businesses. To discover more First Nations-owned businesses, search #BuyBlak on Facebook or Instagram.In 2019, Volodymyr Zelenskiy rode a protest vote to victory in Ukraine, telling his supporters he would jail corrupt politicians and negotiate directly with Vladimir Putin to end Russia’s war in east Ukraine. Nearly three years later, Zelenskiy is staring down the threat of a Russian invasion, while he rallies western powers to his side and calls for aid. “We know what it means to defend one’s own state and land with weapons in hand,” he said during an address last week to the Kyiv Jewish Forum. Under pressure from Putin, Zelenskiy has undergone a profound political transformation. One thing is clear: he is no longer the same dove that he was on the campaign trail. Russia is pushing Ukraine toward Nato, he says, and a membership action plan is now central to his foreign policy. This month, Zelenskiy toured the frontline outside Donetsk. Wearing a flak jacket and helmet, he chatted with service personnel who will be the first line of Ukraine’s defence should tanks from Russia begin to roll. Russia has openly spurned Zelenskiy’s efforts to negotiate and talks have virtually ceased. Fifty Ukrainian soldiers have been killed since last year’s ceasefire, a fact that weighs heavily on Ukraine’s actor turned president. “I think he’s matured. He’s aged. You can see that,” said Orysia Lutsevych, a research fellow and manager of the Ukraine forum in the Russia and Eurasia programme at Chatham House. “He’s simply had to experience the burden of responsibility.” Having massed tanks, artillery and even ballistic missiles near the border, Russia appears poised to invade Ukraine once more, following Putin’s annexation in 2014 of Crimea and de facto takeover of swaths of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in the east of Ukraine. A fresh offensive could begin in the new year, western intelligence agencies have warned. The Kremlin has issued a list of demands over Kyiv’s head directly to the US. It wants a cast iron guarantee that Ukraine will never join Nato, despite the fact that such a prospect is a long way off, with little consensus among Nato members. Moscow wants special status for the separatist eastern territories, already run by proxies controlled from Russia. The demands amount to the de facto return of a Kremlin sphere of influence in eastern Europe. Western leaders are likely to reject them. Moscow can in turn use this as a predicate for war. All of which presents Zelenskiy with the gravest crisis of his presidency. A former comedian, he played the role of president in a popular TV drama, Servant of the People, before getting the job for real. His predecessor, Petro Poroshenko, espoused hardline anti-Moscow views. Zelenskiy, by contrast, ran as the peace candidate. “Zelenskiy was very naive about Russia’s policy. He said that to stop the war it was necessary to talk to Putin. His rhetoric was pacifist,” Olexiy Haran, professor of politics at the university of Kyiv’s Mohyla academy, said. Zelenskiy’s team played with the idea of possible concessions to Moscow, Haran added, including supplying water to Crimea. In the early days of Zelenskiy’s tenure, this engagement strategy produced some results, leading to prisoner exchanges and a series of short-lived ceasefires along the so-called line of control – a fortified 250-mile frontline running through the Donbas, with the Ukrainian army on one side and Russian forces and their proxies on the other. But it gradually became apparent deescalation wasn’t happening. “Putin didn’t stop shooting,” Haran said. “It was sobering for Zelenskiy. He thought: “I’m making concessions and nothing changes.’” Moscow has made no secret of its disdain for the comic turned president. “Why contacts with the current Ukrainian leadership are pointless,” read the headline of an article written by the former prime minister Dmitry Medvedev earlier this year. In it, he laid out Moscow’s strategy of speaking directly to Washington: “It’s pointless for us to deal with vassals. Business needs to be conducted with the suzerain [sovereign].” “There is a deep conviction that Zelenskiy is a guy with whom it doesn’t make any sense to try to discuss things politically,” said Fyodor Lukyanov, a foreign policy analyst. In the halls of power, he said, Zelenskiy was being compared unfavourably with Poroshenko, whom Moscow considered a “provocateur” but who at least understood where Russia’s “red lines” lay. By contrast, he said, Zelenskiy’s inexperience was seen as potentially dangerous. Of course, Moscow never gave Zelenskiy much of a chance. The Kremlin began its relationship with the president-elect by playing hardball, offering to expedite Russian passports for residents of east Ukraine before his inauguration, deepening a conflict it had created in 2014. When negotiations came, Moscow also drove a hard line. Zelenskiy’s first domestic crisis came in October of 2019, after he announced he had agreed to the so-called Steinmeier formula with Russia, which would allow elections in the Russian-controlled regions of Ukraine to move forward under supervision from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. Veterans and activists in Kyiv protested under the slogan “No to capitulation!” That effort to jump-start the Minsk peace agreements ultimately floundered. The Kremlin grew angrier as smaller deals, such as one to create a consultative body within the Minsk agreements, also fell through. It began leaking details of its negotiations with Zelenskiy’s team and ultimately cut off most political contacts entirely. Samuel Charap, a senior political scientist at the RAND corporation, said it may have come down to Putin’s belief that Zelenskiy could not deliver the concessions he wanted. “They came to a conclusion that they don’t really have a partner to negotiate with,” he said of the Kremlin. In the face of hardball tactics from Moscow, Zelenskiy took a tougher stand. In February, Ukraine’s national security council shut down three TV channels controlled by Viktor Medvedchuk, an influential pro-Kremlin Ukrainian politician and oligarch. It was a bold move. Putin is godfather to Medvedchuk’s daughter. Medvedchuk is under house arrest and accused of treason. These channels were spreading a pro-Russian narrative about the conflict in Donbas, Zelenskiy’s supporters say. One member of Medvedchuk’s opposition political party, however, said Putin viewed the clampdown as a “personal insult”. By arresting Medvedchuk, Zelenskiy removed a trusted interlocutor, leaving Moscow with only military options, the person said. Some kind of Russian military action was now likely, Lutsevych added. This might stop short of a full-scale ground invasion. It could include punitive airstrikes on Ukrainian military infrastructure and the Russian army moving overtly into rebel-held Donetsk and Luhansk, where residents would greet Putin’s soldiers with flowers, she said – a perfect image for Russian state TV. Zelenskiy was a “bit despairing” about the west’s slow-moving response to the crisis, Lutsevych said, and its failure to provide Ukraine with additional defensive missiles. Kyiv and Moscow currently had irreconcilable differences over how to resolve the Donbas situation, she suggested. Zelenskiy wanted a ceasefire and the removal of heavy weapons before the region’s political fate was determined; Putin the exact opposite. Moscow has a long history of baiting its neighbours into conflicts and has sought to portray Zelenskiy as another Mikheil Saakashvili, the Georgian president defeated in a short war with Russia in 2008. And as Moscow maneuverers its troops along Ukraine’s borders and demands concessions that its diplomats know will not be granted, it appears Russia may look to provoke that very outcome. “Many people here think that he is ready to risk an external crisis in order to solve his domestic problems, more than previous leaders,” said Lukyanov of the Kremlin. Zelenskiy’s ratings have dipped since 2019, when he won an astonishing 70% of the vote. Halfway through his presidential term, he commands about 25% support. He remains the country’s most popular politician. As things stand he is likely to be re-elected in 2024 – assuming, that is, that Russia does not occupy Kyiv first and topple its pro-EU government. “His character can be impulsive,” Ihor Todorov, a professor of international relations at Uzhhorod National University, said of Zelenskiy. Todorov added: “His electorate is pretty solid. There is an active patriotic majority.” Todorov used to teach at Donetsk University and was forced to flee in 2014. He said he did not expect Russia to escalate its existing military conflict with Ukraine. Rather, he said, Putin was playing a “global political game” designed to divide the west and to extract maximum concessions. Observers say Zelenskiy still shows moments of political immaturity, adding that he is excessively reliant on a small group of advisers who previously worked with him in TV. They cite his ad hoc suggestion last week that a referendum might solve the Donbas problem. And his renewed offer of talks with Putin – a non-starter in Moscow and a forum where Zelenskiy would likely struggle against a more experienced adversary. “It would be KGB vs a comic,” Haran said. He added: “Zelenskiy is stronger mentally since the time he was elected. But there are no clear views in his mind. He believes he is going to do something good for the country. He doesn’t understand many things about politics. He believes that anyone who criticises him, for example, is somehow being manipulated.” For now, Zelenskiy and the western world wait to see what Putin will do next. Russia believed itself to hold all the cards, Haran said. “For Putin it’s important to go down in history as a real national hero, as a person who reunited Russian Slavic lands. He has Belarus in his pocket. He has the DNR [the separatist Donetsk People’s Republic]. Many people there now have Russia passports. Putin can say he’s defending them.” And for Putin, who views it as his duty to reverse Kyiv’s trajectory to the west, he sees Ukraine’s would-be peacemaker as an obstacle in his way. “Anything related to Ukraine is very personal for him, it’s not negotiable, he is willing to be punished in order to achieve this,” said a former Russian government official. “And when he looks at Zelenskiy, he doesn’t see an equal … He sees a person who is wasting his time.”The mobile phone of a UN-backed investigator who was examining possible war crimes in Yemen was targeted with spyware made by Israel’s NSO Group, a new forensic analysis of the device has revealed. Kamel Jendoubi, a Tunisian who served as the chairman of the now defunct Group of Eminent Experts in Yemen (GEE)– a panel mandated by the UN to investigate possible war crimes – was targeted in August 2019, according to an analysis of his mobile phone by experts at Amnesty International and the Citizen Lab at the University of Toronto. The targeting is claimed to have occurred just weeks before Jendoubi and his panel of experts released a damning report which concluded that the Saudi-led coalition in the Yemen war had committed “serious violations of international humanitarian law” that could lead to “criminal responsibility for war crimes”. Jendoubi’s mobile number also appears on a leaked database at the heart of the Pegasus Project, an investigation into NSO by the Guardian and other media outlets, which was coordinated by Forbidden Stories, the French non-profit media group. The leaked list contained numbers of individuals who were believed to have been selected as potential surveillance targets by NSO’s government clients. The data suggests that Jendoubi was selected as a potential surveillance target by Saudi Arabia, which was a longtime client of NSO before it was dropped earlier this year after allegations that it abused the surveillance tool. In a statement in response to questions about Jendoubi’s case, an NSO spokesperson said: “Based on the details you have provided us we can confirm that Kamel Jendoubi was not targeted by any of our current customers”. Jendoubi, a human rights defender and opponent of former president Ben Ali’s regime in Tunisia, was appointed by the Office of the UN high commissioner for Human Rights to lead a group of international experts to investigate human rights violations in 2017. The UN mandate to investigate the possible war crimes came to an abrupt halt this October, after the members of the Human Rights Council voted to end the investigation. Citing political and diplomatic experts with close knowledge of the matter, the Guardian reported earlier this month that Saudi Arabia used “incentives and threats” as part of a lobbying campaign to shut down the UN investigation. Jendoubi told the Pegasus Project that the targeting of his phone marked the actions of a “rogue state”. “There are no other words. As international investigators, we are supposed to be at least protected. But I am not at all surprised. I’ve been apprehensive about this since 2019,” he said. “We knew that we [the panel] could be potentially targeted since the publication of our 2018 report. That report had created a shock in Saudi Arabia and the UAE. They did not expect such findings.” Jendoubi added: “They used all their propaganda, their media … to defame us and discredit our work. Everything you would expect from them. Until the 2021 vote that ended our mission.” The investigator said he did not believe that his work had been compromised on the targeted phone because he had used another device to conduct his investigations. He said the targeting of his phone was indicative of a state that did not care about “commitments and minimum international rules”. Melissa Parke, an expert investigator on the GEE and former Australian MP, said in response to the news of Jendoubi’s targeting: “If only this extraordinary technology and energy could be applied for the benefit of the people of Yemen, instead of the reverse. The calls for accountability for crimes committed in Yemen will only increase in the wake of these revelations.” The Pegasus Project approached Jendoubi after it was confirmed that his mobile number was listed in the leaked database. Experts at Amnesty International’s Security Lab and Citizen Lab, who research sophisticated digital surveillance attacks, found traces of Pegasus on Jendoubi’s mobile phone, which also correlated to a timestamp in the database that indicated when the number was selected. The experts said the forensic analysis showed that a client of NSO had attempted to hack the device. There was no clear evidence that the mobile had successfully been hacked or data exfiltrated, however, because that data could not be retrieved. If a phone is infected with NSO’s signature spyware, called Pegasus, operators of the spyware have total access, including the ability to intercept phone calls, read text messages, infiltrate encrypted apps and track an individual’s physical location. The spyware can also turn a mobile into a listening device by remotely controlling the mobile’s recorder. NSO has staunchly denied that the leaked database at the heart of the Pegasus Project is in any way connected to the company or its clients. NSO has also said that its government clients are only meant to use its surveillance tools to fight serious crime and terrorism and that it investigates credible allegations of misuse. A spokesperson for the Saudi embassy in Washington did not respond to a request for comment. The revelation that Jendoubi’s phone was targeted drew a tepid response from the office of UN secretary general António Guterres. A UN spokesperson said Jendoubi was an independent expert and that the UN would leave it to him to comment more specifically on his own situation. “More generally, regarding Pegasus, the UN has been in touch with relevant parties to ensure that our communications are protected. We take very seriously the need to uphold the security of all our communications and have been following up on all reports of potential hacking,” said Farhan Aziz Haq. Rupert Colville, spokesperson for Michelle Bachelet, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, said: “The targeting of human rights defenders, journalists and politicians is just another example of how tools allegedly meant to address security risks can end up being weaponised against people with dissenting opinions.” Agnes Callamard, the secretary general of Amnesty International, who previously served as a UN special rapporteur, called the news of Jendoubi’s alleged targeting “shocking and unacceptable”. “That he was targeted in the course of inquiry into violations by all parties to an armed conflict and at the hands of a lead party to that conflict? That alleged conduct demonstrates far more than cynicism and callous disregard for the principle of accountability, although it certainly does that,” Callamard said. “It suggests further reprehensible evidence of the Saudi authorities’ utter disregard for international law, their willingness to do anything to maintain their impunity, and it demonstrates yet again a complete disrespect for the United Nations, multilateral instruments and human rights procedures.”Epidemiologist Prof Mary-Louise McLaws has spent the past week dialling in to meetings of the World Health Organization’s [WHO] infection prevention and control group, and said: “I don’t know of any outbreak manager who would not support wearing masks at the very minimum” in cities where Covid-19 cases are rising. “WHO keeps reminding the world that vaccines are not the only answer because this virus keeps changing,” McLaws said. “Vaccines certainly reduce the risk of death and severe infection. But you do need other measures, like physical distancing, and masks.” The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, continued to resist additional measures to mitigate the spread of Omicron on Monday, saying; “The pandemic is not going away. We need to learn to live alongside it,” while ruling out mask mandates and further restrictions for now. “The government can’t do everything,” he said. Like Perrottet, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said booster vaccines are key to living with the virus, a view echoed by Dr Nick Coatsworth, one of Australia’s former deputy chief medical officers, on Twitter. But most eminent virology, infectious diseases and epidemiology experts agree that it is clear public health measures beyond vaccines are needed, especially as Omicron spreads rapidly. There is some disagreement, however, as to whether governments should mandate those additional measures, and which measures would be most useful to mandate. In a joint comment piece, experts from Australia’s leading infectious diseases research institutions including John Kaldor, a professor of epidemiology with the Kirby Institute in NSW, the director of the Doherty Institute, Prof Sharon Lewin, and Prof Greg Dore, an infectious diseases physician and epidemiologist all agreed that while booster vaccinations will be critical, some restrictions are needed. They called for the return of indoor mask mandates in NSW (Victoria already requires masks for indoor retail), and for density limits to be reintroduced for indoor venues over Christmas. These measures should remain for at least a few weeks, they wrote, until more information on Omicron’s severity and its ability to evade vaccines is gathered. Kaldor said throughout the pandemic to date, he has broadly supported public health measures implemented by the NSW government. “This is the first time that I feel that there’s a divergence between my perception of what is needed to manage public health and clinical resources in the coming few weeks, and what seems to be actually happening. “That divergence is because we’ve got this new variant, and there are potential knowledge gaps around that. We understand people want to wait until we have more data about Omicron. But we can put up some barriers now to make sure that we don’t lose the game while we’re waiting.” “Mandating things is not just about saying; ‘You’ll get a fine if you don’t do it’. It’s about saying, ‘We as a government have listened to the experts and have come to the conclusion that we need to do this together’,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning McLaws agreed, saying; “There should be a partnership between the public and government to prevent the pandemic from continuing”. “And by asking people to make up their own mind about what they do, they could be making up their own mind from a non-scientific perspective.” Prof Peter Collignon, an infectious diseases physician and microbiologist said it would be more useful for governments to mandate density limits rather than masks. It could be worthwhile to implement limits in crowded indoor venues given how much close contact drives spread, otherwise restrictions may be implemented and then revoked periodically for months, especially if further variants emerge. “My own view is that until we get really on top of this, which may be another year or two, we should just implement density limits, and those should probably still be in place until the end of our next winter.” Chair of epidemiology at Deakin University, Prof Catherine Bennett, said she believes people need to wear masks indoors. But she is less certain as to whether mandating this will be effective. “We need people to be wearing masks, but if compliance is already high without mandates, and masks are already strongly recommended, I am not sure there is enough evidence that a mandate will make a difference,” she said. “I do know here in Melbourne, not everyone is wearing a mask even with a mandate. Maybe we need to look at the overarching public health messaging, if mandates aren’t always working anyway.” Bennett also believes QR code check-in should be kept up in stores and other venues in NSW, even if they are not being used by contact tracers, because they act as a reminder to people about where they have been. “People may not have to use them because the health department is no longer following up casual contacts unless it’s an extreme situation, in which case they use other means of contact tracing,” Bennett said. On Twitter the president of the Australian Medical Association [AMA], Dr Omar Khorshid, said ‘Even IF Omicron turns out to be mild in vaccinated people, an explosion of cases will have a devastating effect on healthcare”. This includes GPs looking after community cases, furloughing of exposed workers, and an unknown proportion of cases who will need to be treated in hospital, Khorshid wrote. Coatsworth responded to Khorshid by saying; “This adopts the ‘a small percentage of a huge number is still a big number’ fallacy that has swept through #covid19aus and #auspol since #omicron emerged”. “Adapt the policies,” he wrote. “Don’t furlough as many staff as we did pre-vaccine.” He said masks should only be mandated if hospital cases rise, and that booster vaccines will be key. “Recognise that control measures are less effective for Omicron, it’s now about bolstering the health system.” Kaldor said he agreed with Coatsworth that boosters are critical, but that “we don’t know what the small percentage of that big number is at this stage”. “If this variant evades vaccines and even if it has slightly reduced effectiveness at preventing severe disease, and the overall case numbers are high, then that does potentially translate into a very big strain on our health systems”.Chloe Kim won her first event of the Olympic season at the Dew Tour on Sunday while Japan’s snowboarders showed why they are tipped for the podium at next year’s Beijing Winter Olympics with Yuto Totsuka winning the men’s halfpipe and Ayumu Hirano becoming the first to land a frontside triple cork 1440 in competition. Kim, the reigning Olympic women’s halfpipe champion, came out on top with a score of 96.00, beating out Spain’s Queralt Castellet and China’s Xuetong Cai. Kim had dropped to seventh after falls in her first two runs, but was able to edge ahead of Castellet by one point and get the win thanks to a near-perfect third run. “That was so stressful. I hate when I’m in that situation when it comes to the third and final run,” said Kim, who is set to officially qualify for the US Olympic team this week. “Just putting myself in those high-stress situations, especially with the Olympics coming up is pretty important. So, happy I was able to pull through.” Maddie Mastro, the other American Olympic medal contender and the last woman to beat Kim at the 2019 Burton US Open, crashed hard on her first run and did not take her second and third runs. Officials said she suffered an ankle injury. In the men’s halfpipe, Hirano ended fifth but stole the show by landing the dangerous frontside triple cork 1440, which consists of three head-over-heels flips and a twist while grabbing the board. “I was very happy to land the triple cork in competition for the first time,” Hirano said. “It’s game on.” Totsuka held off American Taylor Gold and compatriot Ruka Hirano to win with 95.50 at Copper Mountain, Colorado.With everything smothered in snow, the forested ridge of the Chevin is insulated against ambient noise from the rest of the world, muffling the rush of traffic in the valley below and the rumble of planes above. Fat white snowflakes pour silently through the canopy. Snow-gilded tree limbs bend under the weight and create grotto-like tunnels around the paths. An overladen branch gives way somewhere in the canopy, sending a flurry of snow down the back of my jacket. A mixed flock of tits busily foraging through a patch of birch and heather provides a small pulse of life. The soft sounds the birds make – their tiny chirping conversation, the minuscule flickers of their wings – are bright and clear in the silence, and even the pale-yellow underside of the coal tits (the Latin name for which, Periparus ater, unjustly suggests the bird is simply “dull black”) shines against the monochrome background. The tits have company: a nuthatch, flinty-grey on top and orange underneath, comes walking headfirst down a tree trunk (the only British bird that can climb down trees as well as up them), assiduously combing crevices and cracks for food on the way. With their bandit black eye streak, leading to a pronounced dark dagger of a beak, there is a touch of the fugitive about nuthatches, and they can indeed compete aggressively with larger birds for food and territory. But in this case, it’s possible that something other than competition is going on. Different species of tits live separately during the breeding season, but in winter they come together to form foraging flocks – or “bird waves” – which collaborate to find food and evade predation. Nuthatches, as well as treecreepers and woodpeckers, are known to join these roving winter alliances, which can have complex social dynamics and species-specific roles – some specialising in foraging, for example, and others acting as sentinels to ward off predators. It is, perhaps, something of a rebuff to the idea that the state of nature is perpetual “red in tooth and claw” warfare; in the case of these cold cooperatives, at least, birds of different feathers flock together. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryScott Morrison will meet premiers and chief ministers for what he has characterised as an “informal” meeting of the national cabinet after a surge in Omicron cases as Australians travel in preparation for their Christmas break. The prime minister told reporters in Brisbane the unscheduled leaders meeting, likely on Wednesday, would “give everybody an update on the most recent information we have” and also enable the states and territories to share information. While the leaders meeting self-evidently reflects the changing circumstances, Morrison played down the significance of the discussion. “We are looking forward to catching up, it’s not unusual we would be meeting more regularly with Omicron being where it is.” The prime minister said the conversation would be a “good opportunity” to update each other on all the relevant public health information ahead of the Christmas break. Morrison declared vaccination and booster shots remained the best protection against serious illness, and he said Australia needed to keep moving forward with easing of public health restrictions. But he said leaders would “keep fine-tuning and calibrating the things you need to do”. “We have to keep moving forward with this,” Morrison said on Monday. “This is why Australians rolled up their sleeves, this is why Australians have worked so hard.” “The cases will of course rise with the Omicron variant, what we will continue to work through with states and territories is making sure we manage the impact on the hospital system and the primary health network,” he said. Asked whether he envisaged a return to lockdowns, with some European countries imposing new restrictions to suppress a new spike in infections, including a lockdown of all non-essential services in the Netherlands, Morrison said: “We will make our Australian way through this.” “We always have. The situation in the northern hemisphere is different to Australia, they are not standing over there in the Netherlands in 34 degrees [heat]. It’s winter and people are more indoors, we know the virus does move differently in different seasons, so what’s important is people get their booster shots.” Morrison said people eligible for boosters needed to get them. He said there were 13m doses in the country and “plenty of points of presence”. “Anyone who is concerned and who is ready to have their booster shot, I would urge them to go and get it because that is the best defence against Omicron, particularly for insuring against serious illness, or what might require hospitalisation,” the prime minister said. “That is the key advice we have received and if we do that, then we can keep our nerve, keep calm and carry on.” There has been a significant surge in Omicron cases over recent days, which has prompted a debate among epidemiologists about whether public health restrictions, including mask mandates, need to be reintroduced in Australia. On Monday New South Wales recorded 2,501 cases, Victoria 1,302, Queensland 59, the Australian Capital Territory 13, Tasmania three, and the South Australia premier, Steven Marshall, said there were about 100 new cases in his state. The Northern Territory recorded three new cases and extended the Tennant Creek lockdown and mask mandate for Barkly region by 48 hours. Cases in Queensland are doubling about every 48 hours. The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, has thus far resisted calls to re-impose restrictions or mask mandates. On Monday, the premier told reporters he intended to treat people “like adults” and Australia had reached the time in the pandemic where “personal responsibility” needed to come to the fore. But Perrottet also signalled things could change as new information came to hand: “As I have said, from the outset, we will always tailor our response to the circumstances that are in front of us.” Asked whether he would advocate a mask mandate during his discussion with the premiers and chief ministers, Morrison said Australians had been told what to do for the last couple of years “and Australians have grown pretty tired of that”. He echoed the premier’s message about the importance of personal responsibility. But he added: “We will do what we always do and take advice from the medical expert panel.” The prime minister also said there would be circumstances “where masks are commonsense”. He said he had worn a mask when he attended Christmas carols in his electorate on Sunday night. On Sunday, the deputy chief medical officer, Sonya Bennett, noted that the new Omicron variant was highly transmissible: “We are seeing rapid escalation of case numbers around the globe, particularly in the UK, with the UK recording over 90,000 cases yesterday.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Bennett said Omicron had a doubling time of around two days, “which is obviously concerning”. She urged people to consider wearing masks in crowded indoor settings. Bennett said people should not wait for a mask mandate before taking that precaution. “My plea to the community is we don’t need to wait for mandates to tell us what is sensible to do,” Bennett said on Sunday. “That particularly applies to masks.”Across the country, even before Omicron admissions have started to rise, the bed occupancy in our hospitals is 94%. That seems a luxury to me; it is quite a while since I saw an empty bed in mine. Our bed occupancy hovers around 100% and has done so for some weeks. There is nothing unusual in this, however. Successive decades and serial A&amp;E closures, combined with rising healthcare demands from an elderly and growing population, have meant our bed provision is far too small for our area. Even in a normal winter, critical bed crises are a common problem, with operations cancelled and patient care often compromised as a result. The whole system has been slowly gutted to the point that there is not even enough capacity to deal with routine fluctuations in demand. This, however, is not shaping up to be a normal winter. The Omicron variant is spreading with a speed that is terrifying to me, even after all I have seen and done over the past months. I don’t even need to look at the figures to know this; the evidence is all around me. Friends and family, even the careful ones, have started testing positive and having to isolate. There are multiple outbreaks in schools again. Football matches are being cancelled. And there are already many colleagues unable to attend work, leaving rota gaps that we are already struggling to cover. And the worst of it is yet to come. Extrapolating from the current figures, it looks like within our local area we will have infections in the tens of thousands by the middle of next week. And here comes the biggest unknown. Is this variant really, as we all hope, less virulent than its predecessors? Will our vaccines and immunity be enough to keep people out of hospital? Even with a hopelessly optimistic low rate of hospitalisations, it still looks like there will be far too many patients for us to look after. A small proportion of a very large number is still a large number. Remembering also that there is a lag of a week or two between infection rates rising and people becoming unwell enough to present to hospital, this means the potential point of maximum pressure comes around Christmas and New Year, when many of us were hoping, finally, to take a few days off, and many more will be sick or isolating with Covid. And we have significant other pressures working against us. GPs are scaling back the routine care they offer in favour of vaccinations. Some hospitals are also cancelling elective care so that their consultants can join in the jabbing. Despite this, the new variant has some power to evade the vaccine, meaning that even the current heroic effort may not put the requisite protections in place in time. Vaccinated patients are unlikely to get critically ill, but even relatively well patients coming into hospital could overwhelm us. The reduction in usual care is likely to result in more patients seeking help in hospitals, despite best efforts. One glimmer of hope is the new treatments for Covid now available for patients who are particularly vulnerable, with the aim of stopping the disease progressing and reducing the need for hospitalisations. The first centres for this went live this week, using staff redeployed from other vital work. The problem is, however, that these were set up and resourced based on numbers calculated from the Delta variant. Within the first 24 hours of opening it became clear that the numbers now identified for treatment already exceeded capacity fivefold and are rising exponentially. So even this hope must be tempered with realism: how much will these really be able to hold back the tide? I find myself grudgingly admiring the Covid-19 virus, that with all our modern medicine and incredible science, it is still managing to confound us even 20 months on. It is a fearsome opponent. So why, yet again, do we seem to be underestimating it? Why do we not learn from our mistakes? For a healthcare system already strained beyond capacity the potential threat that Omicron poses is obvious, even though its virulence is yet unknown. Why not therefore take at least some sensible precautions to try to hold back the spread, to buy us time to vaccinate some more and make sure we are set up to give all the therapies at our disposal? Plan B will make very little difference to a strain this infectious. In any case, these measures take time to work. By the time that hospitalisations start to rise, it will be too late. Surely it would be better to make the mistake of introducing early restrictions unnecessarily than to make the mistake of not doing so and causing unnecessary deaths? Boris Johnson “know[s] the pressures on everyone in our NHS”. But does he really? Has he got any idea of the exhaustion, burnout and low morale that I see and feel every day? The dread that my colleagues and I express as we talk about what this winter holds in store, again? How it feels to be potentially facing yet another wave? And yet still we sit on the fence, pretending we can vaccinate our way out of this while carrying on with life as normal. Talk of shielding the NHS rings hollow in the face of this inaction. And while we have been working on throughout to keep people safe, it seems that in Downing Street they found the time to have unmasked quizzes and after-hours gatherings. How nice. It really is hard to put into words exactly how shameful, deceitful, and hypocritical this is. In medicine we sign up to a “duty of candour” that we all owe to our patients, whereby if mistakes are made we admit them, apologise, do our best to make amends. It is a basic thing that even the most junior medical student knows about. Too basic, it seems, for some important people to be concerned with. What we have achieved in the NHS over the past year is little short of amazing. And now we are being asked to make another “extraordinary effort” by leaders who show themselves to be above such things yet too cowardly to admit it. Yet without measures to protect us, will it be enough? • The writer is an NHS respiratory consultant who works across a number of hospitalsThe UK technology sector drew a record £29.4bn in investment this year, according to research, with Cambridge declared the country’s leading regional tech city. The bumper injection of funding from venture capitalists, who invest in new companies by taking stakes in them, is more than double last year’s total of £11.5bn. The number of unicorns – startup firms worth more than $1bn (£750m) – reached a high of 29 in 2021 including Depop, the British secondhand fashion resale app sold to US online marketplace Etsy for $1.6bn this year, and the car-selling platform Motorway. This increase in $1bn companies brings the total number of unicorns in the UK to 116, according to figures published by the government’s Digital Economy Council, an advisory committee. This compares with 31 in France and 56 in Germany, according to the DEC. References to the government’s levelling-up policy, which seeks to reduce the wealth and opportunity gap between London and the rest of the UK, featured heavily in the DEC research. It declared Cambridge the leading regional tech city in the UK, ahead of Manchester and Oxford, reflecting factors including its high levels of venture capital funding and number of unicorns. Edinburgh, Cardiff and Belfast are also in the top 10. “The UK is very good at rearing and cultivating startups and scale-ups into successful global companies right across the UK,” said Gerard Grech, the chief executive of Tech Nation, a government-backed industry group. “A true network of digital excellence is emerging right across the country through entrepreneurship, driving new job and wealth creation.” According to figures compiled by the data firm Dealroom and job search engine Adzuna, the number of tech jobs increased by 165% in Manchester last year while the highest tech salaries outside London, still the UK’s main tech hub, were in Edinburgh at an average of £58,405. Adzuna’s co-founder, Andrew Hunter, said that while there had been a “surge” in tech hiring across the UK, finding skilled staff to fill positions was a problem. “The struggle for businesses across the country is having enough skilled staff to fill these positions to allow them to keep growing,” he said. The research stated that about 30% of the £26bn in venture capital funding in UK tech last year went into companies outside London and south-east England. The regions were home to nine of the 29 unicorns formed this year, including Interactive Investor in Glasgow – an online investment platform – and the electric aircraft firm Vertical Aerospace in Bristol. Most of the venture capital money coming into the UK is from the US, accounting for 37% of investment, with 28% coming from domestic firms.Kate Winslet was reticent, morose and utterly mesmerising as Marianne “Mare” Sheehan, the detective carrying the weight, not just of her own family trauma, but of her entire town in Mare of Easttown. She had lost so much: her husband Frank and her son Kevin, who had recently killed himself. What’s more, her grandson Drew could be taken away by his recovering addict mother. At one point Mare’s mum tells her: “That’s what I wish for you, Marianne – that you could forgive yourself for Kevin. It wasn’t your fault. It wasn’t your fault.” “Yeah,” replies Mare. “I’m going to use the bathroom.” Mare was also investigating the murder of young mother Erin McMenamin and the kidnappings of two other possibly connected women. Everyone was in the frame: Erin’s violent dad, her ex-boyfriend, the dodgy deacon, the uncle, even Mare’s ex-husband. And so for two months of 2021, Mare-mania took hold. There was wild speculation over who killed Erin – and whether anyone would ever stump up the cash for her poor baby’s ear surgery. There were endless stories about this being arguably Winslet’s finest ever performance, plus her refusal to cover up her “bulgy belly” during sex scenes. There was the Saturday Night Live send-up, called Murdur Durdur, which nailed the Philadelphia accent just like Winslet did. Mare of Easttown could easily have fallen into familiar tortured cop investigates dead teen territory. Instead, this was a whodunnit that blindsided the viewer from start to finish – and had so much more besides. It was thrilling: tense and edge-of-the-seat stuff, excellently paced with plenty of twists and cliffhangers. It was also very amusing: the usually sourpuss Mare in stitches at her mum Helen after a man blurted out at his wife’s funeral that he’d had an affair with her; Mare googling how the hell to look after a pet turtle for Drew when she should have been at work; Helen falling off her chair after one too many Manhattans with her cousin the priest. However, it was the love pumped into the script – the depth and detail of every character arc and subplot – that set it apart. Writer Brad Ingelsby grew up in deepest Pennsylvania, and it shows in every second, from the cheese steaks to the small-town gossip channels. Even seemingly minor moments delivered some of the most horrifying TV scenes ever: when we feared Drew’s mum was going to let him die in the bath; when Mare undressed her wasted daughter Siobhan who wept “It should have been you”, referring to the day she got home first to discover her dead brother. By the end, as each character’s full tragedy was laid bare, it was a miracle anyone was still standing. Not least Mare. The scenes with her therapist were devastating, as she finally revealed what happened the day she found Kevin’s body in their attic. In another, Winslet saying almost nothing still made me weep: the therapist asks if she worries her grandson will turn out depressed, or mired in mental health diagnoses like her father and her son. “Oh god yeah,” she says quietly, communicating in just three words a fear of inherited trauma other shows would have needed pages of dialogue to convey. Winslet has said that she wanted middle age to be laid bare in Mare, and she pulled it off. Millions of overburdened women everywhere felt seen. The fact that Mare was a high school basketball hero 25 years ago – Miss Lady Hawk herself! – is a perfect summation of how life grinds people down. One night over drinks with the puppyish detective Colin Zabel, she says: “I didn’t expect life around me to fall apart so spectacularly.” This was a staggering, harrowing portrait of grief. In the end, Mare of Easttown showed the desperate lengths mothers will go to to protect their children from the hellish things the world can inflict – and the need for women to forgive themselves should the worst happen. In its extraordinary final moments, when Mare manages to climb up the ladder into the attic again, we see her finally allowing herself an inch of forgiveness – and possibly starting to heal.City firms are likely to revive plans to shift staff to the EU once Covid-related travel restrictions ease next year, a financial sector report has said, as the number contemplating such moves continues to rise. Of the 222 largest UK financial services firms monitored by accountancy firm EY since the 2016 referendum, 97 of them (44%) have confirmed they are relocating staff or operations to the continent, or are considering it – up from 41% in January 2020. While announcements regarding Brexit-related relocations have slowed in recent years, EY suggested further moves had probably been delayed, rather than reversed, over the past year because of Covid lockdowns and concessions on home working. “It’s been nearly a year since the UK officially left the European Union, but the financial sector is still working through the hangover of Brexit,” said Omar Ali of EY. “While the majority of operational moves were made well ahead of the 2020 Brexit deadline – and before the pandemic – travel restrictions over the last two years have challenged the practicalities of relocation.” He said firms were likely to ramp up their relocation plans over the next 12 months, assuming the number of Covid cases falls back, amid pressure from EU authorities who have railed against “brass plate” access to their markets, where companies maintain just a token staff presence in the bloc. “Depending on the trajectory of the Omicron variant and its impact on international travel in the short term, delayed moves should pick up over the coming year, not least due to ongoing pressure from EU regulators,” Ali said. It is the latest sign of the ongoing impact that Brexit is having on the UK economy. Figures released last week showed a 16% drop in food and drink exports over the first nine months of 2020, a fall which the industry largely blamed on a 24% decrease in sales to EU countries. Despite the UK officially leaving the bloc at the start of the year, trade negotiations over checks on goods going in and out of Northern Ireland are still going on, a matter further complicated by the resignation of David Frost as Brexit minister over the weekend. On Sunday it was announced that the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, would take over his brief. It is unclear whether Frost’s resignation could impact or delay talks over whether the UK’s financial sector will be granted “equivalence” – which would allow UK-based firms to serve EU customers across the continent. “With such ongoing uncertainty, the risk of fragmented markets remains, which is inefficient, costly for all participants, and could ultimately harm the global competitiveness of both markets,” Ali said.Final preparations are under way for the launch of the James Webb space telescope, a landmark observatory built to peer back through space and time to the first stars and galaxies that lit up the universe. Regarded as the successor to Nasa’s Hubble space telescope, the mission is scheduled to blast off at 12.20pm UK time on Christmas Eve onboard an Ariane 5 rocket from Europe’s spaceport in Kourou, French Guiana. More than 30 years in the making, the telescope is bound for a parking spot in space 1m miles from Earth. At about 100 times more powerful than Hubble, the $10bn observatory will detect the faint glow from stars that brought the astronomical dark ages to an end when they blinked into existence 100m to 200m years after the big bang 13.8bn years ago. It will probe the atmospheres of planets around distant stars, looking for signs of molecules such as methane and water which are indicative of conditions ripe for life. “It has incredible potential for expanding our knowledge of the universe,” said Prof Beth Biller, an astronomer at the University of Edinburgh who is due to use Webb to observe planets outside the solar solar system. “Many more scientific discoveries are going to come from this.” While the launch itself will be nerve-racking enough, it will be early summer before mission staff can relax and take data. The size and complexity of the telescope, along with its orbit, mean the six months after launch will be critical. Unlike Hubble, which circles the Earth, Webb will orbit the sun. Its destination is a spot known as the second Lagrange point, or L2. Here, gravitational forces will allow Webb to hold a position with the Earth and sun lined up behind it. Webb will take a month to reach L2. Several more months will be needed for Webb to unfold itself and prepare for at least five years in operation. The telescope must deploy a sunshield the size of a tennis court to keep it cool, and then unfold 18 hexagonal segments that together form its 6.5m-diameter primary mirror. It must also run checks and calibrations to ensure its systems and instruments are working properly. If anything goes wrong, any troubleshooting must be done by beaming commands from Earth. A repair mission of the kind needed to correct Hubble’s faulty vision in 1993 is out of the question for a telescope four times more distant than the moon. Dr Jonathan Gardner, the deputy senior project scientist on Webb at Nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland, has been working on the telescope for more than 20 years. “I don’t know if I’m going to be terrified or excited,” he said of the upcoming launch. “It all has to work.” The size of Webb’s primary mirror and the sensitivity of its infrared detectors will enable it to see some of the faintest, most distant objects in the universe. Because the cosmos is expanding, light emitted by stars and galaxies is stretched as it travels, elongating its wavelength and turning visible light into infrared. The oldest objects – those that formed first – are “redshifted” the most, and it is these that Webb has been built to observe. “The very most distant galaxies are so far away that the light from them has travelled for most of the age of the universe to get to where we are. That allows us to use the telescope as a time machine,” Gardner said. “We look backwards in time to when the universe was younger, hoping to see the very first galaxies that formed.” By working in the infrared, the telescope can look deep inside the dust clouds in which stars are born to see their formation in action. More than a quarter of the projects awarded time on Webb will observe exoplanets – alien worlds that circle stars beyond our solar system. Astronomers have detected thousands such planets, ranging from giant, hot Jupiters to water worlds and rocky planets more like Earth. Scientists plan to watch some of these planets as they cross in front of their parent stars. Using spectrographs on the telescope, they can analyse how light from a star is absorbed by a planet’s atmosphere, providing hints of its chemical composition. “What Webb is focusing on is the conditions for life,” said Gardner. “We have small rocky planets, like Earth, Venus and Mars. What are their temperatures, what do their atmospheres look like, is there an indication of water in their atmospheres, and what kind of organic chemistry is going on in those atmospheres?” But first the telescope must reach its destination and unfold without a glitch. For now, that is enough to keep many scientists occupied. “This is going to be a real nail-biter,” Biller said. “Launch is just the beginning.”Women around the world will take turns to fast for 24 hours in an attempt to put pressure on the UK government to secure the freedom of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe from detention in Iran. The campaign by FiLiA, a female-led volunteer organisation working for the liberation of women, follows the 21-day hunger strike Nazanin’s husband, Richard Ratcliffe, mounted outside the Foreign Office in London until mid-November. Photographs of all the participants in the fasting relay, which begins on Monday, will be published on the group’s website day by day in a display of solidarity. Lisa-Marie Taylor, the chief executive of FiLiA, said women from the UK, India, Morocco and Iran had already signed up to take part in the fasting relay. “Richard has made it clear he doesn’t want people to get poorly,” she said. “So we thought we’d organise a chain of women to each fast for a day to keep the pressure on the government and show Nazanin how much support she has from women in the UK and globally.” The action was also inspired by the 89-year-old human rights lawyer Margaret Owen, who went on a six-day hunger strike last month to take up the baton from Ratcliffe after he ended his protest, amid concerns about his health, Taylor added. Owen, who visited Ratcliffe four times during his hunger strike, said: “Each time I sat next to him, I was so impressed but also so worried by the third week with the state of his health. We knew that Nazanin was begging him to stop. So I told him, I’m going to hunger strike for you.” Although Ratcliffe was worried for her welfare, Owen said she was unconcerned, having previously gone on hunger strike for eight days in 2013 on behalf of the last British prisoner from Guantánamo Bay, Shaker Aamer. “I probably survive a six-day hunger strike much better than much younger people because people my age don’t eat much anyway,” the barrister said, adding she passed the time doing Zoom meetings, listening to music and reading at her home in Hammersmith, west London. Owen then recruited friends and human rights colleagues to go on hunger strike to support the Free Nazanin campaign. Ratcliffe, who said he lost 12kg on his hunger strike and subsequently underwent 10 days of medical checks in hospital, said he was humbled by Owen’s altruism. “The resonance that her hunger strike had in Iran was huge,” he said. “In that here is someone with the wisdom and the judgment of nine decades, deciding to make a stand. It was covered on Iranian satellite TV and a number of Iranian media in the diaspora. Nazanin was really touched.” Zaghari-Ratcliffe went on hunger strike for 15 days in June 2019. Her husband’s strike this autumn – his second on her behalf – was prompted by fears she was about to be returned to a prison in Tehran for another year. The aid worker, who has already spent five years imprisoned in Iran on spying charges she has always denied, recently lost her appeal against new propaganda charges brought against her by the Iranian regime and is living at her parents’ home in Tehran. Participants in FiLiA’s campaign will be asked to email their MP with two demands. First, for Boris Johnson to fulfil his promise that Britain would repay the £400m it owed Iran for an unfulfilled 1970s arms deal, which is a seen a precondition for the release of Zaghari-Ratcliffe and other detainees. Second, for a judicial review to be launched to investigate why the debt has not been paid. “There is something humbling about realising people who you didn’t know about are doing this act of solidarity,” Ratcliffe said of the campaign. “That no one’s letting us be forgotten.” Ratcliffe said he hoped the fasting campaign would also provide strength and comfort to his seven-year-old daughter, Gabriella, who was upset that his strike had not entirely achieved its aim. He said: “She certainly has been asking why it didn’t work: ‘You told me you were going on hunger strike to get Boris Johnson to get mummy back and mummy’s not back yet.’ And we’re preparing for Christmas without mummy again.”This week, on Tuesday, the northern hemisphere experiences the winter solstice. The noon sun will be at its lowest altitude of the year and as a result we undergo the shortest day of the year. To an astronomer, the winter solstice marks the beginning of the astronomical winter, which runs from the winter solstice to the following year’s spring equinox. In 2022, the spring equinox takes place on 20 March. To a meteorologist, however, winter is defined slightly differently. Meteorological winter follows the calendar months, and so began this year on 1 December and finishes on 28 February 2022. The precise moment of the winter solstice – when the Earth’s north pole points directly away from the sun, and the sun is directly over the tropic of capricorn, at about 23.4 degrees south – takes place at 15.59 GMT. At this moment it is also just below the horizon from the Arctic Circle, at about 66.5 degrees north. In the southern hemisphere, it is the summer solstice and the longest day of the year. The one consolation to those of us in the northern hemisphere is that from this point onwards the daylight hours get longer and longer, as we begin the climb towards spring.During the past two years, each stage of the pandemic has brought with it a new species of tired. The first was a heady sort of tiredness, all jittery over-vigilance when the first lockdown happened. The memory of that time has an almost lunar quality: it felt like being marooned in a pod on a hostile deserted landscape but with your lights and radars still blinking, still whirring, powered by adrenaline and restlessness. It was a short, sharp fear, in anticipation of a crisis that would be intense but soon over. And it was soon over. Sort of. And then it wasn’t. Then it was over again, then around Christmas last year, it wasn’t. And now, after a brief late-summer of almost normal, the emergence of the Omicron variant means that Covid is threatening the holiday season for the second year in a row, as restrictions tighten around Europe and scientists advising the UK government turn up the volume on their demands for more curbs before the new year. The British experience is distinguished from much of the world by the in-plain-sight element of our government’s incompetence and corruption. But the uncertainty, the stop-starts, that marooned feeling of waiting to be rescued, the anticipation of life changing overnight, has been a global experience that is still ongoing. Once again, borders are sealed and airports shut down. Once again, infections are rising and as many start planning to travel home for holidays, a ripple of rumours has started. I have heard them from Nairobi to Norwich, predicting another lockdown, another domestic travel ban, another last-minute intervention by authorities who wait too long and act too late. With the dashing of each raised hope and resurrected plan, a new tiredness sets in: a turbulent kind of tired, hot with anger towards politicians whose reckless behaviour claimed your loved one; a confused, self-berating tired, when you don’t seem to be able to complete the most simple of tasks. It’s a glass-eyed tiredness, endlessly scrolling but not absorbing, trying to become animated by force-feeding yourself the news and images of a world you can’t experience. And now, creeping in, is a sloppy tiredness. If you haven’t felt it you will recognise it in someone who has. The kind of tired where – after months of following every single rule, from the sensible to the unreasonable – you are tempted to skip a test and go about your business if you’re feeling poorly. You might cancel your Christmas party, but still make a couple of what you know are not strictly wise visits to the pub. You might not do other small things that do not seem worth the effort, you might let your mask slip on a journey home, you might, as I have often done on a long commute, take the packed train because you are too tired to wait for the next one an hour later. Multiply that tiredness by a thousand if you live in a country where there are not only no boosters, but barely any vaccines at all; where the only means to combat Covid are cyclical lockdowns and curfews, all of which merely keep calamity at bay rather than eliminate it. I have written over the past year of family and friends across the African continent clubbing together to pool resources in the absence of public health support, but now I can see their resolve weakening with every death, with every economic blow. Their efforts at social distancing and mask-wearing have been effaced by time and the realisation that without vaccines and proper healthcare, their trials will not end. There is now only resignation, both to the virus and the poverty and corrupt governance that have allowed it to spread. We tend to think of our pandemic behaviour in binary terms: compliance with the rules or rebellion. But the reality is that in the middle there is drift: metaphorical knees buckling after two years of carrying the weight of responsibility for your safety but also your family’s – and, in fact, every single stranger with whom you share airspace. And this is where the jeopardy comes in. Despite the cartoonish antics of a government branding lockdown easing as “freedom day”, the big victories don’t come in one heave, one big push in the right direction that will deliver normal life. They come in the small moments of perseverance and resolution. And those are harder to muster because they are solitary and unrewarded. Whether you are in Africa or Europe, whether you are well-off or struggling, your efforts to maintain good pandemic manners and protocols will appear trivial, dwarfed by epic systemic failings of governance and mocked by the hypocrisies of those who make the rules but do not follow them. Whenever I reach what I am sure is rock-bottom, I try to purge this jeopardy of defeatism by reading the words Seamus Heaney gave to a graduating class in 1966. “Getting started, keeping going, getting started again – in art and in life, it seems to me this is the essential rhythm not only of achievement but of survival, the ground of convinced action, the basis of self-esteem and the guarantee of credibility in your lives, credibility to yourself as well as others.” The key, I think, is to acknowledge the fatigue and make allowances for it – to view it not as a catalyst or a moral failure, but as a place from which to make a recovery. The end of a year offers the temptation of neat resolutions and trite pledges for the future. But as we find ourselves grappling with a new variant and a new wave – once again making grim calculations and weighing up risks to elderly people, steeling ourselves for the prospect of new restrictions and searching for the willpower to follow them – I am just shooting for survival. My only hope and ambition is to make peace with the fact that being tired and being tempted to give up is part of the essential rhythm of life. My hope for you is the same, that your year-end is one of respite and replenishment. If it isn’t, keep going. Get started again. Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnistWesley Rowell hoped to make it as an opera singer. A bass-baritone, he supported his ambitions and auditions with singing jobs in churches in Chicago and New York, and as a luxury salesperson, selling expensive pots of face cream. Then, at 60, he found a different kind of voice – and started seminary at Princeton with a mission to “reclaim God’s queerness”. No one was more surprised than Rowell, who is now 61. “If somebody said to me three years ago: ‘You’ll be going to a seminary,’ it would have been a ridiculous joke.” His mother, however, “a very serene, soft” 91-year-old, “just smiled and said: ‘Well, I guess your grandmother was right.’” Rowell’s grandfather was a minister in the African Methodist Episcopal Zion church in the family’s hometown of Fayetteville, North Carolina, and his grandmother had raised the possibility that one of the grandchildren might follow that path. Rowell is still a little hazy on where seminary will take him when he leaves in 18 months. His cohort will work in churches and academia and with nonprofit organisations, he thinks. “And I honestly don’t know where I am. I’m open to where it takes me.” Church, song and family have always been intertwined. Singing began for him in church. “My grandmother used to hum with me. And I can almost remember her vibration.” At 10 or 11, he realised: “Oh, I like boys.” The library became a new sort of church. “I would find whatever gay books there were – Oscar Wilde and James Baldwin. And I would hide them and go read them.” Rowell heard “nothing but openness” from his grandfather. But still, he says: “I instinctively knew, this you have to shut down, this you have to keep secret.” In his early 20s, he decided to study music. He stopped going to church regularly, but although he “moved to New York to get famous” at 36, he still sang in churches. Even as he became detached from the religion, he was acquiring a sampler of preaching voices. “I’m very thankful to all those choirs,” he says. “I think I thought: religion is not for me – but spirituality is better in community.” Bass voices mature late, and through his early 40s Rowell “had these fantasies … The right person is going to hear me.” He had big auditions. Friends from grad school were singing all over the world. “I was not at that level professionally,” he says. “So there was that frustration.” For the first time in his life, Rowell stopped singing. In seven years, not one note. He summarises his thinking: “I don’t know what my purpose is here, so I’m just going to party.” It wasn’t until 2013, when he became a paid singer at Middle Church in New York, that he began to enter into religion again with a whole sense of self. One day, he turned up when he was not due to sing. The pastor, who had introduced herself as “the queerest straight black woman”, told him: “Oh, we got you!” Rowell started a group at the church “for queer black men who are interested in spirituality”. The pastor asked him to preach. It was a different form of stage from opera but, he says, “More so than when I was a performer, I’m like: ‘This is where I belong.’” Of course, obstructions to the feeling of belonging remained. If he had previously found homophobia in church, in the gay community he found racism (“‘I don’t date black guys …’”). “I felt rejected. It took a lot to get over that,” he says. “I think I might be in seminary because I want people to realise that they don’t have to leave any part of themselves. “The more we define our particularities, the more our connection is universal. I think people see this person is living into who they are. I don’t think I’m going to start a queer black church, but I want to start a church that centres the experience of people like me.” He wants to start a church? Just now he wasn’t sure why he was in seminary. “I said it out loud!” he says. “Maybe that’s where this is going.” Tell us: has your life taken a new direction after the age of 60?Scrooge (1951) The original Ebenezer is, of course, Alastair Sim. Ideally, I like to watch this on an old videotape with the early 1980s BBC logo and announcer before the film starts. Every Christmas, we would watch Mr Sim transform from a hard, cold, pastry-faced man into a very huggable uncle. Just thinking about it makes my eyes well. I sit down with my kids to watch Scrooge as often as I can get away with it, and I’m always moved by this wonderful film. Cait Hurley, trainee Alexander technique teacher and domiciliary carer, Mitcham You’ve Got Mail (1998) I first fell in love with this film age 14, while staying at my cousin’s house for the Christmas holidays. One scene that comes to mind is Kathleen Kelly (Meg Ryan) decorating the Christmas tree in the window of her bookstore and mentioning the Joni Mitchell song, River. I watch You’ve Got Mail every year, but it was only last Christmas, in the furrows of heartbreak and missing a loved one deeply, that I listened to what Kathleen actually says in this scene, as she talks of how she “misses her mother so much she almost can’t breathe”. I paused the film to listen to River, as tears streamed down my face. It soothed my heart through Christmas and well into the new year. Mustafa Ahmed, web designer, Manchester Pelišky (Cosy Dens, 1999) This is a Czech film about families living in a flat in 1967 in Prague. It is set around the Christmas holidays and presents generational conflicts with both humour and sadness. I watch it every year with my mother, who is originally from Slovakia. We are the only family members who live in the United States, and it helps to connect us to our culture every Christmas. Maya Kavulicova, student, North Carolina, US Serendipity (2001) For my wife and I, this film starring John Cusack and Kate Beckinsale is the one that heralds the festive season. It’s a hugely underrated film with a big heart, brilliant soundtrack and sparky dialogue. We watch it every year during the last weekend in November and our bottom lips always tremble when Nick Drake’s exquisite Northern Sky begins to play over the film’s final moments. It was also the music we chose to play when we walked down the aisle. James Tuck, Thirsk Bernard and the Genie (1991) Bernard and the Genie is a BBC movie from the 90s. My mum taped it off the TV and my brothers and I just loved it. Lenny Henry plays a genie (who was friends with Jesus). He discovers the modern world and how enjoyable Christmas is. Rowan Atkinson plays the bad guy, and Alan Cumming is a man who’s down on his luck before finding the lamp. It’s full of Christmas cheer – everybody should watch it at this time of year. Angelo Virciglio, assistant operations manager at a GP practice, Waltham Cross A Christmas Story (1983) I have a weakness for A Christmas Story. It was filmed in Toronto, and although it’s set in the 40s in Cleveland, it reminds me of home. In some scenes, you can see the old Red Rocket streetcars that I used to take to university in the 80s. The film’s snow and night sky look just like what we experience in Canada. I can also relate to getting bundled up by your mum before braving the cold outside – the scene where Randy can’t lower his arms is accurate. Adrienne Matte, artist, North Vancouver BC Canada The Snowman (1982) The Snowman always brings a tear to my eye. I watch it with my mum every Christmas Eve without fail, followed by The Bear (1998) – at which point she goes off to wrap presents while I continue to watch, like a child. The scene where the little boy and the snowman turn to hug each other and say their final goodbyes gets me every time. A beautiful Christmas classic. Anna Edgell, graphic designer and illustrator, Leeds Planes, Trains and Automobiles (1987) To me, a Christmas film is the kind of movie you can watch whenever it happens to be on – no matter if it’s just beginning, halfway through, or nearing the end. In that sense, Planes, Trains and Automobiles is a great Christmas movie: it’s one of the best films starring the great John Candy; it is very funny and touching; and it never gets old. That the movie is actually about Thanksgiving is no problem for non-Americans – it’s still about time spent with family. Aris Tekelenburg, the Netherlands Remember the Night (1940) This is a film that rarely makes Christmas film lists – but it should. It was written by Preston Sturges and was the film that convinced him that directing his own work was the way forward – leading to some of the great screwball comedies, such as The Lady Eve (1941) and Sullivan’s Travels (1941). But Remember the Night is a brilliant, and brilliantly melancholic piece of Hollywood studio-era counter-holiday programming. It’s the first, and best, of the four films pairing Barbara Stanwyck and Fred MacMurray. If saccharine holiday movies set your teeth on edge, give Remember the Night a go: it captures the sorrows and joys of Christmas in equal measure – and how family can be both a blessing and a curse. Tim Palmer, university professor, Wilmington, North Carolina, US Trading Places (1983) I love Trading Places, because craziness on screen gives us permission to be wacky, and original in real life too. I love that, when the rich character played by Dan Aykroyd loses his money, he becomes just as desperate as we can all become on a bad day; the scene where he drunkenly eats smoked salmon on a bus while dressed as Santa is etched into my mind. Each of the actors is brilliant, every character is believable, and the moral of the tale is great – but most importantly, it is very funny. Magali Fradet, acupuncturist, Javea, Spain Scrooged (1988) I saw Scrooged at the cinema with my dad in 1988 and I’ve watched it most Christmases since. It’s Bill Murray’s snidest performance. He’s perfect as Frank Cross, a TV exec who is visited by three ghosts on Christmas Eve, during a live broadcast. I laugh every time I see it. It features the best comedy fall on film (when Frank slips leaving the restaurant), Karen Allen’s sweetest performance, and a lot of heart. True, it gets cheesy towards the end, but thanks to all the laughs, this film gets away with it. James Keaton, west London Paddington (2014) When Paddington was released, I had been working in Australia. A hold-up at the immigration department delayed my return home, meaning I wasn’t sure I would make it back to Blighty for a family reunion. Thankfully, my visa came through and I made it back in time for a trip to the cinema to see Paddington. As we watched, my brother and I relived our youth, when we first listened to the Paddington stories on a very old, battered tape, narrated by Bernard Cribbins. We had also been big fans of the Paddington board game. There was much laughter and nostalgia – and when we got home, we made marmalade sandwiches. Helen, secondary school teacher, Manchester It’s a Wonderful Life (1946) This is a great film at any time of year, but at Christmas it has an extra piquancy. It deals with fate, memory, age, abandoned dreams and thwarted desires. It’s about the value of life. It is anchored by a range of excellent performances and, having seen it at an early age, it was so long until I saw it again that I began to think I’d dreamed it. I only had to abandon it once: it was just after my father, who passed on his love of films to me, had died. I sat down to watch it, but kept bursting into tears, so I had to stop. Adam Kimmel, retired, London Elf (2003) My wife and I love the slapstick, frenetic pace and gentle send-up of the Christmas tradition in this film. We also appreciate the acting, from Will Ferrell’s totally over-the-top characterisation to James Caan’s impeccably straight portrayal of the long-lost father. Bob Newhart also plays a deadpan elf, giving the film a slightly hallucinatory feel. When Buddy gets super excited about Father Christmas coming to Gimbel’s, we cry laughing. It ticks all the Christmas film boxes: humour, sentiment, snow, elves and a nicely characterised Father Christmas. As they grow older, my daughters appreciate different jokes in the film too – it will always be a family favourite. Peter, architect, London How The Grinch Stole Christmas (2000) My dad took me to see this at the cinema when it first came out. We have watched it together every year since, so we both now know the entire script by heart. As a child, I loved Cindy and absolutely wanted to be her friend, but as I’ve got older, the Grinch is becoming increasingly relatable. He has some classic quotes that I use daily, to the frustration of my family. The humour is very much my taste – sometimes silly, sometimes dark, lots of jokes with hidden meanings. It is hilarious and timeless. Anonymous, BlackburnSunset Boulevard Curve, Leicester I don’t think I’ve ever seen anything quite like it – it was so captivating I saw it twice. Forced to switch to a streamed version, the theatre changed its entire approach, and instead had the doomed tragedy play out across the whole of the auditorium, including the seats and balconies where audiences should have sat, and with the cameras fully visible. With the melodramatic tale now seeming to take place among the paraphernalia of a movie lot and abandoned cinema, it was as though we were watching a ghost story play out. Add in the sweeping score and extraordinary cast – spine-tingling. Anna Anything Goes Barbican, London The antidote to everything. A toe-tapping, deliriously fun watch with a great, game cast and show-stopping tunes from the majestically wonderful Cole Porter. David Deacon Fisherman’s Friends: The Musical Hall for Cornwall, Truro Just the most joyous, uplifting, feel-good musical, packed full of wonderful, traditional sea shanties as well as original songs. The creative staging, lively cast and roving musicians entertained us from start to finish and we wanted to watch it all over again. Our much-loved theatre, newly opened after its spectacular renovation, looked so beautiful and made the evening extra special. There was a buzz, an excitement, a sense of relief and of pride. Anonymous Bloody Elle Royal Exchange, Manchester Growing up northern and gay, I saw very little representation of myself on TV and in the theatre – anything I did experience was never authentic. Everyone wants to feel seen and relate to stories and I had yet to be able to have that experience in a theatre, one of my favourite places to be. Lauryn Redding’s Bloody Elle has honestly changed my life. It is a one-woman show that tells an authentic story of what it is like to grow up queer in the north. It made me cry with tears of joy and sadness. Hannah Smith Manor National theatre, London Despite the criticism that has rained down on Manor, this was the show I enjoyed seeing. The play may not suit everyone’s taste, but it raises many important issues and makes a valid point: if we want to stand a chance at tackling problems as a society, we need to be able to talk to each other despite our differences. The play tries to cover perhaps too much ground in limited time. However, it is dynamic and the cast are energetic and engaging. It deserves to be taken seriously. Sonja Wolf The Addams Family Lyceum, Sheffield The book and music were pitch perfect, the cast superb. But what raised the performance we watched was a moment during Gomez’s speech about keeping secrets where the whole cast, including Gomez, were fighting a mass “corpse”. The audience were in stitches and the momentary breach of the fourth wall made the experience that much more communal. Anonymous The Wife of Willesden Kiln, London This was a fabulous production on so many levels: the joyous performances (especially Clare Perkins in the lead), the staging that made you really feel you were in a north London pub (though with 100 more whisky bottles to dust than in the average boozer) and a script that was an astonishing feat. Zadie Smith’s rhyming drama was fun and engaging but also thoughtful and soul-satisfying. I enjoyed every moment – my friend also adored the production but didn’t even notice it was in rhyme so clearly it worked as authentic speech, too. The Kiln gets better and better. Jennie Allen The Messenger Sherman theatre, Cardiff Seiriol Davies’ show was fantastic. It was part of a cabaret-style, pick-and-mix of new writing by both up-and-coming and established voices from Cardiff. I loved Davies’s work in How to Win Against History, which I saw for the third time in 2021. The Messenger was really fun and inventive, but also said something that resonated with me about queer lives being pushed to the side. I loved the music and the use of the space. The way the Sherman set up the space for these shows is great, like a circus tent with three mini stages. Seeing The Messenger made me feel like a kid seeing theatre for the first time again – as soon as it finished I wanted to see it again. I really hope that it’s developed into a full-length work. Rachel Dawson Talent Crucible, Sheffield I watched Victoria Wood’s play in the 80s when I was a teenager and thought it very funny and original but never got the tragedy which I certainly did this time round. I love that this play is written by a woman for women. Her writing is so distinctive and affecting, and I enjoyed the references to TV shows and brands from the time. Victoria Wood was a trailblazer and no one since comes close in my opinion. I loved her and miss her. Jo Regan Redcoat Live theatre, Newcastle Lewis Jobson’s solo show was a great tonic of laughter and energy as he danced, sang and spoke of his experiences as a holiday-village redcoat. Hilarious and thoroughly engaging, the show isn’t just about entertainment – it takes you through a very personal story of highs, lows and challenges. The show was a limited run and I hope it reaches new heights in 2022. Paul Wailes Patricia Gets Ready (for a Date With the Man That Used to Hit Her) Pleasance at EICC, Edinburgh I saw Martha Watson Allpress’s amazing play at the Edinburgh fringe. It was very well written and discussed a sensitive topic in an honest, thought-provoking and informative way. It was performed as a monologue and the audience was drawn into the inner turmoil of the character yet there were also some lighter moments. We found ourselves captivated and willing her to do the right thing. Anonymous 84 Charing Cross Road Bromley Little theatre, London This amateur theatre puts on several shows a year and has a committed group of players and technicians. 84 Charing Cross Road (adapted from the book by Helene Hanff) had two excellent leads who, because the play is mainly based on letters, have to react to what the other is saying without interacting with them. This subtle romance was beautifully portrayed. The director and cast created the atmosphere of a cosy evening in front of the fire, leaving the audience gently comforted and intensely satisfied. Jeremy Reynolds The Silver Superheroes Òran Mór, Glasgow Morna Young’s play was a delight. Funny, poignant at times and opportunely relevant against the backdrop of the climate conference in Glasgow at the time. A wake-up call that you are never too old to get involved in the world and that life is full of interest if you engage and care. Anonymous Blkdog Sadler’s Wells, London Mind-blowingly brilliant. Botis Seva’s combination of fluid group motifs with sharp, krump-inspired dynamics created one of the most choreographically compelling productions I’ve seen in a long time. The show also drew one of the youngest and most enthusiastic audiences I’ve witnessed at a dance work. Seva’s brilliantly dark and heavy atmosphere created a thick tension in the auditorium that was only broken by thunderous applause at the end. I’m very excited to see what future projects he will work on. It will stick with me for a long time. Eoin Ó Fíannachta My Son’s a Queer (But What Can You Do?) Turbine theatre, London A fantastic one-person show. Rob Madge wrote something personal and touching, but also relatable to anyone who grew up with a love of performance or feeling different. Combined with fantastic staging, catchy music and hilarious home videos, they put on the funniest and warmest tribute to family you could ever want. Anonymous The Dante Project Royal Opera House, London The most extraordinary dance and theatre experience I have ever seen – beautiful, profound and uplifting from the start to a glimpse of paradise at the end. Farewell performance of the amazing Edward Watson. Mary Wilson The Lost Happy Endings Festival theatre, Edinburgh I am obsessed with Ballet Lorent. Their performances are like being sucked into another realm. I hadn’t seen much live theatre for many years. I went on my own to see this show and it gave me so much hope and happiness. AnonymousNo one, my friends decided, should be alone at Christmas. Especially no one as desperately, soul-searchingly, what’s-wrong-with-me single as me. In the late 00s, when internet dating was for nerds, meeting people wasn’t easy – unless you got talking to someone at a party or something, which I never did, because I was too busy banging on to my mates about why I was so achingly single. Thus, a plan was hatched. Three friends would each set me up on a blind date. I’m good-looking (with a squint), charming (after a few drinks) and a good catch, they assured me. What could go wrong? My first date on a cold mid-December Friday evening was organised by my friend Caroline. I would be meeting Thom (Thomasina) for drinks. Things went uncharacteristically well (she was amused and not repelled by me spraying on emergency deodorant as I walked through the pub door) and I ended up being sneaked into her house – just for a snog – to avoid waking her flatmates. The snag was that I had to be up for work at 9am the next morning. As a freelance journalist, I didn’t know which scared me more: being sneaked into a house in the middle of the night by an attractive young woman, or having to get up so early on a Saturday. It was all before everyone had smartphones, and there was no clock in the bedroom, so I relied on half-sleeping and half-squinting at the bright LCD I could see through the bedroom doorway. Nine o’clock arrived sooner than I imagined, so I grabbed my trousers and blundered into the Christmas tree in the hallway, waking all the flatmates. Who was this strange bloke picking up baubles in his underpants? “Odd,” I thought as I set my bearings to the nearest tube. “Why is it still dark at 9am?” “Also,” I thought, shortly afterwards, “why is the tube shut at 9am?” The clock I’d been looking at was the oven timer. It was 4am, and I’d only slept for 45 minutes. Thus my date and her flatmates were delighted to hear me ring the doorbell, get back into bed and repeat my exit strategy at 9am, again crashing full pelt into the Christmas tree. My second date, two days before Christmas Eve, was lovely – until I tried to get back home. I drunkenly overslept my stop in south London and woke up in Staines, in Surrey. Too late for a train back, it was obviously time for a kebab outside a branch of Halfords. “Is this a taxi office?” I remember wondering. Then: “What are those flashing lights?” And, most worrying of all: “Why am I being handcuffed, bundled into the back of a police car and accused of attempted armed burglary?” It turns out that, according to CCTV cameras high above Staines’ high street, a drunken man eating a kebab outside Halfords looks exactly the same as a master criminal about to burgle a shop full of car tyres armed with a handgun. The police were legally permitted to lock me up for the 24 hours it took to retrieve the CCTV footage of me eating a kebab with curry sauce and salad, in pitta bread, and not concealing a weapon. My mind wandered during my time in the clink. Mainly to: “I bet this wouldn’t have happened if I had a girlfriend.” You can bet that the third lucky woman, to whom I was introduced on New Year’s Eve, was delighted when I accidentally broke her key off while chivalrously trying to open her front door, forcing her to cancel her plans for New Year’s Day while I queued to buy a new lock at Homebase. A new lock that – it turned out – you needed a professional, and not someone who would fail GCSE DIY, to fit. These are my dating ghosts of Christmases past. And, to Thom, Louise and Katie: I am truly sorry.Christmas at Liberty 9pm, Channel 4 The only way Liberty department store could be any more Christmassy in December is if Mariah Carey herself applied to be the store Santa. Here, we get a peek at how the teams prepare for the season during a pandemic. There’s not much more to this one-off show beyond it being a very aesthetically pleasing wintry wonderland – but, sometimes, a beautiful window display and some carolling by the London Gay Men’s Chorus is all you need to light up that festive feeling. Hollie Richardson Christmas at Chatsworth House 7pm, Channel 4 British stately homes take Christmas preparation to another level. In the first of a trio of episodes that go behind the scenes of estates, we visit Chatsworth House. After Covid complications, can staff prepare Chatsworth in time for yuletide visitors? Henry Wong Mary Berry’s Festive Feasts 7.05pm, BBC One Berry is back at it, this time tasked with teaching three novices how to cook salmon paté, clementine-glazed ham with garlic potatoes and red berry tiramisu trifle (wipe away that drool). HR The Big Soap Quiz: Coronation Street vs Emmerdale 9pm, ITV The vibe might seem jolly but make no mistake: this smackdown between ITV’s big soap brands has become a keenly contested annual fixture. With the current score 4-3 in Emmerdale’s favour, can Corrie captain Jack P Shepherd lead his team to victory over Mark Charnock’s farm family? Graeme Virtue We Wish You a Mandy Christmas 10pm, BBC Two Mandy (Diane Morgan) is back, and she hates Christmas. Declining an invitation to spend the holidays with pal Lola (Michelle Greenidge), she instead plans to watch Die Hard while getting drunk on Tia Maria (relatable). Will three famous-faced ghosts be able to inspire some festive spirit? Morgan is, once again, at her deadpan best. HR Deck the Halls 10pm, Channel 4 Behind the sparkle and glitz of four-storey trees, giant teddy bears and miles of tinsel at Britain’s landmarks, there is usually a frazzled team that’s been scurrying away to put it together since the end of summer. This hour-long special meets the busiest Christmas decorators in the UK. HRSurging demand at Covid testing clinics across Australia has led to waiting times of up to five days for results, with travellers now worried they won’t get a negative result in time to travel across state borders for Christmas. Waiting times in Victoria have averaged between 40 minutes and an hour during the past week, while a busy ACT site reached capacity by 9.30am on Monday. A negative Covid test is currently mandatory to enter Queensland, Tasmania and South Australia if arriving from an area with community transmission, while travellers to the Northern Territory are required to have a PCR test within 72 hours of arrival. David Wynnum is crossing his fingers he’ll receive his test result in time to fly to Brisbane on Wednesday afternoon. Wynnum was in line for two hours at Melbourne’s Sandringham hospital on Monday morning and was advised it would be a 48-hour wait to receive his result. “Most people looked like they were getting tested for interstate travel,” he said. “It’ll get interesting if my result isn’t back by boarding time.” Many people who spoke to Guardian Australia received their test results within a reasonable timeframe, but Nicolas Ronsmans had just passed the five-day mark. Ronsmans was tested on Wednesday at the Royal Prince Alfred hospital in Sydney after a positive Covid case was detected at his workplace and he was listed as a casual contact. As of Monday he was “still waiting”. “Initially it was meant to be 48 hours max, then they updated it to be 72 hours, to finally tell me, when I phoned the RPA dispatch, they said that it could take up to five days. “There’s no phone number you can call if the results haven’t come back yet. Everything and everyone will redirect you to the SMS number with automated replies as well as a web version of the same service.” Ronsmans said the most frustrating aspect was the “day-to-day uncertainty” forcing him to continually cancel plans. “If I were positive I could at least prepare and unplan for the next two weeks,” he said. Julia Thomas had passed 72 hours without a result after flying home from Sweden on Thursday evening. She was tested at St Ives Showground north of Sydney on Friday morning. “My partner got her results at 2am this morning,” she said on Monday. “After 40 minutes on hold to the pathology hotline, apparently mine has been separated into another batch and I’m unlikely to get results until this evening, 80 hours after the test.” Thomas was almost due for her second mandatory test and couldn’t tell from NSW guidelines whether it would still be required if she hadn’t received her initial result. From Tuesday, the 72-hour isolation requirement will be dropped for new international arrivals into NSW and Victoria, but a negative test is still required. “If my waiting times are normal, the isolation period will be longer than the original 72 hours, and my guess is that most new arrivals won’t have planned a living situation where you can isolate for that long,” Thomas said. Sian Cain was in the same boat. She queued at Haymarket for two and a half hours after landing in Sydney from overseas and said some were put off by long lines. “We did have some people come up to ask how long we’d been waiting and then say they weren’t going to bother,” she said. “Having done PCR tests in the UK for the past couple years, it was a bit of a shock. The queue was well managed but it was insane. There were only two women doing tests – there were easily 200 people in the queue at 8.30am and it just got longer.” Cain still hadn’t received her test results 48 hours later and said she’d already been hung up on once due to the volume of calls. NSW Health in a statement on Monday evening thanked the public for “their incredible response in coming out for testing”. The department said it was monitoring demand and had the capacity “to extend opening hours, introduce additional drive-through sites and establish extra pop-up clinics should the need arise”. In the ACT, the Mitchell testing site had reached capacity by 9.30am on Monday and wait times were exceeding two hours for every testing centre by the afternoon. An ACT Health spokesperson said the department would continue to monitor demand across its testing network and would “consider extended hours where possible”. “While some of our testing sites are very busy at certain times, there is still testing capacity available across our network,” they said. In Melbourne, there have been calls to reopen closed testing centres due to the surge in demand driven by positive cases, a rise in close contacts and increased travel. Data shows 71,491 tests were processed on Sunday. During the past week, the average waiting time in Victoria has been between 40 minutes and an hour, with shorter wait times in the afternoons. Queues around the block had already gathered at the Bourke Street testing site on Monday morning where waiting times were already several hours. Tim Sweeney said he visited three different testing sites in the CBD over the weekend and all were suspended because of high demand. Elise Thomas waited almost seven hours at St Vincent’s testing site on Friday, much of it queueing in full sun on a 32C day. “Nightmare,” she said. A spokesperson from the Victorian health department said testing remained “vital” and reached a record high last week. “We’ve increased testing capacity by 55% since October, with more than 260 sites operating across the state, including six new mass-testing centres and additional lanes at existing drive-through sites,” they said. “We know the morning is the busiest time for testing, which is why we’ve opened sites earlier to cater for the morning peak.”Top story: ‘Public want to know government has got a grip’ Hello and welcome to this, the penultimate Guardian morning briefing of 2021. After tomorrow’s final edition, the plan is to come back on Monday 4 January 2022. It’s Warren Murray taking you through today’s news. Boris Johnson has been pictured with wine and cheese alongside his wife and up to 17 staff in the Downing Street garden during lockdown, raising questions over No 10’s insistence a “work meeting” was taking place. It follows the denial last week that there was a social event on Friday 15 May 2020 including wine, spirits and pizza inside and outside the building. The picture shows bottles of wine, a lack of social distancing and 19 people gathered in groups across the Downing Street terrace and lawn. Even in light of the new picture, it is understood No 10 maintains that it was not against regulations. A spokesperson said on Sunday: “Work meetings often take place in the Downing Street garden in the summer months. On this occasion there were staff meetings after a No 10 press conference. Downing Street is the prime minister’s home as well as his workplace. The prime minister’s wife lives in No 10 and therefore also legitimately uses the garden.” It comes as Sajid Javid says fresh Covid restrictions may be imposed before Christmas. They could include a cap on the number of families that can meet, or even hospitality closures. Government advisers have warned that without tougher measures, hospitalisations across England could be set to peak at between 3,000 and 10,000 a day, and deaths at between 600 and 6,000 a day. Javid hailed the fact that a record 906,656 booster jabs were delivered in England alone on Saturday. A No 10 source played down the chances of an imminent announcement, arguing that “plan B was only implemented a week ago, and we’re getting huge numbers coming forward for their boosters”. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said the public needed to hear “practical steps … The public want to know the government has got a grip but, tragically, Boris Johnson is so distracted by his own internal party pressures that he’s unable to provide the leadership this country needs.” * * * New Brexit big cheese – The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, is to take over responsibility for Brexit after the government’s chief negotiator with the EU resigned. David Frost’s departure dealt a body blow to an already weakened Boris Johnson, reeling from scandals and the loss of the byelection in North Shropshire. Frost said plan-B coronavirus measures prompted his decision, as well as tax rises and the cost of net zero policies. Truss will have to try to sort out problems with the Northern Ireland protocol. It comes as City of London firms are predicted to revive plans to shift staff to the EU once travel restrictions ease in 2022. Of the 222 largest UK financial services firms monitored by accountancy EY since the 2016 referendum, 44% have confirmed they are relocating staff or operations to the continent – up from 41% in January 2020, in the latest sign of the impact of Brexit on the UK economy. * * * Boric roars to power in Chile – A leftist former student leader has stormed to a resounding victory to become Chile’s president-elect. With nearly 97% of the vote counted, Gabriel Boric claimed 55.8% to take a 12 percentage point lead over his far-right opponent, José Antonio Kast, an ultra-conservative. Boric declared to a vast crowd packed into a Santiago boulevard: “The times ahead will not be easy.” Boric, 35, will be sworn in next March as Chile’s youngest-ever president, having amassed more votes than any presidential candidate in history. He comes from a radical generation of student leaders determined to bury dictator Augusto Pinochet’s bitter legacy once and for all. “Chile was the birthplace of neoliberalism, and it shall also be its grave!” he once declared. * * * Fast to free Nazanin – Women around the world will take turns to fast for 24 hours each in an attempt to put pressure on the UK government to secure the freedom of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe from detention in Iran. The campaign follows the 21-day hunger strike by Nazanin’s husband, Richard Ratcliffe, outside the Foreign Office in London. Lisa-Marie Taylor, the chief executive of campaign group FiLiA, said women from the UK, India, Morocco and Iran had already signed up to take part. * * * Space telescope tinselled up – Final preparations are under way for the launch of the James Webb space telescope, built to peer back through space and time to the first stars and galaxies that lit up the universe. Regarded as the successor to Nasa’s Hubble space telescope, the mission is scheduled to blast off on Christmas Eve from Europe’s spaceport in Kourou, French Guiana. More than 30 years in the making, Webb will orbit the sun, unlike Hubble, which circles the Earth. Its destination is the second Lagrange point, or L2, where the balance of gravitational forces will hold it in place between the Earth and sun. Today in Focus podcast: The big red button World affairs editor Julian Borger tries out a VR simulation designed to model a real-life nuclear exchange, and reports on the terrifying outcome. Lunchtime read: His biggest role yet In 2019, the actor Volodymyr Zelenskiy rode a protest vote and was elected president of Ukraine, telling his supporters he would jail corrupt politicians and negotiate directly with Vladimir Putin to end Russia’s war in east Ukraine. Nearly three years later, Zelenskiy is staring down the threat of a Russian invasion, while he rallies western powers to his side and calls for aid. Sport Pyrrhic victories and pointless triumphs were all England had to hold on to on a sometimes comical day four of the second Ashes Test, leaving Joe Root’s team with it all to do if they are to stave off defeat on the final day in Adelaide. Emma Raducanu is the BBC’s Sports Personality of the Year for 2021, capping a year of unprecedented sporting success for the tennis star who told the show she was simply “a 19-year-old from Bromley … that’s who she is, nothing else to it”. Jürgen Klopp said Harry Kane should have been dismissed for a foul that could have broken Andy Robertson’s leg and Liverpool should later have been awarded a penalty as he seethed at referee Paul Tierney’s handling of a thrilling 2-2 draw at Tottenham. Chelsea were held to a goalless draw against Wolves after they were denied a postponement of the game at Molineux and deprived of their first-choice forwards because of Covid. Leicester City players and supporters can breathe a sign of relief going into the winter break after securing their first points in the Women’s Super League against Birmingham. Kyogo Furuhashi’s brilliance secured the Scottish League Cup for Celtic and a first piece of silverware for manager Ange Postecoglou after a 2-1 win over Hibernian. Fallon Sherrock’s dreams of repeating her PDC world championship heroics were dashed by veteran Steve Beaton at Alexandra Palace. The Women’s Tennis Association said an appearance on Sunday by Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai did not address its concerns about her wellbeing. Steve Borthwick’s Leicester kept up that winning feeling against Connacht as they made it a baker’s dozen of victories to head into the Christmas campaign and put a stamp on Europe to add to the mark they have made in the Premiership. And the NBA has postponed a total of five games involving nine teams in response to rising coronavirus numbers, raising the number of contests that have been pushed back this season to seven. Business The UK technology sector drew a record £29.4bn in investment this year, according to research, with Cambridge declared the country’s leading regional tech city. The injection of funding from venture capitalists is more than double last year’s total of £11.5bn. This increase in $1bn companies brings the total number of unicorns in the UK to 116, according to figures published by the government’s Digital Economy Council, an advisory committee. This compares with 31 in France and 56 in Germany, according to the council. Markets in Shanghai, Tokyo, Hong Kong and Sydney have retreated at the start of a trading week that will be shortened by the Christmas holiday. This morning the FTSE looks like opening more than 1% off while the pound is worth $1.322 and €1.175 at time of writing. The papers Our Guardian print edition leads with “Johnson and staff seen at No 10 event in lockdown”. The Daily Mail amplifies Tory Covid curb resisters: “Don’t ruin our Christmas again, Boris”, while the Daily Express has Sajid Javid’s warning: “‘No guarantees’ of escape from tougher Xmas rules”. The chancellor doesn’t like the country to lose money and the Times says of that: “Sunak resists new Covid restrictions before Christmas”. “D-day for Christmas” – the Mirror says Boris Johnson will hold meetings with his top team today amid the “Covid crisis”. The Telegraph has “PM looks at plea to limit mixing at Christmas” – it’s good advice, beer or wine but not both. “It’s all looking a bit ominous” – the Metro puts “Omi” in red to make sure we see what it’s done. “Travel restrictions extend across Europe as Omicron cases soar” is the lead story in the Financial Times, which gives its front-page picture slot to Liz Truss, who has been lumped with making Brexit work after David Frost quit in frustration. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.An internet outage left residents of a Top End remote community unable to buy food for four days, with critics arguing the situation was worsened by forced welfare income management policies. Maningrida, an Aboriginal community in the Northern Territory home to about 3,000 people, suffered through an outage of 3G and 4G internet services from 11am Thursday until Monday afternoon. Speaking before the outage was finally fixed at 12.30pm on Monday, the mayor of West Arnhem regional council, Matthew Ryan, said the situation was dire. “There are food shortages, people are not able to access food from the retail shop,” he told Guardian Australia. “Some of them are closed due to the lack of internet access. The ATMs are closed. Ryan said some residents were going hungry or leaning on extended family for food. “Even fuel has been scarce,” he said. Telstra said the problem was fixed at 12.30pm on Monday and apologised to local residents. Before then, critics argued the situation for some Maningrida residents was further complicated by the basics card, and its successor, the cashless debit card, which are both forms of forced income management. Under the basics card program, which has been in place in the NT since the Intervention in 2007, a proportion of person’s welfare payments is placed on a debit card that does not allow cash withdrawals and cannot be used to buy prohibited items. While Eftpos machines were down during the outage, some of the town’s ATMs have been operational at times. Maningrida resident Olga told ABC Radio Darwin the ATMs were drained “pretty much on the first or second day”. “A lot of the money is tied up in basics cards,” she said. “That means that income management system has totally failed people here with regards being able to purchase food. That’s since 11am on Thursday.” Olga said the council had organised “cook ups” most nights and encouraged people to bring containers so they could take food home. “That’s how desperate it is,” she said. The Northern Territory Labor senator Malarndirri McCarthy said it was unacceptable that families were going hungry. “This wouldn’t be accepted in Melbourne or Sydney, it should not be accepted in Maningrida,” she said. McCarthy said the “latest internet outage in Maningrida is just another example of how dysfunctional and punitive compulsory income management is”. “Families who have no choice but to go on the basics card or cashless debit card by the Morrison government cannot even access their own money,” she said. The government argues the cashless debit card reduces social harm. Labor has promised to scrap the card, which operates in Queensland, South Australia and Western Australia, and with the basics card in the NT. It has not announced its plans for the basics card. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Ryan said he had written to the federal Indigenous affairs minister Ken Wyatt in October complaining about the continual outages in the area but had not received a response. He drew attention to the impact of outages on cashless debit cardholders. “It’s a big human rights issue in our community,” Ryan said. Nic Danks, the regional general manager for Telstra in the NT, said there was an “intermittent issue impacting services in the community since 16 December”. He said landline services and NBN internet services were not impacted. “The cause was found to be a hardware issue at the local telephone exchange that was impacting the transmission network,” he said. “Telstra apologises for any inconvenience caused to local residents during this time and will continue to monitor the site over coming days to make sure it continues to operate effectively.” Danks said Eftpos machines could also connect via fixed line or wifi and the telco encouraged “stores across the NT to have a backup connectivity option”. Hank Jongen, a spokesman for Services Australia, which manages the basics card, said the agency worked with “communities, stores and service providers during outages of any length to provide support”. “Grocery stores can accept the purchase of essential items by local residents and then transactions are processed once the outage is resolved,” he said.Donald Trump is increasingly agitated by the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack, according to sources familiar with the matter, and appears anxious he might be implicated in the sprawling inquiry into the insurrection even as he protests his innocence. The former president in recent weeks has complained more about the investigation, demanding why his former White House chief of staff, Mark Meadows, shared so much material about 6 January with the select committee, and why dozens of other aides have also cooperated. Trump has also been perturbed by aides invoking the Fifth Amendment in depositions - it makes them look weak and complicit in a crime, he has told associates - and considers them foolish for not following the lead of his former strategist Steve Bannon in simply ignoring the subpoenas. When Trump sees new developments in the Capitol attack investigation on television, he has started swearing about the negative coverage and bemoaned that the House minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, was too incompetent to put Republicans on the committee to defend him. The former president’s anger largely mirrors the kind of expletives he once directed at the Russia inquiry and the special counsel investigation when he occupied the White House. But the rapidly accelerating investigation into whether Trump and top aides unlawfully conspired to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s victory at the 6 January joint session appears to be unnerving him deeply. The portrait that emerges from interviews with multiple sources close to Trump, including current and former aides, suggests a former president unmoored and backed into a corner by the rapid escalation in intensity of the committee’s investigation. A spokesperson for Trump did not respond to requests for comment. But as Trump struggles to shield himself from the select committee, with public hearings next year and the justice department said to be tracking the investigation, the path ahead is only likely to be more treacherous. The former president is especially attuned to his potential for legal exposure, even as he maintains he did nothing wrong in conferring about ways to overturn the 2020 election and encouraging supporters to march on the Capitol. He has expressed alarm to associates about repeated defeats in court as he seeks to stop the select committee obtaining some of the most sensitive of White House documents about 6 January from the National Archives, on grounds of executive privilege. The reality is that with each passing day, the committee seems to be gathering new evidence about Trump’s culpability around the Capitol attack that might culminate with recommendations for new election laws – but also for prosecutions. “I think that the justice department will keep a keen eye on what evidence the committee has accumulated, as well as looking out for witnesses for a potential case,” said Ryan Goodman, a former special counsel at the Department of Defense now a law professor at New York University. “One of the outcomes of the committee’s work and the public hearings will be to demonstrate individuals who might be wanting to come forward as witnesses and that’s got to be very important to justice department prosecutors,” Goodman said. House investigators are expected to soon surpass more than 300 interviews with Trump administration officials and Trump political operatives as part of a process that has yielded 30,000 documents and 250 tips via the select committee’s tip line. The flurry of recent revelations – such as the disclosure of Meadows’s connection to a powerpoint outlining how Trump could stage a coup, as first reported by the Guardian – raises the specter that the select committee is swiftly heading towards an incriminating conclusion. Trump’s associates insist they are not worried, at least for the moment, since the select committee has yet to obtain materials covered by executive privilege either through Meadows or the National Archives that could ensnare Trump personally. The former president’s defenders are correct in that respect – the committee does not have messages that show Trump directing an attack on the Capitol, one source said – and Trump has vowed to appeal the National Archives case to the supreme court. But no one outside the select committee, which is quietly making progress from a glass office on Capitol Hill with boarded-up windows and electronically secured doors, knows exactly what it has uncovered and whether the inquiry ends with a criminal referral. The material Meadows turned over alone depicts an alarming strategy to stop Biden’s certification on 6 January, involving nearly the entire federal government and lieutenants operating from the Willard hotel in Washington. One member on the select committee described the events around 6 January as showing a coalescence of multiple strategies: “There was a DoJ strategy, a state legislative strategy, a state election official strategy, the vice-president strategy. And there was the insurrection strategy.” The text messages Meadows received on his personal phone implicate Trump’s eldest son, Don Jr, and Republican members of Congress. Texts Meadows turned over to the committee might also be used by an enterprising prosecutor as evidence of criminal obstruction to stop a congressional proceeding if the White House knew election fraud claims to be lies but still used them to stop Biden’s certification. While Meadows never testified about the communications, a cadre of top Trump officials, from former acting national security adviser Keith Kellogg to Pence’s former chief of staff Marc Short, have moved to cooperate with House investigators. The trouble for Trump – and part of the source of his frustration, the sources said – is his inability, out of office, to wield the far-reaching power of the executive branch to affect the course of the inquiry. The limited success of strategies he hoped would stymie the committee – ordering aides to defy subpoenas or launching legal challenges to slow-walk the release White House records – has been jarring for Trump. “I think what he’s finding is that as the ex-president, he has a lot less authority than he did as president. But his playbook doesn’t work if he’s not president,” said Daniel Goldman, former lead counsel in the first House impeachment inquiry into Trump. In a reflection of dwindling legal avenues available to undercut the investigation, Trump has returned to launching attacks-by-emailed-statement on the select committee, stewing over his predicament and what he considers an investigation designed only to hurt him politically. “The Unselect Committee itself is Rigged, stacked with Never Trumpers, Republican enemies, and two disgraced RINOs, Cheney and Kinzinger, who couldn’t get elected ‘dog catcher’ in their districts,” Trump vented last month. In private, Trump is said to have reserved the brunt of his scorn for Meadows, furious with his former White House chief of staff for sharing sensitive communications on top of all the unflattering details about Trump included in his book this month. Trump’s associates, however, have focused more on questioning the legitimacy of the select committee and its composition, arguing the fact that the House Speaker, Nancy Pelosi, appointed both Republican members reduces the investigation to a partisan political endeavor. They also argue that none of the revelations to date – like the Guardian’s reporting on Trump’s call to the Willard hotel, during which he pressed operatives to stop Biden’s certification from taking place entirely – amounts to criminal wrongdoing. But in the meantime, Trump is left with little choice but to wait for the committee’s report. “The justice department seems to be more reactive than proactive,” Goodman said. “They might be waiting for the committee to wrap up its work to make criminal referrals.”Entire hospital units could be forced to shut because of staff quitting in protest at the government’s order that they must all be vaccinated against Covid-19, a senior NHS leader has warned. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, said that at one hospital trust in England, 40 midwives were refusing to get jabbed, raising fears that the maternity unit may have to close. “Trust leaders are acutely aware that, from April onwards, when Covid vaccinations will become mandatory, decisions by staff to remain unvaccinated could – in extreme circumstances – lead to patient services being put at risk,” said Hopson. “If sufficient numbers of unvaccinated staff in a particular service in a particular location choose not to get vaccinated, the viability and/or safety of that service could be at risk.” Hopson did not name the trust. But he cautioned that its maternity unit is “one representative example” of potential closures on grounds of patient safety that the government’s decision to compel NHS staff in England to be vaccinated or risk losing their job could lead to. Hopson said: “I was talking to a [trust] chief executive who said that 40 of the midwives on their midwifery service … were saying they were not prepared to be vaccinated. Those staff, given their skills and their expertise, are not easily redeployed but they’re also extremely difficult to replace. The trust’s chief executive “is seriously concerned about the safety of the service” because of the potential exodus of midwives. Maternity staff quitting over compulsory jabs posed a particular challenge because of the NHS-wide shortage of midwives, Hopson said. NHS England estimates that maternity services need 2,000 more whole-time equivalent midwives, while the Royal College of Midwives (RCM) puts the figure at 2,500. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, and NHS England need to “be clear well in advance how we will resolve the hopefully small number of instances where service viability and safety could be at risk” because of frontline personnel leaving rather than getting immunised, said Hopson. The new rule applies to any staff who have face-to-face contact with patients but also non-clinical staff including hospital porters. Javid told the Commons last Tuesday that “despite the incredible effort to boost uptake across the country, there are still approximately 94,000 NHS staff who are unvaccinated. It’s critical to patient safety that health and care staff get the jab.” However, the number of NHS workers who have had a first dose since the government first announced in September that it was adopting a policy of compulsory has risen since by 55,000, he added. The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) impact assessment of its policy found that as many as 126,000 unvaccinated staff could lose their job when the rule comes into force on 1 April. The House of Lords has raised concerns about the policy. Its secondary legislation scrutiny committee has warned that the DHSC’s definition of “face-to-face” is too vague, that it had no obvious contingency plans to “cope with expected staff losses” and that the potential loss of unvaccinated staff was “likely to be particularly acute” in London. The RCM said: “We don’t yet have a number for midwives who have yet to be vaccinated. However, to meet the statutory requirement they will need to have their first vaccination by 3 February. The RCM will represent members. But there are very limited options. “We are concerned that this will inevitably deepen maternity staff shortages and severely impact those midwives and maternity support workers left behind in services already struggling with acute staffing shortages.” The DHSC did not respond directly to Hopson’s comments. A spokesperson said: “We are grateful to all our NHS staff who work incredibly hard. “Vaccinations remain our best defence against Covid-19. This is about patient safety and it’s our duty to ensure that they are as safe as can be. “Working with organisations in the health and care sector, we will continue to support those who have not yet received the vaccination to take up the offer to protect themselves, their loved ones and their patients.”Trump’s Peace is a blockbuster of a book. Barak Ravid captures the 45th president saying “Fuck him” to Benjamin Netanyahu and reducing American Jews to antisemitic caricatures. Imagine the Republican reaction if Barack Obama had done that. Sean Hannity, Tucker Carlson and Laura Ingraham would plotz. But Trump? Crickets. Ravid also delivers a mesmerizing tick-tock of the making of the Abraham Accords, the normalization of Israel’s relations with four non-neighboring Arab states. Donald Trump, Jared Kushner, Yousef al-Otaiba – the United Arab Emirates ambassador to the US – and members of Israel’s government took the time to talk. Ravid footnotes the receipts. The result is a well-paced and engrossing read, if in Hebrew only for now. Israel-born and based, Ravid writes for Axios and Walla, an Israeli website. He knows his subject. Netanyahu is caught telling Avi Berkowitz, Kushner’s deputy and a US negotiator, not to leak to the author. Instead, Berkowitz talked on the record. Technically, the Abraham Accords are a joint declaration signed by the US, Israel, the UAE and Bahrain. Practically, the agreements represent the first major breakthrough in Middle East peace since the October 1994 treaty between Israel and Jordan. Unlike the Hashemite kingdom, the UAE and Bahrain do not border Israel, are graced with petroleum reserves, and stare at Iran across the Persian Gulf. According to Ravid, the nuclear threat posed by Tehran and the unrest that followed the Arab Spring reshaped policies and thinking towards normalizing relations with Israel. The Palestinians no longer occupied center stage. Ravid reports that Netanyahu backtracked on a commitment to annex part of the West Bank after being subjected to US pressure. Apparently, the Trump administration made clear it would continue to shield Israel in the United Nations security council but would not at the International Criminal Court. Netanyahu got the message. It came down to a UAE ultimatum: settlements or peace. Netanyahu blinked. Ravid regards Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed, also known as MBZ, crown prince of Abu Dhabi, as an unsung hero. He compares MBZ to Anwar Sadat of Egypt, who made peace with Israel then paid with his life. By the numbers, the Abraham Accords are yielding dividends. The UAE has announced a $10bn investment fund in key Israeli economic sectors and envisions more than $1tn in trade over a decade. Saudi Arabia looks to Bahrain as a conduit for investment in Israel and the Biden administration is “leaning” into the accords, after first hesitating. Ravid portrays Trump and Netanyahu as divisive leaders who threatened their countries’ democratic moorings. He recounts the 6 January insurrection in the US and Netanyahu’s resort to incitement. And yet, Ravid argues, fairness demands that both receive credit for this particular accomplishment. Understandably, Ravid is more ambivalent toward the US withdrawal from the Iran nuclear deal, a legacy of the Obama administration hated by Netanyahu and Trump. In Trump’s telling, his decision to pull out was not the result of Israeli urging. Rather, the deal was flawed and deserved to be scrapped. That verdict is not unanimous. Ravid quotes Udi Lavie, former deputy chief of the Mossad, who says the US withdrawal did not benefit Israel but hurt it. At the same time, Ravid observes that Netanyahu and Yossi Cohen, a former head of the Mossad, harbor no such regrets. Negotiations with the Iranian regime continue, with no tangible signs of progress. As Israel girds for possible conflict, its message is conflicted. A recent New York Times headline blared: Israeli Defense Officials Cast Doubt on Threat to Attack Iran. On the other hand, Amos Yadlin, a former air force general, told the paper his country has the capability for a successful strike. “Can the American air force do it better? Definitely. But they don’t have the will.” Or necessarily the same strategic interests. Trump’s ascendance in 2016 was directly related to the Iraq war and its casualty count. Ravid also offers his take on Trumpworld. He stresses that Kushner was neither ideologue nor idealist. At heart he was a businessman, sympathetic to Israel but not seeing annexation as a personal cause. Nor, Ravid says, was Kushner driven by religious sentiment – as was Mike Pompeo, Trump’s secretary of state. The Messiah could wait. Nor, unlike Condi Rice, George W Bush’s secretary of state, did Kushner regard Palestinians stuck at Israeli check-points as – in Ravid’s words – “the reincarnation of Rosa Parks on a bus in Alabama”. In contrast to Kushner, David Friedman, Trump’s bankruptcy lawyer and ambassador to Israel, viewed the two-state solution as an “illusion”. Before he took office, he derided Jews on the left as “worse than Kapos”. His nomination narrowly cleared the Senate. As ambassador, Friedman was close to Netanyahu, sitting in on Israeli government meetings until he was tossed out by cabinet members. Ravid describes Friedman as “flesh of the settlers’ flesh”. Friedman has taken issue with portions of Ravid’s reporting – and has a book due in February. Earlier this year, Friedman told the Times he would not rule out becoming a US-Israeli dual national, but not until Trump’s plans for 2024 were known. “I’m going to stay American-only for at least four years,” he said. “I want to give myself every opportunity to return to government.” Maybe, maybe not. Trump remains on the stage, ready to kneecap any competitor for the Republican nomination. Netanyahu is standing trial on bribery and corruption charges while leading the opposition bloc in Israel’s Knesset. Paradoxically, his efforts to cling to power may be the best insurance policy for the current coalition government. One thing is certain: the two men created facts on the ground that will outlast them both. Trump’s Peace: The Abraham Accords and the Reshaping of the Middle East is published in Israel by Yedioth Ahronoth BooksAfter six years and more than 250 pieces, our Inside the Guardian series is drawing to a close. Born originally out of reader curiosity about newsroom life, the series has gone behind the scenes to reveal how we uncover major news stories, devise different editions and products, and harness new technology. The first piece, which dates back to July 2015, arrived courtesy of features writer Simon Hattenstone, who admitted to getting thrown out of an interview with Leonardo DiCaprio for suggesting some of his movies were a “bag of shite”. From there, the only way was up. Rock and pop critic Alexis Petridis revealed he used to dream about owning every album in the world; our video teams used to dream about getting nominated for Oscars – only to see it happen not once, but twice (waking up to a statuette that time). Film critic Peter Bradshaw looked back at reviews of Notting Hill to Fight Club, and the unexpected flop Freddy Got Fingered, while film editor Catherine Shoard was papped smoking a cigar at her desk. We’ve had scores of reporters and editors write for the column, but perhaps the more surprising pieces came when we delved into sections of the organisation you may never had considered in your day-to-day reading. In 2018, we went into the archives and riffled through the 5,093 boxes and 1.85 terabytes of unpublished historical documents that have underpinned the Guardian’s 200-year history. We lifted the bonnet on our working day and our suite of products. We learned how live blogs were conceived, and how we were able to update readers right around the clock thanks to our offices in the US and Australia.) We explained the move to a tabloid format, looked at the evolution of Guardian Weekly, chewed over a pioneering move to a potato starch wrapper, visited the Guardian Bookshop, and asked subeditors how they’re endeavouring to shake off our ‘Grauniad’ reputation. Some of our most arresting pieces came from foreign correspondents. Tom Phillips told us about his challenging first year in a Brazil under Jair Bolsonaro’s presidency, Oliver Holmes searched for positive news in Jerusalem, Jason Burke shared what it was like to report from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and those who were on the ground during the Hong Kong protests in 2019 expressed deep concern for the city’s future. When Covid-19 hit, our reporters in Africa, the Middle East, India, Myanmar, Europe and Wuhan, China, each took the time to relate their unique set of challenges. In Australia, we heard how Guardian journalists mapped a decade of indigenous deaths. In New Zealand, reporter Eleanor Ainge Roy described meeting the country’s much-beloved prime minister, Jacinda Ardern. Closer to home, we heard from Libby Brooks on how she maintains a constant dialogue with our Scottish readers; we asked our northern editor about England’s national divide, and Rory Carroll went back to Dublin after two decades overseas. And just in case there was a corner of the globe we had missed, the team behind our Today in Focus podcast explained how they intended to bring listeners the world in 20 minutes. The Football Weekly gang were also generous enough to invite us into the recording studio with them. Politics, of course, loomed large. Before the 2017 general election, Martin Kettle explained how we decided which party to endorse, and later, Heather Stewart confided that a sense of humour is vital in Westminster. Across the Atlantic, our Washington bureau chief David Smith likened the task of reporting on Donald Trump’s presidency to “being tossed around in a washing machine”, and in 2020 we saw both horror and democracy unfold in real time. Over the course of the series, not one but two readers’ editors highlighted the importance of authentic self-regulation in covering these complex issues. We lifted the lid on several groundbreaking Guardian investigations. Amelia Gentleman revealed how the Windrush scandal started with the story of a former chef in Wolverhampton, and snowballed into a major international news story. Carole Cadwalladr took us behind the scenes on the Cambridge Analytica, which sent shockwaves through big tech. Before he retired, investigative reporter Ewan MacAskill – perhaps best known for his role in uncovering the NSA scandal – recalled with pride the day Trump called him a “nasty, nasty man”. Exit conversations with newsroom legends such as Paul Johnson and Michael White proved particularly eye-opening, as did an interview with the the remarkable Hella Pick, a Jewish refugee who became one of the first female newspaper correspondents. We enjoyed a masterclass in the art of the celebrity obituary by seasoned editor Robert White. Other certified Guardian and Observer treasures who took us on a tour of their work included food critics Jay Rayner and Grace Dent, theatre critic Michael Billington, columnists Polly Toynbee, Gary Younge, Aditya Chakraborrty, economics editor Larry Elliott, environment editor Damian Carrington, and First Dog on the Moon – to name just a few. We opened up the floor wherever possible. At the end of 2015, we asked editors and writers to tell us their predictions for 2016. Not everyone got it right (our then deputy national news editor foresaw the big story of 2016 being “the government’s decision on airport expansion”). Readers had their say too: in one exercise asking for ideas for coverage in 2020, one wrote in asking for deeper coverage of the World Indoor Bowls Finals. For our final flourish, we marked the Guardian’s 200th anniversary with a series within a series, and for much of its final year, Inside the Guardian became “before my time”, a chance for current writers and editors to look back at life for their predecessors and compare notes on how the job has changed. This unearthed some fabulous anecdotes, from Belfast during the darkest days of the Troubles to subediting in the pre-computer age and some rather curt notes on Yves Saint Laurent in the 1970s from our first fashion editor. It’s often said that journalism is the first draft of history, and so this feels a fitting finale for a series that set out to show readers how we work, and has ended up capturing life for those on the frontline of history during six remarkable years. The series may be over, but we’ll continue to keep our readers and supporters abreast of how and why we do what we do, via our growing suite of newsletters, podcasts and our annual report.Read the returns policy before you buy Whether you are shopping online or in person, check the retailer’s returns policy before you part with your cash. Many high street shops offer at least a 28-day period in which you can return unused items and get a full refund or exchange – and over Christmas these are often extended to allow people to return unwanted gifts. At John Lewis, for example, the standard returns period is 35 days but gifts bought between 1 October 2021 and 24 December 2021 can be returned until 28 January 2022. Argos usually has a 30-day returns window but anything bought between 17 October and Christmas Day can be taken back until 24 January. Check how the returns can be made Some retailers let you return items bought online or in a shop to any of their branches but some have restrictions. Uniqlo, for example, will not let you return items bought online to a shop for a refund but will let you do so for an exchange. If you shop in its stores you can only get a refund if you take something back to the place where you bought it, otherwise you can only exchange it. Online returns were typically free, and made easy with the inclusion of a label with your order, but these days you may have to download the label and pay for postage. This could be a fixed fee charged by the retailer and retained from your refund, or you could be responsible for arranging the return and covering the cost. Al Gerrie, the chief executive of ZigZag, a company that handles returns for retailers, says this could be a growing trend as “retailers have been subsidising the true cost of returns for a long time now”. ZigZag’s figures show that pre-Christmas returns are up 69% on last year. Know your rights For online shopping a 14-day cooling-off period is enshrined in law – during that time you can change your mind and reclaim all of your cash – although some retailers offer longer. There are some caveats: the goods cannot be perishable or have been customised. But the law is helpful if you suddenly realise that a gift you have ordered is not going to arrive on time and want to make a last-minute dash to the shops instead. You need to tell the retailer that you want to cancel within the 14-day period – most will have a cancellation or returns form to fill in. Then, if the item has arrived, you need to arrange to send it back. The law gives you another 14 days to get it to the retailer. Once it has arrived, your refund must be processed within 14 days. If you opted for fast delivery and paid more than the shop’s standard p&amp;p charge for it, it does not have to refund you for the extra cost you paid, only for its basic service. If an item turns out to be faulty, you have the right to ask for a replacement or repair. The law says that within the first six months the retailer has to prove that the item was not faulty when you bought it if it tries to turn down your request. However, the relationship is with the buyer, so if you have received the item as a gift you will need to ask the person who gave it to you to deal with the retailer. On the high street, buying something you change your mind about or being given something you don’t like or that doesn’t fit is not covered by consumer law. Instead, you need to rely on the retailer’s goodwill – fortunately, as outlined previously, this can be especially bountiful over Christmas. Look out for sales small print Many retailers do offer less generous terms on items that are in the sales. Often a retailer will say that you cannot return things just because you’ve changed your mind, or will offer a smaller window for refunds. Your legal rights apply – although you cannot ask for a refund if a fault was marked up when you bought the item. So if you see a jacket with a button missing and there is a note pointing it out, you cannot later use that as grounds to request a refund. When you are shopping online, the 14-day cooling-off period stands, even when an item is discounted. Some retailers that offer a longer returns period online will restrict it to the legal minimum during the sales – this is the case at Marks &amp; Spencer, for instance. Get a gift receipt To make it easier for people to return unwanted presents, in recent years many retailers have started to offer gift receipts – they don’t say how much the item cost so you can pop them in with your present without giving too much away. The receipt should spell out the seller’s returns policy and the last day for an exchange. It is likely the person making the return will be offered a giftcard or credit note rather than cash. Look after the item To qualify for a refund in a shop when there’s nothing wrong with the goods you will usually need to return the item in perfect condition and has its tags still on. For online purchases you are likely to have got items out of their original packaging to examine or try them on. The retailer is not allowed to deduct any of your refund just because you have done this – but it can hold some back if you have done anything that has reduced the value of the item. As Citizens Advice explains on its website: “Sellers can ask you to pay if something gets damaged because it wasn’t packaged properly. The seller can also ask you to pay (or reduce your refund) if you’ve reduced the value of the item, eg, if you wore shoes outside and scuffed the soles – but they can only do this if it’s in the terms and conditions.” Track the return Parcel your return up safely, so it doesn’t get damaged, and consider paying for a tracked return. Gareth Shaw, the Which? head of money, says: “If you are paying for the return you might want to consider tracked postage for peace of mind, and if the retailer hasn’t provided a free, tracked pre-paid label, we recommend you get proof of postage so you can show that you returned your goods.” Citizens Advice suggests you get a certificate of posting from Royal Mail when you post the item in case you need to show the seller that you did return it.A British biotechnology firm that supplies big pharmaceutical firms with synthetic antibodies for targeted delivery of drugs will float in London this week valued at £80.7m – giving its two founders a combined paper fortune of more than £33m. Aptamer Group was founded in 2008 by Dr Arron Tolley, 44, an early school leaver who later completed a doctorate in biophysics and molecular biology, and Dr David Bunka, a geneticist. Today, the York-based company has partnerships with the vast majority of the world’s top 20 pharmaceutical firms, including Britain’s biggest drugmaker, AstraZeneca, and Japan’s Takeda. When the two founders first met at Leeds University, Tolley was doing a PhD in virology, studying DNA packaging mechanisms in viruses. “We noticed there was a need in the market for molecules that could plug the gap where antibodies failed to be successful or perform correctly, and we decided that we would set a business up developing aptamers to address that need in the market,” he told the Guardian. Aptamers, also known as chemical antibodies, are short synthetic DNA or RNA molecules that bind to a specific target, such as proteins or viruses. Drugs can be attached to them to deliver treatments to cancer cells, for example, and for a host of other diseases – as an alternative to antibodies, which take far longer to generate in the lab. They can also be used as a diagnostic tool, for example in cancer detection. Aptamer Group is working on a leukaemia project with Cancer Research UK, and with AstraZeneca on delivering its kidney disease treatments into the kidney. The company, which employs 37 people at its base in a science park next to the University of York, has priced its initial public offering at 117p a share. The shares are expected to start trading on the London Stock Exchange’s junior Aim market on Wednesday. The firm will also raise £10.8m by selling 9.2m new shares in a placing – equal to 13.3% of the enlarged share capital. Tolley, who serves as chief executive, Bunka, its chief technology officer, and the rest of the management team are not selling down their stakes in the flotation and are locked in for a year. Tolley’s 23% stake will be valued at £18.5m, while Bunka’s holding will be worth £14.7m and Stephen Hull, the former chairman, has shares worth £3.6m. The flotation comes after Oxford Nanopore’s stellar London stock market debut in September. Shares in the firm, whose DNA sequencing technology has played a key role in tracking Covid-19 variants globally, have risen 54% since the flotation to 655p, valuing the business at £5.4bn. When the artificial intelligence drug specialist Exscientia listed on Nasdaq a day later, its shares soared 23%. They now change hands for $19.66, below the $22 float price, giving the firm a market value of $2.3bn. Aptamer Group is competing with companies such as the US firms Aptagen and Base Pair Biotechnologies, and Canada’s NeoVentures Biotechnology. The global aptamer market is worth $2.5bn at present and is forecast to grow to between $5bn and $9bn by 2025, said Tolley. The key benefits of aptamers compared to antibodies, he said, are a higher success rate in development, broader target applicability, and easier manufacturing – aptamers are synthetically manufactured whereas antibodies are grown in cell-based systems. “The main benefit is the speed of discovery. It takes us on average a couple of months to develop aptamers but the very fastest we can do it in is 17 days, when it can take four months and in some cases over a year to develop an antibody.” Unlike other scientists, Tolley was late to the game. He left school at 16 to work in a factory and become a bricklayer, but in his early 20s decided to go to college and university and completed a PhD. He has ADHD and was disruptive at school because he received little support, but now channels it into his work. “I think of my ADHD as a superpower because it gives me tons of energy,” he said. Aptamer Group’s revenues have climbed 62% since 2019 and totalled £1.6m in the 15 months to 30 June. Its loss before tax rose to £2.9m in that period (from £941,000 in the year to 31 March 2020) because of higher research and development costs. The firm is also developing a test that can detect Covid-19 in wastewater in partnership with Deepverge, but dropped a partnership with Mologic to develop a rapid lateral flow Covid test because it realised the market was “saturated, with around 1,000 tests,” Tolley said.Officers arriving at the scene of a Florida road accident involving an overturned truck were surprised to find that two of the “victims” were large alligators, captured by the teenage driver and a friend on a morning fishing expedition and thrown into the back of their vehicle. Details of the extraordinary incident appeared in a weekend Facebook posting by the Florida Fish and Wildlife Commission (FWC). The post chronicled how officers found the two alligators, measuring 8ft and more than 6ft, “hanging from the rear window of an SUV lying on its side” in Hardee county, about 70 miles south-east of Tampa. An FWC officer, Jerod Gadd, noticed one of the reptiles was moving. He “immediately removed them from the vehicle and, just to be safe, secured their mouths using electrical tape”, the post said. Sheriff’s deputies arrested the uninjured driver and his passenger, youths aged 18 and 17, and charged them with misdemeanors for taking alligators without a permit. The teenagers did not say what they planned to do with the alligators once they got them home, the FWC said, but the younger of the two confessed to using a large rock to try to kill the creatures before loading them into the truck. The youths told officers they were unhappy about the reptiles chasing their fishing lines. It was not clear what caused the vehicle to overturn. The alligator that was still alive at the time of the accident died shortly afterwards. Alligators are an increasingly common sight on the roadways of Florida, a state with an estimated 1.3 million of them, although most make their own way there from the swamps of the Everglades. Last month, a motorist found a 6ft alligator underneath his car in Collier county. In April last year, officers were called to deal with an “aggressive” 9ft reptile stopping traffic in Manatee county. Wildlife officials say most human-alligator encounters occur during the rainy months beginning in April, when amorous reptiles leave the swamps at the start of mating season. But the FWC advises anglers and boaters in particular to look out for alligators at all times of the year, because of the sheer number in inland canals and waterways.Q I have a complicated mortgage question for you. We are looking to buy my mum’s house (which she owns outright) and build her a granny annexe in the same property. Our home has a mortgage of about £270,000 on it and is worth about £345,000. My mum’s house is worth about £700,000. We’re thinking of selling our home, buying my mum’s house, continuing with a mortgage of about £200,000, and using this to build the granny annexe and to carry out other refurbishments on the main house. I’m hoping that this will mean that my mum will remain happy, as she will have a new custom-built home in a familiar location with us close by. One thing which is worrying me is that I’ve become self-employed over the past two years, and have gone to earning half of what I used to. I’m concerned that my current mortgage supplier won’t want to keep our business, and others will stay well clear of us. PS A Your question is confusing rather than complicated. If you sell your house, after clearing your mortgage (which is what you have to do when you sell up) you will be left with in the region of £75,000 in cash. This might be enough to get the work on building work on the granny annexe started (and possibly even completed) but it is nowhere near enough to buy your mother’s house as well. To be able to do that, you would need to raise a mortgage of at least £625,000 (£700,000 minus £75,000). And you might need more than that to be able to finish the building work as well. Given what you say about your earnings from self-employment, I don’t think a mortgage that size is an option for you. What might be an option for you would be to raise the mortgage you can based on your and your partner’s earnings and use that to buy the house. But for that to work, your mother would have to sell you her property for a lot less than it is worth. I’m not sure that I would recommend that she did that – especially not if you have siblings, who might take a dim view of such an action. Another option would be for your mother to sell you a share of her house and so become joint owners with you but I’m not sure that that would go down any better either. Unless you can magic up £700,000 out of nowhere, you need to go back to the drawing board to come up with a plan that you can afford to finance. If that involves getting a mortgage, it would be a good idea to use an independent mortgage adviser who can find a firm willing to lend to the self-employed and that will also help fund building work.We have been through the worst five months of our lives, and now face £650 in fines for driving our van through the Rotherhithe tunnel, which runs under the Thames in east London. In July we received a phone call from our son who was in Royal London hospital having had an emergency scan that showed a large tumour in his brain. We immediately travelled down from our home in Lincolnshire and rented a flat close to his to help in any way we could, as he is now classed as terminally ill. We realised that our car would fall foul of the London ultra low emission zone, so travelled down in my van that is compliant with the ultra-low emissions regulations. We have been driving him everywhere, including to chemotherapy every weekday for six weeks. Our neighbours in Lincolnshire have been forwarding our post. On opening it we found three fines for travelling through the tunnel in a vehicle weighing more than two tonnes. Our van is the smallest van that has three seats in the front, and I had no idea that, when it is loaded up, it is rated at more than two tonnes. We are now being chased for five fines of £130 – it would have been £65 but, because I appealed, it reverted back to the full charge. I have explained our position and pointed out the van was empty on each crossing, except for us, so it would not have exceeded the two-tonne limit, but this has been refused. Eventually, Transport for London agreed to reduce the five fines to £65 each. I have asked for some leniency but, while the staff are empathic – and some apologised – it is impossible to speak to whoever makes the decisions. We would appreciate any help you can give us. PH, Lincs You have been through every parent’s worst nightmare and I really hope you get some better news about your son’s treatment. Not living in that area of London you would have had no idea that even small vans fall foul of Rotherhithe tunnel’s weight limit, which is calculated according to the vehicle’s maximum permitted load rather than actual weight. It doesn’t help that all the signs at the tunnel entrance show pictures of lorries rather than vans like yours. When I got on to Transport for London, staff jumped into action. All the fines have been cancelled and you will be refunded for the payments you made. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsI have a dream: that dream is to ride a dog like a horse. That isn’t possible. But I’ve heard the next best thing is possible, which is why I’m freezing in a field in Tewkesbury. Gloucestershire may not be Lapland but it’s where you can try mushing, organised by Arctic Quest. Single-handedly charioteering a sled powered by huskies? Sounds like a Christmas miracle to me. I gape in awe, as countless lupine beasts emerge from a trailer, yelping with excitement. It’s a few weeks before Omicron gathers strength, and I’m here for one last shot at feeling free. Vickie Pullin – a superb candidate for nominative determinism – set up Arctic Quest, and is a former world champion dog-sledder in four divisions, an achievement never equalled. (You have to be driven to get into husky sledding, ironically.) She has 36 dogs in total, all smaller than I imagined, total cuties with names like Azera, Frappe, Mocha and Cino. It would sound like a sitcom premise, were it not for Pullin’s no-nonsense demeanour. “The blue-eyed, fluffy husky thing? Hollywood PR,” she snorts. Her Siberian huskies and Scandinavian hounds are striking, though – blue eyes, brown eyes, sometimes one of each. Though small, they are mighty, bouncing with scarcely containable energy, closer to furry nuclear rods than dogs. They are born to run, but am I? I’m smaller than Pullin expected. I might be too lightweight to ground the rig. The dogs can run at 20mph and there’s a chance I’ll be overturned once they get going. Pullin decides to trust me with a few of her most experienced animals. These are working dogs and need the exercise, after all. I’m relieved, but more scared than I was. “Huskies have no recall. Never let go of one,” she says sternly, before instructing me to put a harness on one. Axel jumps up and licks me, whipping his body around excitedly. Imagine putting a harness on an alligator, or giving eye drops to a bear. That would be easier than calming Axel down. Two more ungovernable creatures are clipped to the cable of the rig: a minimal three-wheeled frame with foot plates. They have to be held back physically from charging ahead, while I adjust my goggles and squash my fear. I don’t get to shout “Mush!” but I will need to direct the team. “It’s ‘Gee’ for right, ‘Hor’ for left,” Pullin explains. (Luckily, there are no left turns in the direction I’m going, hugging the edge of the field.) Joining Axel is Rocco and his sister River. River gave birth to most of the dogs here. In my head, I hear We Are Family, the disco classic by – ha! – Sister Sledge. This is meant to be! What is? I don’t know. I’m shackled to maniacs. Release the hounds! They burst forth with astonishing strength. I’m off, rapidly picking up speed. It’s fast. I’m scared to ride in their slipstream as instructed, not wanting to run one over. I veer to the left, then the right. I come within millimetres of being deposited in the hedge. A sharp, off-balance yank of the handlebars pulls me back on course, still wayward. This is terrifying. The rig bumps and hurtles forward, relentlessly forward. I’m holding on for dear life, with something akin to rigor mortis. “Relax!” yells Vicki, from her quad bike. Unthinkable. Yet I’m so tense, I’m not going to make the distance like this. I drop my shoulders, stand a little taller. I pull in line directly behind the dogs, and suddenly we’re travelling as one. This transforms the entire experience. I can hear the paws drumming ahead, I can smell the sky. River has been glancing backwards since I nearly drove into the hedge, checking on me. Is she … smiling? We take a corner, and I lean in, throttling just enough to sweep the curve with full control. “Go, go, go!” I shout to the dogs, who bound into the future, happy that I’m finally on their level. It’s … unbelievable. Who knew such magical transport existed? We’re travelling too fast for trouble, for sadness. We’re leaving behind a year that was, somehow, even worse than the one before. I find myself laughing. Huskies can race 1,000 miles – I can’t. My legs are aching, fingers freezing, goggles misted. I’m relieved to hit the final stretch. We charge home, where arms greet the conquering dogs. Stepping off, I literally whoop. I’m no whooper. My team are returned to their siblings, and I give them each a kiss. They need a drink. I need a drink. Hot chocolate and camp fire sarnies await. “That was a good save,” nods Vicki, referring to the hedge, before admonishing me for stepping off the rig before the dogs were unharnessed. I’ll take it. Terrifying, transcendent, enchanted. What a ride. I still play it back at night, this running with the pack, blades of grass blurring, earth spinning beneath us. I’ve never known animal joy like it. The dogs and I, we were flying. More than anything I’ve tried, this has stayed with me. It’s a weird time right now – everyone is sad or mad and living on hope – but that is what December is for. I’ve always relied on the kindness of animals, tried to stay alert to the wisdom they offer. Even when not in control, we move forwards, always forwards. Happy Christmas, everyone! Other racing dog songs are available Top answers include Drive My Car by the Beagles and Come On Feel the Nose by Sled. Smugness points My heart is mush. 5/5 Want to suggest an activity for Rhik to try? Tell us about it here.On Christmas Eve, a cheque arrived from our father so that our mother could get presents. She laughed bitterly and ripped it up. “But what will we thank him for?” cried my sister. “Nothing,” said my mother, throwing the pieces into the air. I admired the gesture. Sure, I’d have preferred my father had driven over with a tree lashed to the roof, but I’d just turned 12 and knew how offputting the 30-mile round trip was, especially with petrol nearly 50p a gallon. Later, I heard my mother alienating herself on the phone: “Well, we’re not fucking having Christmas this year, so go to hell.” I had no idea who she was talking to – her mother? My father? Dial-a-Disc? It had been a tough year. We’d moved to a tiny house with nothing on the concrete floors except carpet gripper. Laddered nylon curtains floated about like wind socks, and our mother had to sleep in the lounge. She’d sold the car and was getting about on a third-hand moped. Some months earlier, the East Midlands Electricity Board had cut us off. She hadn’t thought they would, her being a single parent with four children, but they did, leaving her with no option but to approach her boss, Mr Holt, for a sub to pay the bill. Awful as it was, it got them on friendly terms, and he’d given her overtime so she could catch up. When Christmas came around, he offered to convey a tree home for us. He’d bring it over on Christmas Eve, he said. Our new circumstances didn’t lend themselves to Christmas. There was none of the traditional toiling over glitter and glue, no peppermint creams, and no cake. No trip to the next village to steal holly from MP Nigel Lawson’s garden, no wreath, no paper chains, no policing the advent candle, no church. No fashioning baby Jesuses from a bar of Lux, and the only ornament a potted hyacinth. We four could have done something homemade or performative to elicit joy, but knew that our mother wasn’t the type. Instead, I reminded her to expect the boss and the tree, at which she brightened and did some hoovering. With nothing better to do ourselves, we settled on the Z-bed that served as a settee in our half of the lounge and watched telly, a thing that on previous years would have been inconceivable. If you think the relentless merriment of festive TV felt hollow or shallow or like taunts to us, then you’ve never endured Christmas presided over by a parent so profoundly tired, lonely and impoverished that the only viable option is to have the shittest time imaginable. Television was cheerful, diverting and perfect. While my brothers and I watched Dana and the Goodies in pantomime on BBC One, my sister Victoria snuck out and spent her paper round wages on the Radio Times and TV Times. So, not only did we have unlimited access and no seasonal obligations, we now had the complete Christmas listings, and, when the penny dropped, it was like a scene from Dickens as we danced around the little room. The cry that came from the other side of the chipboard partition – ‘Jesus Christ! Turn the fucker down!’ – only validated it. Christmas had begun. But alas, soon after we’d settled back into Aladdin, the image divided into about 10 lines, which, travelling upwards, took a slice of picture out of sight. “Should we watch the whole thing,” my brother asked, “or a line at a time?” “Focus on one,” I said, “and when it disappears, start again, at the bottom.” “No,” said my sister, “it’s best to squint and look slightly away.” The sound was unaffected and the plot inevitable, and so it was liveable with, until the news came on and the screen went entirely to fuzz, and we felt Christmas slipping away. It was hardest on Vic, obviously, having invested so heavily. We read out what we’d be missing: It’s a Christmas Knockout, A Stocking Full of Stars, André Previn’s Christmas Music Night … and so it went cruelly on. “Mum! The telly’s broken!” one of us shouted. “Thank fuck for that,” she called back. And to be fair, we did need the socket – for the tree lights. Later, I answered the phone. It was the boss man. He hadn’t got the tree, he said, the bloke he’d been banking on had sold out. I told him the television had gone on the blink. He was sorry to hear it. I passed the receiver over and heard him tell my mother he thought they’d probably shot it, tree-wise, but he could try Horse Fair Street, what were her thoughts? “Oh, I don’t know,” she said, stubbing her cigarette out in the hyacinth. Ten minutes later, he was at the front door. “Weren’t you going to try Horse Fair Street for the tree?” she said. “I thought I’d better take a look at the television,” he said. I led him through to our quarters. “Ah, Philips …” he said. “Nice set.” After telling us to stand back, he had all three channels crystal clear in time for the start of Disney’s Kidnapped, starring one of my mother’s favourite actors. We didn’t have a tree that year, and we missed Tom &amp; Jerry in The Night Before Christmas, but we watched everything else mentioned above, plus Ice Station Zebra, Way Out West and The Bridge on the River Kwai; us four, Mr Holt and my mother. This year will be their 47th Christmas together. Nina Stibbe’s new novel One Day I Shall Astonish the World (Viking) is published in AprilAs many of us will be snuggling up in front of the fire with yet another mince pie, some hardy souls will be joining in an increasingly popular seasonal tradition: the festive swim. Bathers will brave chilly temperatures for the annual plunge off coasts around the UK, some in fancy dress and most raising money for charity. Here is a selection, for participating, or just watching. Christmas Day Weymouth harbour, Dorset, 11am One of the UK’s largest Christmas Day swims, with thousands of people lining the harbour to cheer on those brave enough to take a Christmas morning dip. It started in 1948 as a bet between friends Dill Laker, landlord of the Duke of Cornwall, and local taxi driver Reggie Bugler, after a heavy drinking session on Christmas Eve. Word got around, and after that swimmers would turn up and swim the harbour for fun. It eventually became an organised event, run by Weymouth and Portland Lions Club. It’s estimated over 2,500 showed up to watch in 2019, supporting 450 swimmers in an event lasting just over an hour. Swimmers’ tickets (still available) £12, Weymouth and Portland Lions Club Porthcawl, Mid-Glamorgan, 11.45am This annual splash was dreamed up in 1965 by members of the local Chamber of Trade. The plan was for one of them (dressed as Coco the Clown) to push his colleague (dressed as Father Christmas) off the pier. The locals enjoyed the spectacle, and now more than 1,000 swimmers take part, raising thousands for local charities. Fancy dress is still a popular option. Porthcawl Christmas Day Swim Hunstanton, Norfolk, 11am The Hunstanton Christmas Day swim from the main beach has been organised by the local Round Table for over 50 years and draws more than 100 swimmers and many more spectators. There are prizes for the best fancy dress before the swimmers parade into the sea at 11am. Register at hunstantonroundtable.com, sponsor forms from bit.ly/2OvFHKe Bude, Cornwall, 11am Hundreds of swimmers from across Cornwall and beyond will go for a Christmas dip to help raise money for the northern hemisphere’s oldest Surf Life Saving Club, at Crooklets Beach. This year the organisers of the Mike Moyle Memorial Swim are aiming for their biggest-ever turnout, with a target of 600 sponsored swimmers. It is rapidly growing as a spectator event, too, making Bude seafront remarkably busy on Christmas morning with spectators and well-wishers. Swimmers will be led in a group warm-up on the beach by the club’s fitness trainer, David Herman, before a klaxon at 11am signals the dash for the waves. On Facebook Boxing Day Tenby, Pembrokeshire, 11am Tenby’s Boxing Day swim is an institution, and this year will be extra special as it marks its 50th anniversary. The pandemic put paid to the event’s half-century celebrations in 2020, but careful plans are now in place to ensure that the swim takes place in a Covid-safe environment. About 700 swimmers will take part, with thousands of less-hardy souls cheering them on. The fun starts on the town’s North Beach with a canoe race, a crazy raft race and a fancy dress parade – this year’s theme is “golden” –and the stampede for the sea is signalled at 11.30am. Register online (£10pp) at Tenby Boxing Day Swim Ayrshire, Ayr, 11am You might need a wee dram before taking a dip off Ayrshire on Boxing Day. Every year, hundreds of people gather at the seafont Blackburn car park to brave the cold water, and this year the event is raising funds for a cancer charity. Organisers recommend bringing a big towel and a bag of dry clothes that someone can give you straight after you get out of the water, and some form of footwear, like sandals or old trainers – the ground in December is very cold! Register at Ayshire Cancer Support Walk into the sea, Paignton, Devon, noon Every year hundreds of fundraisers get into fancy dress (optional) and at the starter’s command swiftly walk into the chilly waterfor this charity event started in 1976. Registration (£10pp, free with sponsorship) opens at 10am, and participants then make their way on to the beach for the fancy dress judging at 11.45am, followed by the starter’s signal at noon. Paignton Lions Club Seaton Carew, County Durham, 11.30am Hundreds of bathers will brave the North Sea for this swim organised by the Hartlepool Round Table, starting from the Marine Hotel. A parade led by the Round Table chairman will leave at 11.30am and head down the slipway to the beach. Dippers can register at the hotel on the day (£5pp), and warm up afterwards with hot refreshments and food. Hartlepool Round Table Llandudno, Conwy, 11am There are prizes for the first brave female and male to enter the water, and also for best fancy dress at this popular annual dip organised by Llandudno Lions Club. The water is usually a bracing 9C, but a bowl of hot soup at the St George’s Hotel afterwards should revive the spirits. Llandudno Lions Club New Year’s Day Loony Dook, South Queensferry, near Edinburgh, 10.45am. The name is an amalgamation of “Loony” and “Dook”, a Scots term for dip or bathe. This has been an annual tradition since 1986, when three locals dived into the Forth as a joke to cure their Hogmanay hangover. Hundreds of people gather on the banks of the Forth in South Queensferry, most in fancy dress and raising money for charity. Before braving the water, Dookers will march along South Queensferry High Street, led by the Noise Committee drummers as part of the Dookers’ Parade, before launching into the Firth of Forth. £11.50,Edinburgh’s Hogmanay Lyme Lunge, Lyme Regis, Dorset, 1pm This is an annual fancy dress swim organised by Lyme Regis Rotary Club on the town’s sandy Cobb beach, with hundreds taking the plunge dressed in weird and wonderful outfits. Thousands of spectators watch from the beach and the gardens above. Lyme Regis Rotary Club Scarborough, North Yorkshire, 12.45pm The annual event, started more than 20 years ago, is attended by thousands of spectators, who watch hundreds of swimmers set off from Scarborough Amateur Rowing Club on the seafront, usually in fancy dress and raising funds for charity. There will be prizes for best team, individual and child under-11 in fancy dress. Scarborough Lions Club Whitesands, Pembrokeshire, 11am A local charitable organisation, St Davids Penknife Club, runs this annual swim on Whitesands Bay, a favourite surfing beach on the westernmost tip of Wales. Registration begins at 11am and after the dip there is live music at St Davids Rugby Football Club. Register (£5 donation) at St Davids Penknife Club Salford, Greater Manchester, 11am With the water in Salford Docks usually a cool 5C, this 250-metre open-water swim in MediaCity’s Dock 9, used for the 2002 Commonwealth Games, attracts hundreds of hardy souls in fancy dress. Swimmers are encouraged to get creative and flaunt their most outrageous hats! The nominated charity this year is Reubens Retreat, which supports families who have lost a child or have a child with a life-threatening or life-limiting condition. Entry £25, £12.50 under-16s, uswimopenwater.comHeavy rain soaked Grace’s clothes as she huddled in the doorway of an empty building in Derbyshire. Just weeks before, the 57-year-old had been a care worker, looking after vulnerable adults with severe learning disabilities. But she had lost her home, and then her job after her boyfriend’s violence escalated. The pair had been together for five years. “I was in love,” she says. “I thought this was it. But then things changed, and I think it was because he didn’t want me there any more.” Her partner became physically and verbally abusive and played psychological games. “He’d put my shoes on the other side of the room. I’d leave, make a cup of tea, come back, and they’d be obviously not where I left them, and he’d say I was imagining things,” Grace says of this manipulative tactic, known as gaslighting. He’d pull the same trick with her shoelaces, food and towels; whenever things went wrong at home, Grace was always to blame. She told her family, but they didn’t believe her and “thought I had gone mad”, even threatening to have her sectioned. Work wasn’t much better. Short-staffing during the pandemic meant that Grace was often working 15-hour shifts, and given drastically different tasks, often with little notice. One evening, she was attacked by a young man she was trying to help. When she returned from A&amp;E, her partner was more concerned with fixing a broken CD player than her ordeal at work. He dismissed her as “the bitch from hell” when he dropped a part, and told her to get out. He had assaulted her before but one day he strangled her until she lost consciousness. When she awoke disoriented on the floor, he was nowhere to be seen. She frantically gathered up her belongings to flee, but before she was finished, he returned. Terrified of further violence, Grace placated him until she was able to get out. When she finally escaped, Grace sofa surfed with friends and family, but before long she ran out of places to stay, ending up in that Derbyshire doorway. “I didn’t know where else to go. I hadn’t slept in about a day and a half. I just thought, ‘If I go, I go.’” Meanwhile, her career imploded. First she had been signed off with stress, then she had to give up work entirely. Grace’s story is sadly familiar. The idea that low-income workers are one missed pay cheque away from ruin was dismissed as a crude exaggeration long ago. However, when Britain went into lockdown for the first time, and more than 1 million people overwhelmed the Department for Work and Pensions with universal credit (UC) claims, it looked like cold reality. Homelessness mushroomed due to an epidemic of domestic violence, with lockdown making it harder for victims to move in with friends and family. More than 13,000 calls were made to Refuge’s National Domestic Abuse helpline every month between April 2020 and February 2021, an increase of 60% on the months before. For many, being employed is not enough to avoid homelessness. According to the most recent government figures, of the 284,480 homeless people in England, 58,590 of them are in work. These statistics are almost certainly an underestimate due to the chaotic lifestyle of homeless people. For others, it was insecure jobs that led to homelessness. Employees lucky enough to have steady work with full-time permanent contracts and full employment rights were furloughed and received most of their wages. The self-employed, temps, interns and gig-economy workers were not so lucky. Their employers often opted to terminate their contracts despite government subsidies covering most of the costs, and even when they didn’t sack their workers, many simply slashed their hours. The result: 130,000 homeless households by the end of the first year of the pandemic. This happened despite formal evictions falling by 90% between April 2020 and March 2021. Unscrupulous landlords, predicting a steep shortfall in rent receipts, either illegally evicted their tenants or made life so unbearable that they had little choice but to leave. This is the situation that confronted Hassan, who worked in hospitality before Covid struck. Hassan is Senegalese and began his career in a restaurant near Trafalgar Square 15 years ago. “I loved it and was really starting to work my way up. When the pandemic hit, I had just changed jobs so wasn’t eligible for much money with the furlough scheme, so I started to fall behind with my rent payments, and I had to leave my home.” Hassan received £800 a month from his employer; the Department for Work and Pensions decided that he wasn’t eligible for UC. But £800 wasn’t nearly enough to cover his rent and living costs, which caused friction between him and his live-in landlord. He wasn’t officially evicted from his flat in south London; instead he says the landlord made life so uncomfortable there that he felt forced to leave. Hassan moved in with a friend, staying in his living room. Things were stable for a while, then his friend announced that Hassan had to leave – during the dead of night in the middle of winter. “I thought he was joking,” Hassan says. He wasn’t – even going as far as calling the police, who ushered Hassan out of the flat on to London’s freezing streets. Hassan had nowhere to go. His wife and children were back in Senegal, but he didn’t want to worry them. “They are my world, and everything I do is to make sure I can be a good father. I’d love to get back to work, find a suitable home and look after my little family. I really just want to be a good dad,” he says. He spent the next 10 days braving the cold in a park near Elephant and Castle, south London. Hassan has asthma, and after the first week he felt like there was a vice squeezing his chest. So he took to sleeping on buses for warmth and shelter, catching as much shut-eye as he could between first departure and final destination, then doing it all over again until 6am, when he would revitalise with a coffee and a croissant. StreetLink, a homeless outreach charity, eventually referred him to St Mungo’s, which placed him in a hostel near Southwark station until the council found him temporary accommodation in Peckham. Hassan is settled there, but not secure. “I don’t feel safe because I see so many people coming here, making noise,” he says. The room he is in is not ideal either. “The windows won’t close properly, and it’s getting so much colder outside.” Still, relief is on the horizon. While living in temporary accommodation, he was referred to Beam, a homeless charity that helps its members through crowdfunding. The organisation has raised nearly £2,000 to help him buy work clothes, a laptop, a phone, and the training required to be a security guard. He has given up his career in hospitality, reasoning that if another lockdown happens, security guards will always be in demand. “Without Beam, I don’t know where I would be. I’m so grateful for them, and I had 45 people donate to me, which is very nice. I’m very happy,” he says. Anna Kolosova also benefited from funds offered by Beam after spending much of the pandemic squatting and sofa surfing. An artist who also worked as an admissions administrator for a London university, she says she lived “like Harry Potter” in a broom cupboard before Boris Johnson announced the first lockdown. Then she lost her job and could no longer afford to pay the rent on her flat and her art studio. The organisation that let the studio wouldn’t allow her to sleep there, so she ended up living in a north London squat. “Living in squats is not a big leap. I was really lucky that I happened to meet someone who took me in and gave me a little room and a roof over my head,” Kolosova says. Yet it was stressful, with little privacy and the threat of eviction always hanging over her. Kolosova was able to sell some of her artwork to stay afloat until she started receiving universal credit. And one benefit of squatting was she never had to go hungry. “Everyone shared food with each other. Some people go skip-diving, some people buy food, and usually it gets shared.” But one day the eviction came: 10 men with a dog stormed the building and ordered them all to leave. Kolosova scrambled all her things together and fled – first to another squat, then to friends’ sofas, until Beam helped her raise £2,264 towards finding more stable housing. “I kind of feel I’m lucky that I’ve gone through this even though it’s been stressful,” Kolosova says. She’s been commissioned to paint murals and is working on putting together an exhibition. Beam’s founder and CEO, Alex Stephany, says the charity has helped 500 people like Hassan and Kolosova in London. Unlike other crowdfunders, where payments are earmarked for specific projects, “the least competitive crowdfunding platform in the world” encourages general donations and distributes them equally among its members. “I think what it has that the other models don’t have is this real community-driven quality,” says Stephany. “It brings a support group around each individual. When people use the service, strangers support them through their campaign.” Stephany hopes that Beam could one day support “millions of people” far beyond London. Yet however well-intentioned Stephany is, this is still hi-tech begging for things that should be – and are, according to the United Nations – fundamental human rights. A blueprint already exists for solving homelessness. Developed in New York in the 1990s, the policy known as Housing First has virtually ended rough sleeping in some countries. The idea is to provide homeless people with a home without pre-conditions. Then, and only then, are their other needs addressed. Housing First has been highly effective in states such as Utah, which has reduced chronic homelessness by 91%. Finland virtually eliminated rough sleeping after it introduced Housing First in 2007. In the UK, meanwhile, we often treat poverty as if it was a vice that could be remedied by pulling up one’s socks. Housing provision is a kafkaesque labyrinth, which could be construed as a conspiracy to make life as hard as possible for the nation’s poor. Local connection laws exclude homeless people from accessing support in areas they’re not from (discriminating against Roma, Traveller communities, refugees and people fleeing violence). Even if there is a local connection, councils and charities demand that every time they’re in need, housing applicants divulge their private lives in exhaustive detail and relive the traumas, failures and mistakes that made them homeless in the first place. Rick Henderson, CEO of Homeless Link, an umbrella organisation for homeless charities, says this disclosure should only have to happen once. “Then that should be their passport into services,” Henderson says. “I’m not against the idea of there being some process. But forcing people to constantly relive the trauma of their past life is unhelpful and should be avoided.” Housing First would right this wrong; instead, we have a hostel system, which is where Grace ended up after two miserable days in her doorway. She was grateful for the shelter, but as she sat on her bed with all her worldly possessions at her feet, she had little hope. “I was the wrong side of 50; I’d lost everything. I’d worked so hard and got nothing … absolutely nothing.” She spent most of that night in the hostel crying and struggling to sleep due to the fighting that had broken out in the building. Eventually, she found help from St Mungo’s Recovery College, an education and employment service. Now she is more settled and thinking of the future. She has reconnected with her children and grandchildren; she’s working with an employment specialist at the Recovery College, who is helping her to find a job. She’s currently in supported accommodation, and the next step is to find a more permanent home. “I’m gonna fight this. At least I’ve got somewhere,” she says. “I’ve got a roof, for Christ’s sake. There’s people out there on the road, living in a doorway.” Some names have been changed.The first album I ever bought Michael Jackson’s Thriller. I had a little record player, and I remember playing the album over and over and over. I liked it, but it was everywhere. To answer with Michael Jackson, does that make me fall somewhere on a political spectrum? But it was the bestselling album of all time, which I guess makes me a cliche. The song that is my karaoke go-to At this point, given its connection to my character in The Office [Kevin Malone, who plays the drums and sings in a Police covers band Scrantonicity], it would have to be Roxanne. In a hugely public setting, that has become the one that I have to sing. But I would do it as me, not as Kevin. The song I inexplicably know every lyric to Neil Diamond’s Sweet Caroline. In my college-days parties, it just became an absolute mainstay and the lyrics have never left my mind. The song I’ve streamed the most Highwayman by the Highwaymen. I wasn’t overly familiar with them, but when I was travelling with a friend, we put this on. There is just something about the passion of the performance, the artistry, the soul and humanity. To me, it’s really not that far from Tom Waits and Bob Dylan – it’s about the heart, the poetry, the tune. The song I tell people is my favourite I was asked to name my favourite classic songs from the 70s, 80s, 90s this week and the ones I like are pretty big: Journey’s Don’t Stop Believin’, John Mellencamp’s Jack &amp; Diane. The song that is my actual favourite I’ve been to many Willie Nelson concerts. I went to school in Texas and that’s where I was introduced to him; he was around, and I really grew to appreciate what he did and how he changed the face of not just country music, but music. But my all-time favourite song of his? I’ll say [his version of Ray Charles’s] Georgia on My Mind. The song I can’t help singing All I Do Is Win by DJ Khaled. I am sure that I screw up 90% of the words, but I like the energy of it. As well as the soulful lyricism. The song I’d be happy to never hear again Anything by Boyz II Men, or modern country. I can’t even tell you a song right now, but I know I don’t like it. To me, it’s whiny and vapid, it just makes my ears bleed. The song I pretend to hate that I secretly like Lizzo’s Truth Hurts. It doesn’t seem on brand for me, it seems like something I should hate. A grown man and Lizzo? It just seems weird. But that ding-ding-ding-ding piano intro, it’s almost funny. There’s a comedy to it that makes me smile. Brian Baumgartner’s book, Welcome to Dunder Mifflin: The Ultimate Oral History of The Office, is out now.Mining giant Glencore has defended its plans to dig a $1.5bn coalmine in Queensland after telling the federal government more than a dozen threatened species could be on the site. Environmentalists said the Valeria mine would destroy habitat for threatened species and threaten farmland, and put a question mark over the company’s climate goals. But Glencore said it was yet to decide if it would commit financially to the project, which would have to fit within its commitment to reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. That goal, the company has said, also includes the burning of the coal the company sells. In 2019, the company said it would not increase its coal production after pressure from investors. Company documents say the mine would produce between 14m and 16m tonnes of coal a year from six open-cut pits in the Bowen Basin with an expected lifespan of 35 years. According to documents sent to the federal government this month, there are four plants and nine animals that are considered threatened but that could be present at the mine site. There are also three threatened ecological communities that would be affected, with some of those areas needing to be cleared. Surveys carried out between 2019 and 2021 recorded hundreds of species, including 334 plants, 132 birds, 34 mammals, 37 reptiles, 16 fish, 10 frogs and 10 introduced species. Koalas, greater gliders and squatter pigeons that are all considered to be vulnerable to extinction were recorded at the site. Koalas and greater gliders were also seen in areas the company would use to build a 67km rail line. The company said the project covered 29,501 hectares with about 10,364 hectares that would need to be cleared for the mine, workers’ camp, and access road. The company has sent five documents to the federal government – covering the mine and other infrastructure including roads and rail – that will now be considered by the environment minister under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Director of the Queensland Conservation Council, Dave Copeman, said: “We can develop other projects that would create longer-lasting jobs and economic opportunities for regional Queensland without trashing the planet.” He said the production of coal for power generation “must end by 2030 if we are to stay below 1.5 degrees of global heating” and the methane emissions from the proposed open-cut pits would be “a climate nightmare.” Ellie Smith, of campaign group Lock the Gate Queensland, said there was no justification for a future approval of the project. She said: “The Valeria coal project poses an unacceptable risk to farmland and to Theresa Creek, a known habitat of numerous threatened species and a waterway relied on by communities in the region for agriculture.” She said the plan for the mine made the company’s climate goals “look like nothing more than greenwashed propaganda.” In a statement, Glencore could not say when a final investment decision might be made. But the company said it was carrying out studies into the Valeria coal resource as the project moved through the state and federal assessment process. Glencore has committed to cutting emissions by 15% by 2026, 50% by 2035 and to be a “net zero total emissions business” by 2050. The statement said: “The development of any coal project, including Valeria, will take into account Glencore’s climate change strategy and stated emission reduction targets.” The Queensland government granted the mine special status last year, streamlining the approvals process.Bats sweltering in their boxes, polar bears and narwhals using up to four times as much energy to survive, birds starving as Turkey’s lakes dry up, and unique island species at high risk of extinction as the planet warms. If there was ever any doubt about the inextricable link between the climate emergency and the biodiversity crisis, those doubts were well and truly dispelled in 2021. “The science is clear: climate, biodiversity and human health are fully interdependent,” Frans Timmermans, the European Commission vice-president who heads the European Green Deal; Achim Steiner, of the UN Development Programme; and Sandrine Dixson-Declève, of the Club of Rome, wrote before the Cop26 climate conference. While the much-anticipated Cop15 Kunming biodiversity conference was delayed yet again, Cop26 brought together leaders from across the globe to discuss the climate emergency. Although the pledges on emissions cuts fell short of those required to limit the increase in temperatures to 1.5C, there were promises to halt and reverse global deforestation over the next decade. Meanwhile, dozens of countries have committed to protecting 30% of the planet’s land and oceans by 2030, and in September, nine philanthropic foundations pledged $5bn (£3.75bn) to finance the 30x30 pledge. Despite the coronavirus pandemic and the many lockdowns, 2021 saw the world’s scientists, volunteers and conservationists continuing their efforts to protect nature. The International Union for Conservation of Nature launched its new green list of protected and conserved areas, researchers at the Natural History Museum worked on digitising its vast collection, Kenya held its first animal census, and a multimillion-pound project was launched that aims to describe and identify the web of life in large freshwater ecosystems with “game-changing” DNA technology. In September, the IUCN world conservation congress in Marseille brought together innovators and policymakers from across the world for talks and debates on subjects as diverse as the universal declaration of the rights of the river, alien species, human-wildlife conflict, the use of smart technology in conservation, genetic engineering and much more. Not all conservation efforts are down to scientists and policymakers though. There is growing recognition of the vital role communities and indigenous people play in conserving biodiversity and building livelihoods and this year we highlighted projects that included a shade-grown coffee initiative in Peru, islanders rallying to save the coco de mer nut in Seychelles and an army of nature recorders and seed conservers in the UK. There was good news elsewhere. The flatpack homes for animals that fall victim to wildfires that we highlighted in April have since been trialled in Sydney, where a “housing estate” of the biodegradable cardboard pods has been put up to give shelter to wildlife after the bushfires. In response to our piece on conservationists criticising Marks &amp; Spencer for releasing 30 million honeybees, the British retailer filled 500 stores with little signs telling shoppers about the importance of native bumblebees in producing a number of foods. M&amp;S has been “really open to learning”, said Gill Perkins, chief executive of the Bumblebee Conservation Trust, who believes it is the first UK supermarket to introduce bumblebee labels highlighting the work of these pollinators. She hopes others will follow suit. Andrew Kerr, who spoke to the Guardian about wanting to create a UK eel rewilding programme, is having discussions with the relevant government ministry in January about the feasibility of getting rewilding permits sorted for this coming eel season. Since we reported on the proposals to extend Barcelona airport, threatening neighbouring wetlands and a wealth of biodiversity, the plans have been put on hold. The future of the red wolf in North Carolina still hangs in the balance but the US Fish and Wildlife Service says it is planning to release nine wolves from captivity this winter. And an experimental feeding programme has been approved for Florida’s manatees, after a record year of deaths. Over the coming weeks, we will follow up on some of the stories that we covered during 2021 in more depth, but in the meantime, you might like to take a look at some of our favourite articles from the year that celebrate the planet’s beautiful and intricate biodiversity: why we need to stop treating soil like dirt; the wonderful world of fungi; the value of dead wood; how a wild night out could help you reconnect with nature; and, lastly, a lesson in why some things are worth waiting for, especially when they turn out like this … Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and features*** Drama Critics’ choice: A Very British Scandal Plummy diction. Roaming eyes. Pouting red lips. Claire Foy is gleefully on-brand as Margaret Campbell, Duchess of Argyll in this three-part drama from Sarah Phelps. Following the duchess’s real-life divorce from the duke (an icky Paul Bettany who will make you wince), it cleverly unpicks the institutional misogyny of the time, which targeted Campbell for being a woman who enjoyed sex. In fact, it could be argued that the duke stealing and using his wife’s explicit, private photos against her in court was an early example of revenge porn. A beautiful production with some ugly truths and plenty of raunch. HR Boxing Day, 9pm, BBC One *** Gomorrah The fierce, visceral and compelling Neapolitan mob drama returns for its final season. When we left Gennaro Savastano (Salvatore Esposito), he was hiding in a bunker, with his dreams of civilian life in tatters as predators gathered round him. He has no option but to fight for his life – what will he lose in the process? PH Saturday 18 December, 9pm, Sky Atlantic *** The Girl Before Hundreds of well-off, seemingly smart people are desperate to rent One Folgate Street – a soulless London grand design rented out by a cryptic landlord who has a list of 100 ridiculous stipulations for tenants such as “no books”. For Jane (Gugu Mbatha-Raw), the house is a place to escape a recent trauma. But this is a thriller series, not an observation on the housing crisis – and Jane soon learns the fate of the girl who lived there before (Jessica Plummer). HR Sunday 19 December, 9pm, BBC One *** Landscapers What started as a darkly comic retelling of a true crime story turns into a surprisingly emotional and sometimes uncomfortable deep dive into the troubled backstories of two convicted killers in love – Susan and Christopher Edwards (Olivia Colman and David Thewlis). Kate O’Flynn is particularly brilliant as the seemingly steely DC Emma Lancing. Next week’s final episode details the trial. HR Tuesday 21 December, 9pm, Sky Atlantic *** Hansel and Gretel: After Ever After Sheridan Smith and David Walliams star in this atypical fairytale, following Hansel and Gretel after their escape from the gingerbread house. Walliams is also a co-writer, which explains some of the more adult humour – such as the villagers being just as worried about cancel culture as they are about the perils of a child-hungry witch. HW Thursday 23 December, 8pm, Sky Max *** Agatha Raisin: Kissing Christmas Goodbye Ashley Jensen returns in the refreshingly silly crime romp. The glamorous sleuth is brightening up the dark December days with thoughts of her old flame James Lacey. But her plans to distract herself with the perfect Christmas are thwarted by the need to solve a mystery after a pesky poisoning in the village. HV Thursday 23 December, 10pm, Sky Max *** The Amazing Mr Blunden Tamsin Greig and Simon Callow star in this new TV special based on Antonia Barber’s fantasy novel. The ghost story with a time-travel twist follows what happens when a mysterious old man enters the lives of teenagers Jamie and Lucy, offering their mum the opportunity to be the caretaker of a suspiciously haunted country house. Perfectly festive family fun for the night before Christmas, with Callow revelling in his eccentric role. HR Christmas Eve, 7pm, Sky Max *** A Ghost Story for Christmas: The Mezzotint In the mood for something else a bit spooky? MR James’s classic ghost story is brought to life by Mark Gatiss in a chilling half-hour adaptation boasting a cast of Rory Kinnear, Robert Bathurst and Frances Barber. In 1922, Edward Williams receives a curious engraving of an unknown country house … but what exactly is it? HR Christmas Eve, 10.30pm, BBC Two *** Call the Midwife It’s Christmas 1966 and there’s no room at the Nonnatus inn as 20 extra expectant mothers make sure the annual tearjerking staple is packed full of drama. Luckily, Mother Mildred (Miriam Margolyes) comes to help as the babies start popping out all over the place. Meanwhile, Lucille (Leonie Elliott) is preparing for her wedding, with a couple of hiccups. HV Christmas Day, 8pm, BBC One *** The Larkins at Christmas Following its first season run, here’s the festive special of the Darling Buds of May spin-off. An experimental nativity, a spate of burglaries blamed reflexively on the local ex-con, and the visit of Charley’s austere parents are the three threads tied in a neat bow by writer Simon Nye for a toasty, undemanding episode. Ideal turkey-stupor telly. JS Christmas Day, 9pm, ITV *** Around the World in 80 Days With a second series already confirmed, David Tennant was clearly the ideal choice for Phileas Fogg in this adaptation of Jules Verne’s classic novel. In the first five minutes, he spots the travel competition that will take him on the voyage of his life with French valet Passepartout (Ibrahim Koma) and journalist Abigail “Fix” Fortescue (Leonie Benesch). HR Boxing Day, 5.50pm, BBC One *** Death in Paradise Good vibes, cold beers, elaborate slayings: this year saw tropical murder-fest Death in Paradise celebrate its 10th anniversary. The cherry on top is this feature-length festive special where current fish-out-of-water cop Neville (Ralf Little) teams up with returning veteran Dwayne (Danny John-Jules) to investigate the demise of a shipping magnate. GV Boxing Day, 7.30pm, BBC One *** Clarice Clarice has the unenviable task of following one of cinema’s most highly regarded horrors, The Silence of the Lambs. A year after the film’s events, Clarice Starling (Rebecca Breeds) is struggling to handle her newfound notoriety within the FBI when a grizzly killer strikes. Sometimes schlocky, but moreish. HW Monday 27 December, 9pm, Alibi *** Worzel Gummidge: Twitchers Mackenzie Crook steps back into his straw-filled shoes for this continuing reboot – one which is warmly welcomed. This time, Worzel and his friends Susan and John have a pesky group of birdwatchers to deal with. HR Tuesday 28 December, 7.15pm, BBC One *** Superman &amp; Lois As the reboot rumbles on, it’s Smallville’s first harvest festival since Clark Kent’s mother Martha died; a reminder what the town means to him and his family. Meanwhile, Lois makes a breakthrough in the investigation of Morgan Edge, and Kyle tries to reconnect with Lana. HR New Year’s Eve, 5.15pm, BBC One *** Comedy Critics’ choice: Ghosts In this seasonal special episode, Alison (Charlotte Ritchie) and Mike (Kiell Smith-Bynoe) are dreaming of a quiet Christmas by the fire – but an unexpected visitor who won’t leave puts a stop to that. Of course, it was always going to be a chaotic affair with their ghostly house guests in tow. Keep an eye out for Jennifer Saunders’s short but welcome cameo. HR Thursday 23 December, 8.30pm, BBC One *** Rob &amp; Romesh vs Christmas Having asked the former’s Instagram followers to suggest a Christmas challenge, Rob Beckett and Romesh Ranganathan are training to join the circus ahead of a potentially dangerous gala performance. Acrobatics and knife-throwing are among the skills that do not come easily. JS Sunday 19 December, 9pm, Sky Max *** We Wish You a Mandy Christmas Mandy is back – and she hates Christmas. Declining an invitation to spend the holidays with pal Lola (Michelle Greenidge), she instead plans to watch Die Hard while getting drunk on Tia Maria (relatable). Will three famous-faced ghosts be able to inspire some festive spirit? Diane Morgan is, once again, at her deadpan best. HR Monday 20 December, 10pm, BBC Two *** Dating No Filter: Under the Mistletoe The show that marries Gogglebox and First Dates returns. London Hughes, Jayde Adams and Tom Allen are just some of the excellent comedians watching videos of people going on festive first dates. The pantomime date is just one moment that leaves them cringing behind their hands. HR Tuesday 21 December, 10pm, Sky Max *** Live at the Apollo Christmas Special Back following a one-year hiatus when Christmas was cancelled, this festive edition of the show sees Jason Manford hosting. He’s joined by one-time best newcomer nominee at the Edinburgh comedy awards Maisie Adam and ex-Britain’s Got Talent act Nabil Abdul Rashid. AD Wednesday 22 December, 10pm, BBC Two *** Alan Carr’s Epic Gameshow Christmas Special Snowball cocktails at the ready for this festive gameshow romp. Carr revives The Price Is Right for a nostalgic classic with a Christmas twist. Contestants hoping to win tonight are big personalities including Carole the nurse who, as Carr puts it: “Everybody at home is going to be rooting for.” HR Thursday 23 December, 8pm, ITV *** And Just Like That … As the Sex and the City reboot continues, Carrie is navigating grief after that Big shock ending of the opening episode, with the help of Miranda, Charlotte and Stanford. And fans have hopefully just about got over the fact that writers dared to suggest Samantha would ever ghost her best pals (it’s not her style). Another double bill follows next Thursday. HR Thursday 23 December, 8pm, Sky Comedy *** Not Going Out A festive-themed episode of the longest-running sitcom on air (not, as assumed, prime minister’s questions). After Lucy announces she has tickets to see Jason Donovan in panto, a cheesed-off Lee falls asleep and dreams his entire life’s a pantomime: cue Lee as Buttons, Lucy as Cinders and Mr Especially for You himself as Prince Charming. AC Thursday 23 December,10pm, BBC One *** Christmas Comedy Club With Lost Voice Guy Better known as Lost Voice Guy, the uniquely talented Lee Ridley (who this year found a new voice courtesy of a geordie voiceover artist) hosts a beautifully diverse and inclusive comedy bonanza featuring some of the best of British standup acts: Bill Bailey, Rosie Jones, Omid Djalili and future Masked Singer live show host, Joel Dommett. AC Christmas Eve, 10.30pm. ITV *** Big Fat Quiz of the Year Jimmy Carr is back with the popular annual quiz that celebrates, or ridicules, the year that’s been. This year’s contestants are Jonathan Ross, Sarah Millican, James Acaster, Judi Love, Sara Pascoe and Guz Khan. (Small plea to bring back the Goth Detectives.) HR Boxing Day, 9pm, Channel 4 *** Jon &amp; Lucy’s Christmas Sleepover Comedy couple Lucy Beaumont and Jon Richardson attempt to brighten up the lull between Christmas and New Year with this one-off get-together with their closest pals. Joining them for a boozy feast is Roisin Conaty along with the inescapable Romesh Ranganathan and Rob Beckett. HR Monday 27 December, 9pm, Channel 4 *** Curb Your Enthusiasm Season 11 of Larry David’s acidic comedy of ill manners dropped hints that it might be the equivalent of an origin story as the moneyed curmudgeon successfully sold a lucrative streaming series about his formative years. But as the season concludes, any actual self-reflection on Larry’s part has been in short supply. GV Monday 27 December, 9pm, Sky Comedy *** Insecure After five unwaveringly excellent seasons, Issa Rae gives us the last ever episode of her Emmy-winning creation. Details are being kept under wraps, but the finale is bound to be an emotional one for both cast (Yvonne Orji, Jay Ellis, Natasha Rothwell) and fans. But nobody expects a neat “happy ending” – this show celebrates life’s mess and grey areas, after all. HR Tuesday 28 December, 9pm, Sky Comedy *** Mock the Week End of Year Special Yet another comedy panel show runs the rule over the defining incidents of 2021. And what a year it’s been: we sat at home and watched TV; we got vaccinated; we got pinged; we wondered whether to risk going on holiday. Dara Ó Briain, Hugh Dennis and pals will be attempting to find the funnies. PH Tuesday 28 December, 10pm, BBC Two *** Frankie Boyle’s 2021 New World Order Who better to spread some Christmas cheer than … er, Frankie Boyle? He attempts to make sense of the last 12 months – or at least poke a big stick at them – in this end-of-year special. Guests are yet to be confirmed, but their reviews and discussion of the bewildering year that was 2021 are guaranteed to be brutally funny (if we don’t laugh, we will surely cry). HR Wednesday 29 December, 10pm, BBC Two *** One Night in London Zoo Alex Brooker and Josh Widdicombe spend the night in the zoo, American Werewolf in London-style – which makes the show’s rule of “If you break it, you pay for it” sound even more worrying, frankly. Comedians Desiree Burch and Guz Khan join them as they befriend the penguins and sidestep prodigious quantities of camel dung. AC Thursday 30 December, 9pm, Channel 4 *** I Literally Just Told You Produced by Richard Bacon, here’s the first celebrity special version of the new “gameshow with a unique twist” fronted by Jimmy Carr (yes, him again). As questions are written throughout the show based on things that are said, Aisling Bea, Asim Chaudhry, Alex Horne and Lorraine Kelly need to pay attention and answer them correctly to win big for charity. HR Thursday 30 December, 10pm, Channel 4 *** The Last Leg of the Year Adam Hills, Alex Brooker and Josh Widdicombe host a two-hour bonanza of their usual end-of-week show to take a look back at the highs and lows of what has been a year to forget, with guests including Joe Wilkinson, Ivo Graham, Nish Kumar and Vick Hope. House band Alex Horne and the Horne Section provide the live tunes. HR New Year’s Eve, 9pm, Channel 4 *** Have I Got 2021 News for You A New Year’s Eve special in which Ian Hislop, Paul Merton and assorted guests see off the laugh riot that was 2021 in style. But where to begin? With revolting Trumpists? Vaccine sceptics? Racist football fans? Racist politicians? With the proviso that moaning about 2021 will be like shooting fish in a barrel, this should be entertaining. PH New Year’s Eve, 9.30pm, BBC One *** Entertainment Critics’ choice: Terry Pratchett’s The Abominable Snow Baby Julie Walters and a big friendly snow baby? It’s the Christmas telly we deserve. Terry Pratchett’s short story is animated in a half-hour adaptation, following Granny (Walters) and her grandson Albert (Hugh Dancy) as they rescue a 14ft furry creature. Not everyone in their town is happy about it – is a lesson in Christmas spirit in order? HR Christmas Day, 7.30pm, Channel 4 *** The Brits Are Coming Changes are afoot for this year’s Brit awards, with four new categories including hip-hop/grime/rap act and dance act. It’s also the first year they’re doing away with gendered categories. About time. In this one-hour special, Maya Jama and Clara Amfo announce the nominations, while Anne-Marie and Swedish pop starlet Mabel perform. AD Saturday 18 December, 5pm, ITV *** Strictly Come Dancing: The Final After an emotional and incredibly uplifting competition, this year’s Strictly finally reaches its end. The last three couples hotfoot it on the dancefloor in sequins and sparkles, giving it all they’ve got one last time. Look out for the festive spectacular on Christmas Day, too. HR Saturday 18 December, 7pm, BBC One *** Paul O’Grady’s Saturday Night Christmas Line Up Dame Joan Collins is in the house for O’Grady’s celebrity hurrah, along with Julian Clary, Sunetra Sarker and Paddy McGuinness. One of the tasks given is to arrange themselves from best to worst. Awkward much? HR Saturday 18 December, 9.30pm, ITV *** The Royal Variety Performance In the second of his Christmas telly specials, Alan Carr hosts a night of performances by stars such as Rod Stewart and Elvis Costello. Then hold on to your hats: the cast of Moulin Rouge perform. HR Sunday 19 December, 7.20pm, ITV *** Michael Bublé’s Christmas in the City Ladies and gentleman: the Christmas Crooner has arrived, celebrating 10 years since his chart-topping festive album (it feels much, much longer to be honest). Expect an hour of comforting, reliable entertainment. HR Sunday 19 December, 10.15pm, ITV *** Christmas University Challenge Nothing says “yuletide” like Jeremy Paxman hurrying along conferring quizzers. In tonight’s first episode of the festive run, a face-off between alumni-based teams from Edinburgh and Leicester. Cookery writer Thomasina Miers and actor Miles Jupp represents the former; author Jeffrey Boakye and presenter Dallas Campbell the latter. AD Monday 20 December, 8.30pm, BBC Two *** The Big Soap Quiz: Coronation Street vs Emmerdale The vibe might seem jolly but make no mistake: this smackdown between ITV’s big soap brands has become a keenly contested annual fixture. With the current score 4-3 in Emmerdale’s favour, can Corrie captain Jack P Shepherd lead his team to victory over Mark Charnock’s farm fam? GV Monday 20 December, 9pm, ITV *** The Great British Sewing Bee: Celebrity Christmas Special New host Sara Pascoe brings us wholesome content with a sewing extravaganza. Anneka Rice, the Rev Kate Bottley, Antony Cotton and Kiell Smith-Bynoe are tasked with transforming a charity shop bundle into fancy-dress outfits. A New Year special follows next Thursday. HR Wednesday 22 December, 8pm, BBC One *** Madame Tussauds: The Full Wax Even the best digital deepfake cannot hold a candle to a good old waxwork. This documentary goes behind the scenes at 190-year-old Madame Tussauds to see what goes into crafting doppelgangers of 21st-century celebrities including Little Mix, while there is also a visit from a talismanic Liverpool FC player to view his super-sub. GV Wednesday 22 December, 9pm, ITV *** First Dates at Christmas It’s been brutal out there for many singletons during the pandemic, so Fred Sirieix is back to warm up some cockles. Tonight, 25-year-old Dan is a jobbing Father Christmas who, despite spreading joy each year, struggles to sprinkle magic on his own love life. HR Wednesday 22 December, 9pm, Channel 4 *** Shaun the Sheep: The Flight Before Christmas Hard-to-resist family fun with a familiar, friendly face. This time, Shaun needs to rescue little cousin Timmy after he is taken away. HR Christmas Eve, 6pm, BBC One *** Carols from Kings The last word in traditional Christmas Eve ambience as your mum gets the mince pies ready and the squeaky voiced Cambridge choirboys bust out the festive bangers. Expect excitement to peak with a showstopping rendition of O Come All Ye Faithful. And crack out the mulled wine. PH Christmas Eve, 6.15pm, BBC Two *** The Greatest Snowman A simple and silly format that, surprisingly, hasn’t been done before: celebrities in a snowman-building contest. Sue Perkins presents, while Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen, Johnny Vegas, Dani Dyer and Liam Charles get grafting. HR Christmas Eve, 8pm, Channel 4 *** Superworm While we lay in a Quality Street-induced coma, Superworm and Butterfly were busy helping their friends all day – until the wicked Wizard Lizard comes along. Olivia Colman and Matt Smith lend their voices for some easy-going fun for the young ’uns. HR Christmas Day, 2.30pm, BBC One *** All Star Musicals at Christmas Gyles Brandreth, Fern Britton and ex-Blue Peter host Radzi Chinyanganya will be backed by a West End choir as they attempt to inspire joy by not mangling songs from Cats and Moana. AD Boxing Day, 8pm, ITV *** All I Want(ed) for Christmas Jonathan Ross, Big Narstie and Martine McCutcheon reveal which toys have always been on their Christmas list and finally get the chance to unbox them. An exercise in delayed gratification. HW Boxing Day, 8pm, Channel 4 *** The Voice Kids The talent show for teenyboppers returns, and Sporty Spice herself Melanie C joins Danny Jones, will.i.am and Pixie Lott on the judging panel. The three-part competition will continue tomorrow and Wednesday. HR Monday 27 December, 7.30pm, ITV *** MasterChef: The Professionals Rematch 2021 Nervously serving up posh festive eats to critics Grace Dent, Jimi Famurewa and Jay Rayner are 2020 finalists Philli Armitage-Mattin, Santosh Shah and Bart van der Lee, and 2017 runner-up Jamie Park. JS Monday 27 December, 8pm, BBC One *** Travel Man: 96 Hours in Iceland Joe Lycett makes his Covid-delayed bow as the new Travel Man. A trip with Bill Bailey includes visiting a punk museum in a public toilet and husky sledding. HR Monday 27 December, 8pm, Channel 4 *** Celebrity Quizness Tom Allen hosts a famed-up version of the silly, clever quiz that demands nimble thinking. Willing to look mildly foolish are Siobhán McSweeney, Jo Brand, Robert Rinder and AJ Odudu. JS Wednesday 29 December, 10pm, Channel 4 *** Lady Gaga at the BBC Lady Gaga gets exactly what she wanted for Christmas: an “at the BBC” treatment. Expect to revisit renditions of her belters, including Shallow and Paparazzi. HR Wednesday 29 December, 11.20pm, BBC Two *** Top of the Pops New Year Special Clara Amfo and Jordan North co-host a special TOTP, with the sounds of Sam Fender, Lola Young and Mabel, plus clips from the past 12 months from artists such as Billie Eilish and Arlo Parks. AC New Year’s Eve, 4.15pm, BBC One *** The Graham Norton New Year’s Eve Show Chatshow host Norton never fails to impress with his guestlist on NYE. Claire Foy, Peter Dinklage, Michael Sheen, Cush Jumbo, Joe Lycett and Jessica Chastain (phew!) provide the anecdotes. The Divine Comedy provide some live music, while the Big Red Chair goes global. HR New Year’s Eve, 10.20pm, BBC One *** The Big New Years &amp; Years Eve Party It’s time to say “so long” (or “good riddance”) to 2021. Olly Alexander – who helped a lot of us ease into this year with It’s a Sin – takes the hosting reins for an hour. Kylie Minogue and Pet Shop Boys help out with the music, with a pause for the countdown to midnight. HR New Year’s Eve, 11.25pm, BBC One *** Jools’ Annual Hootenanny It’s Jools and his annual shindig, which might be the closest many of us get to a party this year. Ed Sheeran performs, while Lulu indulges in a few of her greatest hits. One of 2021’s breakout stars, Joy Crookes, also stops by. HW New Year’s Eve, 11.25pm, BBC Two *** Factual Critics’ choice: Christmas at Liberty The only way Liberty department store could be any more Christmassy in December is if Mariah Carey herself applied to be the store Santa. Here, we get a behind-the-scenes peek at how the teams prepare for the season during a pandemic (fun!). There’s not much more to this one-off show than it being a very aesthetically pleasing wintry wonderland, but sometimes a beautiful window display and some carolling by the Gay Men’s Chorus is all you need to spark up that festive feeling. HR Monday 20 December, 9pm, Channel 4 *** A Lake District Farm Shop at Christmas What better way to kick off the festivities than with a trip to, er … Tebay services on the M6. But far from being a pit stop for fast food and the loo, Tebay is a farm shop that embraces its Lake District surroundings. Here, we see how they prepare for the busiest time of the year during a pandemic. HR Saturday 18 December 6pm, Channel 4 *** Christmas at Chatsworth House British stately homes take Christmas preparation to another level. In the first of a trio of episodes that go behind the scenes of estates, we visit Chatsworth House. After Covid complications, can staff prepare Chatsworth in time for yuletide visitors? HW Saturday 18 December, 7pm, Channel 4 *** Daniel Barenboim: In His Own Words From his roots as a piano child prodigy in Buenos Aires to his meteoric rise to fame in classical music, the conductor and pianist speaks candidly about his music and life, as well as his relationship with Jacqueline du Pré. HR Sunday 19 December, 9pm, BBC Four *** Buried Not-so-festive fun. In 1969, eight-year-old Californian Susan Nason was abducted and murdered while walking to school. The crime remained unsolved for 20 years, until Susan’s childhood friend Eileen Franklin claimed, via a “buried” memory, that her own father George Franklin was the perpetrator. This four-part documentary unpicks the case. AC Sunday 19 December, 10pm, Sky Crime *** Chateau DIY Christmas Because there’s no greater joy than watching other families do up their houses at Christmas in bigger and better ways than you, here are a handful of British couples who are renovating their French chateaux in time for the festive season. HR Monday 20 December, 4pm, Channel 4 *** Mary Berry’s Festive Feasts Berry is back at it, this time tasked with teaching three novices how to cook a festive feast of salmon paté, clementine-glazed ham with garlic potatoes and red berry tiramisu trifle (wipe away that drool). HR Monday 20 December, 7.05pm, BBC One *** Sarah Beeny’s New Life in the Country at Christmas Having struggled to get their Somerset pad in shape, t4he Beeny family will hope for a festive payoff. But they wouldn’t be the Beenys if they didn’t make life more difficult for themselves for entertainment purposes. Accordingly, they’re building a tree house and brewing some homemade mead. PH Tuesday 21 December, 8pm, Channel 4 *** A Taste of Christmas With Andi Oliver The highly affable TV chef meets three very different families from Glasgow as they create feasts for their nearest and dearest, and tell the story of their city with food. HR Tuesday 21 December, 9pm, BBC Two *** Philip: Prince, Husband, Father This tribute to the long-serving royal consort, who died in April at the age of 99, makes much of his forthrightness, sense of duty and love of family. But while the tone is reverent it does not shy away from Philip’s contentious relationship with the modern media. Gyles Brandreth and Joanna Lumley are among those paying respect. GV Tuesday 21 December, 9pm, ITV *** The Hairy Bikers Go North for Christmas A series that’s powered by the warmth of the hosts’ friendship is well suited to a festive special, as is the show’s emphasis on independent producers in northern England. Todmorden pork, artisan marshmallows in Leeds, and Sheffield’s hot sauce all look heavenly. JS Wednesday 22 December, 8pm, BBC Two *** Our Victorian Christmas Nostalgia is never far from the British mind. This festive reality show in which a family attempts to recreate a late 19th-century Christmas feels like a safe bet. No electronic gizmos and TV specials for them – just handmade toys and carols round the piano. PH Wednesday 22 December, 9pm, Channel 5 *** The Queen’s Christmas Broadcast In times of royal upheaval the Queen has tended to rise above it. But this was the year she lost Prince Philip, her husband and royal consort of 73 years, so there may well be a more personal dimension to the address. GV Christmas Day, 3pm, BBC One *** Quentin Blake: The Drawing of My Life The illustrator who has brought so many of our beloved characters to life gets the documentary he deserves. As he fills a 30ft-long canvas, fans such as actor Peter Capaldi and comedian Josie Long celebrate his legacy. HR Christmas Day, 4.10pm, BBC Two *** Royal Institution Christmas Lectures With Jonathan Van-Tam One of the more reassuring presences of the Covid era, Professor Jonathan Van-Tam delivers the first of three addresses on the subject of viruses. A heist-themed look at immunity and a supersized lateral flow test are among the educational stunts. JS Tuesday 28 December, 8pm, BBC Four *** JFK: Destiny Betrayed Oliver Stone dives into the world’s most famous whodunnit, which remains shrouded in conspiracy theories. In episode one of the four-parter, Stone examines the early formation of Kennedy’s foreign policy worldview and builds a portrait of the leader he was. HR Tuesday 28 December, 8pm, Sky Documentaries *** Billionaire Blooms Florals? For winter? This one-off show follows some of the world’s most celebrated high-end florists as they put together Christmas displays. Prepare to feel ashamed of that drooping poinsettia. HR Wednesday 29 December, 7pm, Channel 4 *** Britain’s Most Expensive Houses What better time of year to think about excess? This new series profiles the palatial abodes on the books of one of the world’s largest luxury estate agencies. Think a 102-room neoclassical mansion in north Wales. AD Wednesday 29 December, 9pm, Channel 4 *** Attenborough and the Mammoth Graveyard True, this title might not instantly evoke seasonal images of sparkles and candy canes. But it’s a calming dose of Attenborough nonetheless. In this documentary, he meets a couple who accidentally found a mammoth fossil in Swindon and retraces what happened next. HR Thursday 30 December, 8pm, BBC One1) Tierney leaves Klopp bemused by decisions Jürgen Klopp spent much of the pulsating 2-2 draw with Tottenham frothing with rage at some of the refereeing decisions and his anger was more than justified. We all have bad days at the office, but certain elements of Paul Tierney’s display were inexplicably poor. Diogo Jota was denied a blindingly obvious penalty in the first half, before Harry Kane escaped with a yellow card for a potentially career-ending tackle on Andy Robertson. Robertson was smart enough to jump, without which the damage would have been severe. “That’s definitely a red card ... if Robbo’s leg is on the ground, it’s a broken leg,” Klopp correctly told Sky Sports after the match. Robertson was subsequently sent off in the second half for kicking Emerson Royal, a blatant act but far less serious, in terms of the level of danger to his opponent, than Kane’s tackle. Referees have a hard job, and Tierney should have been better supported by the VAR, but consistency and common sense were nowhere to be seen at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium on Sunday. Luke McLaughlin Match report: Tottenham 2-2 Liverpool 2) Spurs’ forgotten men given chance to shine Dele Alli made his first Premier League start since a 45-minute appearance in a north London derby drubbing in late September during Nuno Espírito Santo’s failed reign. He was joined in the side against Liverpool by Tanguy Ndombele who was also starting his first league game under Antonio Conte, as the Italian looked to give his squad players a chance to demonstrate he does not need to do much business in January. Considering their lack of action, they both acquitted themselves well in a frenetic match, as Alli earned two chances by getting beyond the Liverpool defence, the first saved superbly by Alisson and the second ended with him getting a hand in the back from Trent Alexander-Arnold. It is those runs that Alli has struggled to make in recent years, coinciding with his downturn in form. He was struggling physically in the second half but made the effort for the 80 minutes he was on the pitch, which should give Conte hope that he should persevere with Alli for the rest of the season. Will Unwin 3) Cancelo excels as most modern of full-backs As the Manchester City fans sung the name of Pablo Zabaleta high up in St James’ Park, they witnessed their latest all-action full-back score his third of the season to go with seven assists. João Cancelo has proved himself on both sides of the defence, from where he wanders into midfield - and anywhere else he wants - to wreak havoc against unsuspecting opposition. He created the first goal thanks to his determination (and Ciaran Clark’s incompetence) – it is that level of desire that made Zabaleta a cult hero in east Manchester. Cancelo’s goal was everything he has shown going forward this season, as he moved into space in the centre of the pitch, before dribbling at defenders who refused to commit, giving him time and space to drill a precise shot beyond Martin Dubravka. Maybe City fans should come up with an iconic song for a soon-to-be club icon. Will Unwin Match report: Newcastle 0-4 Manchester City 4) Howe needs to work with what he’s got “All that money and you’re going down,” chorused Manchester City fans as they watched their side canter to a 4-0 win on Tyneside. Eddie Howe’s problem is that he has not had a chance to spend any of the Saudi millions and, when he gets the opportunity next month, Newcastle’s league position is likely to remain too dire to attract top players. Right now all Howe can do is work with the existing personnel and his transformation of Joelinton from shot-shy centre forward to the sort of midfield enforcer who might fancy his chances against Roy Keane bodes extremely well. Conversely, Joe Willock has regressed and Newcastle’s defence is as bad - if not worse - than ever. It was surely unwise to stick with a back four rather than revert to a five against City. When Federico Fernández recovers from injury Howe must recall his Argentinian centre-half. Louise Taylor Manchester City enjoy Sunday stroll in their north-east happy place 5) Ødegaard shows his worth by unleashing Arsenal’s attack First, the caveat: inferior teams to Arsenal would have had fun against a decimated Leeds in the first half on Saturday, such was the hosts’ determination to persist with a high-risk game their resources simply could not sustain. Now that is out of the way, it feels appropriate to celebrate the best player on the pitch. Martin Ødegaard was in irresistible form, using the space he was given to create a near-endless stream of chances in that opening 45 minutes, and got the assist he deserved late on with a delicious scooped pass for Emile Smith Rowe. It is hard to believe Ødegaard is only 23 and, after a relatively quiet start to his permanent deal at Arsenal, over the last month he has shown why Mikel Arteta’s pursuit of his services was justified. The Norway captain could even be a contender to take Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s relinquished armband in the medium term and seems, at last, en route to fulfilling his lavish potential. Nick Ames Match report: Leeds 1-4 Arsenal 6) Tuchel needs to be more flexible Thomas Tuchel has been wedded to a back three since taking over at Chelsea. He feels that the system guards against Thiago Silva’s ageing legs in central defence and ensures that Jorginho is not overpowered in central midfield. However that approach can reduce Chelsea’s options in attack. Perhaps Tuchel needs to be more flexible. He could have adjusted his formation after seven players were forced into isolation before the goalless draw with Wolves. With Romelu Lukaku, Timo Werner and Kai Havertz missing, Mason Mount, Christian Pulisic and Hakim Ziyech were an unconvincing front three. Meanwhile Ben Chilwell’s knee injury has dimmed Chelsea’s threat from left wing-back and there are rarely any goals from Tuchel’s two No 6s in midfield. In that context why not tweak the approach for what was a must-win game? Could Chelsea have given themselves more threat by dropping a defender and starting Ross Barkley in midfield? Jacob Steinberg Match report: Wolves 0-0 Chelsea 7) Supporters forgotten about in postponements For the second time in a week, Burnley saw their game called off within three hours of the scheduled kick-off. Like Watford’s Wednesday visit to Turf Moor, Saturday’s trip to Villa Park was scrapped because of rising Covid-19 cases among the opposition squad. The Burnley chairman, Alan Pace, said after Saturday’s postponement that top-flight players who remain unvaccinated “may have to choose a different career”. His position might draw sympathy from some Burnley fans who, like Pace, had already arrived in Birmingham, Covid passes loaded up, only to find the game called off. The Omicron variant’s rapid spread has created a chaotic, fast-moving situation with a host of factors involved in making late calls, but fans should be among them. On a weekend where Bournemouth fans expressed their displeasure over a lunchtime kick-off in Middlesbrough, the supporters who spent so long locked out of English grounds cannot simply be overlooked. Niall McVeigh Aston Villa Covid outbreak forces game with Burnley to be postponed 8) Kyogo will be attracting interest from Premier League Supporters of either half of the Old Firm do not tend to take kindly to any sense that their players are being ‘sold’ by neutral observers. It is treated as some kind of affront that a footballer’s lifetime ambitions may not begin and end with trips to Ross County or St Johnstone. In the case of Kyogo Furuhashi, it should be taken as a high compliment that a move to the Premier League is wholly legitimate just months after he swapped Vissel Kobe for Celtic. Kyogo has the clear capability to, at the very least, play for teams in the middle rump of England’s top flight. This is a player with wonderful movement, a glorious first touch and a ruthless finishing streak. At £4.5m, he looks an absolute steal for Ange Postecoglou. January desperation means bids of umpteen times that amount are not at all difficult to foresee. It already feels a case of when, not if, the outstanding Kyogo is afforded sterner tests. Ewan Murray Match report: Hibernian 1-2 Celtic 9) Rovers dreaming of top-flight return When Fulham won 7-0 at Ewood Park in early November, it looked like the automatic promotion battle would be nothing of the sort. Since then, Marco Silva’s side and fellow pacesetters Bournemouth have stumbled, both winless in their last four. Even more surprising is Blackburn’s revival since that defeat, winning at Bournemouth and Stoke before Saturday’s 4-0 rout of Birmingham sent them third. Tony Mowbray has forged a skilful but solid team made up of young talents, canny loan recruits and second-tier stalwarts. Leading the line is Ben Brereton Díaz, a different player since his unexpected call-up for Chile. The forward has 19 league goals already this season, having scored 17 across his six previous Championship campaigns. He has already been linked with a January move, and Mowbray accepts that big-money offers may prove hard to turn down. The manager is not prepared to ‘mortgage the club’ to end Rovers’ 10-year top-flight exile, but his inexpensively assembled side are already making the promotion race much more interesting. Niall McVeigh Ben Brereton Díaz stars again as Blackburn hit four 10) Injury-hit Napoli earn their luck in Milan This may yet become another season when Napoli are left wondering what might have been. But this gritty, narrow success against a strangely lacklustre Milan felt like it carried huge significance in the race for the Serie A title. Luciano Spalletti’s squad is ravaged by injury, with Kalidou Koulibaly and Victor Oshimen both sidelined, among others, but Elif Elmas’s early header from Piotr Zielinski’s exquisite delivery was enough to take three points. Napoli also enjoyed a generous helping of luck when Franck Kessié’s last-minute effort for Milan was ruled out via a marginal offside call against Olivier Giroud. The Rossoneri’s riotous celebrations were brought to an abrupt halt after the referee took a look at the monitor and ruled the goal out – but Napoli had earned that good fortune with their steely performance. Spezia visit on Wednesday, after which fans in Naples should be celebrating Christmas believing that the leaders Internazionale can be caught and ultimately vanquished. Luke McLaughlin This article was amended on 20 December 2021 because an earlier version referred to the Liverpool v Tottenham game taking place at the London Stadium when the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium was meantIt’s been an eventful month for Elon Musk. The world’s richest man and founder of Tesla and SpaceX was, controversially, named Time’s person of the year; became embroiled in a Twitter spat over his taxes with a politician he branded “Senator Karen” and got a bizarre new haircut after splitting with his girlfriend, the pop singer Grimes. Next month, however, or perhaps a few weeks beyond if the attendant gremlins of spaceflight choose to play with the launch schedule, could come an achievement to surpass anything Musk has done before. The first orbital test launch of the largest and most powerful rocket ship ever to leave Earth – SpaceX’s towering Starship, from its Starbase headquarters in Texas – is seen by many as a pathway back to the moon for the first time in half a century and maybe the first vehicle to eventually land humans on Mars. The project that began life in Musk’s overactive mind more than a decade ago is every bit as ambitious as his pronouncement this week that: “I’ll be surprised if we’re not landing on Mars within five years.” Starship will be the first spacecraft in which all components are fully reusable, reducing significantly the traditionally astronomic costs of space travel. It has an unprecedented in-flight refueling capacity, allowing for more frequent and efficient operations. As the visionary behind the return to human spaceflight from US soil last year for the first time since the retirement of Nasa’s shuttle fleet in 2011, Musk, 50, is confident that his 395ft (120m) spacecraft, a full 32ft taller than the Apollo-era Saturn V, can deliver. Time magazine, in honoring the billionaire entrepreneur, appeared to acknowledge that humankind’s greatest achievements come from unorthodox minds. Musk, it said, is “a madcap hybrid of Thomas Edison, PT Barnum, Andrew Carnegie and Watchmen’s Doctor Manhattan, the brooding, blue-skinned man-god who invents electric cars and moves to Mars.” Sean O’Keefe, a former head of Nasa, said Musk had repeatedly challenged the traditional rules of spaceflight with great success. “One of the things that [he] has artfully figured out how to do is, whenever there has been any doubt about his ability to accomplish something, in some period of time thereafter, he has focused his attention, expertise and talent to go out and demonstrate that you can do it,” O’Keefe, professor of strategic management and leadership at Syracuse University, told the Guardian. “And that’s what this is. It is going to be interesting to see where this goes. [Starship] provides options, very significant options. “To look at, for example, the lunar surface as being not only reachable by multiple means but also by commercial sources that can do the regular resupply and so forth, will be extremely beneficial.” Starship will be propelled into orbit by a first-stage booster rocket called Super Heavy, to which SpaceX attached 29 of its Raptor engines before sending the entire craft to the launchpad at its Starbase launchpad this week. With about 16m pounds of thrust, and a capacity to lift up to 165 tons from the Earth’s surface, Starship is almost twice as powerful as the Saturn V rockets that sent 12 astronauts to the moon between 1969 and 1972. “You can really take advantage of the Starship architecture and get to the outer solar system in ways we haven’t thought about before,” Jennifer Heldmann, a planetary scientist at Nasa’s Ames research center in California, told Arstechnica. “It could provide a revolutionary new way of exploring these worlds.” Other innovative and speculative uses have been proposed for the new spacecraft, including asteroid-busting missions to protect Earth. Musk, though, has made no secret of his ambitions to reach the moon and one day colonize Mars to make humans a multi-planetary species. “The next really big thing is to build a self-sustaining city on Mars and bring the animals and creatures of Earth there,” he told Time. “Sort of like a futuristic Noah’s ark. We’ll bring more than two, though, it’s a little weird if there’s only two.” First, however, astronauts must return to the moon and Starship is only one of two spacecraft in production with the capability to land astronauts back there. Nasa’s own space launch system (SLS), part of the Artemis program, has suffered budget overruns and delays in development, pushing back its first crewed landing until at least 2025. SpaceX also has a hand in Artemis, having won the $2.9bn Nasa contract to build its lunar lander and sparking a lawsuit with rival Jeff Bezos’s Blue Origin company that was settled in Musk’s favor last month. No firm date has been set in January for Starship’s orbital test launch, which follows a series of increasingly successful suborbital flights from Texas over the last two years. If successful, Musk has said up to a dozen further flights could follow in 2022, with Starship’s first lunar voyage – a space tourism venture funded by Japanese billionaire Yusaku Maezawa – set for 2023. O’Keefe, meanwhile, remains cautious about Starship’s deeper-space capabilities for humans, despite its size and innovation, given that it relies on the same chemical propulsion systems used in spaceflight “since Yuri Gagarin took the first trip and Alan Shepard was right behind him” in 1961. “Mars is 65m miles away,” he said. “‘Cutting’ the distance can only be achieved if you add space propulsion and right now we have none of that. We have no means to achieve it. No one on this rock knows how to do that. “The second thing we don’t have is the means to provide shielding sufficient to preserve human life. As it stands, the radioactivity is so extraordinary you wouldn’t make it, much less get back. Those are the two fundamental limitations I see to anyone being able to achieve anything much beyond the lunar objective at this stage.”I started working as a nurse in 1987. I’m coming up for my 35th year: I knew it was an anniversary, but I had to count which one. Sometimes I feel I’ve been doing this for too long. But the Covid vaccination programme has been amazing. We have seen how, when we want to do something, we can pull it off. I work as a vaccinator at a centre in Coventry where we get through 440 a people a day, usually between five vaccinators; about 80 people each. The mobilisation of this workforce and the rollout has been outstanding. The camaraderie is the best bit of the job for me – that we’re working together and it’s positive when so much is doom and gloom. We’re doing something to fix the pandemic, and fixing things is what nursing is about. I find myself smiling under my mask; I’ve realised people can see it in my eyes, even if they can’t see my mouth. Our centre is in a clinical setting, but there are many in other places like Sikh temples and mosques, which is great, I think, to get to people more hesitant, to allow people to have their vaccine in a more comfortable, or familiar setting – and to reach all communities. I notice the loud person, the quiet person, the person who may be scared. One went pale when I drew up the vaccine – my colleague was administering – and I thought, “He’s about to faint.” I gave him what we call in nursing “the reassuring arm”. I spoke to him, about nothing in particular; I held his hand. The colour came back to his face. Afterwards, my colleague said I’d acted fast, but that’s what we do. As a nurse, I’m always looking around to see what is going on: who may need more care. I see a lot of fear in people’s faces, people are scared. Some come in who have lost family members. I’ll never forget the young mum with lung disease right at the beginning of the vaccine drive, last winter, who said, “I think I might actually survive this.” I always well up in this job. Nurses in GP surgeries, which is my background, often feel invisible. But we are the first people you talk to when you want to set up a vaccine clinic: we run them all the time in general practice – for flu, HPV, baby vaccines. It’s as much about the logistics of running a service – getting the staffing numbers right, ensuring adequate PPE for the team, the safe disposal of needles and syringes – as it is about delivering vaccines. Vaccinators work swiftly, but I have seen cases where people do hurry, and we say to them to take their time. I’ve learned to spot the people who might have concerns; I try to build trust with them and ask them to look at the science. It’s hard in a fast-moving environment, I have to build a relationship with someone in three to four minutes. But I think it’s important vaccine-hesitant people are not labelled anti-vaxxers: I would say to anyone who has doubts about having their vaccine, ask questions. People always apologise to me for asking, but they’re the ones I want to spend the time with. Two extra minutes could mean they come back for their second jab or their booster. Occasionally someone will walk out and decide not to get the vaccine, and that’s fine. It’s a personal decision at the end of the day, but it’s important to leave the door open so they know they can come back and get it another time. We vaccinate people in their homes, too. We work with people’s carers. We’ll go to any length to provide people with the support they need. Nurses have helped and responded like this throughout the pandemic, going the extra mile. Colleagues are burning out, of course, but when we’re asked to do more we will. That’s in our nature as nurses. And I want Christmas dinner with my parents, who are in their 70s, as much as the next person, so I know how important it is to deliver vaccinations. It’s a real undertaking, but I’m proud to be involved. Heather Randle is a general practice nurse and a professional lead for primary care at the Royal College of NursingIn the late 60s, the burgeoning movement to legalize US abortion state by state found an unlikely yet loyal ally – a contingent of women at the First Unitarian Universalist church in Dallas, Texas. In lieu of knitting sessions and bake sales, the church’s Women’s Alliance advocated for abortion rights and even had a hand in legally supporting Roe v Wade, the pivotal US supreme court case that protects abortion care in the US as a constitutional right. The trailblazing women laid the groundwork for not only the church’s intrepid commitment to reproductive freedom over the decades, but today’s growing pro-choice faith community movement in Texas. “These women had the foresight at the time to understand that abortion rights wasn’t just a debate for the moment but would be very important to future generations of women,” says Kathleen Campbell, current president of the Women’s Alliance. “They also understood that one of the core teachings of the church is the belief that every human is worthy of love and dignity and that a woman’s right to control her own body and reproductive future is a very natural extension of that principle.” The Dallas church has carried on their legacy for generations by openly supporting reproductive rights groups and causes, spiritually advising abortion patients, and even helping challenge onerous abortion laws in court. Even as Texas’s leadership has become more conservative and the voices of anti-choice evangelical religious figures became louder, the church remained dedicated to its abortion advocacy. Now, in the face of a draconian abortion ban in effect for more than three months – and the prospect of the US supreme court potentially overturning Roe v Wade next year – that mission has only grown stronger for the progressive congregation, who hope others around the US will join their movement. ‘We believe God loves us all’ Amid the feminist revolution, the Alliance grappled with what a woman’s role in society should – and could – be, and a large part of that conversation included reproductive freedom. In 1969 the organization held study groups over the next year to educate themselves on abortion procedures and laws; they heard from members of Planned Parenthood, doctors and lawyers. At first they treaded conservatively into the issue, but soon became “passionate” about pro-choice values, according to a source closely involved at the time. They examined the moral, legal, and practical reasons to legalize abortion care and began organizing, making trips to the Texas capitol to advocate for a bill that would repeal the state’s anti-choice law, which only made an exception in the event the woman’s life was in danger. As largely privileged white women in a conservative city, the group was also very aware that abortion would likely be accessible for them and were motivated by the fact that legal abortion care would be difficult, if not impossible, for low-income women and many women of color, a reality that persists today. ‘Jane Roe’ In 1970, Linda Coffee, an attorney and friend of the church, introduced the women to Dallas resident Norma McCorvey – known widely under the pseudonym “Jane Roe” – and told them she was about to launch a legal challenge against local district attorney Henry Wade. Wanting to assist in any way they could, the women took the bold step of filing a legal brief on behalf of McCorvey in her pursuit to strike down the Texas law, helping spur support for what would later become Roe v Wade. Over the decades the church has carried on the tradition of ardently supporting reproductive rights, a seemingly radical mission in a state headed by Christian rightwing leaders deeply hostile to abortion care. “We see that moment many years ago not just as a shining era to look back on, but as a charge for us to go forward and continue to work to support reproductive rights with any opportunity in our particular moment of history,” says Campbell. “To this day, their contribution resonates, as we still very much support abortion rights.” Among its activism the church offers comprehensive sex education, financial support to Planned Parenthood and abortion funds like the Texas Equal Access Fund, and volunteer to drive and safely escort patients to abortion clinics. The church also has a strong presence within an abortion clinic itself. The Rev Daniel Kanter, senior minister and chief executive of First Unitarian church of Dallas, started a multi-faith rotating chaplaincy at Southwestern Women’s abortion clinic five years ago. Kanter, who has served on the board of Planned Parenthood Federation of America, and other faith leaders volunteer their time listening and spiritually guiding patients in the waiting rooms. They’ve heard heartbreaking stories about abuse and rape; about fetal anomalies that would kill the mother if carried to term; about pregnant women with children they already couldn’t support or care for. Rather than judgment, Kanter meets them with an open heart and compassion. “While so many think all religious people are against abortion, that’s just not true,” says Kanter. “We are there to support those who have abortion, we believe God loves us all and we shouldn’t be silenced or shamed for the decisions we make about our bodies.” And like its feminist predecessors decades ago, the church has not shied away from getting involved in major abortion cases: Kanter is a plaintiff in the legal challenge to the state’s abortion ban, Senate Bill 8. The law, which went into effect on 1 September, has devastated reproductive health care in the second largest state in the US for three months. The US supreme court failed to block SB 8 earlier this month, and sent the legal challenge from Texas abortion providers to the conservative US fifth circuit court of appeals. The law allows for any private individual to sue anyone who “aids or abets” abortion care beyond around six weeks of pregnancy, casting a chilling effect on those who seek to assist abortion patients, including clergy. SB 8, says Kanter, is an affront to religious liberty. “SB 8 censors what clergy can say in the confines of a private counseling room,” says Kanter. “All faith leaders of all religions should be concerned by this.” ‘Taken God hostage’ With its long history of abortion rights support, it may be no wonder then that the progressive church is leading the Just Texas Reproductive Freedom Congregation movement, which launched this August. The first to join, the Dallas church and 29 others across Texas are working to remove the stigma associated with abortion. The movement, started by the Texas Freedom Network, which was founded in 1995 by former Planned Parenthood president Cecile Richards, seeks to unite faith groups to commit to three tenets: trusting and respecting women; ensuring congregants are free from shaming people’s reproductive decisions; and believing access to comprehensive, affordable health services is a moral and social good. Congregants learn to testify at the state capitol, publish op-eds, attend marches, help abortion clinic staff and engage in other forms of activism. “We are on a quest to wrestle God back from the religious pro-life conservatives who have taken God hostage,” says the Rev Erika Forbes, faith and outreach manager for Just Texas. “I have no doubt in my mind God is on our side and that God respects and trusts women.” Forbes has spiritually counseled dozens of Texas women through their abortions. She says her own abortion experiences as a teenager “saved” her life and motivated her to pursue her calling, ministry. She spreads the message that it is a “divine right” for a person to choose to control their bodies and futures without shame or stigma. The Reproductive Freedom Congregation movement plans to expand nationally in January, says Forbes. At least 50 congregations across the country have expressed interest in joining. The goal is to create a “lasting culture change” that subverts the dominant narrative that claims people of faith don’t support reproductive freedom. That narrative often feels ingrained in US – and Texas – culture, in large part due to religious right’s success in tying anti-abortion policies to Christian family values and sexual morality, an idea boosted by the Moral Majority movement of the late 70s and 80s. However, researchers stress that narrative is a largely false notion, or at least one that is far more complex. The religious right – mostly composed of conservative Catholics and evangelicals – carry an “outsized” and “disproportionate” influence in the overall religious community when it comes to abortion due to their strong organizing power and are not necessarily reflective of all Christian groups. “While abortion is certainly an issue that catalyzed the Christian right, Christian conservatives don’t all sort neatly into being anti-abortion – it’s a lot more granular than that,” says Amanda Hollis-Brusky, associate professor and chair of politics at Pomona College who studies the Christian right. Some 55% of Catholics believe that abortion should be legal in all or most cases, as do 63% of non-evangelical white Protestants and, notably, 21% of white evangelicals, a Pew Research Center study found earlier this year. Frederick Clarkson, senior analyst with social justice think tank Political Research Associates and author of Dispatches from the Religious Left: The Future of Faith and Politics in America, has followed the Christian right for the past four decades. While Roe v Wade fueled the Christian right’s “successful efforts” to mobilize and enmesh themselves in Republican electoral politics, that approach has resulted in a “shrinking minority” led by white evangelical Protestants exercising electoral power “disproportionate” to their numbers. Clarkson believes that the Christian right could be “dethroned” by the vast pro-choice faith community that comprises the majority or at least, near-majority, of the overall religious community in the US; it is akin to a sleeping giant waiting to be “reckoned” with. As abortion rights are in the crosshairs nationally after the Supreme Court recently heard Dobbs v Jackson – a challenge to Mississippi’s 15-week ban that could upend Roe – the time to mobilize feels especially urgent, says Clarkson. “If the pro-choice religious community in the US could become as organized as the Christian right and electorally focused it would be a sea change in American culture and politics,” says Clarkson. “They have the potential power to erode – or even end – the Christian right’s theocratic ambitions.” Often overshadowed by the Christian right, Clarkson points to the long history of religious groups – including mainline Protestant denominations, Catholics and most of Judaism – supporting abortion care. For instance, the Clergy Consultation Service on Abortion comprised of 2,000 religious leaders in the late 60s was the largest abortion referral service in the US before Roe, helping thousands of women access safe care. Today, organizations like the Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice and Catholics for Choice – both founded in 1973 following Roe – have continued to gain influence. Of course, challenging the loudest religious voices in the room comes with its share of hostile pushback, especially in Texas. Kanter and his congregation must face vocal anti-choice protesters who rally in front of the church, as well as dozens of phone calls and letters ranging from moderate anger from fellow Christians to “extremely violent and threatening” messages, some of which Kanter has been forced to report to the FBI. “While our views have caused some friction, we are not afraid and not backing down,” says Kanter. “We want to steer the wheel back from evangelicals and those who claim to be pro-life. We feel strong and more ready than ever to do so.” • This article was amended on 22 December 2021. The senior analyst’s name is Frederick Clarkson, not Carlson.The puritan MPs who banned Christmas in 17th-century England had a point. They thought holy days should involve contemplation rather than waste, extravagance, disorder, sin and immorality, so outlawed not just Christmas, but Easter and Whitsun too. “Christ-tide” (renamed to eliminate Roman Catholic associations with the mass) was to be marked, if at all, with fasting and prayer. It’s hard not to empathise with those who seek, if not to ban Christmas, then to do it differently, to stop it from being the season of gorging followed implacably by debt consolidation, buyer’s remorse and atonement for our excesses. True, not all of us spend madly at Christmas (and many of course, do not celebrate it) – but all of us are nudged in that direction. What nonsense, you might reply: proverbially joyless Puritans have nothing to teach us. Now more than ever, after 18 months of pandemic and when lockdown ruined last year’s festive season, we need to celebrate with friends and family. Most of us are perfectly happy having a commercialist Christmas. In any case, the last thing increasingly un-Christian Britain needs to do this December is to re-Christianise what is now an overwhelmingly secular festival. But think of it this way. Even godless pessimist Schopenhauer invoked the Judeo-Christian idea of a sabbath day of rest in his excoriating account of how humans are tormented and degraded by the eternal labour of desiring stuff. True, he was writing before Black Friday effectively replaced the celebration of the birth of the Redeemer with the obeisance to the Dark Lord of White Goods, and he wasn’t explicitly indicting those who want this year’s must-have Christmas presents (which according to the Telegraph are a Serge Bambino coffee machine and a Liberty cotton pyjama set). And yet what he argued pertains very much to why and how we currently get Christmas wrong. “All willing,” as he wrote in The World as Will and Representation, “springs from lack, from deficiency and thus from suffering.” Even when you get that coffee machine you want on Christmas morning, satisfaction will be fleeting. “The wish fulfilled at once makes way for a new one: the former is a known delusion, the latter a delusion not as yet known.” Christmas doesn’t bring joy to the world but materialistic mass delusion. Here’s an experiment: think of everything you don’t want from Christmas. Sprouts, secret Santas, Dickensian schmaltz, Roy Wood of Wizzard, Amazon Prime, the Queen’s speech, the look in your child’s eyes when they tell you on Christmas morning they’ve already got one of those. We behave as though governed by the fear of missing out, when, just maybe, we’d do well to cultivate a new Christmas experience – the joy of missing out. Comedian Bill Bailey once told me about his favourite Christmas. He and his family headed off to a sunny island where, on Christmas Day, they ate jam sandwiches and played on the beach. But opting out of the social norms that produce our festive seasonal affective disorder isn’t enough; changing them is what matters. For Schopenhauer, peace and wellbeing are impossible when the subject of willing “is constantly lying on the revolving wheel of Ixion, is always drawing water in the sieve off Danaids, and is the internally thirsting Tantalus”. Only by suspending desire do we, as he put it, “celebrate the Sabbath of the penal servitude of willing; the wheel of Ixion stands still”. Christmas gives us a chance to step off the hedonic treadmill; but instead we have made it the annual culmination of buying, giving, receiving, being disappointed and queuing to return things. When you give your children Christmas presents, in a sense, you are inducting them into a life-long spiritual slavery to desire that will only end in their deaths. Which, last time I looked, isn’t good parenting. Instead of celebrating Christmas as a sabbath respite from consumerism, we have made it into the epitome of what we do in the other 364 days: gratify our desires and then feel remorse. Capitalism is an amoral virus that thrives as Black Friday becomes not a day but a week, when Christmas goods are not made by Santa’s elves but by satan’s nudge units who, as Michigan behaviour economist Rick Ross writes, have made the birth of our Lord the occasion for the biggest sucker deal in retailing. “A lot of what we buy is just a loss leader to bait you inside and get you to buy high-margin stuff”. Economist Joel Waldfogel, author of Scroogenomics, argues that Christmas is a machine to efficiently destroy value and squander utility. He reckons we value items we receive as gifts 20% less, per pound or dollar spent, than items we buy for ourselves. If auntie gave you cash instead of that horrible jumper, you could have bought what you wanted. Even the alien charmed by the gift the little boy gives her in the John Lewis Christmas ad is bound to be disappointed when she unwraps it on her home planet. The answer? Ban Christmas on economic grounds. But such economic critiques of Christmas only highlight the hideous truth that we are prone to think of everything, even prospective lovers, in cost-benefit terms. Or, as philosopher Michael Sandel puts it, the most fateful thing that has happened to humans in the last 30 years is the expansion of markets into spheres of life where they don’t belong. What we’ve done to Christmas is just the paradigmatic example of that. At Christmas we might aim to escape what Iris Murdoch called the “fat relentless ego”. Murdoch repeatedly counselled “unselfing”, a kind crypto-Buddhist notion she thought key to being virtuous. It involves turning attention outward and seeing the world as something other than a thing to be exploited to make us happy. How to do that, as anyone who has followed the characters’ spiritual journeys in her novels, is the hard work. But the idea is to get off the hedonic treadmill, and do something like the Centre for Effective Altruism recommends, namely thinking hard about how best to help other people. Imagine if, one day, you rescue a small child from a burning building. Imagine this happened to you every two years and as a result you saved dozens of lives during your career. If you earn the equivalent of the typical income in the US, and donate 10% of your earnings each year to the Against Malaria Foundation, you will do just that. Perhaps religion can help us save Christmas from being merely another way station on the Wheel of Ixion. In Religion for Atheists, Alain de Botton considers the Catholic mass, early Christianity’s ritual of agape or love feasts, and Jewish Passover rituals to explore how religions encourage us to overcome fear of strangers and create communities. In our age of siloed thinking, social media echo chambers., gated estates, inhumane scorn for refugees, overcoming the fear of the other seems more important than ever. De Botton imagines a so-called “agape restaurant” where, instead of dining with like-minded friends and family, you would be invited to eat with strangers. It is just an example of what Christmas, not to mention Easter, Whitsun, Eid, Passover, Diwali and any other religious festival might become in the 21st century. We need spurs, De Botton argues, to “produce the benevolence, charity, curiosity and goodwill that are in all of us but we can’t let out”. Christmas could be just such a catalyst. Ten million Britons volunteered during the pandemic. Christmas could catch the wave of that goodwill and make the selflessness that lies latent in many selfish hearts real. The NHS is calling for volunteer responders to help, through making friendly phone calls, picking up medicines or arranging doctors’ appointments; Crisis at Christmas asks for time and money to help end homelessness. Not that we don’t want new coffee machines and Liberty pyjamas for Christmas, but how much better if we wanted something more. Further reading The Joy of Missing Out: The Art of Self-Restraint in an Age of Excess by Sven Brinkmann (Polity, £40) Scroogenomics: Why You Shouldn’t Buy Presents for the Holidays by Joel Waldfogel (Princeton, £18.99) The Sovereignty of Good by Iris Murdoch (Routledge, £11.99)And with that, we are going to put the blog to bed for the evening. Thank you everyone for going through the evening’s news with me – as always a total pleasure. Let’s quickly recap the big moments from today: Clean-up continued on Sydney’s northern beaches after ‘mini-cyclone’. Later, emergency services said a microburst was to blame for northern beaches wild weather. Strike announced that will stop Sydney trains overnight. NSW recorded 2,501 new local Covid-19 cases, Victoria 1,302, ACT 13, Queensland 59, SA 105 and Tasmania recorded three. NT recorded three new Covid cases and the lockdown was extended in Tennant Creek At least 10 Melbourne Covid testing sites shut after reaching capacity – wait times we’re long in Victoria, NSW and SA. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet said public health is a “personal” decision and he would not mandate masks. The PM announced he would discuss Omicron outbreak with premiers at snap national cabinet meeting on Friday. Refugee activist Shane Bazzi lodged an appeal against Dutton defamation decision. And NSW approved the construction of a gas-powered station in Hunter. And that’s it! I will be back with you tomorrow – we can do it all again. I reckon what your Monday night needs is this great TikTok from Matilda. From AAP: A monolithic steel cask designed to withstand an earthquake and a jet strike will arrive in Sydney next year, carrying two tonnes of radioactive waste. For security reasons authorities won’t say when the hulking capsule - containing four 500kg canisters of ‘intermediate-level material’ - will arrive from the UK. But it will hardly be an inconspicuous affair: the cask itself weighs 100 tonnes and resembles something from NASA’s space program. Its forged steel walls are 20cm thick, it’s 6.5m long and three metres wide. Back in 2015, when the first cask of its type arrived, it was carrying 20 tonnes of Australian nuclear waste that had been reprocessed in France. About 600 police and security officers were involved in the mission to truck it from Port Kembla, near Wollongong, to Lucas Heights, the southern Sydney suburb that serves as the country’s nuclear technology hub. It is safe to assume that next year’s arrival will involve an equally elaborate, high-security operation. Mining giant Glencore has defended its plans to dig a $1.5bn coalmine in Queensland after telling the federal government more than a dozen threatened species could be on the site, Graham Readfearn writes. An internet outage left residents of a Top End remote community unable to buy food for four days, with critics arguing the situation was worsened by forced welfare income management policies. Maningrida, an Aboriginal community in the Northern Territory home to about 3,000 people, suffered through an outage of 3G and 4G internet services from 11am Thursday until Monday afternoon. The NSW government has approved the construction of a $600m gas-fired power station backed by the Morrison government in the state’s Hunter region. Snowy Hydro has received its planning approval to build the 660 megawatt power station in Kurri Kurri from Rob Stokes in one of his final decisions as the state’s planning minister and after a fast-tracked environmental assessment. The Morrison government announced in May it would spend up to $600m on the project after warning it would step in if the private sector did not commit to building at least 1000MW to replace the Liddel coal-fired generator in 2023. Labor had called for the government to release its business case for the taxpayer-funded project. The project’s environmental impact statement showed the Kurri Kurri plant would be rarely used. “This project will improve energy reliability and security in the National Energy Market as it brings on renewable energy from wind and solar farms, and transitions away from coal-fired power generation over the next 10-15 years,” a spokesperson for the NSW department of planning, industry and environment said this evening. A severe storm on Sydney’s northern beaches on Sunday that left one woman dead and three injured, tore the roof off buildings and felled trees, was a microburst event, according to New South Wales emergency services. On Monday, NSW State Emergency Service superintendent Stuart Fisher said: “At approximately 3.45pm yesterday, a microburst appeared out of nowhere, situated over the northern beaches, resulting in over 550 requests for assistance and 150,000 phone calls.” From AAP: A yoga instructor heading home from a neighbourhood Christmas gathering has been identified as the woman killed in a brief but ferocious storm in Sydney. The storm, which ripped roofs off apartment buildings and took out power for 35,000 homes, struck as 68-year-old Susan Cobham was heading home from a party near Narrabeen Surf Life Saving Club on Sunday afternoon. “Lightning hit a massive Norfolk pine which subsequently fell, crushing her and hitting two other women,” her son Ben Porter posted to her Facebook page. “It was an unlucky freak accident and she has left us far too early and will be sorely missed.” Cobham, who was educated in Uruguay and previously worked as a scientist for AstraZeneca, was “a terrific person, a real bright spark and will be much missed”, friend Penny Auburn posted. Former AstraZeneca colleague Karishma Pai said Cobham was “a great colleague and even better a friend to many of us who worked in the lab alongside her”. Surging demand at Covid testing clinics across Australia has led to waiting times of up to five days for results, with travellers now worried they won’t get a negative result in time to cross state borders for Christmas. Waiting times in Victoria have averaged between 40 minutes and an hour during the past week, while a busy ACT site reached capacity by 9.30am on Monday. We’ve got a little bit of wet weather on the way for some states ... From AAP: Conservation groups have reached the Supreme Court to challenge key environmental approvals granted to Woodside’s Scarborough Gas project off northwest Western Australia, in order to prevent what they call “staggering amounts of pollution”. Woodside reached a final investment decision in November for the joint $16 billion LNG development. Part of the proposal is to pipe gas from the field, approximately 375km west of the Burrup Peninsula near Karratha, to its existing onshore Pluto LNG plant. At the heart of the challenge are amendments to the project’s environmental approvals, which the EPA agreed to in August. The changes were then approved by WA Environment Minister Amber-Jade Sanderson. Lawyers for the Environmental Defenders Office, acting on behalf of the Conservation Council of WA, told the court in Perth the changes would allow for “significant” extra greenhouse gas emissions, which EPA chairman Matthew Tonts had not properly assessed in deciding on the approvals. “The inference to be drawn is that the chairman didn’t reach his own decision,” Henry Jackson SC, representing the EDO, told the court on Monday. We mentioned earlier that the PM is holding a previously unscheduled meeting with national cabinet, here Katharine Murphy has the full run down. The shadow education minister Tanya Plibersek has written to the auditor general about an “unacceptable delay” in the Australian Research Council announcing 2022 grant funding round outcomes. There have been significant delays to announcements of grants awarded in the ARC’s Discovery Projects, Linkage and LIEF schemes. Plibersek wrote: “With only seven working days left this year, researchers across the nation are yet to receive a decision about their 2022 Australian Research Grant applications. We understand this is the longest delay in announcing these grants in thirty years. This is causing significant uncertainty for around five thousand Australian researchers who don’t know whether they’ll have a job next year or whether their projects will have funding. In our view, the Government’s unacceptable delay in announcing Australian Research Grants is a serious failure of public administration – a matter of national interest that bears further scrutiny. The delays come after months of controversy for the ARC. In August, the council was widely criticised for deeming grant proposals ineligible due to a rule banning applicants from citing preprint materials. The rule was later scrapped and affected applicants had an appeal upheld. The ARC’s chief executive Sue Thomas said this month that she would step down in January. Epidemiologist Prof Mary-Louise McLaws has spent the past week dialling in to meetings of the World Health Organization’s [WHO] infection prevention and control group, and said: “I don’t know of any outbreak manager who would not support wearing masks at the very minimum” in cities where Covid-19 cases are rising. “WHO keeps reminding the world that vaccines are not the only answer because this virus keeps changing,” McLaws said. “Vaccines certainly reduce the risk of death and severe infection. But you do need other measures, like physical distancing, and masks.” The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, continued to resist additional measures to mitigate the spread of Omicron on Monday, saying, “The pandemic is not going away. We need to learn to live alongside it,” while ruling out mask mandates and further restrictions for now. “The government can’t do everything,” he said. Like Perrottet, Scott Morrison said booster vaccines are key to living with the virus, a view echoed by Dr Nick Coatsworth, one of Australia’s deputy chief medical officers, on Twitter. Read more: A Labor-led committee will scrutinise the problem-plagued light rail system in Sydney’s inner west, reports AAP. The parliamentary inquiry comes after cracks were found in all 12 vehicles used on the L1 line, forcing commuters onto replacement buses and ferries. “With light rail services suspended from Central to Dulwich Hill for up to 18 months, thousands of individuals and businesses have been significantly impacted,” committee chair Daniel Mookhey said. “The committee seeks to shed light on how and why this has happened, its impact on the community, and importantly, how those impacts can be mitigated until the line is reinstated.” The inquiry will also examine services in Sydney’s southeast and Newcastle as well as the procurement, operation and maintenance of the systems. Hearings will be heard in the new year, with submissions and a questionnaire closing on 31 March. Outgoing Transport Minister Rob Stokes announced last month that all 12 trams on the city’s inner west line would be decommissioned for up to 18 months to fix major cracks - up to 30cm long - on the rolling stock. But last week he revealed the seven-year-old light rail cars would be back up and running in less than a year. Former police minister David Elliot will take over the transport portfolio from Tuesday after Premier Dominic Perrottet’s first major cabinet reshuffle. Looks like it could be a scorcher in Perth this Christmas. From AAP: Sydney train commuters have been warned of major disruptions to the network overnight as union members plan on further strike action. The work stoppage will disrupt the Sydney Trains-operated network as Rail, Tram, and Bus Union members plan to strike from 8pm on Monday to 4am on Tuesday. Transport for NSW has warned train frequency will slow from 6pm and people could be left stranded. Buses will replace train services on all lines between 8pm and 4am, but Sydney commuters are being encouraged to avoid travelling on Monday afternoon and Tuesday morning. Intercity and regional services will also be affected, with some of the services suspended from 3.30pm on Monday before resuming at 5.30am on Tuesday. The union says it remains at loggerheads with Transport for NSW as they negotiate a new enterprise agreement covering more than 10,000 staff. Federal parliamentarians from across the political spectrum have pleaded with the Western Australian government to strengthen new state laws designed to protect Aboriginal heritage, amid concerns the McGowan government has not taken into consideration lessons learned from the destruction of a sacred site at Juukan Gorge in 2020. Members of the joint standing committee on northern Australia wrote to Stephen Dawson, WA Aboriginal affairs minister, on 10 December, to express their concern about the WA Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Bill, days before it was passed into law. The committee previously conducted a review into Rio Tinto’s destruction of a 46,000-year-old cultural site at Juukan Gorge. The committee’s chair, federal LNP MP Warren Entsch, said the new WA bill “falls far short of the reforms advocated” advocated in his committee’s final report. Entsch noted the committee’s recommendations called for “consistency with the principles of free, prior and informed consent by Indigenous people”, and said the WA bill “conflicts with these principles by giving the Minister the ultimate power to decide whether mining or other activities can go ahead if traditional owners do not agree”. Entsch also criticised the consultation process behind the WA bill, saying it “was not centred on culturally based protocols, was not undertaken in language and was not linked to elements of Aboriginal culture”. Last week, after the bill passed, Labor senator Pat Dodson, who co-wrote the letter to Dawson, blasted the Western Australian government for failing its one opportunity to protect Aboriginal heritage and stop the “tyranny of cultural genocide”. Read more about the WA bill here, from Lorena Allam, Guardian Australia’s Indigenous affairs editor: Specialist forensic interviewers from NSW are being briefed by Tasmanian police today before they interview young witnesses of the tragedy in Devonport. They will start interviewing some of those students at the school within days. There’s been a lot of heat in the debate today about if NSW is right not to mandate masks. Some people are arguing the government needs to stay out of lives, treat people like adults – essentially how Perrottet put it this morning. Here is what the University of Sydney’s Prof Julie Leask – who I am sure I don’t have to remind anyone is a leading infectious disease and immunisation expert – had to say. SA has recorded triple digit Covid cases, officially recording 105 new cases. They are 11 children, six teenagers, 39 women aged between 18 and 93 and 49 men aged between 18 and 67. Refugee activist Shane Bazzi has lodged an appeal in the federal court in relation to the defamation action brought against him by Peter Dutton. Bazzi, through his lawyers, said on Monday that Dutton “succeeded on only parts of his claim before justice Richard White”. “Bazzi will be arguing that the judge erred in finding [his] tweet carried the meaning found by the judge, namely that Mr Dutton ‘excuses rape’,” his lawyers said in a brief statement. The appeal should be heard in 2022. In November, the defence minister won his defamation case, with damages of $35,000, over a tweet labelling him a “rape apologist” which the court agreed did convey the defamatory imputation he “excuses rape”. Bazzi’s lawyers asked for the costs bill to be reduced, citing a discretion to do so if the win was worth less than $100,000 or the court decided the case could more suitably have been brought in another court or tribunal. White in early December ruled Dutton would not receive his full legal costs from Bazzi because it would have been more appropriate to pursue the case in a lower court. Bazzi’s tweet, since deleted, said “Peter Dutton is a rape apologist”. It included a link to a 2019 Guardian Australia article reporting comments by Dutton that some female refugees were “trying it on” by making claims they had been raped, and needed to travel to Australia from offshore detention to receive abortions. The tweet was published on the same day Dutton had said he didn’t know the “she said he said” details of Brittany Higgins’ allegation of rape. From AAP: The death of two children, their father and a pilot has been described as a “terrible incident” as the plane at the centre of the joyride tragedy is recovered near Brisbane. Investigators from the Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) have begun collecting evidence after the operation in “quite inaccessible” mangroves off Scarborough, following the crash on Sunday morning. The wreckage is being taken to a secure location at the Redcliffe Aerodrome where investigators will try and recover specific components to send to Canberra for analysis. Recorded data, weather information, and pilot and maintenance records will also be examined, and ATSB investigators have begun interviewing witnesses and those involved. The Rockwell Commander 114 single-engine light aircraft crashed into the water near the shoreline shortly after take-off, coming to rest upside down. There were no survivors. Queensland minister Stirling Hinchliffe, whose electorate of Sandgate is near the crash site north of Brisbane, led tributes on behalf of the state government on Monday. “Obviously all of the appropriate investigations will be undertaken … and we hope that we can get to the bottom of what might have caused this awful, terrible incident,” he said on Monday. From AAP: The majority of new COVID-19 infections in the ACT have been linked to outbreak hotspots including Sydney and Newcastle. The national capital recorded 13 new infections on Monday. The health minister, Rachel Stephen-Smith, said a large number of cases stemmed from people who tested positive after arriving in Canberra from interstate. There have been 40 infections linked to the Omicron variant since the new strain emerged. “The majority of our cases were interstate acquired, rather than being locally acquired, so we still weren’t seeing a high level of local community transmission,” she told ABC radio. Vaccination bookings for children aged between five and 11 have opened ahead of the rollout starting from January 10. An estimated 46,000 children will be eligible. The PM is now spruiking the family home guarantee, which is a government program targeting single parents. It allows them to buy a home with a 2% deposit. This is targeted towards single parents. And it’s getting them out of public housing, getting them out of unpredictable rents, and now they are buying their first home. Can you imagine what that means to a single parent, that they can get the kids into their own home and not be fighting in the rental market. He says 177,000 Australians have bought their first home this year, “up from less than 100,000 just three years ago.” I’m no economist, and I don’t want to take away how good that must feel for those parents – but I feel like it would help more people if houses were like, you know – cheaper. Too wild? IDK I’m not in politics. And now we are on another crisis – housing affordability. The PM says the government is helping more than any other government in the history of Australia. He’s citing the government’s First Home Loan deposit scheme and the Home Builder programs as the reasons first homebuyers have been able to get in the market. It is really hard to buy your first time. It’s always been very hard but it’s even harder as time goes on. That’s why we introduced those programs so people would be able to buy first time with a smaller deposit. Since we have done that 323,000 Australians have got into their first home since the last election. That’s extraordinary. I wonder how many first homebuyers have been priced out since the last election? The mask mandate has been a hot issue today – and the PM says the government will take advice from medical experts. There will be circumstances where masks are commonsense and I have noticed that, especially with the increase in Omicron. There is not that requirement in NSW at the moment but anybody who has been out there recently know that people are taking responsibility for their own health. He says he was at Carols in the Shire last night and a lot but “not all” people were wearing masks. The PM says he will discuss the rising number of Omicron cases and the issue of state borders with the premiers at an unscheduled meeting of national cabinet. National cabinet was not due to meet again until February. What’s very important ... under the national plan we are now at more than 90% double dose vaccination rate. It is important that we do what we have also sought to do and save lives and livelihoods, protect lives and livelihoods ... we want to stay safely open so the economy can continue to grow and people can get jobs. The PM is asked if he is concerned about the effect on the airline industry – he says something vague about Australians needing to know that if they get on a plane, they can get off it at the other end. He says they are taking Omicron seriously. Remember, we have been doing that for coming on to two years and what has been the result of the approach we have taken? The lowest death rates in the world, the strongest economies, coming out and through the pandemic, one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. That’s what happens when you keep your head, keep focused on the future, deal with the problems in front of you and you work together and you do so in a commonsense and calm way. The PM is asked if Australia will return to lockdowns next year like parts of Europe are doing now: We will make our Australian way through this, we always have, the situation in the northern hemisphere is different to Australia. They are not standing over there in the Netherlands in 34 degrees, it’s winter and people are more indoors, we know the virus does move differently in different seasons. What’s important is people get their booster shots. Anyone who is concerned and who is ready to have their booster shot, I would urge them to go and get it. Because that is the best defence against Omicron, especially for making sure against serious illness ... That is the key advice we have received and if we do that, then we can keep our nerve, keep calm and carry on. The PM says he welcomed Annastacia Palaszczuk’s announcement this morning about extra health funding. We have to keep moving forward with this. This is why Australians rolled up their sleeve, this is why Australians have worked so hard. The cases will rise with the Omicron variant, what we will continue to work through with states and territories is making sure we manage the impact on the hospital system in the primary health network. I welcome the decision the premier made here today; we have a 50-50 funding arrangement with all states and territories when it comes to their COVID-19 cost we put in place at the start of the pandemic, and we are doing this hand in glove. He says there are “plenty” of boosters: Doses sitting in the fridges, at the distribution points, 9000 around the country right now, there are 13 million doses in Australia, right now... There was some pressure but that’s been overcome now, and people will be able to get on and do that over the course of the summer break. The PM, Scott Morrison, is talking in Brisbane now ... A lot of people on (and I suspect off) Twitter are asking why RAT aren’t free today. As the political year draws to a close and an election looms, the foreign minister, Marise Payne, has been busy filling diplomatic appointments. Australia’s foreign minister has confirmed that the former Liberal frontbencher and Senate president Scott Ryan is bound for Canada as Australia’s next high commissioner. When Ryan departed the Senate presidency earlier this year rather than seeing out his full term, the internal speculation pointed to a looming diplomatic appointment. And so it was. In a statement issued today, Payne notes that Ryan has served in a number of ministerial roles as well as being president of the Senate between 2017 and 2021. Payne says: Australia and Canada have a close relationship founded on shared values and experiences. We are proud liberal democracies and federal systems. Australian and Canadian defence personnel have served side-by-side for over 100 years. We also share a deep commitment to celebrating our indigenous heritages. Our bilateral economic relationship is substantial. Two-way trade was worth $6.4bn in 2020, and Canada is our 11th largest source of foreign investment, with two-way investment currently standing at $159bn. Canada is a vital partner in a range of international forums, particularly the United Nations, APEC, WTO, G20 and the OECD. Our two countries work together closely through the Five Eyes group. We cooperate on international issues such as climate change, global peace and security, human rights, and the empowerment of women and girls. Australia stands with Canada against the use of arbitrary detention and we welcome Canada’s growing engagement in the Indo-Pacific. Ryan will replace the current high commissioner, Natasha Smith. SA premier Steven Marshall says the state has recorded “about 100” new Covid cases. The official figure will come this afternoon, around 3.30pm ACDT so we’ll bring you more info then. The 19-year-old pleaded guilty to charges of not using a QR code and failing to wear a mask in two settings, AAP reports. With big business backing Labor’s climate policy and net zero gaining bipartisan support, the climate battle is transitioning into a new phase, writes Adam Morton. For those who had Santa swimming with sharks on their 2021 bingo card Boost for open borders! The first death of a child with Covid-19 in New Zealand has prompted calls for Māori children to be prioritised in the next stage of the vaccine rollout, as the country grapples with racial inequalities compounded by the pandemic. A Māori boy, under the age of 10 and who had tested positive for the virus, died last week, becoming the youngest New Zealander to die with Covid, the Ministry of Health confirmed. Acting chief minister Nicole Manison said there were 3,207 Covid tests taken in the Northern Territory in the past 24 hours. The mask mandate has been lifted for Katherine. Thirteen Covid patients are in hospital in Alice Springs. The three new cases are: A man and a woman in their 30s from Walkabout Bore outstation. They have both spent time in Tennant Creek. And the other is a child from Tennant Creek who was already in quarantine. The Tennant Creek lockdown and mask mandate for Barkly region has been extended by 48 hours until 5pm Wednesday after the territory recorded three new cases. More testing trouble in Melbourne ... There are plans to open up more testing clinics in Melbourne after people report waits of more than two hours. A reader contacted me earlier to say he had waited in line for two and a half hours in Preston this morning – and the testing site only had one nurse: There is legit only one testing staff and hundreds of people waiting. Another reader in Fairfield waited more than an hour – with three nurses working. The demand is being driven by a combo of more people having to isolate and people getting tested before they travel interstate. In response, the state government announced three new Covid testing sites have been set up today and 20 across the city will open one hour earlier. We’ll see over the next few days if that helps make a dent ... And that is it from Queensland. Just to recap: There are 59 new Covid cases across the state and they’re seeing roughly a doubling of cases every 48 hours. Omicron is quickly becoming the dominant strain and the government is recommending that people wear masks indoors. Some patients in Queensland are being treated at home, Gerrard says: There are 66 patients in hospital but, of those 66 patients, only one of them is there for medical reasons. There are other reasons why patients might be in hospital with Covid-19, such as isolating them from sick relatives, etc. We are increasingly managing patients with Covid-19 in their homes. And quite a number of patients have been shifted to home care in the last few days. In fact, there are 32 cases currently being cared for in their home or in another suitable residence. Gerrard: In terms of the Omicron strain – Omicron is clearly becoming dominant in Queensland. We’ve had 43 confirmed Omicron cases in Queensland so far and of those tested yesterday, there were 13 Omicron cases and eight Delta cases. John Gerrard says today’s cases bring the total number of cases in Queensland to 2,356, with 197 cases active and 33 under investigation: In terms of the locations of cases, very similar to what we’ve seen in the past few days, including Brisbane south and north, Gold Coast, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba region and Townsville. Queensland’s CHO Dr John Gerrard is speaking now. He is giving a rundown of the state’s cases: We’re seeing roughly a doubling in the number of cases every 48 hours roughly. So we do expect the cases to increase significantly and the trend has continued as we head into January. He says the state has one patient in hospital who is recovering well at the moment, which is great news: I was told last night and she was not vaccinated. Having said that, our cases are still ... Our case numbers are still small. Only a couple of hundred cases over the past week. And we know that people are most likely to get seriously ill in the second week of their illness. So it will be very instructive to learn in the next one to two weeks what pattern we see in the hospitals. Palaszczuk: We had extra money from stamp duty and extra money from coal royalties and I believe that this is a necessary step to make sure that health has that extra money there. This is already on top of the $22bn in the health budget. So that’s some good news. Palaszczuk is now talking about the government’s announcement that it will create 108 new jobs for paramedics: Today I’m announcing an extra boost to Queensland Health and that is an additional $200m. As we enter this new phase of dealing with Covid and the pandemic, we will be dealing with more and more people in the home environment and we want to make sure that we have the best technology. We’re giving people the best care possible because a lot of this will be managed at home rather than our hospitals unless people are seriously ill. Palaszczuk has thanked Queenslanders for wearing masks and strongly recommends people wearing them inside: We’re not mandating it, but I will be wearing my mask when I go in and out of cafes or restaurants and, when you’re sitting there, you can take your mask off. This is just an added precaution until we get to that 90% fully vaccinated. But also, too, until we need Queenslanders to get their boosters. It’s really important if your boosters are due – please go and get your booster. Annastacia Palaszczuk says cases will spike over Christmas: I expect to see more and more cases coming up into Christmas and over new year, but we are well prepared for this. We now have had 13,395 tests in the last 24 hours – 10,520 vaccines were administered by Queensland Health and the good news is that we are now at 89.67% first dose and we are looking at 84.51% of eligible Queenslanders are fully vaccinated. We also have had 197,546 border passes issued. So again, you can see that there’s a lot of people who are reuniting with families and friends coming into the Christmas and new year season. In Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk is speaking ... Days after introducing controversial heritage laws widely criticised by peak Aboriginal advocates, WA Aboriginal affairs minister Stephen Dawson has been stripped of this portfolio in a cabinet reshuffle. On 17 December premier Mark McGowan announced that Dawson will become the minister for emergency services, innovation and ICT, medical research and volunteering “after delivering important reforms in his portfolios”. The reshuffle comes just a week after the the Aboriginal cultural heritage bill 2021 passed WA parliament. Kado Muir, WA Ngalia cultural and community leader and chairman of National Native Title Council, said traditional owners had been left in the dark after the cabinet reshuffle: The fleeting impermanence of ministerial appoints show the stark contrast of experiences and laws. We the Aboriginal people are left with an intergenerational burden of bad laws, while the minister representing the settler state rides off into the unknown and into obscurity. Muir said there needed to be a new relationship between Aboriginal people and the settler society that takes into account First Nations laws are ancient and enduring: In contrast, whitefella laws come and go but create unending uncertainty and sadness to my people. He called for the new portfolio minister Toni Buti to build a relationship on respect, and earn the trust of Aboriginal people. The new laws, which will replace the Aboriginal Heritage Act, were designed to allow proper consultation with traditional owners before the destruction of sacred sites – after the 46,000-year-old Juukan Gorge caves in the Pilbara were blown up last year by Rio Tinto. But the bill has been widely criticised by advocate groups and the peak body for lawyers in the state as it removed the rights of traditional owners to appeal against any destruction to traditional sites. Hello everyone – this is Cait. Firstly, thanks to Matilda Boseley, who as always – completely smashed it this morning. I’m going to take you through the afternoon – so hold on to those hats! With that, I shall hand you over to the always amazing Cait Kelly to take you through the afternoon of news. See you tomorrow! Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai has denied that she accused a former senior official of sexually assaulting her, in what is believed to be the first foreign press interview since her November essay caused a media storm: I wanted to make this very clear: I have never claimed, or written about anyone having sexually assaulted me. With regards to Weibo, it’s about my personal privacy ... There’s been a lot of misunderstanding … There [should be] no distorted interpretation. The claim apparently contradicted a 2 November social media post, in which Peng accused the former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli of having coerced her into sex. The essay was taken down less than 30 minutes after it was published, and Peng became the centre of a global media storm after disappearing from public view for more than two weeks after the essay. You can read the full report below: Summer in Australia is synonymous with seafood, from fish and chips at the beach to prawns on the barbie. But how do we know if the seafood is sustainable – that is, harvested from healthy stocks with minimal negative environmental impacts? More than a third of the world’s fisheries are being harvested at unsustainable levels, according to the latest figures from the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organisation. Research shows public awareness of the problem is growing. But 62% of the seafood Australians eat is imported, which can make it hard to determine the food’s provenance. While comprehensive sustainable seafood guides like the Australian Marine Conservation Society’s Good Fish are readily available, we know some people find them daunting and time-consuming to use. To make it simpler, we’ve put together five tips for better seafood-buying, focusing on holiday favourites. You can read all the best tips on how to make your feast of summer seafood sustainable below: We can expect to hear from the Queensland premier at about 11.30am Brisbane time, so in about an hour. Usually, this is when we get the state’s Covid-19 numbers as well so looks as though we might have a little while to go. Today the NSW premier also announced that the party’s candidate for Sydney’s inner-west federal seat of Strathfield would be Bridget Sakr, whose daughter Veronique was 11 when she and her three cousins were killed by a drunk driver in Oatlands. Dominic Perrottet: To have someone like Bridget put her hand up and run in public life, the Liberal party is blessed – with the people of Strathfield even more. To have someone of her value and virtues to put a hand up to public life is an incredible testament to her to have the most heartbreaking tragedy that no parent could ever imagine going through, but the way that she dealt with the and particularly her forgiveness that was so striking, and every person across our state was incredibly moved by that tragedy but I think we were moved even more by the family’s response. Reporter: Hospitalisations up 30% on yesterday, doesn’t that set off alarm bells because people who test positive this week potentially won’t go to hospital for two to three weeks? Perrottet: We monitor that. As I said, of the ICU presentations – 33 – 26 of those people are not vaccinated. Vaccination has been crucial, New South Wales is standing strong. We are going to leave the nation out of the pandemic. There is always concern. We look at these, we look at the data every day. We consider the position every day. But if not now, when? It is time for New South Wales to go to the next level, it is up to New South Wales to continue to be strong and lead the nation out of the pandemic. It is exactly what we’re going to do in this state. We monitor that situation every single day – yes, there will be challenges. But ultimately where we sit today with the strongest health system in the nation, we are ready. There will be, we know, there will be hospitalisations. We have said that from the outset. When we opened up, I said numerous times, when we opened up my as mobility increases, case numbers will increase, case numbers will lead to hospitalisations and hospitalisations will lead to ICU presentations. But we cannot live in a world where there is not Covid. We have to live in the world as it is. And as it is, the best thing we can do is have a high vaccination rate. Dominic Perrottet says the only reason other states have closed their border is that Labor ministers have not invested enough in their health system. (Only WA now has its border closed, so not totally sure who is now “closing their borders”.) Perrottet: When I look around the country right now and I see borders closing, they are closing for one reason. They are closing because they have not invested in their health system like we have in New South Wales. Liberals and Nationals are not known for health but now, if you look around the other states, it is the Labor states that are closing their borders because they have not invested in their health system. We have the best health system in the nation, if not the country. We can open up safely. I am completely focused with the health minister on ICU presentations, we monitor this every day. Perrottet: To have 95%, 95% of our population here in New South Wales having a first-dose vaccination, yet, 26 of the 33 people in ICU in New South Wales are unvaccinated. The numbers speak for themselves. Dominic Perrottet: Rest assured, every single day, we meet with the health minister and discuss these matters on an ongoing basis. But we need to stand strong. The people of New South Wales are incredibly resilient. We have got through the last two years, we are going to get through this period as well. As the key to that, if you look at the evidence – and there is a great recap today, if you get the chance to see it in the Australian Financial Review – that shows over the last period of time that while case numbers have increased with Delta and previous variants, hospitalisations are not at the same levels as they were. We continue to monitor that information, we continue to look at the evidence and we will tailor our response accordingly. But the key message from the government is look after each other, socially distance when you can, if you can’t – wear a mask. That is our message and it is pleasing to see the public are responding. The public are listening to those messages. Dominic Perrottet says if the state “needs” to change its approach due to Omicron, it will. This is interesting as a number of top experts have said it should be. Perrottet: We are taking a balanced and proportionate response. It is completely focused on keeping people safe while at the same time opening up our economy and ensuring that people are able to work, be in jobs and provide for their families. There will always be new variants of this virus. The pandemic is not going away. We need to learn to live alongside it. I appreciate as premier there is concern in the community. but now is our time to stand up, to stand tall, to look after each other, to treat people with kindness and respect and we will get through it. As I have said, from the outset, we will always tailor our response to the circumstances that are in front of us. When it comes to face masks, we recommend face masks in areas where you cannot socially distance. It is a time of personal responsibility for our state. We are treating the people of our state like adults. We need to tailor our responses from time to time and we will. There are challenging times today, there will be challenging times tomorrow. We have come through what has been an incredibly difficult 12 months and we still stand strong and accept there are differing views from time to time. Jumping back to Dominic Perrottet for a moment, here is what he has to say about the hospitalisation rates in NSW: The first point I want to make in relation to the ICU presentations is very important. We are currently on a first-dose vaccination at close to 95%. In relation to the ICU presentations, which is the key metric for the state, we have 33 people in ICU; 26 of those 33 are unvaccinated. The evidence is clear. The numbers do not lie. Getting vaccinated protects you and your family, and that has been the key success for our state in opening up. I just want to encourage you again today. It has been five months since your second-dose vaccination, please make an appointment because booster shots [are] keeping people safe. He reassures people that vaccines will still be available over the Christmas break:. I know as we head into the Christmas break, many of you will be aware that GPs go on holidays. So our vaccination centres are not going on holidays, they will be opened by people to visit and receive your booster shot. The Northern Territory has opened its borders to travellers who are fully vaccinated against Covid-19 as quarantine requirements for arrivals end, reports AAP’s Aaron Bunch. Travellers now have to return a negative PCR test taken within three days of their arrival in the territory. They also need to get re-tested within three days of arriving and again on their sixth day in the NT. Unvaccinated travellers have been barred, with only returning residents exempt. Travellers will need to show proof they are vaccinated or evidence they are ineligible for the jab. Tests are free at NT government coronavirus testing facilities and travellers are not required to isolate while they wait for the results. Authorities are also handing out free rapid antigen test kits at the airport for use at home if people develop symptoms. Arrivals must stay in high-vaccination areas, such as Darwin and Alice Springs. The are also required to download the G2G Now app and complete location check-ins when ordered. Most travellers are banned from dozens of remote communities where vaccination rates remain below 80%. Unvaccinated people who try to get into the territory will be turned away and could face a fine of more than $5,000. Those allowed in must quarantine at their own expense for 14 days. Speaking of ... The Victoria government says they are doing what they can to boost testing capacity as centers around the state are overwhelmed. OK, time to hear from the NSW premier who is laying out his government’s cabinet recent reshuffle, with members expected to be sworn in to their new roles tomorrow. This includes nine members who are new to the cabinet. After this shakeup, there will then be seven women and 19 men, which, rather scarily is actually an improvement for NSW gender equality. Dominic Perrottet: I want to congratulate those members and I’m here today with Wendy [Tuckerman] who will be appointed tomorrow as a minister for local government, Natasha Maclaren-Jones will be appointed the minister for disability services also, another appointed for small business in fair trading and James Griffin who will be appointed as a minister for the environment and heritage ... Big curveballs come have come our way and we wanted a team here New South Wales [who] will continue the great work that this government has laid and the infrastructure and driving a state through challenging times but ultimately, to take New South Wales the next level and I know, that every one of these new ministers who will be appointed tomorrow has the experience but importantly, the passion and energy to take New South Wales to the next level and that’s what this is all about. Edward says there were a number of “near misses” that resulted in people receiving only minor injuries. We had people hit by debris that had a lot of bruises and cuts that were assessed, and those people did not require transport to hospital. Superintendent Paul Edwards has given some more detail on the incident that claimed the life of one woman during the northern beaches storm over the weekend. It was a difficult situation, managed extremely well. We got early calls in the afternoon about the storm in this area that was quite widespread and it soon became evident that the priority was this location. On arrival, we had a surf lifesaver who performed an amazing job, looking after the patient before our arrival. Unfortunately, one of the patients was deceased. There were two that were critical. There was one with minor injuries. Communication was amazing. They were two rescue helicopters dispatched and we brought medical teams into the site to assist the patient. One patient was in her early 20s with head injuries and spinal injuries and the second patient with severe internal injuries. It became evident with the amount of people looking after these people that the best option was to transport them by road to Royal North Shore hospital. One of the medical teams assisted with the paramedics. Essentially, a medical team, we have the ability of bringing in the ED department to be seen. It seems that surf lifesavers were the first on the scene after a woman was fatally struck by a fallen tree in the northern beaches, and were later assisted by ambulance and fire teams. Fisher says 10 families have been forced to leave their homes on the northern beaches in Sydney due to storm damage. Only a small number have been displaced. We are looking at about 10 properties, mainly units, at this point in time. Air crews are working through those homes that have roof damage so that may increase but at the moment it is minimal. Let’s go to Sydney now where emergency services are giving an update on the freak storm that wreaked havoc on Syndey’s northern beaches yesterday, and has so far led to the death of one person. Superintendent Stuart Fisher: At approximately 3:45pm yesterday, a microburst [weather event] appeared out of nowhere, situated over the northern beaches, resulting in over 550 requests for assistance and 150 000 phone calls. According to the US government’s national weather website, a microburst is “a microburst is a localised column of sinking air (downdraft) within a thunderstorm and is usually less than or equal to 2.5 miles in diameter”. They can cause a hunger amount of damage to infrastructure and, as we have seen, can be fatal. Currently, the SES have over 15 teams out in the field along with support from our FS, New South Wales Fire and Rescue, council and other local government authorities. We expect to have the majority of those jobs are sorted today and tomorrow, although we are working closely with Ausgrid who are working through restoring power to over 26,000 homes ... The main damage were trees and power lines down as well as minor to moderate and major property damage workplaces lost roofs. Places ... lost their roofs and the majority were trees down and sadly one person was deceased as a result of a falling tree. As a little break from all the doom and gloom Omicron news, please enjoy this story about an ungodly fish that’s washed ashore in California. As NSW continues to set national records for daily Covid-19 infections, the premier is resisting calls to reinstate mask mandates but says he will act if required, reports AAP. A day after NSW recorded 2,566 new COVID-19 cases and with Christmas fast approaching, Dominic Perrottet has written an editorial in the Daily Telegraph calling for calm. Case numbers are bound to rise, just as the modelling predicted, and we are all likely to have a close encounter with Covid ... This is not to be taken lightly. The safety of the community is and always will be our top priority, and if the trajectory of an outbreak appears likely to put our health system under excessive pressure, we will change our approach, tailoring it to the circumstances and the evidence ... For now, that is not the case. NSW is urging people to keep wearing masks indoors while other health experts are calling for mask mandates to return in those settings. However, Perrottet said it is a personal decision. It is time to shift the balance back to personal responsibility, because a strong, healthy society is built not on the dictates of government, but on the common pursuit of the common good. Overwhelming testing demand has created long queues and forced several sites to shut, as Victoria reported 1,302 new Covid-19 infections and no deaths, reports AAP’s Callum Godde. It is the first day the state has not reported a Covid-related death since 16 September, and there are 13,175 active cases in the community. A total of 406 patients are in hospital, 81 of whom are actively infected with the virus in intensive care and 43 on ventilators. The seven-day hospitalisation average has risen by seven to 387. About 4,800 people were vaccinated in state-run hubs on Sunday, while 71,491 tests were processed. Strong testing demand in the lead-up to Christmas is putting the state’s testing system under pressure, with long lines forming on Monday morning. At least 10 testing sites across Melbourne were temporarily shut at 9am after reaching capacity. They include Alfred Health’s walk-through clinic in the CBD and Aughtie Walk in Albert Park, Montague Street in South Melbourne, St Vincent’s hospital walk-through site in Fitzroy, La Trobe University’s Bundoora campus and Monash University at Clayton. A long queue was also seen outside the Bourke Street walk-in site, with people facing a wait of several hours to tested. Acting premier James Merlino said on Sunday that opening times at centres had been extended considering the number of people wanting to be tested as they prepared for leave or holiday travel during Christmas week. I know that there are particular sites where the wait is long but the average is 45 minutes to an hour or so ... I ask people to be patient. We’re expanding and extending it as much as we can. The state government has increased capacity by about 55% since October, with about 260 sites now in operation across Victoria. This means that NSW’s numbers are nearly double that of Victoria, a reversal of a weeks-long trend of more infections below the border. Sydney train commuters are facing major disruptions with another strike due to hit the network, reports AAP. The action will disrupt the Sydney Trains-operated network as Rail, Tram, and Bus Union members take action from 8pm Monday to 4am on Tuesday. Transport for NSW has warned train frequency will slow from 6pm and people could be left stranded. Buses will replace train services on all lines between 8pm and 4am but Sydney commuters are being encouraged to avoid travelling on Monday afternoon and Tuesday morning. Intercity and regional services will also be affected, with some of the services suspended from 3.30pm on Monday before resuming at 5.30am on Tuesday. Transport for NSW says there will be flow-on effects throughout the week, as many services are nearly fully booked as people travel home for Christmas. NSW TrainLink chief executive Dale Merrick said in a statement: This is significant disruption that means many regional and rural customers will not be able to travel, have a dislocated journey on road coaches or will need to make other plan. The strike comes after industrial action last Tuesday when RTBU members refused to drive foreign-built trains used on about 75% of services. The union and Transport for NSW are at loggerheads as they negotiate a new enterprise agreement covering more than 10,000 staff. RTBU NSW secretary Alex Claassens has said the government is refusing to deliver on “basic hygiene, safety and privatisation commitments”. Transport for NSW said workers had been offered new enterprise agreements, including a 2.5% pay rise in the first year. The union wants a 3.5% wage rise. The Morrison government has been warned a coordinated interference campaign unleashed by foreign states or malicious actors through social media platforms is a serious risk to manage in the looming federal election campaign. With the federal contest now imminent, a Senate select committee established in late 2019 to investigate the risks posed to Australia’s democracy by foreign interference through social media platforms including Facebook, Twitter and WeChat has used its first report to urge the Coalition to adopt better protocols before the poll. The new report concludes Australia currently lacks some of the institutional architecture needed to respond effectively and proactively to the threat of foreign interference. You can read the full report below: A freak weekend storm on Sydney’s northern beaches that killed a woman, ripped roofs off buildings and uprooted trees has left thousands of households without power, reports AAP. Described as a “mini-cyclone”, the storm tore across suburbs from Mona Vale to Forestville, causing a trail of destruction. A massive Norfolk pine tree hit powerlines, which fell on three women who were trying to take shelter at a car park at Ocean Street Narrabeen. A 68-year-old woman died at the scene, while two other women – aged 19 and 71 – were critically injured, police said. The two injured women were taken to Royal North Shore hospital, where they both remain in a serious but stable condition. The State Emergency Service responded to nearly 600 calls for help and volunteers are still on the ground with police and NSW Fire &amp; Rescue crews who are helping people clear debris and secure homes that have lost roofs. Adam Jones from the SES told ABC most calls were for leaking roofs and fallen trees that were blocking roads as well as downed powerlines and people who were stuck in lifts. We can’t promise that we’ll have everyone ready for Christmas but that is the goal of every member out there today ... Powerlines are incredibly dangerous. If they are down, stay away from them. Do not assume that they’re turned off because they’re on the ground. Try to stay 16-20 metres away from them. More than 35,000 homes lost power, with areas including North Turramurra, Frenchs Forest, Forestville and St Ives still affected. Ausgrid says employees were working around the clock to restore services. A freak storm has lashed Syndey’s Norther Beaches over the weekend, with many still without power and hundreds of hours of clean up work to go. I’ll bring you more updates on the situation there over the morning. From prisoners to the homeless and people living with disabilities – these are some of the at-risk communities hidden from public view during the pandemic. Now the health workers working with them share their stories. Covid was a little bit outside our realm because we were in a relatively protected environment. That whole barrier of being isolated was somewhat beneficial as long as the virus stayed out of there. There was always going to be an outbreak [though]; you can only build a net, it’s never a wall, and eventually something will get through there. Now they were in a closed community where people live together, many who aren’t vaccinated, so it didn’t take long for the virus to spread. Prison’s a little bit like a game of Jenga – not every bit of wood can go next to every bit of wood – so to move guys around takes a lot of logistics. It was really interesting trying to deliver care through a metal door which was locked. A flap would open up, a finger would come out and you’d do a set of observations, you’d do a temperature [check] and make sure they were OK at least once or two times a day. You can read the full report below: A man who was confined to his room at his Melbourne sharehouse and forced to go to the toilet in a bucket after being diagnosed with Covid has prompted calls for better awareness of support available for people isolating during the pandemic. Melbourne man Qas Ansari, 37, said he was worried he would pass Covid onto his three housemates, so they sealed off his room using plastic sheeting, building an airlock over his door, and for two days he used a bucket for a toilet and did not shower. “I understood why it needed to be done, the hardest bit was using a bucket, but if I kept using the bathroom and kitchen I would create more opportunities to get ill,” Ansari said. You can read the full report below: Kaldor says the national reopening plan needs to be able to react and adapt to the landscape of Covid-19 across the world as it changes: Every plan needs to be responsive to changes in circumstances, and what we’ve seen with Covid is that there are twists and turns that are unexpected. And when Omicron emerged, the first thing to figure out – as with any new variant – is first of all, how infectious and secondly, how much disease is caused and particularly how well are the vaccines working? And we’ve got the answer to the first one of those three, but we haven’t got the answer to the second and the third is yet. Kaldor has warned that Australia shouldn’t base too many of their decision on the extremely early studies that suggest Omicrom may cause a less severe form of the disease. So there have been reports from South Africa that strongly suggest it’s less severe than Delta. But we need to take that information cautiously in our contexts, for a couple of reasons. First, the information for it is largely from younger people who have traditionally had lower severe outcomes. But also it’s a population in South Africa that’s had a lot of exposure to circulating virus and maybe a lot of people whose immune systems are more primed than ours would be here. In a report by the Sydney Morning Herald, the director of the Doherty Institute, Prof Sharon Lewin, who advised on Morrison’s national plan to ease Australia into living with Covid-19, says we should pump the reopening brakes as concerns grow about the Omicron variant. She called for the return of mask-wearing indoors and stopping large gatherings at pubs and nightclubs. And she isn’t the only one. Prof John Kaldor, an epidemiologist at the Kirby Institute tells ABC radio that we just don’t know enough about Omicron just yet. This is a big unknown because we have very good information about how much protection we get from the vaccines against the previous variants, but we have very little information about how much protection we get against Omicron. There is evidence from overseas and from studies in the laboratory that there will be reduced efficacy, so particularly in the absence of a booster it may actually be a much more severe outcome in terms of its severity. Butler has been asked if Labor would be calling for booster shots to be moved forward to four or even three months, as a number of other countries have done, but he says they will be sticking with Atagi’s official advice. The opposition [will follow] the public health advice. Atagi has decided not to shorten it from five to four or even three months. Right now the government’s rollout isn’t even meeting the demand of a five-month eligibility ... let alone being able to meet the extra demand for a four-month or three months eligibility would provide. Now it’s time to talk about the booster shot program, and this morning Labor is coming out and attacking the government hard over this. The shadow health minister, Mark Butler, tells ABC radio that Australia is once again falling behind the rest of the developed world. The first six weeks so far we’ve done a little more than 1 million boosters. By the end of next week, we’d have to have delivered 4 million. 4 million people are supposed to receive their booster shots this month. There’s no way we’re going to achieve that under Scott Morrison’s program. Liberal party members will select a new candidate to run in former attorney general Christian Porter’s seat after he announced he wouldn’t contest the next election, reports AAP. The Perth-based seat of Pearce was held by Porter on a 7.5% margin at the last federal election in 2019 but is now considered a much tighter contest after a boundary redistribution. Labor has preselected City of Wanneroo mayor Tracey Roberts. Roberts’ council colleague Linda Aitken is touted as a potential Liberal candidate, as is former navy officer Miquela Riley. The election is due to be held by May. Porter has held the seat since 2013 and the seat has remained in Liberal hands since its inception in 1990. The former minister said he wouldn’t recontest the seat after being dumped from federal cabinet following him accepting legal fees from a blind trust. In a lengthy Facebook post, he said he wouldn’t be able to give the next three years his all after “experiencing the harshness of modern politics more than most”. Porter sued the ABC after it published a story about allegations an unnamed cabinet minister had raped a now-deceased woman in 1988. He strenuously denied the allegations after outing himself as the accused minister and has since settled a defamation case against the national broadcaster. But it was then revealed in September anonymous donors had paid for part of Porter’s legal fees. Porter denied any conflict of interest and said no banned donors contributed money to the fund, but nonetheless tendered his resignation from cabinet rather than publicly reveal the donors. The party members will make their selection on Monday. Good morning everyone, it’s a lovely Monday morning (as much as any Monday can be) and there is plenty of news to get through. It’s Matilda Bosley here and why don’t we jump into the day. Today after months of strict border restrictions the Northern Territory is opening up to the rest of the country – well, the rest of the vaccinated country at least. Travellers from all around Australia will now be able to travel anywhere in the territory as long as they avoid remote communities where less than 80% of the eligible population is vaccinated. Arrivals must also record three negative PCR tests, one before crossing the border and two in the days afterwards. In other news, the federal government has committed to spending another $78m to help Australia’s aviation sector recover from the Covid-19 pandemic. The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, has announced a “aviation recovery framework” which he says is aimed at rebuilding the workforce and upgrading regional infrastructure. This will involve a “strategic aviation advisory forum”, whose job it will be to brief the federal government and provide annual “health checks” about the state of the sector. The funding includes $4m to increase the number of women in the sector and $15m to upgrade remote aerodromes. Another $29m will be made available through the third round of a regional aviation infrastructure program. A $30m rebate program will help aviation operators upgrade aircraft safety. OK! With that out of the way, why don’t we jump right into the day!The NSW government has approved the construction of a $600m gas-fired power station backed by the Morrison government in the state’s Hunter region. Snowy Hydro’s application to build the 660-megawatt power station in Kurri Kurri was approved by Rob Stokes in one of his final decisions as the state’s planning minister before Anthony Roberts takes over the portfolio. The Morrison government announced in May it would spend up to $600m on the project after warning it would step in if the private sector did not commit to building 1,000MW to replace the Liddell coal-fired generator in 2023. The NSW government declared the project critical state significant infrastructure and fast-tracked its environmental assessment. The government confirmed on Monday night it had approved the project after the NSW planning department earlier emailed stakeholders – apparently in error – to notify them of the approval. A spokesperson for the NSW department of planning, industry and environment said the plant was approved “following rigorous assessment and consideration of community feedback”. The power station will be built on part of the site of the former Kurri Kurri aluminium smelter, which ceased operations in 2012 and has since been demolished. According to the environmental impact statement lodged with the NSW government, the plant is expected to run at just 2% of its full capacity across the year, filling gaps at times of peak demand. “This project will improve energy reliability and security in the national energy market as it brings on renewable energy from wind and solar farms, and transitions away from coal-fired power generation over the next 10-15 years,” the department’s spokesperson said. “The project will provide on-demand energy when the grid needs it and will only operate on average 2% over a year.” The project is subject to environmental conditions. The department’s spokesperson said Snowy Hydro was required to prepare a net zero power generation plan to support the transition toward net zero emissions. “This may include using hydrogen gas, which would be subject to further planning assessment,” they said. The federal energy minister, Angus Taylor, said the approval was an “important next step” for the project which aimed “to keep prices low and the lights on while creating jobs in the Hunter region”. “The Morrison government will continue to take the necessary steps to safeguard the delivery of affordable and reliable power and ensure Australian households and businesses get a fair deal on energy,” Taylor said on Monday. The project still requires environmental approval under commonwealth laws from the federal environment minister Sussan Ley. Nic Clyde, a spokesperson for the Lock the Gate Alliance, said the project was a waste of public funds and a white elephant that Australia did not need. “It’s disappointing that as the world shifts towards renewable energy and zero carbon technology, the Perrottet and Morrison governments are spending more than half a billion in public money propping up this polluting gas plant, and many more millions on the fossil fuel industry as a whole,” he said. The Gas Free Hunter Alliance said the approval showed “total disregard to the hundreds of locals who oppose the development”. “It is particularly disturbing that this project has received the green light from the NSW state government after it has made commitments to net zero emissions by 2050,” alliance representative Fiona Lee said. Earlier this year, the federal Labor opposition called for the Morrison government to release its business case for spending taxpayer funds on the project. The former chair of the Energy Security Board, Kerry Schott, has said the project makes little commercial sense and an analysis by Victoria University’s energy policy centre found the project had no prospect of generating enough revenue to justify its cost. Snowy Hydro declined to comment. With additional reporting by Elias VisontayThe pharmaceutical firm GlaxoSmithKline has hired the former Tesco boss Sir Dave Lewis to chair the consumer healthcare business that it plans to spin off next year. GSK told investors on Monday morning that Lewis, who left Tesco in September last year, would be appointed as non-executive chair designate from 1 January. The group’s consumer healthcare business – which runs brands including Sensodyne toothpaste – will demerge from the wider group in mid-2022 and list separately on the London Stock Exchange. Lewis said: “GSK Consumer Healthcare is a world-class business with significant prospects and a high-quality leadership team. I am looking forward to being part of its exciting future as an independent company and the very positive impact it can have on people’s health all over the world.” Lewis was parachuted in to run Tesco in 2014 and oversaw a five-year turnaround from a financial crisis and accounting scandal that had almost shredded the grocer’s blue chip reputation. His departure was unexpected at the time. Announcing his decision in late 2019, Lewis said he was leaving the company in “position of strength” and had completed a recovery plan mapped out at a time when the supermarket had issued five profits warnings in a year. He cashed in more than £13m of share options in October 2020 as he exercised bonuses handed out over his time at the helm. The payments were part of more than £30m in total pay since he joined Tesco. Before joining Tesco, Lewis was a veteran of the consumer goods giant Unilever, a rival to GSK’s consumer healthcare business. Sir Jonathan Symonds, the chair of GSK, said: “I am delighted to welcome Dave as chair designate of the new consumer healthcare company. He brings outstanding global consumer and retail sector experience that will be of valuable support to Brian McNamara and the management team as they deliver the full potential of this new world-leading consumer healthcare company.”It covers 9 million sq miles from the Atlantic to the Indian Ocean and from the Sahara in the north to Cape Point in the south. And in between lie some of the world’s most ancient cultural sites and precious natural wonders. However, despite its vast size, sub-Saharan Africa has never been proportionately represented on Unesco’s world heritage list, its 98 sites dwarfed by Europe, North America and Asia. Now, the first African to be made head of the world heritage centre has said that needs to change – and fast. Lazare Eloundou Assomo, a Cameroonian who led the reconstruction of the Timbuktu mausoleums after they were badly damaged in 2012 by Islamist fighters allied to al-Qaida, has said it will be a priority of his time in office. “What we think has room for improvement is that, when you look at the list, you still, 50 years after [the signing of the world heritage convention], see that there are some regions of the world that are not equally represented in the list as compared to others,” he told the Guardian. “This is something that we, together with the [Unesco] member states and other state parties, have … to address.” Assomo, who started in his new job earlier this month, said small island developing states had also historically suffered from a disproportionately low number of recognised sites. Of the 27 countries with no sites of any kind on the Unesco list, only four are not either in Africa or classed as a small island state. At the other end of the spectrum, wealthy countries – such as Italy (58), China (56) and Germany (51) – have ratcheted up dozens of sites, making the most of the very tangible influx of money and tourism that comes from the more abstract notion of recognising a country’s heritage. For Assomo, it is not a question of chasing numbers, but of using Unesco’s collective cultural and financial clout to help underrepresented countries overcome the lack of resources and expertise that has proved an obstacle in the complex and costly nomination process. “The training and capacity-building of heritage experts is an area where we will have to put more emphasis [on] in the future to help address this imbalance,” said Assomo. Unesco would like to see greater cooperation between member states, he added, with countries in Europe and other regions helping to fund training programmes. “Africa is the cradle of humankind. It has so many cultural, natural sites that are important, which people value a lot,” said Assomo. “But some categories of site in Africa are not necessarily the same type of categories that you find in other regions.” The “sacred forests” of west Africa – patches of land preserved over countless generations because of their religious and cultural significance – were a good example, he said. According to a recent study in Togo, the forests are as environmentally important as they are culturally precious, and, on a continent bearing the brunt of the climate crisis, their protection is vital. “Africa is today … on the frontline of the effect of climate change. This is also something … which makes us believe that mobilising our efforts for [existing] world heritage sites in Africa should be a priority,” said Assomo. Both natural habitats, such as the Niokolo-Koba national park in Senegal, and cultural treasures, such as Mozambique’s San Sebastian fortress, battered by increasingly intense cyclones and heavy rains, are vulnerable to the changing climate. Assomo, a former Unesco head representative in Mali, is particularly worried about the impact on Timbuktu, the fabled city in the Sahara – and world heritage site since 1988, which has been affected by long-term desertification. “If we don’t do something about the effect of climate change, about the natural disasters [that] continue multiplying … If we don’t do something about the growing [number of] forest fires; if we don’t do something about hurricanes … these sites are going to disappear. “Our responsibility is to work with countries to ensure that we maintain them and we preserve them and we pass them on to the next generation. So for me, it’s an urgent matter,” said Assomo. Africa’s 98 world heritage sites range from the famous – Tanzania’s Serengeti national park, for example – to the lesser-known, such as Koutammakou, the Land of the Batammariba, in Togo. Fifteen African sites make up nearly 30% of the “in danger” world heritage list, due to a variety of threats including poaching, illegal logging and conflict. One site that is not yet on the endangered list is Lalibela in north Ethiopia, a place of pilgrimage and home to 11 medieval monolithic cave churches carved out of the rock, which in recent weeks has been fought over by government forces and Tigrayan rebels. Assomo said he could not comment on “national issues”. But whenever heritage sites became involved in conflict, Unesco has urged those in control to protect the sites from looting and vandalism, he said. Through his work in Timbuktu, where Unesco helped reconstruct the mausoleums wrecked in 2012, he has learned the value that cultural heritage can have in the aftermath of conflict. He said: “[That work] has shown how culture and cultural heritage are important to help people recover from trauma, start having an economic living after the conflict, but also help bring back the social cohesion that was lost because of the conflict.” • This article was amended on 20 December 2021. Kruger national park in South Africa is not a Unesco world heritage site as an earlier version said.A severe storm on Sydney’s northern beaches on Sunday that left one woman dead and three injured, tore the roof off buildings and felled trees, was a microburst event, according to New South Wales emergency services. On Monday, NSW State Emergency Service superintendent Stuart Fisher said: “At approximately 3.45pm yesterday, a microburst appeared out of nowhere, situated over the northern beaches, resulting in over 550 requests for assistance and 150,000 phone calls.” What is a microburst? A microburst is a small-scale version of a weather event known as a downburst – a powerful current of air that moves downwards to ground level and then spreads outwards in all directions. According to the Bureau of Meteorology, downbursts typically last five to 15 minutes and have unusually high downward wind speeds. During a downburst, peak winds can exceed 200km/h. A microburst refers to a downburst concentrated over a small area – less than 4km in diameter. Downbursts can affect wider areas than tornadoes. Those that are larger than 4km in diameter are called macrobursts. How do they form? Dr Linden Ashcroft, a climate scientist at the University of Melbourne, said downbursts can occur during severe thunderstorms. “It happens when we get a lot of updraft – which is when you’ve got a lot of quickly rising air – inside a thunderstorm,” she said. “This air is rising and rising … and it’s picking up a lot of rainfall and hail. When that updraft weakens for whatever reason, this mass of cold air can’t be held up in the cloud anymore.” Downbursts form when hail or large raindrops fall through drier air, cooling the surrounding air as they melt or evaporate. This colder air – which is denser than warmer air – falls to the ground. “As it falls, there’s a bit of evaporation that occurs and that allows it to cool down even more, which makes it fall even faster,” Ashcroft said. “Then all of a sudden, you get this massive burst or this big collapse of cold air outside the bottom of a thunderstorm. “You get this huge mass of air smashing into the surface of the Earth and then rushing out in all directions – in 360 degrees.” According to the BoM, a downburst occurs in a similar process to “pouring a large bucket of water from height on to a path covered in autumn leaves. The leaves are spread forwards and outwards from where the water first hits the ground.” How common are they? Microbursts can occur during severe thunderstorms all around the world, Ashcroft said. “They can be dry, but the one we saw in Sydney was wet, so there was a lot of moisture as well that collapsed out with this cold air.” Certain factors need to be present for them to occur, such as evaporative cooling and strong winds inside the storm cloud. Determining whether the intensity and frequency of microbursts may change in future is difficult to predict, Ashcroft said. “We do know that severe heavy rainfall events have been identified as becoming more intense [with climate change],” she said. “We don’t know enough about severe wind events like this to understand how they are changing as a result of climate change. We also have to factor in this year that we are experiencing a La Niña event.” Victim remembered A yoga instructor heading home from a neighbourhood Christmas gathering has been identified as the woman killed in Narrabeen on Sunday afternoon. The storm, which ripped roofs off apartment buildings and took out power for 35,000 homes, struck as 68-year-old Susan Cobham was heading home from a party near Narrabeen Surf Life Saving Club. “Lightning hit a massive Norfolk pine which subsequently fell, crushing her and hitting two other women,” her son Ben Porter posted to her Facebook page. “It was an unlucky freak accident and she has left us far too early and will be sorely missed.” Cobham, who was educated in Uruguay and previously worked as a scientist for AstraZeneca, was “a terrific person, a real bright spark and will be much missed”, friend Penny Auburn posted. Former AstraZeneca colleague Karishma Pai said Cobham was “a great colleague and even better a friend to many of us who worked in the lab alongside her”. Her death has been referred to the coroner, delaying funeral plans. Two women injured in the same tree fall remain in Royal North Shore hospital. A 71-year-old woman was in a serious but stable condition on Monday afternoon while a 19-year-old woman had been upgraded to stable. – with Australian Associated PressGabriel Boric, a leftist former student leader, will become Chile’s youngest president after storming to a resounding victory in a run-off vote against his ultra-conservative far-right opponent, José Antonio Kast. With nearly 97% of the vote counted, the 35-year-old claimed 55.8% to take a 12 percentage point lead over Kast, who quickly accepted his defeat and called Boric to congratulate him. “We are a generation that emerged in public life demanding our rights be respected as rights and not treated like consumer goods or a business,” Boric said in front of a vast crowd packed into a Santiago boulevard. “We no longer will permit that the poor keep paying the price of Chile’s inequality.” Boric has vowed that he will oversee a youth-led form of inclusive government to attack nagging poverty and inequality, which he has pinned on the free market economic model that was imposed during the Augusto Pinochet dictatorship. His progressive campaign promises included fighting climate by blocking a proposed mining project in the world’s largest copper producing nation and ending Chile’s private pension system — a hallmark of the Pinochet neoliberal model. “The times ahead will not be easy,” Boric said on Sunday. “Only with social cohesion, re-finding ourselves and sharing common ground will we be able to advance towards truly sustainable development – which reaches every Chilean.” His relative inexperience was regularly highlighted by his rivals, but on Sunday night Boric was fluent and assured as he reiterated his campaign pledges before the raucous crowd of supporters. He thanked each candidate in turn - including Kast - and reinforced his commitment to Chile’s constitutional process, a key consideration for many as the country embarks upon this latest chapter in a turbulent period of transition. “Just, truth and respect,” Boric said as he signed off to deafening cheers. “We will continue.” Kast, a father of nine, said earlier outside his campaign headquarters: “Gabriel Boric can count on us.” The air on Sunday night was split by the sound of car horns and the jubilant chants of Boric’s supporters, who thronged the street corners, plazas and wide boulevards of downtown Santiago. “This is such a massive win – I still can’t quite believe it!” exclaimed Communist party congresswoman Karol Cariola outside Boric’s campaign hub in downtown Santiago. Kast won the first round vote in 21 November by two percentage points, but Boric was able to prevail on Sunday by expanding beyond his base in Santiago and attracting voters in rural areas. For example, in the northern region of Antofagasta, where he finished third in the first round of voting, he trounced Kast by almost 20 points. In Santiago’s subway, where a fare rise in 2019 triggered a wave of nationwide protests that exposed the shortcomings of Chile’s free market model, young supporters of Boric waved flags emblazoned with the candidate’s name while jumping and shouting as they headed downtown for his victory speech. “This is a historic day,” said Boris Soto, a teacher. “We’ve defeated not only fascism, and the rightwing, but also fear.” On a sweltering day in Chile, voting was marred by public transport difficulties across the country, although the government claimed it had done everything in its power to guarantee voters could reach polling stations. Boric, who comes from Punta Arenas in the far south of Chile, has enjoyed a meteoric rise from student politics to be the next occupant of La Moneda, Chile’s presidential palace. He has changed his image markedly since his participation in 2011’s student movement, emerging from a group of young student politicians to serve two terms in the national congress before running for the presidency. At 35, he will become Chile’s youngest ever president when he is sworn in on 11 March. His term lasts until 2026 and will encompass a period of social and political transformation for the country, which is currently rewriting its constitution – the result of the 2019 mass a protests. Associated Press contributed to this reportThe Cardinals are 3-4 over their last seven games after opening the season with a 7-0 record, transforming, on a dime, from the league’s only two-way juggernaut into a bundle of parts masquerading as a team. On Sunday, against the Lions in Detroit, you could almost feel the shudders of concern seeping through the screen. All those early-era Kliff Kingsbury concerns were back in full force: The dodgy clock management, the lack of faith in an (admittedly rough) offensive line clouding the offensive play-calling, the boom-or-bust defensive doctrine striking out more than it hit – again. Kingsbury’s team had the look of a side coming unstuck at the wrong moment. Their final three opponents: The Colts, Cowboys, and Broncos. Drop one – or two – and there’s a good chance the Cardinals wind up in a wild-card spot, and this after opening the year as the league’s last undefeated team. “I thought they played better, coached better, and had a better sense of urgency from the start,” Kingsbury said of the Lions post-game. The Cardinals didn’t just lose. They were beaten up. Offense, defense, special teams, it didn’t matter. And while the result could be held up as yet another example of football as a whole – and this season in particular – being weird, that would do a disservice to the Lions, and cover up some of the long-term concerns about the Cardinals. Don’t look now, but the Fighting Dan Campbell’s have been simmering for some time. As 2-11-1 teams go, the Lions are as good as it gets. They play with a frenzied energy. They’re smart, stay within themselves, and play hard. That last part can often be shuffled into the category of vapid coach-ism. But with the Lions, it’s visceral. Every game, every possession, Detroit makes you earn it. Campbell, Ted Lasso in Hulk Hogan’s body, has built a team that’s smart, fights like crazy, and is coached by a staff that does creative things, schematically, on both sides of the ball. This isn’t a typical two-win team – and few are as well-versed in such matters as Detroit. Still: This is not a game that a legitimate contender loses this late in the season, not while jockeying for playoff positioning. Detroit is just the third team in the Super Bowl era to enter a game with fewer than two wins and beat a 10-win opponent. It was a defeat that exposed flaws in the Cardinals’ construct. Without Deandre Hopkins, out until the playoffs with an injury, the offense looks impotent when it matters most, save for some individual moments of Kyler Murray magic. They drove to the 10-yard line against the Lions four times on Sunday, coming away with just six points. When Arizona’s offense is rolling – when the aggressive plays, speedy weapons, and up-tempo pace work in unison – the offense is less about executing football plays as it is psychological warfare. There is no defense you can draw up to slow down Murray, Hopkins, Christian Kirk, Rondale Moore, AJ Green, and a free-flowing run-game. They’re better than you, and they know it, hitting you over the head with the same plays over and over again, and banking on the brilliance of their stars to make it click. Rip one of the much-needed bricks out of the facade, though, and the whole thing is liable to tumble down. Losing Hopkins and the threat of the run game has seen the offense stall out, defaulting back to the Save Us Kyler territory that has been a feature ever since he was drafted. There are bigger issues are on defense. Since Week 9, the Cardinals’ defense ranks 12th in EPA per play, a measure of a group’s down-to-down effectiveness. Worse than that: They’ve sunk all the way to 28th in EPA per play on first downs, the metric by which the league’s top defenses judge themselves. First down is the new third down. It’s where a defense gets into attack mode, particularly if the offense is liable to get into predictable looks. Getting off the field on third downs is a staple of shouty-man-on-TV analysis, but success on first downs is more predictive of long-term success. Stopping a team on third down matters, but what difference does it make if they already strung together a succession of first downs on early downs. Winning the first down – forcing a negative play or creating a second-and-10 – is how defenses can keep up in the era of the pace-and-space, chunk play offense. Attack early. Force a loss. Then sit back and rally to the ball. That’s the mantra ringing out across football at all levels. Do that, and a defense ups its odds of cutting off a drive before it can begin. The key to a good third-down defense, as coach’s like to point out, is winning on first down. No team has embraced that more than the Cardinals. Arizona sends blitzes and pressures on early downs almost by organizational fiat. Early in the season, it was booming. As opposing offenses have adjusted, it’s started to bust. Losing JJ Watt to injury has compounded the issue. Against the league’s leading defense, life for the game’s most porous offense was … easy. Jared Goff (Jared Goff!) was rarely troubled. He knew what was coming, was prepared, and got rid of the ball in double-time. He completed 21 of 26 passes for 216 yards, three touchdowns and zero picks, shredding the all-out-attack style. “We have got to figure it out,” Kingsbury said post-game. There is no one answer; there are debilitating problems in all three phases. With three games left against tricky opponents, Kingsbury is running out of time to find any solutions. Video of the week Panthers field goal kicker Zane Gonzalez sustained a leg injury during pregame warmups in Buffalo, which led to the team holding open tryouts among the rest of its gameday roster to find a kicker. The results: not pretty. There is something both magical and unedifying about seeing some of Planet Earth’s finest athletes unable to kick a ball. Brandon Zylstra, a receiver, won the open tryout and was handed kickoff duties. Without a viable kicker, the Panthers opted to go for it on fourth downs rather than attempt field goals and to try two-point conversions instead of kicking point-afters. They were hammered 31-17 by the Bills. MVP of the week Jonathan Taylor, running back, Indianapolis Colts. What can’t Taylor do? Runner, receiver, blocker, the Colts’ do-everything back leads the league in the totally fictitious Just Makes Plays stat. We can quibble back and forth about the universal value of running backs, but Jonathan proved his value to this specific Colts team on Saturday night. Taylor was the star of the Colts’ 27-17 win over the Patriots, scoring a breakaway touchdown to ice the game after the Patriots rallied from 20-0 down to pull within a score in Indy. Taylor finished with 170 yards rushing on 29 carries, capped with a 67-yard touchdown run to put the game away. The Colts’ offensive line deserves a heaping of credit, too. It was not a dominant performance, but it was an important one. Indianapolis does not ask a whole lot of its line (less so with center Ryan Kelly out on Saturday night). Their job is to run off the ball, mash the defensive front, look to distort the defensive wall, and offer enough daylight for Taylor to dance and wiggle at the second level. This isn’t an all-singing, all-dancing linemen ballet, with tackles and guards pulling and moving in any number of wonky directions. It’s old-school football, featuring a classic one-cut-and-go running back – perhaps the finest single-cut runner in the league. Against one of the league’s most ferocious fronts, the Colts’ offensive line and back was still able to consistently churn out yards on the ground. And that despite Bill Belichick trying to force the ball into Carson Wentz’s hand. The Colts didn’t need their line to win the game, but just offer enough oomph that it didn’t devolve into a Wentz-or-bust game. The line did its job, and Taylor did the rest. Stat of the week The Ravens were without 12 players who count at least $2m against their cap in their 31-30 loss to the Packers: Ronnie Stanley; Marcus Peters; Marlon Humphrey; Calais Campbell; Derek Wolfe; Gus Edwards; DeShon Elliott; Patrick Ricard; Jimmy Smith; Sammy Watkins; Chuck Clark; Lamar Jackson. They count a combined $65m against the cap (36%). Here are a couple more doozies: Six of the Ravens’ top-seven cornerbacks were out vs. the Packers, and they lost the seventh to an in-game injury; the team was down to its fifth offensive tackle, having to insert practice-squad player David Sharpe into the lineup after another in-game injury; at kickoff, the Ravens had 23 (!) players on either injured reserves or the Covid-19 list. And the game still came down to a winner-take-all two-point play at the end of regulation. Do we hand John Harbaugh the Coach of the Year award now? With a roster of cast-offs and lost-looking rookies, the Ravens were able to keep pace with the Packers. Backup quarterback Tyler Huntley was the star of the show. He filled in admirably in place of Lamar Jackson, relying on Mark Andrews, Baltimore’s lone, healthy offensive star to carry the ravaged offense. Huntley posted four touchdowns (two with his arm, two with his legs), and continually found a way to make plays to keep the chains moving and out the Ravens in scoring position. Huntley’s play as a backup this season will earn him starter consideration when he hits free agency this offseason. Quote of the week “Christmas in Green Bay. Where else would you rather be?” – Aaron Rodgers after clinching the NFC with the Packers’ 31-30 win over the Ravens Rodgers has been battling a toe injury that has inhibited his deep and intermediate passing over the past month. Against the Ravens, he was back to his best, picking on a roughed-up defense to the tune of 268 yards, three touchdowns and zero interceptions. Getting Marquez Valdes-Scantling back in the fold is a game-changer for the Green Bay offense, too. They’ve lacked a second receiver who can consistently toast man-coverage opposite Adams. When healthy, Valdes-Scantling is that guy. Rodgers targeted Valdes-Scantling seven times against the Ravens, the same total as Adams. The receiver finished with 98 yards and a touchdown grab. With the win, the Packers moved to 11-3, clinching the NFC North and a playoff berth. Elsewhere around the league • After a week of back-and-forth between the NFL league office, team owners, and the NFL Players Association, the league has opted to shift to targeted Covid testing. Meaning: Weekly testing of every player is out. Now, only those with symptoms will be tested. Unvaccinated players will still be tested daily. Players will also be able to return from the Covid list sooner than they could under the previous policy. The change changes come two days after the NFL eased its return-to-play protocol for players who test positive, one day after three games were postponed, and at the end of a week in which the virus sent over 100 players to the league’s Covid list. • The shift in policy is about the obvious: Money. The NFL has no extra weeks built into its schedule to allow for games to be rescheduled. Postponing two games from this weekend to next Tuesday has already caused all sorts of consternation about the fairness of those games (and the games that will follow) for the four teams involved and the general integrity of the league. By reducing testing, the league will see a reduced number of cases, a reduced number of players forced to miss games, and a decreased likelihood of a team being unable to field a team or the league needing to reschedule further games – which would issues of competitive balance, and could impact the league’s TV and sponsorship deals. • When will NFL players learn not to mess with the Football Gods? After Vegas’ debacle in Kansas City, you’d have been forgiven for thinking it would be a while until a side attempted the road-team-stomps-on-the-home-teams-logo routine. Nope. The Titans took it upon themselves to dance all over the Steelers’ logo during the pre-game warm-ups. Down 13-3 at half-time, the Steelers came from behind to clinch a late 19-13 win. Over the last three weeks, teams that have stomped on an opposing team’s logo have been outscored 67-22. • This weekend’s AFC results mean: If the Kansas City Chiefs win out, they will be the number one seed in the conference. The Chiefs have the Steelers, Bengals, and Broncos left on the schedule. If they win all three remaining games, they will take the number one seed and the sole bye week heading into the playoffs ... just as everyone thought a month-and-a-half ago. • Tua Tagovailoa overcame an uneven performance to lead the Dolphins to their sixth consecutive victory. Tagovailoa twice led the Dolphins back from a 10-point deficit against the Jets. He also led an impressive bounce-back drive after tossing an ugly-looking pick-six late in the game. The Dolphins are now 7-7, just one game behind the Bills in the AFC East and well and truly in the playoff picture.As his engineers tinkered away with the car parked in the tent just behind him, the former Formula One world champion Nico Rosberg looked down the mud-splattered paddock and said: “For all sports in the world, this is the direction we need to go in.” Rosberg, now a full-on sustainability entrepreneur since hanging up his racing gloves, was back competing, albeit this time as founder and chief executive of RXR racing. “This is the first motorsport ever to be built on a social cause. We are a global role model for sport.” His new role has brought him to deepest Dorset in the middle of winter for the final race in the inaugural season of the innovative Extreme E championship, an FIA-sanctioned series for electric off-road SUVs. This new concept of racing is designed to shine the spotlight on the climate crisis by holding races in remote parts of the world affected. After events in Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Greenland and Sardinia, the season should have ended in Patagonia but for pandemic reasons it’s being held at Bovington Army camp on the south coast of England. This race has been named the Jurassic X-Prix, certainly not a reference to any dinosaurs, more a nod to the famous coastline nearby. Just a few tents down from Rosberg’s was the car belonging to a very familiar foe and the only one that could stop him from lifting this year’s title – the purple liveried X44 team, formed by Sir Lewis Hamilton. “How cool is this?” the German said. “Not only are we fighting for a championship, we’re also in it for a good cause. The more intense our battle, the more impact we’ll have, the more awareness we can raise – that’s amazing.” All weekend, much like the rest of the season, the two teams had dominated, going head to head down to the final lap of the season (stop me if you’ve heard this one before). In the end the X44 car was by far the strongest on this course, driven by Cristina Gutiérrez of Spain and the seven-time world rally champion Sébastien Loeb of France. It put them level on points with RXR, who finished fourth here, but Rosberg’s team claimed the title by having more race victories. Agony for Hamilton’s team (again). The paddock was full of motorsport celebrities. Jenson Button was there, in charge of his team JBXE, while the former rally world champions Carlos Sainz and Loeb were both driving. Jutta Kleinschmidt, the first female Dakar Rally winner, was there too, as was Jamie Chadwick, the first winner of the all-female W Series in 2019, who followed up with victory again this year. This is because gender equality also plays a major part in Extreme E’s philosophy. Unique in the world of motorsport, each team has to field one male and one female driver, with equal roles to both. Catie Munnings, the 24‑year‑old British driver for the Andretti United team, only made her debut in the world rally championship last year but this year she has been racing against heroes such as Loeb. She is the unofficial face of Extreme E and even represented them at the recent Cop26 in Glasgow. Button is fully behind the mixed‑gender racing of Extreme E. “Motorsport has been a male‑dominated sport for decades,” he said. “But this brings a lot of awareness to female drivers, which is great. It means we’re going to see more girls at a young age get interested and that will filter up.” Each of the nine teams has one car, a fully electric SUV named Odyssey 21. These futuristic machines are nearly identical, the only alterations the teams are allowed to make are with the bodywork. The batteries have been developed by Williams Advanced Engineering, designed to withstand the extreme temperatures, conditions and terrains. They can produce a maximum power output of 470kW (equivalent to approximately 630bhp) enough to project the 1,780kg SUV from 0-62mph in 4.5 seconds at gradients of up to 130%. To power up the batteries, Extreme E is using pioneering hydrogen fuel cell technology which will enable its race fleet to be charged using zero emission energy. This innovative, off-grid solution from AFC Energy uses water and sun to generate hydrogen power. Not only does this process emit no greenhouse emissions, its only byproduct is water, which is utilised elsewhere on site. The racing for this X-Prix was held over three days, rather than two for the others, due to the shortage of daylight, with two sets of qualifying on the first two days followed by semi-finals and then a five‑car final on the Sunday. There was also a “crazy race” thrown into the mix, a kind of repechage, in which the slowest qualifiers vie with each other to win the last spot in the final. Every race consists of three laps of the 3.8km circuit: two laps by one driver then a quick changeover in a designated “switch zone” before one lap by the other. It’s fast, furious and futuristic. The defining feature of the course is the 5.4metre “knife edge” jump, which features a 23‑degree slope, making the cars airborne. The noise from the cars is a mix of electric screeching, much a like a pig squealing, and the clatter of stones sent flying. One of the key components to Extreme E’s global adventure is docked in Poole harbour for the duration of this round. Instead of using carbon-heavy air freight to transport all the kit for the championship around the globe, the organisers transformed the former Royal Mail ship, St Helena, which had been serving in the South Atlantic for 26 years. She isn’t fully electric yet, as she proclaims in bold down the side of her hull, instead running on a low-sulphur marine diesel, known as “champagne” in the industry. At every venue for an X-Prix this season Extreme E’s scientific committee has selected a legacy project, a chance to highlight and provide help with a local environmental issue. In 2022 the National Trust is hoping to reintroduce beavers for the first time in 400 years to the Little Sea area near Studland, in the wetlands at the heart of its dune system. Wetlands are particularly vulnerable areas when it comes to changes in climate and biodiversity, but beavers act as nature’s water engineers. This weekend’s final race was held in front of no spectators, just a small gathering of sponsors witnessing the action. This was a decision by the organisers to keep fans away and reduce the carbon footprint their attendance produces. As soon as the race had finished in Dorset, the usual motor-racing rituals had to be played out. Then, once all the champagne had been sprayed and post-race interviews completed, Rosberg and his two ecstatic drivers jumped into the quagmire together and rolled around with delight.An unusual item appeared, recently, in a newspaper in North Carolina. “A plus-sized Jewish lady redneck died in El Paso on Saturday,” the article announced – before careening through a thousand words of one of the more outrageous obituaries ever written. Renay Mandel Corren – a “bawdy, fertile, redheaded matriarch” and “talented and gregarious grifter” – has “kicked it,” the obituary lamented. “There will be much mourning in the many glamorous locales she went bankrupt in,” including McKeesport, Pennsylvania, where the Jewish mother and grandmother “first fell in love with ham, and atheism” and Fayetteville and Kill Devil Hills, North Carolina, “where Renay’s dreams, credit rating and marriage are all buried”. The rollicking, manic tribute delighted in subverting the respectful conventions of the small-town obituary – such as listing the deceased’s achievements (“Yes, Renay lied a lot”), domestic virtues (“Renay didn’t cook, she didn’t clean, and she was lousy with money”) and hobbies (“pier fishing, rolling joints and buying dirty magazines”). The obituary promised a “very disrespectful and totally non-denominational memorial”, “most likely at a bowling alley”, adding, “The family requests absolutely zero privacy or propriety, none whatsoever” – a stipulation that proved apt when the obituary went viral on Twitter, where thousands of readers proclaimed it a masterpiece. “I just thought a few friends would read it,” the author, Andy Corren, told me. I tracked down Corren, 52 – described in the obituary as Renay’s “favorite son, the gay one who writes catty obituaries in his spare time” – by email. After asking if I was writing to beg that he “pay for a subscription to the Guardian after ignoring your desperate pleas all these years”, Corren eventually agreed to speak to me by phone from his weekend house (a “wretched little fortress of wind”) in upstate New York. He’s still in shock at her death, he said. “But I didn’t want to pass up the chance – would never pass up the chance – to make sure that this absolutely fascinating libertine and vulgarian that I was lucky enough to call my mother is remembered.” He began writing the obituary while sitting next to her, and read a few passages aloud before she died. “She laughed at some of it. She raised her eyebrow, archly disdaining some of it.” That was the extent of her participation. “She refused to indulge in any post-life planning. She only planned the day she was alive.” It was an irreverent obituary for a defiantly irreverent person, he said, and a stylistic statement. Obituaries are expected to be staid and earnest. “I don’t have any interest in formats or straitjackets that deprive you of your humanity or seek to create a totally artificial whiteboard. Who needs a report card after you die?” The obituary describes abortions and an affair with Larry King, but he said that he actually toned down some of Renay’s life – for the protection of those living and dead, and because not all statutes of limitations have expired. “I didn’t want to cause too much scandal. Let’s just say that the attorney general of North Carolina tweeted my mom’s obituary and my first thought was, I really feel like we should be getting a posthumous pardon.” Corren is a talent manager who splits his time between Manhattan and the Catskills. He has also written, produced, and performed small stageplays and has two decades of experience writing “tight 1,500-2,500-word pieces” to perform at storytelling shows such as “Sit ’n Spin” and “Listen to This.” But his rowdy obit reads like something by one of the great Southern comic novelists – Charles Portis, say, or John Kennedy Toole. “I come from three ancient and proud traditions of storytelling – Jewish, gay, and Southern,” he said. (He emphasized that the obituary is his point of view and that he doesn’t claim to speak for his brothers.) Corren has spent recent days processing his mother’s death at his “dirt hovel on the side of a mountain”, lamenting the feeble Internet connection and patrolling the property with his dog and a .22 rifle, on the lookout for dog-hungry coyotes. On Saturday he returns to New York to sing kaddish – the Jewish hymn for the dead. He was “deeply touched” by readers’ response to the obituary, and speculated that it may have to do with the pandemic. With Covid killing so many people, “Maybe we all needed a laugh, and a way to talk about death in a funny way.” He’s currently working on a writing project about a “tumultuous” period of early-career misbehavior in LA – “a redneck Less Than Zero.” I asked what it’s about. “Are you sitting down?” he said. “Shocker! It’s about me and my family.”Questions have been raised once more after Boris Johnson was pictured with wine and cheese during a Downing Street garden gathering, with up to 17 staff on 15 May 2020. No 10 has insisted a “work meeting’ was taking place. Last year on 13 May, only two people from different households in England could meet outdoors socially distanced. In workplaces, guidance said in-person meetings should only take place if “absolutely necessary”. Similar easing of restrictions were introduced in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland later in May. We would like to know what you were doing on 15 May 2020. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Adrian Searle’s best art shows of the year 5. Derek Jarman: Protest! Manchester Art Gallery until 10 April With Jarman’s paintings as its core, this retrospective looks at the development of this restless spirit who moved first into theatre and movie design, and then into film-making. The show also charts his radicalisation as an HIV-positive artist in the mid-1980s. With music videos for the Smiths and Pet Shop Boys, we also revisit his later, coruscating canvases and tarry reliquaries, and the garden he created at Dungeness. Derek Jarman Protest! Runs concurrently with a show at the John Hansard Gallery in Southampton and a film retrospective at Manchester’s Home, starting in January. Read the full review. 4. Jean Dubuffet: Brutal Beauty Barbican, London, now closed The everyday and the extraordinary collided in the Barbican’s Dubuffet exhibition, which took us through the twists, turns and leaps of the career of this complex and contrary man. Bustling bistros, crowded buses, bonkers traffic, wonky people: Dubuffet approached his subjects with hilarity and horror, subtlety and a perversely sophisticated cack-handedness. Collector of outsider art, loners, people driven by some private need (which he termed Art Brut), Dubuffet learned from, and was freed by these wayward individualists. Read the full review. 3. Sophie Taeuber-Arp Tate Modern, London, now closed The Swiss-born abstractionist, applied artist, painter and sculptor, maker of humorous marionettes, stained-glass, interior design and textiles brought visual pleasure, curiosity, seriousness and joy to whatever she did. For a long time, like Sonia Delaunay and Anni Albers, her reputation languished in the shadow of her male partner the sculptor Jean (Hans) Arp. Her applied art was also relegated to a secondary position. An introduction to an artist whose unbounded energies were cut short by her death in 1943, this exhibition (now at MoMA in New York) is more than a corrective, it is a lesson in openness and freedom. Read the full review. 2. Life Between Islands: Caribbean-British Art 1950s–now Tate Britain, London, until 3 April Windrush and carnival, the rise of the Black Power movement, social injustice, racism and pride are some of the themes of this important and overdue show. Looking not just at artists who came to Britain from the Caribbean, and those of Caribbean heritage, but also at artists who have travelled in the opposite direction. Flawed and fascinating, this is a show of great richness and impact. Read the full review. 1. Theaster Gates: A Clay Sermon Whitechapel gallery, London, until 9 January For Gates, working with clay is as much cultural and bodily language as it is a procession of useful, decorative, commemorative and sculptural objects. Gates’s show takes us from Han dynasty storage jars to the work of Dave the Potter, a hugely talented 19th-century enslaved worker, and from there to Peter Voulkos, the controversial clay sculptor who died in 2002. Amid it all, Gates’s own ceramics, and a related film, delve into materiality and mourning, pushing clay, and ideas, to their limits. Wonderful. Read the full review. Jonathan Jones’s best art shows of the year 5. Gold of the Great Steppe Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, until 30 January Nomads have long been looked down on as the outsiders of history, raiders and rovers who never created anything of their own. This is a hugely important exhibition that refutes that. The ancient Saka people of the east Kazakhstan steppe made dreamlike images of deer, eagles and big cats in gold, and dressed their horses as fabulous dragons. The loans here are so newly dug up you can almost smell the earth. A poem of a show that marries emotion and science. Read the full review. 4. Peru: A Journey in Time British Museum, London, until 20 February Pottery will never look the same after you see how ancient Peruvian peoples stretched clay into surreal shapes, used it to make panpipes and giant drums, then painted it with scenes of sex and death. Human sacrifice and drugs are prominent themes. It includes such unforgettable masterpieces as a 2,000-year-old burial shroud embroidered with dancers swinging severed heads and a scene of musicians inspired by hallucinogenic cactus. A mind-altering encounter that changed my artistic map of the world. Read the full review. 3. Yinka Shonibare CBE RA Stephen Friedman Gallery, London, now closed Shonibare is my artist of the year, setting out a theory of creativity as a hybrid, even “monstrous” process in brilliant sculptures that put African masks on classical European statues, then bringing the same vision to coordinating the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition as a truly global event. Shonibare’s pop art cultural mashups knowingly allude to Picasso’s mask-robbing and the surrealist concept of the marvellous. He’s a visionary who knows how to steal from the past to make the future. 2. Poussin and the Dance National Gallery, London, until 3 January It takes brilliant curatorial insight to turn one of the most apparently remote and cold artists in the canon into a wild and passionate rebel you’d love to have a few glasses of wine with. I finally saw the point of Poussin in this exciting, sharply executed rethink of his early career that is also a beautiful poem to the Rome he loved – a city of classical learning, clerical largesse and plentiful sex, at least to judge from his bacchanalian art. Read the full review. 1. Jean Dubuffet: Brutal Beauty Barbican, London, now closed This phenomenal exhibition turned the story of modern art upside down. The true revolutionary of the 20th century who paved the way for all today’s most exciting impulses turns out not to be Duchamp or even Warhol but this champion of graffiti and children’s art whose cult of the “raw” burst apart every convention. From his grotesque yet moving portraits to landscapes layered in mud and stone to abstractions rivalling Pollock’s, he emerged as a great artist as well as incendiary prophet. Oliver Wainwright’s best architecture of the year 5. The Cosmic House From first entering the Cosmic Oval lobby, lined with disorienting mirror-panelled doors, to ascending the momentous Solar Stair, each step marking a week in the solar calendar, Charles Jencks’ house takes visitors on a whimsical journey of cosmological enlightenment – with a good dose of postmodern kitsch. The house of the late architectural theorist opened to the public this year, unleashing a wonder-world of ornament, symbolism and historical in-jokes, a temple to the man who championed eclecticism and wit in the built environment. Who else could have commissioned a whirlpool bath in the shape of an upside down baroque dome? Read the full article. 4. Becontree Forever The largest interwar council estate in the world, Becontree in Barking &amp; Dagenham celebrated its centenary this year. It wasn’t your usual local council anniversary jamboree, but a carefully curated series of permanent interventions across the estate, led by arts group Create. It included a pair of colourful new playgrounds designed by Yinka Ilori and Eva Rothschild, as well as (forthcoming) new public squares on the estate’s corner plots, by Nimtim architects. One of the most eye-opening projects was by Verity-Jane Keefe, whose exhibition at the RIBA recreated several of the estate’s customised facades, featuring crazy paving and pebbledash alongside doric columns and golden cement lions. Read the full article. 3. East Quay, Watchet Standing as an anarchic, piratical encampment on the windswept harbour front of Watchet in Somerset, the East Quay arts centre shows how coastal regeneration can be done differently. Many are the shiny new arts centres that have been airlifted into struggling seaside towns, but this one is different. Initiated by a group of local mothers, and developed in partnership with the town’s community, it provides a series of airy studio spaces for artists and makers alongside a gallery, classroom, restaurant and shop, as well as a geology workshop, print studio and paper mill – all topped with a cluster of quirky holiday rental pods. Read the full article. 2. Serpentine summer pavilion At just the moment when the 20-year-old annual commission seemed like it might be reaching the end of its useful life, along came a young, largely unknown architect from South Africa to show why it still has the power to inspire. Rather than designing a singular object, Sumayya Vally assembled a mesmerising landscape of ghostly architectural fragments. It was a dreamy collage of steps, plinths, columns and niches, sampled from places across London that all held significance for migrant communities. It was one of the few recent pavilions that made you want to sit, lounge or lie down and while away a few lazy hours. Read the full article. 1. Sara Cultural Centre, Skellefteå While building regulations in England might be making it ever harder to use timber in construction, Sweden is leading the way with wood, showing what a bold new future of “plyscrapers” might look like. The Sara cultural centre and hotel in Skellefteå stands as a 20-storey beacon of pine and spruce, glued and cross-laminated to form super-strong beams, columns and floor slabs – making it stronger than both steel and concrete, relative to its weight. With all the trees harvested from within a 60km radius of the site, and processed nearby, the project shows what locally sourced, low-carbon architecture can be. Read the full article.In the end it took a freak dismissal for England to be finally brought to heel. Over the course of four hours Jos Buttler had resisted Australia’s marauding attack on the final day in Adelaide, an innings of gimlet-eyed application that sat in contrast to the skills that have made his name and the one-sided contest before it. It was all an illusion anyway, the discombobulating effects of day‑night Test cricket hinting at greater hope of England pulling off a famous rearguard when the match had only just ticked over into the final session, they sat eight wickets down and salvation was still the best part of two hours away. Nevertheless, it was not until the 207th ball Buttler faced that Australia were assured of a 2-0 lead going into the Boxing Day Test. They were first to know of this too, Buttler pushing Jhye Richardson into the off side, hearing cries of celebration from the slip cordon behind him and then spotting two zing bails twinkling on the floor like fairy lights; out, hit wicket for 26 after treading on his own stumps. It was gut-wrenching for Buttler. England’s wicketkeeper had been lasered in on atonement with the bat, those two costly drops on the opening day and his duck during England’s collapse on the third having gnawed away in the way only Test cricket does. As he walked off, disconsolate, Australia were one wicket away, the recalled Richardson sealing a mammoth 275-run victory and a maiden Test five-wicket haul when Jimmy Anderson poked a ball to gully. Bowled out for 192 in 113.1 overs when needing to survive about 130 of them, England require a Christmas miracle to regain the Ashes, given neither country has come back to win from this position away from home. They have a maelstrom of selection issues to ponder while trying to enjoy the coming days with their families in Melbourne. Australia, by contrast, have learned they are still the dominant force even in the absence of Pat Cummins and Josh Hazlewood. And both are soon to return. Though Australia hinted at mild signs of frustration towards the end, and used eight bowlers, desperation never truly manifested itself on a final day watched by 7,446 spectators. This figure was a reflection of what felt largely a foregone conclusion, England starting out on 82 for four in the face of a notional target of 468 and knowing Nathan Lyon would probably operate from one end throughout and have plenty of assistance from the pitch. It did not take long for them to start picking away at England’s stitches either – eight minutes, to be precise – with Mitchell Starc resuming after the previous evening’s festive performance of the The Nutcracker alongside Joe Root, switching to over the wicket and forcing Ollie Pope into a back-foot poke that flew into the safe hands of Steve Smith at slip. Starc has been immense in the absence of his fellow New South Wales seamers, this his sixth wicket of the match and 52nd in day-night Tests, but he was assisted by a defensive shot that presented half a bat face. Pope, who nudged ahead of Jonny Bairstow at the 11th hour on tour but may now have this reversed, has scores of 35, four, five, and four this series; his home ground, the Oval, where a Bradman-esque first-class average of 99.94 gets the statistical types purring, this is not. Starc was unfortunate not to seal a five-wicket haul, and a pair for Buttler that would have shut down the match far sooner, when the Englishman nicked the pink Kookaburra between his opposite number, Alex Carey, and David Warner at first slip. It was Carey’s catch and therefore mistake, perhaps the result of unfamiliarity in his second Test or simply the apparent politeness of character. At the other end Ben Stokes was stonewalling Lyon but a tight battle that spanned 54 deliveries in a cage of close catchers ended with Australia discovering the benefits of unused reviews when an umpire called Wilson – Paul as opposed to Joel at Headingley two years ago – turned down an lbw shout. With Stokes gone for 12, pinned by a ball that slid on, England were six down an hour into play. Over the course of the next two Buttler found an ally in Chris Woakes, the pair resisting to take the contest past the first interval. That it took a sublime delivery from Richardson with the second new ball to break through, nipping back off the seam and trimming the top of middle stump, said plenty about the application shown by Woakes during his 97-ball 44. That the No 8 is the only England batter to make it to double figures in all four innings said plenty about those above him. Thereafter it was down to Buttler to marshal the tail, Ollie Robinson hanging around for an hour until Lyon masterfully switched to around the wicket, teased an edge to slip and Smith again clung on. A frantic start to Stuart Broad’s innings, in which he was dropped first ball and then had his batting paid the highest compliment since his solitary Test century 11 years ago when Smith optimistically reviewed an lbw, just about scraped England through to the delayed tea break but soon the game was up. After Root’s painful blows to the groin 24 hours earlier, the coup de grace of Buttler’s demise provided a second metaphor for this tour. The 31-year-old had battled through the second-longest innings of what remains an unfulfilled Test career, while the team as a whole have been hit with the double whammy of self-inflicted problems and an opponent in the mood to inflict heavy punishment.Contact with nature in cities significantly reduces feelings of loneliness, according to a team of scientists. Loneliness is a major public health concern, their research shows, and can raise a person’s risk of death by 45% – more than air pollution, obesity or alcohol abuse. The study is the first to assess how the environment can affect loneliness. It used real-time data, collected via a smartphone app, rather than relying on people’s memory of how they were feeling. The research found that feelings of overcrowding increased loneliness by an average of 39%. But when people were able to see trees or the sky, or hear birds, feelings of loneliness fell by 28%. Feelings of social inclusion also cut loneliness by 21%, and when these feelings coincided with contact with nature the beneficial effect was boosted by a further 18%. The findings pointed to interventions to reduce loneliness, the researchers said: “Specific measures that increase social inclusion and contact with nature should be implemented, especially in densely populated cities.” Time spent in nature is known to boost wellbeing, with woodland walks estimated to save the UK at least £185m a year in mental health costs, for example. Natural places in cities could reduce loneliness by enhancing feelings of attachment to a place, or by providing more opportunity to socialise, the researchers said. The study challenged the traditional view of cities as places that are always bad for mental health and loneliness, according to Prof Andrea Mechelli, part of the research team and an expert in early intervention in mental health at King’s College London in the UK. “There can be aspects such as natural features and social inclusivity which can actually decrease loneliness,” he added. Michael Smythe, an artist who works on social architecture and urban landscapes and was part of the study team, said: “For people like us who work with public space, validating the anecdotal knowledge we get on the ground with data is incredibly valuable in communicating the worth of these spaces. Environmental health and public health are one and the same.” The research, published in the Scientific Reports journal, collected data from urban citizens across the world using the Urban Mind research app. People were prompted at three random times a day for a fortnight, during waking hours, to answer simple questions on loneliness, overcrowding, social inclusion and contact with nature. More than 750 people provided 16,600 of these assessments, which included the questions “do you feel welcome among [the people around you]?” and “can you see trees right now?”. The participants were self-selecting and so did not provide a representative sample of the wider populations. But when the researchers took age, ethnicity, education, and occupation into account, the benefits of nature contact and feelings of social inclusion on loneliness remained strongly statistically significant. Christopher Gidlow, a professor of applied health research at Staffordshire University in the UK, who was not involved in the research, said: “It has long been recognised that having access to natural environments can foster social interactions and connectedness. This study adds further weight to existing evidence of our affinity for natural environments and the potential benefits for social wellbeing. “Familiarity with environments was not measured, but is likely to be at play as people tend to visit the same natural environments. Such familiarity has been linked with feeling more connected to a place, with possible mental health benefits.” Johanna Gibbons, a landscape architect and part of the research team, said: “Cities are probably the only habitat that is increasing at a high rate. So we should be creating urban habitats where people can thrive. Nature is a critical component of that because, I believe deep in our souls, there are really deep connections with natural forces.”It is that time of the year again when we prepare to present our list of the 100 best male footballers in the world. This will be our 10th list and notable football figures such as Luiz Felipe Scolari, Thomas Hitzlsperger and Roque Júnior joined the judges’ panel for the anniversary. Former players such as Javier Zanetti, Franky Vercauteren and Emre Belozoglu also join a selection of coaches, broadcasters, reporters, correspondents and editors from around the world to form a knowledgable and truly global jury. The 24 current and former professionals have won a combined 1,071 international caps. The countdown begins at 00.01 GMT on Tuesday 21 December with numbers 100-71. On Wednesday we will reveal numbers 70-41, on Thursday 40-11 before the top 10 on Christmas Eve completes this year’s list. The top 100 rules are explained beneath the list of judges. The judges are listed in alphabetical order by category. Players Patrik Andersson Former Sweden international who won 96 caps and played at the 1994 and 2002 World Cups Roman Berezovsky Former Armenia international with 94 caps between 1996 and 2016 Rune Bratseth Former Norway international with 60 caps who captained his country at the 1994 World Cup Steven Caldwell Former Scotland international with 12 caps who is the president of Oakville Blue Devils FC and chief executive of the youth sports analytics company Best Athletes Gilles De Bilde Former Belgium international with 25 caps Erik Edman Former Sweden international with 57 caps who played at the 2006 World Cup Edmilson Former Brazil international with 39 caps who won the 2002 World Cup Jan Åge Fjørtoft Former Norway international with 71 caps who played at the 1994 World Cup Grafite Former Brazil international with four caps Thomas Hitzlsperger Former Germany international with 52 caps who is the chief executive of Stuttgart Juan Former Brazil international who won 79 caps and is Flamengo’s technical director Roque Júnior Former Brazil international with 48 caps who won the 2002 World Cup Janusz Michallik Former US international with 44 caps and ESPN football analyst Eduard Mor Former Russia international, two-times Russian champion with Spartak, and now a pundit on Match TV Lutz Pfannenstiel Former goalkeeper and the first player to have played professionally in all six Fifa confederations. Now sporting director at the MLS team St Louis City SC Alexei Smertin Former Russia international with 55 caps who played at the 2002 World Cup Aymen Tahar Former Boavista midfielder now with Larissa Yegor Titov Former Russia international with 41 caps who played at the 2002 World Cup Franky Vercauteren Former Belgium international with 63 caps who played at the 1982 and 1986 World Cups Frédéric Waseige Former midfielder who won the Belgian Cup and League Cup with FC Liège and is a TV pundit Javier Zanetti Former Argentina international with 143 caps who played at the 1998 and 2002 World Cups Coaches and technical staff Emre Belozoglu Former Turkey international with 101 caps who is the manager of Istanbul Basaksehir Antonio Carlos Zago Bolívar coach and former Brazil international with 36 caps Magnús Már Einarsson Head coach of Afturelding in Iceland Luiz Felipe Scolari Former Brazil, Portugal and Chelsea manager who won the 2002 World Cup Journalists Ed Aarons Deputy news editor, the Guardian Ireneo Acosta Editor-in-chief at La Nación in Paraguay Ahmed Adala Journalist at Radio Mosaïque FM Tunisie Omar al-Raisi Founder of Dantani, Inc and editor-in-chief of the Sports Journal in the UAE Davit Alaverdyan Chief editor, Mediamax Media Company, Armenia Bruno Alemany Football journalist at Cadena Ser in Spain Abdulmohsen Algabbani Football editor based in Saudi Arabia Tobias Altschäffl Chief footballer reporter at Sport-Bild in Germany Edward Alva Football producer at Gol in Peru David Álvarez Sports journalist at El País in Spain Nick Ames Football writer, the Guardian David Amoyal Host of Calcioland podcast and columnist for the Athletic Juan Arango Match commentator and correspondent for Diario Sport (Spain) and AhoraMismo (USA) Marcela Mora y Araujo Argentinian football writer Philippe Auclair Senior writer, France Football Gregg Bakowski Football writer, the Guardian Nicky Bandini Italian football correspondent, the Guardian Jorge Baravalle ESPN journalist, European football analyst John Bennett Broadcaster, BBC World Service &amp; BBC 5 Live Chloe Beresford Italian football writer and editor Luca Bianchin Football writer, La Gazzetta dello Sport Christoph Biermann Football writer for 11Freunde in Germany Eduardo Biscayart Commentator on European football at Fox Sports Mexico and Telemundo (USA) Andreas Böni Head of football at Blick in Switzerland Andy Brassell European football writer/broadcaster Costas Bratsos Football writer at Sport24.gr in Greece Feargal Brennan Staff writer, Football Espana Gevorg Burnuchyan Editor-in-chief of football365.am in Armenia Edgar Cantero Pelota Tata, ESPN Felipe Cardenas Football writer at the Athletic, covering MLS as well as football in Mexico and Conmebol Javier Cáceres Football writer, Süddeutsche Zeitung Pedro Canelo Journalist at El Comercio in Peru Antonio Casale Journalist for RCN Radio. Also works for ESPN and El Espectador newspaper Hernán Castillo Argentinian football journalist at TNTSports Mauro Cezar Pereira UOL columnist and commentator for TV Cultura and SBT Ivaylo Chilev Football journalist and Champions League broadcast producer at bTV Media Group in Bulgaria Rodolfo Chisleanschi Sports journalist for El País (Spain) and La Nación (Argentina) Marcus Christenson Football special projects editor, the Guardian Solace Chukwu Football writer for the Africa desk of goal.com Paulo Vinicius Coelho Football writer and Fox commentator in Brazil Alfredo Coronis Hot 94.1 FM / Conexión Goleadora Ezequiel Daray Fox Sports correspondant in Germany Haresh Deol Editor of TwentyTwo13 in Malaysia Adam Digby Italian football writer John Duerden Asian football correspondent for the Guardian Mohamed Amine Elamri Sports journalist at Le Matin in Morocco Adam Elder US freelance journalist Kasper Elissaar Editor-in-chief at Soccernet in Estonia Jeroen Elshoff Football commentator at NOS Dutch National television Muhannad Elshenawy Senior Online Journalist at Sky News Arabia in Abu Dhabi Rodrigo Errasti Founder of Imagosport Comunication and former sports editor chief of the Agencia Colpisa-Vocento in Spain Amr Fahmy Journalist working for beIN Sports in Egypt Christian Falk Head of football at Sport-Bild in Germany Alan Feehely Staff writer, Football Espana Martín Fernandez Senior football writer at Globoesporte in Brazil Barak Fever ESPN football commentator Ben Fisher Football reporter at the Guardian Alex Frosio Football editor at La Gazzetta dello Sport Johanna Frändén Football journalist at Swedish paper Aftonbladet Sidney Garambone Writer and head of sports programmes at Globo TV Juan Manuel Gavilan TV football producer in Peru Santi Gimenez Football writer at AS Barry Glendenning Football writer and Guardian Football Weekly regular Fabián Godoy Argentinian/Spanish commentator and tactical analyst at Directv Sports, TNT Sports and Continental Radio; correspondent from Argentina at Cadena Cope (Spain) Denis Green Head of international PR at Mailman Group in Shanghai Cristian Grosso Sports editor of La Nación in Argentina Carlos Guisasola Football writer at El Mundo Andreas Hagenauer Football journalist at Der Standard Daniel Harris Sports writer at the Guardian, and filmmaker Jesper Haue Hansen Football reporter at Jyllands-Posten in Denmark Kevin Hatchard Commentator for Bundesliga world feed, Uefa and TalkSport Johannes Hofer Presenter at Sky Sport Austria Gustavo Hofman Football journalist and ESPN commentator in Brazil Andy Hunter Football writer, the Guardian David Hytner Chief football correspondent, the Guardian Seo Hyung-wook MBC TV commentator, Footballist chief executive, South Korea Sasa Ibrulj Bosnian football writer Jamie Jackson Football writer, the Guardian Behnam Jafarzadeh Deputy editor at Varzesh3.com, Iran Juan Jiménez Football writer at AS in Spain Boris Jovanovic Editor-in-chief at Sportske.net Raphaël Jucobin Editor-in-chief at Get French Football News Eduard Kalantaryan Head of Armenia TV sport Jamie Kemble Journalist at Football Espana Ali Khaled Freelance writer/editor based in Dubai André Kfouri Commentator and writer for ESPN Brasil Tom Kludt Football journalist based in the US Pavle Knezevic Reporter at Sportske.net Zee Ko Journalist at Zuju Group in Singapore Oleg Koshelev Russian football writer at Sport-Express Ermal Kuka Sports journalist at vipsport.al in Albania Samindra Kunti Freelance football journalist Cecilia Lagos Freelance football correspondent in Europe and writer at Totaalvoetbal, her European football newsletter Joshua Law Features editor for Planet Football Sergio Levinsky Journalist working for Infobae and Jornada in Argentina as well as Kicker in Germany Gianluca Lia Sports journalist at Times of Malta Fabio Licari Head of international department at Gazzetta delo Sport Jonathan Liew Sports writer, the Guardian Sid Lowe Spanish football correspondent for the Guardian Alexandre Lozetti Commentator and writer for Globo Olof Lundh Swedish football writer for Fotbollskanalen and Dagens Industri, pundit for TV4 and C More and author Ben Lyttleton Football author and consultant Ben Mabley Japan-based television commentator for J Sports, SkyPerfecTV, and DAZN Jaime F. Macias Football analyst at BeIN Sports USA Paul MacInnes Sports writer, the Guardian Hatem Maher Senior sports editor at Ahram Online in Egypt Nebojsa Markovic Sports journalist at Mondo.rs in Serbia Gergely Marosi Freelance sports journalist and football writer in Hungary Everaldo Marques TV Globo broadcaster in Brazil Oleg Medvedev Russian football writer and best-selling author Ugur Meleke Football columnist at Hürriyet Daily; also a pundit for CNN Turk and Radyospor Renata Mendonça SporTV commentator and Folha columnist in Brazil Colin Millar European football writer for Mirror Football Luo Ming Sports editor, Titan Sports, China Tomasz Mortimer Hungarian football writer Dmitry Mostovoy Commentator at Setanta Euroasia in Kazakhstan Rasim Movsumzadeh Has written for Kicker and the European Football Yearbook and has been Azerbaijan’s juror on the Ballon d’Or since 2000 Hassanin Mubarak Football writer Daniel Mundim International football journalist at TV Globo Ricardo Murguía Champions League commentator for TNT Sports México Ewan Murray Scottish football correspondent, the Guardian Hirofumi Nakano Journalist and radio show host in Japan Sachin Nakrani Football writer, the Guardian Akihiro Nomura Japanese television commentator and presenter Mauricio Noriega Brazilian journalist and SporTV commentator Hernan O’Donnell Journalist working for Universo Deportivo who has previously written for El Gráfico and La Nación Antonis Oikonomidis Greek freelance football writer Rafael Oliveira Football journalist and ESPN commentator in Brazil Joseph Owino Founder, Kawowo Sports Alberto Pereiro Football reporter at Onda Cero Álex Pareja Sports journalist at ESPN Juan Carlos Pasman Argentinian journalist who presents his own shows on DirecTV Sports and Radio La Red Artur Petrosyan Russian football journalist who is a uefa.com reporter and Guardian contributor Cesare Polenghi MD and founder of Ganassa LLC, Japan Edu Polo Writer at El Mundo Deportivo in Spain Francesco Porzio Onefootball and SkySport.it editor Thiago Rabelo Brazilian journalist and Guardian contributor Derek Rae ESPN commentator Bundesliga and La Liga and the Fifa 22 video game Marion Reimers Journalist and broadcaster/commentator for TNT Sports; founder and president of Versus Filippo Maria Ricci Spain correspondent of Gazzetta dello Sport Roberto Rivera Sports commentator and producer with his own company, Gol Dreams Films; also presenter of a show on WAO (radio) and Gol Magazine (TV) in Panama Tom Robinson Argentinian and South American football writer, podcaster and scout José Armando Rodríguez Editor-in-chief, Deporte Total USA Roberto Rojas Paraguayan-American journalist based working for NBC Sports and is a co-host of the Low Limit Futbol podcast Fabrizio Romano Guardian transfer expert Alejandro Romero Football journalist at Onda Cero Emanuel Rosu Romanian football writer Guillermo Rubio “Gumi” Freelance sports journalist working for, among others, Fox Sports Argentina and Onda Cero in Spain Jeff Rueter Football writer for the Athletic Max Rushden Guardian Football Weekly host Graham Ruthven Football journalist based in Scotland Marwan Saeed Operations manager of KingFut.com Mauricio Savarese Associated Press sports writer in São Paulo Tsuneyuki Shimoda Japanese television commentator and presenter Metodi Shumanov Bulgarian football writer Vidir Sigurdsson Sports editor of Morgunbladid and mbl.is and author of the Icelandic Football Yearbook Nacho Silván Co-founder of Imagosport and professional football analyst Manos Staramopoulos Chief editor of Discoveryfootball.com, Demokratia and Foxssportstories and contributor to SportPress24.com and Overfm 104.9 Mojmir Stasko Football writer for Dennik Sport in Slovakia Jacob Steinberg Football writer, the Guardian Vladimir Stognienko Russian football expert and VGTRK commentator Nikos Stratis International football correspondent at Kingsport.gr Keeshaanan Sundaresan Host/Writer at Astro SuperSport Malaysia Saku-Pekka Sundelin Football journalist at Ilta-Sanomat Aet Süvari Estonian football reporter Agris Suveizda Reporter for Sportacentrs.com in Latvia Jonathan Tannenwald Football journalist at Philadelphia Inquirer Ivan Tarasenko Deputy editor-in-chief of bookmakers-ratings.ru in Russia Carlos Tassara Journalist and football analyst at NIX Media in Peru Mihovil Topic Chief football writer at Telesport in Croatia Nuno Travassos Portuguese football writer at Maisfutebol Tran Duc Truong Sports journalist, ZingNews, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam Darren Tulett Presenter at beIN Sports in France Will Unwin Football writer, the Guardian Patrick Urbini Football writer for France Football Felipe Valderrama Journalist for Caracol Radio and editor of ElCincoCero.com Vijhay Vick Johor Darul Tazim FC in Malaysia Ari Virtanen Sports journalist at Helsingin Sanomat in Finland Raúl Vilchis Mexican sports journalist based in New York Bart Vlietstra Dutch football journalist working for de Volkskrant and Santos magazine Lukas Vrablik Slovakian freelance football writer Grant Wahl Journalist at GrantWahl.com Greg Wilcox Freelance sports journalist and football writer Umaid Wasim Sports reporter at Dawn in Pakistan Ola Wenström Freelance football journalist and producer Senta Wintner Sports writer for Austrian daily newspaper Die Presse Tomasz Wlodarczyk Football journalist at Meczyki.pl Carl Worswick Football writer based in Colombia Michael Yokhin European football writer Ahmad Yousef Egyptian football journalist and editor at KingFut.com in London Bi Yuan Chinese football journalist at Titan Sports, Beijing Victor Zaferson Football scout and analyst based in Peru Tim Zinoviev Chief editor of Football.by in Belarus Miran Zore Chief editor of Nogomania in Slovenia How the voting works The No 1 choice of each judge was awarded 40pts, No 2 given 39pts, down to 1pt for their No 40 choice. All the votes were added together to give a raw score. • To minimise the influence of outliers in the list, the highest score awarded to a player was then deducted to give a final score. • A player needed to receive votes from at least five judges to qualify for the list. • If players are level on points in the scoring, the number of individual votes cast is used as a tie-breaker. • The individual voting breakdown will be published when the full list has been revealed. Voting disclosure We are very grateful to our judges for taking part, and none have been paid for participating in this project. To allow our judges the freedom to express their opinions without fear or favour, individual voting records will be anonymised in the full breakdown of scores. Voters are identified only by their category and a number chosen at random. The judges’ numbers bear no relation to the alphabetical list of judges’ names presented above.Henrika Kull’s intimate movie is set in a real-life legal brothel in Berlin. Katharina Behrens plays fortysomething Sascha: a good-natured, easygoing veteran who brusquely calls herself a Nutte, a “tart”, rather than the official term Sexarbeiterin, or sex worker, and she periodically makes tense visits to her home town of Brandenburg to see her 11-year-old son from a previous relationship. She is more or less happy with her life – until suddenly she falls passionately in love with a new girl at the brothel, a twentysomething Italian called Maria, played by the performance artist and former escort Adam Hoya, who as Eva Collé was the subject of the 2019 documentary Searching Eva. Bliss may or may not illuminate the “sex work is work” debate: certainly, Sascha and Maria’s day-to-day experience of the oldest profession is frankly and unproblematically depicted, and prostitution itself is not made an issue in dramatic terms in the same way as Lizzie Borden’s 1986 film Working Girls. New customers can ask to see all the women in turn and they must line up in the brothel’s corridor in their underwear to be formally introduced to the man before he makes his choice. Payment is in cash – maybe the men don’t want unexplained items showing up on their statements. Maria is stashing hers away in a rail station locker, and she leaves sad, affectionate voice messages for her widowed father back in Italy. The crisis in Sascha and Maria’s relationship comes when Maria goes with her to a community festival in Brandenburg and drunk local guys make Sascha angry and uncomfortable; when Maria says that she is a “performer”, Sascha contemptuously corrects her: “She’s a hooker, like me.” Could it be that Maria still has dreams of doing something else with her life, where Sascha no longer has the imagination? The performance styles of Behrens and Hoya are quite different – Hoya is more opaque – but this is a pointed, candid drama. • Bliss is released on 24 December in cinemas and on Bohemia Euphoria.Film “I know what I’m going to do tomorrow, and the next day, and the next year, and the year after that.” The confident announcement of James Stewart early in It’s a Wonderful Life would not be shared by the characters of Tangerine, another festive treat that begins on a dicey Christmas Eve. For LA trans sex workers Sin-Dee and Alexandra, even the next 10 minutes are likely to be unpredictable. All they do know is that, having learned Sin-Dee’s boyfriend is cheating on her, a wrong must now be righted. That Sean Baker’s 2015 film was shot on iPhones is not the only break with Christmas movie tradition. But the meaning and message? As joyful as anything in cinema: no one is a failure who has friends. Danny Leigh *** Stage Blinding people with a dizzying amount of sequins for nearly half a century, the Thursford Christmas Spectacular is a frenzied festive extravaganza. With live doves, an ancient Wurlitzer organ and an extremely camp hoedown, this annual glitz-filled showcase in Norfolk is one of the most bizarre and memorable ways to spend a day in the run-up to Christmas. Particularly memorable for me: two years ago, I was asked to review the show last minute. I had plans for a first date, so asked if she wanted to come on a 10-hour round trip to Norfolk. We have just moved in together. Kate Wyver *** Music An oldie but a goodie, Wham!’s 1984 single Last Christmas is still the tinsel-gold standard of festive anthems. The sort of rueful storytelling that would make Taylor Swift proud, it has aged like a particularly fine festive stilton: the gentle swoosh of sleigh bells, the pang of unrequited love, the ultimate resolution to protect oneself better next time. In a year that maybe hasn’t quite seen the post-pandemic euphoria that many of us were expecting, it’s the perfect song for recalibration, a moment of hopeful solace before a fresh start. Jenessa Williams *** Books “Kay was coming home for the Christmas holidays after his first term at school. The train stopped at Musborough station … ” And that’s pretty much the last normal thing that happens in John Masefield’s classic children’s novel The Box of Delights. At the station, a strange old man warns the boy that “the wolves are running”. He also entrusts him with the titular box, and soon Kay is using it to shrink in size and fly over the wintry countryside, while fighting off the dark menace of the sorcerer Abner Brown and the shadowy figures who work for him. It’s hallucinatory, bewildering and, above all, magical. You’ll get to the end wondering what happened, but also knowing that the journey was extraordinary. Sam Jordison *** Games Despite that fact that I have only been skiing exactly once in my life, and well into adulthood at that, I always yearn for snow and mountains at Christmas, and so often find myself developing brief December obsessions with winter sports games. But last year reminded me that the best virtual place to spend Christmas is Animal Crossing. Even if you’ve not played for a while, it’s so cosy and comforting seeing your island all snow-carpeted and decked out in festive finery, its weirdo animal inhabitants all cosied up in jumpers and bearing gifts. It honestly makes me quite emotional. Keza MacDonaldTottenham have been knocked out of the Europa Conference League after being made to forfeit their final group‑phase tie at home against Rennes 3-0 despite the Spurs manager, Antonio Conte, feeling that the process has been unfair. The game was scheduled to be played on Thursday 9 December, with Spurs most likely needing a win to finish above Vitesse Arnhem in second place and qualify for a two‑leg play-off to reach the last 16. But Spurs announced the night before that the tie would not take place owing to a Covid outbreak at the club, which had forced them to temporarily close the first-team area of their training ground on the advice of the Health Security Agency. Earlier that day, Conte said eight players and five coaches had tested positive. Uefa rules say games can be postponed if a club have fewer than 13 available senior players and no goalkeeper. Spurs’ statement surprised Uefa and infuriated Rennes, who had travelled to London after their opponents had assured them the tie would go ahead. The French club accused Spurs of acting unilaterally – without the support of Uefa – and in bad faith. Uefa said the next morning that it was satisfied the tie could not be played and blamed a bureaucratic error for the confusion – specifically Spurs’ failure to keep them up to date in writing about the situation, which meant the governing body could not confirm the postponement on the Wednesday night. But with anger continuing to bubble in Rennes and frustration at Spurs, attempts to reschedule the game before the Uefa cut-off date of 31 December became deadlocked. Spurs had suggested they play it on 16 December, which would have meant their Premier League game at Leicester being moved – a request that was denied. Ironically, that match was later postponed because of a Covid outbreak at Leicester, with Spurs in the city and ready to play. Spurs even said they would be willing to travel to Rennes to fulfil the fixture. There was the suggestion that Uefa might relax its deadline, mindful of the crowded December programme and the French league’s winter break – allowing for the tie, perhaps, to be staged in January. That did not happen. When Uefa announced on 11 December that the clubs had failed to find a date and it had referred the matter to its control, ethics and disciplinary body, the likelihood was that Spurs would be made to forfeit. The case was passed to Uefa’s appeals body which declared the tie “as forfeited by Tottenham, who is therefore deemed to have lost the match 0-3 in accordance with Annex J.3.1 to the regulations of the Uefa Europa Conference League”. Spurs said: “We are disappointed by the ruling of the Uefa appeals body and the refusal to allow more time for the match to be rescheduled. We have to accept this ruling, however, and our focus now turns to the competitions we remain in.” Conte had made his feelings plain last Wednesday. “Tottenham deserves to play the game,” he said. “It’s a really strange situation because we didn’t play through no fault of our own but because of a big problem and because the government decided to close our training ground. “We don’t find a good solution between Uefa and Premier League … why Tottenham has to pay for this? It’s not fair we have to pay for a situation that isn’t our fault. I understand if we did something wrong but in this way, for the club, the players, the staff, it’s very difficult to understand what’s happening.” Spurs never really wanted to be in Uefa’s new third-tier competition and their participation has been a disaster. They were mocked and trolled by Paços de Ferreira before and after the 1-0 defeat at the Portuguese club in the first leg of the qualification play-off and that was just the start. After losing 1-0 at Vitesse with a shadow team under Nuno Espírito Santo, the 2-1 reverse at NS Mura, the Slovenian minnows, under Conte was one of the most embarrassing results in the club’s history. There has been criticism from inside and outside the club, arguments and, in many respects, the forfeit against Rennes provides an appropriately downbeat signoff.The Bank of England has fined Standard Chartered £46.5m for repeatedly misreporting its liquidity position and for “failing to be open and cooperative” with the regulator. The Bank’s Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) said Standard Chartered had made five errors in reporting an important liquidity metric between March 2018 and May 2019, which meant the watchdog did not have a reliable overview of the bank’s US dollar liquidity position. At the time, the lender was temporarily subject to extra liquidity requirements because the PRA was concerned about US dollar outflows. The regulator said this was the largest fine it had ever levied in a case where it was the only enforcing body. “We expect firms to notify us promptly of any material issues with their regulatory reporting, which Standard Chartered failed to do in this case,” said Sam Woods, the chief executive of the PRA. “Standard Chartered’s systems, controls and oversight fell significantly below the standards we expect of a systemically important bank, and this is reflected in the size of the fine in this case.” In October 2017, the PRA temporarily imposed extra liquidity requirements on Standard Chartered, because it was concerned about “heightened risk” of US dollar outflows. Even though the bank’s overall liquidity remained above regulatory requirements during the period, the regulator said multiple errors caused liquidity miscalculations. One of the errors occurred in November 2018, as a result of a mistake in a spreadsheet entry. A positive amount was included when a zero or negative value was expected, leading to an $7.9bn (£6bn) over-reporting of the bank’s dollar liquidity position. The potential size of the error was $10bn, according to the PRA, which would have resulted in Standard Chartered breaching the regulator’s liquidity requirements. The PRA found that the bank launched an internal investigation into the error, but did not inform the regulator until four months later. The watchdog said the delay in giving notice meant Standard Chartered had “failed to be open and cooperative”. It also found that the lender’s internal controls and governance arrangements concerning its regulatory reporting of its dollar liquidity were not implemented or operating effectively. Standard Chartered said it accepted the PRA’s findings related to dollar liquidity reporting errors, and also accepted that there was a delay in notifying the PRA about one of the errors while an internal review took place. The bank said in a statement: “Standard Chartered has cooperated proactively and fully with the PRA’s investigation and has made significant improvements to and substantial investment in its liquidity and regulatory reporting processes and controls and remains committed to accurate regulatory reporting.” Standard Chartered qualified for a 30% reduction in the fine by agreeing to resolve the matter with the PRA. Without the discount, it would have been fined £66.5m.The UK’s national LGBTQ+ charity, Stonewall, has recently been accused of advocating for trans rights. Six years ago, there was another “Stonewall question”, but the issue wasn’t whether the organisation should be advocating for trans rights, but instead why it wasn’t. For those of us who remember these fights, it’s discombobulating to witness a reframing of Stonewall as a sinister organisation that sneaked trans rights on to its agenda when nobody was looking. The very opposite was the case: it was hard won. Many petitions were circulated, letters written and debates had. The inclusion of trans men, trans women and all transgender people eventually followed in 2015. Stonewall public campaigns, training, policy, work with employers and sports organisations, for example, included trans and transgender people. They could seek advice if they faced discrimination at work, in housing or health provision. For many people, this was an obvious broadening out of the title, to reflect the solidarity and diversity that already had long existed in LGBTQ+ communities, clubs, organisations and social groups. This unity was no more obvious than at the famous uprising in the US in 1969, from which Stonewall takes its name. This protest included people from all identities – Black and white, drag queens, drag kings, transmasculine queers, trans men and women, butch lesbians, gay men, homeless young people and people working in prostitution – all of whom, in all their diversity, shared experiences of being excluded and seen as deviant by mainstream society. They forged a solidarity in that experience. Tired of being harassed, assaulted and raped by police raiding the gay bars that provided a home and an all too rare supportive social network, the people eventually fought back; and the resistance at the gay bar, the Stonewall Inn, became legend. In the same year as Stonewall in the UK was finally broadening its title, the reality TV star Caitlyn Jenner was on the cover of Vanity Fair, and in Westminster the women and equalities committee inquiry on UK transgender equality produced a report recommending reforms to modernise the Gender Recognition Act 2004. Suggestions included reducing the fee payable for a gender recognition certificate (GRC), streamlining the process so it is quicker and easier, and removing the need for any medical diagnosis. In 2017, the then prime minister Theresa May promised that these reforms would be carried out, and at a Pink News awards event assured the audience that the Conservative government did not see being trans as a mental illness, and the process of acquiring a GRC would be simplified. This is where concerns over what became called self-ID, or self-certification, perhaps first arose; and, due to misunderstandings of what these proposals would mean in practice, these concerns grew. Then in 2018 the government announced its LGBT equality action plan and began a public consultation on reforming the Gender Recognition Act. Around this consultation, and the similar one launched by the Scottish government, many groups mobilised in favour, and just as many mobilised against. Opponents, such as the LGB Alliance, called this a “green light” for “predators” and some people felt it would mean that men intent on abuse could change all their sex markers on their official identification online one evening, access spaces for girls or vulnerable women the next day, then just change back again online. This was never what was suggested or offered in the consultation document though. The so-called gender wars have raged ever since. Now even a mainstream workplace equality, diversity and inclusion programme in universities, called Athena Swan, is being singled out for promoting trans rights by stealth. Far from radical, the scheme operates firmly within the current system, and is concerned with promoting equality across all the protected characteristics in the Equality Act 2010, which includes trans and transgender people. Those of us who may consider ourselves activists are now forced to passionately defend the most basic, the most liberal, the most assimilated and bureaucratic tools within the system. The current gender wars are not a fight against the binary roles that constrict our society, instead this particular manifestation of the culture wars is a battle against trans women in particular. Most of the debate concerns what services trans women should or should not be allowed to access, from public toilets to public services. Perhaps all of this was to be expected, and perhaps it is just part of a larger backlash against the mainstreaming of LGBTQ+ rights over the decades. Yet society still remains deeply sex- and gender-conservative, and, at times of economic and political uncertainty, those stances become more entrenched as people try to find some certainty in a mythic ideal of complementary gender roles. It seems as if the Conservative government has purposely fuelled and exacerbated the gender wars in order to consolidate its base. We’ve seen Liz Truss bleating about centralised control of public toilets to keep out trans women, and the government has ditched most changes to the Gender Recognition Act, despite the majority of more than 100,000 respondents to the consultation supporting modernising reforms. At the same time, the government has stalled on its promise to end conversion practices. For Truss, free speech must be protected, and this means an assumed right for those who are LGBTQ+ to consent to anti-LGBTQ+ conversion practices. This debate may remain contentious for some time, but any lesbian, gay or bisexual person, in particular, supporting the current war on trans people, should remember that while T is near the end of our acronym, the other letters are just further back in the queue. Any talk of the movement going too far, or the community getting too broad is just a shameless display of exclusion, pointing at someone else you think is weirder than you and saying they are the real problem. But tomorrow’s weirdo could be you. We have already seen rising hate crimes against LGBTQ+ people, increasing year on year since 2015. This month witnesses at an inquest, pushed for by relatives of four murdered gay men, claimed that the Met police displayed homophobia when investigating their deaths. Assistant commissioner Helen Ball, the head of the Met’s professional standards, said she did not accept that the Met was “institutionally homophobic”. If organisations like Stonewall are brought down, who will be there to defend us or our families from such basic withdrawal of service responses, flawed as they are? Who will step up if raids start, or when our marriage certificates aren’t recognised, when our children are taken away from us, or when we don’t have the right identification to apply for work or welfare? It is when attacks come to the doors of the most liberal, and surely the most inoffensive human rights groups, that all radicals should be worried. Finn Mackay is the author of Female Masculinities and the Gender Wars and is a senior lecturer in sociology at the University of the West of England in BristolDominic Raab has said he disagrees with the concerns of the former Brexit minister David Frost that Covid restrictions are too coercive, saying it was too early to know how damaging the rapid spread of the Omicron variant may be. Amid speculation that Boris Johnson could be considering further restrictions for England before Christmas given the risk of thousands of hospitalisations a day, Raab said it was correct to respond robustly to an “unprecedented” pandemic. The prime minister has promised a Commons vote on any tougher formal rules, and could face a rebellion from his MPs and dissent from some ministers. On Sunday, Lord Frost announced he had stepped down from his Brexit role, saying this was because of concern about government policies including the introduction of “plan B” coronavirus measures, such as Covid passes. On Monday, Frost told Sky News he “never disagreed in any way” with Johnson about Brexit policy, but that “I don’t support coercive policies on Covid”. He added: “And if you’re a minister you have to support collective responsibility, you have to support decisions of the government, and I couldn’t, so that’s why I had to leave.” Asked about Frost’s view, Raab, the justice secretary and deputy prime minister, said he was sorry to see him depart. He said: “I’ve got great respect for him. I’m afraid I don’t agree with his analysis. I think we’ve just been discussing that we’re dealing with an unprecedented global and historic pandemic, something we’ve not seen on that scale before.” Raab told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “If we hadn’t taken the measures that we have to support public health, to support businesses, to support livelihoods, to support whole communities, we would have seen much more damage done, economic and social scarring, as well as the public health damage.” Speaking earlier on Sky News, Raab said it was impossible to rule out further Covid restrictions before Christmas. “I just can’t make hard, fast guarantees,” he said. “We’re in a much stronger place because of the resilience of our communities because of the high take-up of the vaccine. “But of course there is this time lag in the data. We know Omicron is spreading fast, we don’t yet know the severity. We’re reliant on seeing that data come through, and it comes through day by day.” He added: “I think we will have a much better Christmas than last year because of the vaccination level, both the overall vaccination level but particularly the impact of the booster campaign.” Raab said it was normal for the modelling and projections of government scientists to be challenged: “We always, all of us, question the advice. And I don’t think that should be presented as a sort of tectonic opposition to scientists. The scientists will tell you that they are constantly testing the evidence and the advice amongst themselves, let alone politicians.” He added: “What I don’t do is have those rigorous discussions, which rightly take place in private, in the cabinet, and then bandy them around.”In the first five months of the pandemic, violence increased in the nation’s most underserved communities, according to a recent study from the Violence Prevention Research Program at UC Davis. The study, published on 9 December in the American Journal of Public Health, compared zip codes in 13 major US cities, from Los Angeles to Boston, to see how gun violence affected “disadvantaged” areas versus “privileged” ones based on racial and economic segregation. Researchers compared the rates of gun violence in the given areas from 2018 through 2020. They found that people living in the zip codes that fell in the disadvantaged category were subject to a dramatically higher level of gun violence than their wealthier neighbors were. “Unfortunately the findings were not that surprising. Disparities in violence have existed for a long time and the pandemic was impacting structures in the communities that have endured the greatest burden,” said Julia Schleimer, the study’s lead researcher. Overall, Schleimer and her team found, gun homicides and assaults increased by 27.7% and 4% in March through July of 2020, compared to the average figure for the same period of 2018 and 2019. When the team analyzed zip code-level firearm violence data against the racial makeup and income levels of people within those areas, they found that racial disparities were deeply entrenched in neighborhoods. The locales where low-income Black residents and people of color were concentrated were among the most disadvantaged, and on average each zip code analyzed by Schleimer and her team saw 14 additional incidents of gun firearm violence, 150 more aggravated assaults and five more homicides than the most privileged areas. “This research is measuring the lived experiences of people who live in these communities, it’s not news to them,” Schleimer said. “I would hope that studies like this are illuminating to people who may be unaware of the toll violence takes on communities other than their own.” The findings from Schleimer and her team are backed up by numerous news reports of gun violence hitting Black and Latino communities the hardest and official crime data released by the FBI that revealed the largest single-year increase in homicides in six decades. And while homicides were up across the US, in cities with liberal and conservative leadership, this increase did not affect all locales and racial groups equally. In California, where Black people make up about 6% of the population, they accounted for 31% of the state’s homicide victims in 2020, according to the state attorney general. Schleimer hopes more academics and research institutions will dig into the ways race and economics affect gun violence rates throughout the nation and that these findings will make their way to the eyes of those in power. “Around the country we’re talking about racism more broadly and as a nation we need to do a better job of recognizing this history,” Schleimer says. “Having these numbers about gun violence and the research behind them can be important for policymakers who say, ‘Show me the data, show me the evidence.’”AAA: a standard-size dry battery cell, backstage pass I hope for, Australian Archaeological Association, Japanese rock band, morse code for aerial attacker, and a trio of food writers, Ada, Anna, Anna. Ada is Ada Boni, the Roman gastronomist, magazine editor and author of several books, most famously the 1925 Il Talismano della Felicità. Boni hoped that her The Talisman of Happiness, a collection of 882 recipes (which was later expanded), would both preserve culinary traditions and teach, although she didn’t see recipes as things to be followed slavishly; rather, as infinite creative possibilities – which, for me, is the beauty of the book. Anna Gosetti della Salda’s volume of regional recipes, Le Ricette Regionali Italiane, on the other hand, can feel more prescriptive, which is much to do with the encyclopaedic nature of the book. Although this passes when you realise that the succinct nature of a recipe can be liberating, like being given just enough advice and told to jump in. While both books are famous for their autonomy, I think they are even better in company, and especially in that of Anna del Conte, who translates and communicates the recipes and lessons in both (and many others) delightfully and wisely. And nowhere more than in the anthology of her work, Amaretto, Apple Cake and Artichokes, which is divided by ingredient. This week, carrots! I asked all three – Ada, Anna and Anna – what I should do with carrots at Christmas, and the answer was unanimous: braise them in plenty of butter with liquid (which I will come to shortly) until they shine. But before you do, a word about age. Mature is better. Detailed research by Hans Platenius, a research instructor at the Department of Vegetable Crops in New York in 1934, showed that sweetness in carrots is controlled primarily by the amount of sucrose they contain, which increases as they age, meaning so, too, does their sweetness. Thanks to ongoing and extensive research in my fridge, I have tested this theory on many occasions, and can confirm that the old, wrinkly, bendy carrot with a black tip is almost always the sweetest, and that oversized carrots do improve with age. What’s more, doing the first five months of storage in a cool place, carrots will actually increase their vitamin A content. Neglecting carrots, it seems, is a good thing. As well as flavour, sweetness and vitamin A, as Jane Grigson reminds us in her Vegetable Book, there is another advantage of maturity: resilience, such as braising in stock or, for an even richer and more celebratory dish, in a glass of amber marsala. Anna (del Conte) notes that this, Ada’s way, is one of the best ways to cook carrots. And I agree – it brings out the best in them, while allowing them to remain themselves. Like AAA, while they stand alone, carrots cooked this way are even better with others: cabbage and chestnuts, spring greens and bacon, or roast potatoes and parsnips, a stuffed bird or pumpkin – whatever is in the middle of your table. Le carote di Ada Boni – Ada Boni’s glazed carrots with marsala Serves 6 750g carrots 40g butter Salt and black pepper 1 tsp sugar 1 heaped tsp flour 200ml dry marsala, or 300ml vegetable or light chicken stock 1 tbsp minced parsley Peel the carrots and trim the tips and tails. There are two options for cutting: slice them into 3mm-thick discs or cut into batons, in which case cut into 5cm-long chunks, then cut each chunk into batons. In a deep frying or saute pan, melt the butter on a medium heat and add the carrots, salt, pepper and sugar, and cook, stirring, for three minutes. Sprinkle over the flour, stir, then pour in the marsala and 100ml water (or use 300ml stock instead), which should just cover the carrots. Bring to a boil, then reduce to a gentle simmer, cover the pan and cook for 15-25 minutes, lifting the lid to stir every now and then, and adding a little more liquid if you think it needs it. By the end of cooking, the carrots should be very tender with a little thick sauce. Add the minced parsley and more black pepper, and serve. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoThe Jailbird I’ve this gut feeling that inside somewhere, perched, so to speak, in the innermost wood of my body or brain, on mute since childhood a bird-creature lurks in its cramped lair for when the wood’s consumed, as in a fire, though also consumed as drinks are or food (over months or could be years ingesting crude chemicals, making the sly one ever slyer). But then crackle’n’pop, it’s all gone for good. And good riddance, since freed from its bonds the avian now preens its wings and absconds from the scene below (that’s me, in my last throes) skyward like a lark saying fuck to the whole brood and piping forth some blithe hymn as she goes. Maurice Riordan was born in Lisgoold, County Cork in 1953. His work quickly asserted a distinctive voice and viewpoint, and challenged some English stereotypes about “Irish poetry”. It has won wide recognition since his first collection, A Word from the Loki, in 1995. His latest, fifth collection, Shoulder Tap is as full of verve and creative range as ever. “Every so often I revise my position on the soul,” asserts the speaker in a lively meditative sequence, The Seven Songs of Myself. The Jailbird may be concerned with that same perplexing entity, the soul – or something not dissimilar. Caged in the ribs of a fierce and knotty Petrarchan sonnet, but theologically free-range, this “bird-creature” finally makes its getaway with a robust curse. The octet presents the speaker’s half-consciousness of the bird-creature, imprisoned and “on mute” inside him “since childhood” – and awaiting release. Lines four and five abbreviate that last thought unexpectedly: the bird, we’re told, “lurks / for when the wood’s consumed”. To “lurk for” is a far more sinister formulation than “wait for”: lurking is not passive but suggests a creature tensed for the pounce. This is a jailbird, after all: it knows it must be alert to the dangers beyond the gates. A jailbird is often a persistent offender. Perhaps the bird has been freed before, but recaptured? Lines five to eight, focused on consumption either by fire or “crude chemicals”, suggest body-dissolution. The fire may be in the crematorium where the body’s “wood” (and that of the coffin) is burned. But the ingestion of the chemicals (“over months or could be years”) might allude to the treatment of terminal illness. The last clause of the eighth line is the most tricky to interpret. Being consumed has the effect of “making the sly one slyer” – which is understandable: but the emphasis on slyness is interesting and surprising. Is “the sly one” simply the bird-creature? We might also think of the fox in popular tradition, or Christopher Sly in The Taming of the Shrew, serpentine Old Nick himself, or even that supreme trickster Odysseus, making his long way home. And the very title of Riordan’s collection refers to a practical joke whose essence is slyness – the shoulder tap. However, the etymology of “sly” connects particularly keenly to that earlier idea of the bird-creature lurking for its moment: “Twelfth century: from Old Norse slægr, clever, literally: able to strike, from sla to slay.” Dark, cartoonish humour lurks in the phrase “crackle’n’pop” at the start of the sestet, a reminder of a once much-advertised breakfast cereal (which purportedly snapped, crackled and popped when you added milk) and so connecting, with nice mischief, to the food-consumption motif of the octet. It hints at the body’s final moment with the light sound of a breakage occurring when there’s little left to break. The tone is insistently jocular: “that’s me, in my last throes”. Now the bird has its moment. The jail-body is dying or disintegrating, while the bird, anointed by a new ironic formality of diction (“the avian now preens its wings and absconds”) ascends and sings like a lark “saying fuck to the whole brood”. Perhaps “the whole brood” implies the whole of the body-world, not simply the hatchlings, but still the image of absconding mother persists. The lark’s female pronoun inevitably produces a stronger tone of transgression. I suspect birds use this sort of language to each other quite a lot, but few poets have traditionally dared admit it. The Jailbird subverts the old and ever-persistent notion of a consciousness that’s more than bodily with its de-familiarised metaphor. This metaphor-bird is a little angry, a little unnerving. The sonnet form itself is refreshed, its diction often a teasing mix of the colloquial and formal. Internal rhyme dances almost self-mockingly throughout, and the end-word rhymes are bracingly un-songlike in sound and texture. Entirely to the poem’s credit, there’s no mention of the word “soul”.Good morning. Donald Trump is increasingly agitated by the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack, according to sources familiar with the matter, and appears anxious that he could be implicated in the sprawling inquiry into the insurrection even as he protests his innocence. The former president in recent weeks has complained more about the investigation, demanding to know why his former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows shared so much material with the select committee and why dozens of other aides have also cooperated. The portrait that emerges from interviews with multiple sources close to Trump, including current and former aides, suggests a former president unmoored and backed into a corner by the rapid escalation in intensity of the committee’s investigation. Adam Kinzinger, one of two Republicans on the 6 January committee, said he was not yet ready to declare the former president guilty of a crime, but that the panel was investigating the likelihood that he is. The US is “closer to civil war than any of us would like to believe”, a member of a key CIA advisory panel has said. The analysis by Barbara F Walter, a political science professor, is contained in a book due out next year. Omicron ‘raging through the world’ and travel increases Covid risks The Omicron variant of Covid-19 has “extraordinary spreading capabilities”, the top US infectious diseases expert said on Sunday, and promises to result in a bleak winter as it continues “raging through the world”. Dr Anthony Fauci’s warning came before the busy holiday travel period, which he said would elevate the risk of infection even in vaccinated people. In an interview with NBC’s Meet the Press, Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser and head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases urged Americans to get booster shots and wear masks. Fauci also appeared to attempt damage control over Kamala Harris’s contention that the Biden administration “didn’t see” the Omicron or Delta variants coming. Harris’s comments on Friday were “taken out of context”, Fauci insisted, and referred to the “extraordinary number of mutations” of Covid-19 rather than any lack of readiness. Doug Ericksen, a staunch conservative Washington state senator and an outspoken critic of Covid-19 pandemic emergency orders, has died aged 52. His death comes weeks after he tested positive for coronavirus, though his cause of death wasn’t immediately released. The US senators Elizabeth Warren and Cory Booker have confirmed they have tested positive for Covid-19. Both reported having mild symptoms. British prime minister under pressure over photo of gathering during lockdown A photograph of Boris Johnson, his wife and up to 17 staff in the Downing Street garden during the first lockdown shows people “having a drink after a busy set of work meetings” and acting entirely within the rules of the time, the British justice secretary, Dominic Raab, has said. Raab’s defence of the events of 15 May 2020, shown in a picture shared with the Guardian, appears to differ from the Downing Street version, which stated that the image showed people still taking part in work meetings. The pictured emerged after a string of reports about similar alleged events in Downing Street and elsewhere during a subsequent lockdown last Christmas, and suggests rules may have been broken over a series of months. On Friday the Conservative party was dealt a blow when it lost a byelection in a stronghold seat that it had held for all but two of the last 189 years. Johnson has since been put “on notice” by his own party and could be gone within a year unless he cleans up his act, senior aides have said. What were the Covid rules in England on 15 May 2020? Two days before the gathering, lockdown restrictions had been eased to allow two people from different households to meet outdoors and at a distance of at least 2 metres. In other news … Gabriel Boric, a leftist former student leader, will become Chile’s youngest president after storming to a resounding victory in a run-off vote against his ultra-conservative far-right opponent, José Antonio Kast. With nearly 97% of the vote counted, the 35-year-old had 55.8% and a lead of 12 percentage points. Joe Manchin dealt a huge blow to Joe Biden yesterday, saying “no” to the $1.75tn Build Back Better domestic spending plan. The White House issued a stinging rebuke to the senator, stoking a bitter war of words in a party sharply divided between moderates and progressives. A group of attorneys and advocates have pledged to seek clemency for 110 Black soldiers who were convicted in a mutiny and riots at a military camp in Houston in 1917. They plan to ask the secretary of the army to posthumously grant honorable discharges and hope to get the men pardoned by Joe Biden. Officers arriving at the scene of a Florida road accident involving an overturned truck were surprised to find that two of the “victims” were large alligators. Officers found them “hanging from the rear window of an SUV lying on its side” The uninjured driver and his passenger, aged 18 and 17, were arrested. Don’t miss this: the Texas church fighting for abortion rights In the late 60s, the burgeoning movement to legalize US abortion state by state found an unlikely yet loyal ally – a contingent of women at the First Unitarian Universalist church in Dallas, Texas. In lieu of knitting sessions and bake sales, the church’s women’s alliance advocated for abortion rights and even had a hand in legally supporting Roe v Wade. The trailblazing women laid the groundwork for today’s growing pro-choice faith community movement in Texas. … or this: behind the outrageous viral obituary that people are calling ‘a masterpiece’ An unusual item appeared recently in a newspaper in North Carolina: “A plus-sized Jewish lady redneck died in El Paso on Saturday,” the article announced, before careening through 1,000 words of one of the more outrageous obituaries ever written. Renay Mandel Corren, a “bawdy, fertile, redheaded matriarch” and “talented and gregarious grifter”, had “kicked it,” the obituary said. The rollicking, manic tribute delighted in subverting the respectful conventions of the small-town obituary. Climate check: Scientists watch giant ‘doomsday’ glacier in Antarctica with concern Ice scientists meeting in New Orleans have warned that something alarming is brewing on the West Antarctic ice sheet, a vast basin of ice on the Antarctic peninsula. Years of research by teams of British and American researchers found that great cracks and fissures had opened up on top of and underneath the Thwaites glacier, one of the biggest in the world, and it was feared that parts of it may fracture and collapse, possibly within five years or less. Last Thing: the weirdest news stories of 2021 In a year that began with the US Capitol attack, continued with the fall of Afghanistan and is ending with the rapid spread of Omicron, the global news cycle has at times felt overwhelming. But while 2021 has been another fraught year, not all the news has been negative. From Shakira’s boar brawl to Nicki Minaj’s testicle fiasco, here are a few of the funniest and weirdest stories and headlines published this year.When Joe Manchin, the West Virginia senator, announced on Sunday he could not support Joe Biden’s $2.2tn Build Back Better legislation, it marked the end of at least one era. Biden and other Senate Democrats had spent most of 2021 trying to get Manchin, a conservative Democrat, to vote for a bill that would dramatically bolster the social safety net, combat climate change and raise taxes on corporations. Manchin has not budged from his central concern – that the spending is too much, inflation is too high, and the national debt will loom ever larger. He is wrong to oppose the legislation, but it’s clear negotiations will only go so far. In a 50-50 Senate, the margin for error is almost nonexistent, and Manchin represents a state Donald Trump won comfortably in 2016 and 2020. Democrats of all ideologies have little leverage over him. In 2022, Biden and the rest of the US Senate can continue to try to drag Manchin towards modest concessions, perhaps focusing on passing one or two major pieces of Build Back Better, like the child tax credit that has already made a significant dent in the child poverty rate. Either way, they probably will only have one more year to accomplish anything. A Republican wave next fall could very well drive Democrats out of power in Congress. But if that happens, Biden will still be president. If he begins to wield the power of the executive order, there is much he can get done. It is moral for Biden to take more aggressive action and it is politically wise, too. Entering a dismal midterm environment and a tough re-election – if he decides to run at all – will mean reminding voters, like Barack Obama in 2012, of the concrete things the Biden White House did for them. What can Biden do? As the American Prospect has noted, there are a wide array of transformational executive orders Biden can pursue tomorrow. He can start with immediately lowering America’s absurdly highly prescription drug costs by seizing patent licenses and distributing them to other manufactures that will produce treatments more affordably. In essence, this would be an “eminent domain” for patents. The law, known as Section 1498, has been on the books since 1910 and used chiefly for military purposes, like procuring lead-free bullets and night-vision goggles. It’s rarely been used in a pharmaceutical context but Biden can single-handedly change that. Even wielding the threat of so-called “march-in rights” could increase the federal government’s leverage over big pharma, which has only gotten richer during the pandemic. Democrats have campaigned for decades on cutting drug prices, promising to allow Medicare to finally negotiate them. Each time Democrats fail, voters lose trust in them. After tackling drug prices, Biden can seek to cancel student debt. As a candidate, he promised to cancel $10,000-worth per person, a reasonable figure, but has not pursued this any further since becoming president. There is the risk of backlash from working-class voters who never attended college – they might ask why their mortgages aren’t being canceled too – but Democrats are likely staring down defeat in 2022 anyway. An executive action to wipe away at least $10,000 in debt would help many millions of Americans who were preyed on by for-profit colleges or simply have struggled to repay what it is they owe to lenders. There is, certainly, an economic argument to giving the middle class more discretionary income. Biden has the authority to do far more on climate, too. If Congress won’t act, he can ban fossil fuel drilling and mining on federal lands and oceans. He can designate new national monuments to protect imperiled animals, including marine wildlife in the oceans under American jurisdiction. It’s vital Biden begins to use the full extent of his presidential powers to make far-reaching change, especially with Republicans threatening to take power again. While executive orders can be rolled back in the future, there is the reality that some, like lowering drug costs or canceling debt, will be popular enough for the Republicans to leave them alone. Democrats can’t pretend any more that the entirety of their agenda is being held hostage by Manchin or give Biden a pass he doesn’t deserve. He is the president of the United States and he must start behaving that way. Ross Barkan is a writer based in New YorkOne of the world’s smallest books has been sold at an auction in Brussels for €4,200 (£3,500). The leather-bound work, measuring 5mm by 5mm – smaller than the end of a pencil – contains versions of the Lord’s Prayer in Dutch, English, American English, French, German, Spanish and Swedish. It had been valued between €1,000 and €1,500 but an anonymous buyer snapped it up at Arenberg Auctions in Brussels for €3,500, with additional costs bringing the price paid to €4,200. Henri Godts, the auctioneer, said: “The printed text is so minuscule that you cannot read it with the naked eye but need a strong magnifying glass.” The book, titled The Lord’s Prayer, was one of a few hundred published in 1952 by the Gutenberg Museum, in Mainz, Germany, as part of a fundraising initiative to pay for the building’s reconstruction after the second world war. The institution is one of the world’s oldest printing museums, named after Johannes Gutenberg, who pioneered mechanical printing in Europe in the 15th century. Godts said: “The copy has been in a collection for dozens of years and is kept in a jewel box as if it were a gem. You could even incorporate it into a transparent jewel and wear it around your neck, if you so wish.” The book came with the metal printing plates used to make it. There is a long history to the publication of miniature books. In Europe, many were produced in the 16th century as printers sought to test the technological limits of the presses, but there are examples from ancient Mesopotamia dating back to 2325BC. According to the US-based Miniature Book Society, a miniature book “is no more than three inches in height, width, or thickness”. A book titled Teeny Ted from Turnip Town, measuring 70 micrometres by 100 micrometres, holds the Guinness World Record for being the smallest reproduction of a printed book. A micrometre is equivalent to 0.001mm.While their fear and dismay is often regarded as rooted in delusion, rightwingers are correct that the world is metamorphosing into something new and, to them, abhorrent. They’re likewise correct that what version of history we tell matters. The history we tell today lays the groundwork for the future we make. The outrage over the 1619 Project and the new laws trying to censor public school teachers from telling the full story of American history are a doomed attempt to hold back facts and perspectives that are already widespread. In 2018, halfway through the Trump presidency, Michelle Alexander wrote a powerful essay arguing that we are not the resistance. We, she declared, are the mighty river they are trying to dam. I see it flowing, and I see the tributaries that pour into it and swell its power, and I see that once firmly grounded statues and assumptions have become flotsam in its current. Similar shifts are happening far beyond the United States, but it is this turbulent nation of so much creation and destruction I know best and will speak of here. When a regime falls, the new one sweeps away its monuments and erects its own. This is happening as the taking down of Confederate, Columbus and other statues commemorating oppressors across the country, the renaming of streets and buildings and other public places, the appearance of myriad statues and murals of Harriet Tubman and other liberators, the opening of the Legacy Museum documenting slavery and mass incarceration and housing a lynching memorial. There was no great moment of overthrow, but nevertheless we are dismantling the trophies of the ugly old world of sanctified inequality and erecting monuments to heroes of justice and liberation, from the Olympic track medalists of 1968 making their Black power gesture at San Jose State University to the Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad National Historical Park in Maryland. All those angry white men with the tiki torches chanting, in Charlottesville in 2017, “You will not replace us” as they sought to defend a statue of Gen Robert E Lee were wrong in their values and actions but perhaps not in their assessment. White people are not being replaced, but in many ways a white supremacist history and society is. The statue of the general was removed earlier this year and will be melted down to be made into a new work of art under the direction of the Jefferson School African American Heritage Center. They call the project “swords into plowshares”, a phrase suggesting that this marks the end of a war – perhaps the civil war in which the north never fully claimed its victory, the south never accepted its defeat. What’s happening goes far beyond public monuments. The statues mark the rejection of old versions of who we are and what we value, but those versions and values matter most as they play out in everyday private and public life. We are only a few decades removed from a civilization in which corporal punishment of children by parents and teachers was an unquestioned norm; in which domestic violence and marital rape were seen as a husband’s prerogative and a wife surrendered financial and other agency; in which many forms of inequality and exclusion had hardly even been questioned, let alone amended; in which few questioned the rightness of a small minority – for white Christian men have always been a minority in the United States – holding almost all the power, politically, socially, economically, culturally; in which segregation and exclusion were pervasive and legal; in which Native Americans had been largely written out of history; in which environmental regulation and protection and awareness barely existed. You have to remember how different the past was to recognize how much has changed. Frameworks such as indigenous land acknowledgments that were unheard of and maybe almost inconceivable a few decades ago are routine at public events. Land acknowledgments are not land return, but they fortify the case for it. The Civil Rights Act passed in 1964; in 1965, with Griswold v Connecticut, the supreme court overruled state laws criminalizing birth control and laid the groundwork for Roe v Wade six years later; only in 2015, Obergefell v Hodges established marriage equality for same-sex couples (while equality of rights between different-sex couples had also gradually been established as marriage became a less authoritarian institution). The right is trying to push the water back behind the dam. With deregulation and social service and tax cuts, they have succeeded in reestablishing an economy of extreme inequality, but not a society fully committed to that inequality. They have succeeded in passing laws at the state level against voting rights and reproductive rights, but they have not succeeded in pushing the majority’s imaginations back to 1960 or 1920 or whenever their version of when America was great stalled out. They can win the battles, but I do not believe they will, in the end, win the war. While the right has become far more extreme and has its tens of millions of true believers, it is morphing into a minority sect. This has prompted their desperate scramble to overturn free and fair elections and other democratic processes. White Christians, who were 80% of the population in 1976, are now 44%. Mixed-race and non-white people are rapidly becoming the majority. On issues such as climate, people of color are far more progressive; if we can make it through the huge backlash of the present moment, the possibilities are dazzling. These are relatively concrete changes. Others are subtler and more recent, but no less important. Even in the last decade there has been an epochal shift in our expectations of how we should treat each other, and the casual cruelty and disdain targeting women, queer people, Bipoc, the disabled and those with divergent bodies that pervaded entertainment and daily life are now viewed as repugnant – and are met with consequences in some contexts. A regular experience of this era (for those of us who were around for the last one) is to revisit a song, a film, a book and find that we have now become people who can see better the insults and exclusions that were so seamlessly woven into it. Some of the old art has not weathered well and will fall out of circulation, as some old culture always does; some will be interpreted in new ways; some neglected treasures will move from margin to center. We – a metamorphosing “we” – are sifting through an old and building a new canon. Even more profound than this is a shift in worldview from the autonomous individual of hypercapitalism and social darwinism to a recognition of both the natural and social worlds as orchestras of interdependence, of survival as an essentially collaborative and cooperative business. Disciplines from neuropsychology to economics have shifted their sense of who we are, what works, and what matters. Climate change is first of all a crisis, but it’s also a reminder that the world is a collection of interlocking systems. The just-deceased bell hooks talked about a “love ethic” that included “a global vision wherein we see our lives and our fate as intimately connected to those of everyone else on the planet”. Birth can be violent and dangerous, and sometimes one or the other of the two involved die. There is no guarantee about what is to come, and the shadow of climate chaos hangs over it all. We do not have time to build a better society before we address that crisis, but it is clear that the response to that crisis is building such a society. So much has already changed. The river Alexander described has swept away so much, has carried so many onward. It has come far; it still has dams to overtop and so much farther to go. Rebecca Solnit is a Guardian US columnist. Her most recent books are Recollections of My Nonexistence and Orwell’s RosesAn 82-year-old Jewish woman, who is being investigated by Labour for alleged antisemitism for the third time in less than three years, is threatening legal action against the party, claiming it has unlawfully discriminated against her based on her belief in anti-Zionism. Diana Neslen, who lives in east London, regularly attends her local synagogue and keeps a kosher home but has been accused of antisemitism for tweets she has posted about Israel and Zionism. In a pre-action letter to Labour, her lawyers, Bindmans, say the party’s investigation is totally unjustified and disproportionate as it rests on a single tweet from 2017, which said “the existence of the state of Israel is a racist endeavour and I am an antiracist Jew”. They claim anti-Zionism is a protected philosophical belief under the Equality Act and Neslen has been “subjected by the party to discrimination and harassment related to her protected philosophical belief”. Neslen, who said she was a “committed Zionist” before she visited Israel, told the Guardian: “I remember thinking at the end of the war, ‘Why didn’t the Germans do anything?’ When there’s injustice done in your name you cannot close your eyes to it. That’s why I feel very strongly. “The Labour party has no idea in my opinion of what antisemitism is. My son was attacked by a luminary of the BNP [British National party] who was jailed for three years. I remember picking up the phone and being subjected to death threats from the BNP. People who have never experienced antisemitism have no idea what it means, what it means for a Jew to be found guilty of antisemitism.” Neslen, who grew up in South Africa, said she had spent her life fighting apartheid and racism. In 2018, while mourning the death of her husband of 51 years and having recently been diagnosed with cancer, she was sent a “reminder of conduct” accusing her of antisemitic comments on social media. In February this year, she was given a “formal NEC warning relating to your conduct”. Bindmans said all bar one of the tweets cited in the latest investigation, of which she was notified in August, were excluded under party rules either because they were before she rejoined the party in 2015 or were considered in the previous investigation. In 2018, Labour, beset by antisemitism allegations, adopted the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance’s definition of antisemitism, which includes as an example: “Denying the Jewish people their right to self-determination, eg by claiming that the existence of a state of Israel is a racist endeavour.” Neslen is a member of Jewish Voice for Labour, which says it knows of 42 Jewish members of the Labour party, two of whom have since died, who have faced or are facing disciplinary charges relating to allegations of antisemitism. The group estimates that Jewish Labour party members are at least five times more likely to have faced actioned complaints of antisemitism than non-Jewish members. The letter from Bindmans quotes the judge who, in the case of Maya Forstater earlier this year, determined that gender-critical views were a protected philosophical belief, saying “only if the belief involves a very grave violation of the rights of others, tantamount to the destruction of those rights, would it be one that was not worthy of respect in a democratic society”. Neslen is threatening to sue Labour if it does not apologise and undertake not to pursue further investigations against her in respect of her beliefs. Labour has not replied to letters from her lawyers and did not respond to a request for comment from the Guardian.Gabriel Boric has vowed to unite Chile, fight “the privileges of the few” and tackle poverty and inequality after winning a decisive victory over his far-right opponent to become the South American country’s youngest president. The 35-year-old leftwing former student leader won 56% of the vote in Sunday’s second-round presidential election, cruising past his ultra-conservative opponent, José Antonio Kast, who took 44.2%. The triumph of Boric, who belongs to a generation deeply opposed to the extreme economic model bequeathed to Chile by the Pinochet dictatorship, comes two years after a rise in metro fares triggered huge protests and demands for drastic changes to the political and economic system. The president-elect, who will be sworn in on 11 March, said the time had come for a radical overhaul of Chilean society and its economy. “Men and women of Chile, I accept this mandate humbly and with a tremendous sense of responsibility because we are standing on the shoulders of giants,” he said in front of a vast crowd packed into a Santiago boulevard. “I know that the future of our country will be at stake next year. That is why I want to promise you that I will be a president who will take care of democracy and not jeopardise it, a president who listens more than he speaks, who seeks unity, who looks after people’s daily needs, and who fights hard against the privileges of the few and who works every day for Chilean families.” Boric said his generation wanted to have their rights respected and not be treated “like consumer goods or a business”, adding the country would no longer allow Chile’s poor to “keep paying the price” of inequality. He added: “The times ahead will not be easy … Only with social cohesion, refinding ourselves and sharing common ground will we be able to advance towards truly sustainable development – which reaches every Chilean.” The new president said he would be “the president of all Chileans … and serve everyone”. Boric also highlighted the progressive positions that launched his improbable campaign, including a promise to fight the climate crisis by blocking a proposed mining project in the world’s largest copper-producing nation. He also called for an end to Chile’s private pension system – the hallmark of the neoliberal economic model imposed by Augusto Pinochet. Boric thanked each candidate in turn – including Kast – and reinforced his commitment to Chile’s constitutional process, a key consideration for many as the country embarks upon this latest chapter in a turbulent period of transition. The new administration is likely to be closely watched throughout Latin America, where Chile has long been a harbinger of regional trends. It was the first country in South or Central America to break with US dominance during the cold war and pursue socialism with the election of Salvador Allende in 1970. It then reversed course three years later when Pinochet’s coup ushered in a period of rightwing military rule that quickly launched a free-market experiment throughout the region. Kast won the first-round vote on 21 November by 2 percentage points, but Boric was able to prevail on Sunday by expanding beyond his base in Santiago and attracting voters in rural areas. In the northern region of Antofagasta, where he finished third in the first round of voting, Boric trounced Kast by almost 20 points. Ghosts and old divisions returned to haunt the bitterly fought campaign, during which Kast – who has a history of defending the military dictatorship – sought unsuccessfully to caricature his rival as a puppet of his Communist party allies who would upend Latin America’s most stable, advanced economy. However, Kast proved unexpectedly magnanimous in defeat. After tweeting a photo of himself congratulating his opponent on his “grand triumph”, he visited Boric’s campaign headquarters to see the new president. Kast, a father of nine, also said: “Gabriel Boric can count on us.” Chile’s outgoing president, the conservative billionaire Sebastián Piñera, held a video conference with Boric to offer his government’s full support during the three-month transition. In Santiago’s subway, the flashpoint for the 2019 protests, young supporters of Boric waved flags emblazoned with the candidate’s name while jumping and shouting as they headed into the city centre for his victory speech. “This is a historic day,” said Boris Soto, a teacher. “We’ve defeated not only fascism, and the right wing, but also fear.” On a sweltering day in Chile, voting was marred by public transport difficulties across the country, although the government claimed it had done everything in its power to guarantee voters could reach polling stations. Turnout for the vote – in which 1.2 million more people cast their ballots than in the first round – was nearly 56%, the highest level since voting ceased to be mandatory nine years ago. Boric will become Chile’s youngest modern president when he takes office, and only the second millennial to lead in Latin America, after El Salvador’s Nayib Bukele. Only one other head of state, Giacomo Simoncini of the city-state San Marino in Europe, is younger. “It’s impossible not to be impressed by the historic turnout, the willingness of Kast to concede and congratulate his opponent even before final results were in, and the generous words of President Piñera,” said Cynthia Arnson, the head of the Latin America programme at the Wilson Center thinktank in Washington. “Chilean democracy won today, for sure.” The markets reacted less enthusiastically, with Chile’s peso falling and its dollar-denominated stock index slumping 10% on Monday. The peso’s 2% fall left it down nearly 20% since Chileans elected a constitutional assembly dominated by leftwing and independent representatives in May to redraft the country’s market-oriented constitution. • The headline and first line of this article were amended on 21 December 2021 to correctly refer to the “president” of Chile, rather than the “premier” as an earlier version said. The Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this reportThis should have been the ideal fixture to take us into the Winterpause. A soupçon of a possible fight for the title, an indication that Bayern Munich would have work to do in the second half of the season, a sense of leaving the public begging for more in the last match of the calendar year – along the line of tradition like last year’s late, late Robert Lewandowski goal digging out a win at Bayer Leverkusen, or the two goals in the last four minutes that were needed to put away Wolfsburg, Friday night’s visitors, two years ago in this same fixture seeing us into Christmas 2019. By the end of the match, however, all Die Wölfe were begging for was mercy. There was never any cliffhanger potential here and if you were looking for statistical hope, you were doing so in the wrong place. Never before has a team with 43 points or more at Christmas failed to go on and win the Bundesliga, and that’s where Bayern are. There were four and it could have been so many more for Bayern, who were kept at arm’s length for much of the first half by the ultra-defensive visitors (but still led through an early, predatory Thomas Müller strike) but pressed with greater vigour in the second half, and Wolfsburg were powerless to resist. Bayern were “incredibly sharp” in those second 45 minutes, as their coach Julian Nagelsmann told DAZN, while understandably classifying his first half-season in charge as “a lot of fun.” Other records have been shattered along the way. Their 56 goals for the first half of the season is a never-before-reached high watermark, and they’re well on pace to beat Bayern’s Bundesliga best of 101 from 1971-72. Lewandowski, naturally, was also responsible for something new. He has now surpassed two seemingly impregnable Gerd Müller records this year, a late goal here taking him past Der Bomber’s record for a calendar year (42 trumping 41), having beaten his single season record in spring. The visitors, given their particularly harrowing history against Lewandowski in this fixture, must have felt they got off lightly in conceding just one to him, a satisfying left-foot volley with the game long since decided. Neither this stream of statistical superlatives, nor the sense of the inevitable, should diminish Bayern’s achievements. They are playing magnificent football under Nagelsmann and while the Hansi Flick era was packed with performances to get the pulse racing, an artistic pinnacle to compare with the Guardiola years, the new man is aiming to move away from such a haphazard, visceral, turbo-Keegan type of template. Nagelsmann praised his side for their “very good control” of the game. “I prefer good control to 10 chances and 10 counter-chances,” he stressed. The last week, which looked challenging on paper, has only strengthened Bayern’s hand. Putting away a stubborn Mainz last weekend was one thing. Faced with a jaunt to Stuttgart and this reception of Wolfsburg without their first-choice midfield axis of Joshua Kimmich and Leon Goretzka, Bayern have flown. Nine goals scored, none conceded and the title almost signed and sealed, even before a spluttering Borussia Dortmund fell 3-2 at Hertha on Saturday night. Those needed have stepped in with authority. Marc Roca, who had cut the figure of an outcast, is now in form and probably playing himself out of a potential move, loan or otherwise. “Looking at the last six months, I’m glad that we had such a big squad,” said Nagelsmann. “We needed every player.” The unlikely central midfield of Roca and Jamal Musiala have been excellent, though it does feel as if everything is going their way. Musiala was set to be substituted in the closing minutes, but Benjamin Pavard’s unscheduled sprint from the pitch changed that. “Benji came out and said in French that he had to go to the bathroom,” recounted Nagelsmann. “Then he decided to play for another 15 seconds, played three or four more passes and when the ball was on the other side, disappeared into the tunnel.” So exited a grinning Pavard, with Musiala staying on and shortly afterwards, he laid on Lewandowski’s goal. With the mix of swagger and serendipity, the 5-0 reverse at Borussia Mönchengladbach in the DfB Pokal in late October is a result that is more incongruous and inexplicable as time goes by. For Wolfsburg, expected to be part of the chasing pack, this was a seventh straight loss. Sporting director Marcel Schäfer was looking on the bright side – because what else can you do after a game like this, and an opponent like this, especially when you’ve already fired one coach this season? – as he looked back on the rubble of recent weeks. “Due to the Champions League elimination, we will be able to put in a lot of work on the [training] pitch,” he argued, “and this will give Florian the chance to work on the understanding between [the players].” Wolfsburg were criticised for a lack of ambition in some quarters but Florian Kohfeldt, their manager, was constrained by a shortage of personnel – particularly in the wide areas, where the banned Jérôme Roussillon or the injured trio of Paulo Otávio, Admir Mehmedi and Maximilian Philipp could have given the side some energy out wide, particularly on the counter. Further forward, he was lacking Lukas Nmecha, one of the bright spots of the season so far. For Kohfeldt and company, it may well get worse before it gets better. That may well be the case for the rest of the Bundesliga too. Nagelsmann’s Bayern are, it seems, just warming up. Talking points • The potential competition did themselves no favours this weekend, with Dortmund inexplicably letting a half-time lead in Berlin disintegrate (“we gave the game away,” bemoaned stand-in goalkeeper Marwin Hitz) with Hertha scoring three times in 18 second-half minutes, including two belting finishes by Marco Richter for the hosts. Earlier on Saturday Leipzig suffered their first loss under Domenico Tedesco, 2-0 at home to lowly Arminia Bielefeld. “I couldn’t have imagined us scoring if we’d have played for another hour,” admitted the coach. Leverkusen are still six points adrift of second-placed BVB after going down to a late Kevin Schade goal in Freiburg. • Christian Streich’s side, instead, finish the Hinrunde in third place and with the joint-best defensive record in the Bundesliga. • Max Kruse finished off a good week, getting married on Wednesday – having proposed live on TV from the Olympics back in July – and striking a spectacular winner at Bochum on Saturday, making Union only the second team to win a Bundesliga game there this season. The only fly in the ointment was VfL fans throwing beer cups at Union players. Kruse said he had “seldom seen such antisocial fans” though clarified later on Instagram that “80% of Bochum fans are nice”. • The Anthony Modeste show rolls on into Christmas. He missed a few chances he would normally gobble up for Köln against Stuttgart, but then scored a formidable header, his eighth of 11 Bundesliga goals so far, in the 89th minute to snare another three points in what has been a highly satisfactory first half of the season. The emotion at full time was clear, with a tearful Modeste embraced by teammates and his coach Steffen Baumgart.The humble vol-au-vent, a canapé long compromised by memories of Abigail’s Party and the three-day week, is staging a bold comeback this Christmas: sales are up 25% year-on-year at Waitrose, with stocks of their party packs of 12 running low. This resurgent interest in what the Sun describes as “the naff snack” has been attributed to a nostalgic obsession with bygone foodstuffs triggered by the pandemic, but the revival could have just as much to do with the emergence of an entire generation for whom vol-au-vents hold no unpleasant associations, because they’ve never eaten any and barely know what they are. Here’s what they are: small pastry cases loaded with a variety of savoury fillings – ham, chicken and mushroom being among the most common. The vol-au-vent originated in France around the start of the 19th century as a larger, pie-like affair; the bite-size cocktail party version is more properly known as a bouchée. By the 1990s, they were tragically unfashionable and remained so for decades, although classy, updated vol-au-vents started appearing in smart restaurants a year or two before the pandemic erupted. Now it’s the retro hors d’oeuvre of the season, and the shops have been picked clean. Don’t let that stop you – you can still make your own vol-au-vents. This traditional recipe from tasteatlas.com – with a classic sauce financière filling – gives you an idea of just how difficult that can be. But do not fret: the following 16 alternatives prove it doesn’t have to be that hard – for one thing, they all call for shop-bought puff pastry dough. There may be culinary pursuits for which it’s worth producing your own puff pastry from scratch; a batch of vol-au-vents ain’t one of them. Once your dough is bought and unrolled, there are two basic and interchangeable methods for forming the cases. In the first, a circle of dough is stamped out using a wine glass, fluted cutter or similar, and then a smaller, indented circle is lightly scored on top of each. When they’re cooked this will create a little semi-detached lid that can be prised off for filling. The other way is to cut out a batch of circles, then cut smaller circles out of half of those to make rings. Lay a ring on top of each circle, so that they puff up into little baskets when baked. If you fancy it, you can also make square cases, as Yotam Ottolenghi and Sami Tamimi do for their smoked aubergine and yoghurt vol-au-vents. In any event, all you need is a reliable method for cases, like this one, to be baked and cooled prior to filling – as prior as the night before, if necessary. After that it’s all about fillings – you might even want to produce more than one for the same party. Jamie Oliver’s creamy mushroom filling is certainly among the most foolproof. Simon Rimmer’s coronation prawn vol-au-vents hark back to a time when vol-au-vents were still fashionable, possibly before you were born. Other useful combinations include smoked trout, horseradish and asparagus and spiced egg and coriander mayo. Shredded, cooked chicken with bacon, leek and cream cheese sounds like a back of the fridge combination borne of dire necessity – a huge lorry driver shortage, perhaps – but tastes none the worse for it. Sausage vol-au-vents are pretty much sausage rolls with a flakier pastry, making them wholly suitable for Christmas drinks, or a Boxing Day hangover. These brie and cranberry vol-au-vents from Olivia’s Cuisine also have a seasonal attraction, particularly if you bought a load of cranberries just because it seemed like a seasonal thing to do, and subsequently find yourself managing a surplus. James Martin’s seafood vol-au-vent with pea puree is more starter than canapé (you’ll need a fork) but it possesses a certain aura of luxury, or at least gluttony, calling as it does for lobster, salmon, prawns snd monkfish. Likewise, these giant champagne and lemon prawn vol-au-vents, each with a 12cm diameter pastry casing, are rather closer to a meal than a snack. If mussel, spinach and roquefort sounds a bit experimental, rest assured it comes from a solid source: the website of Jus-Rol, purveyors of ready-roll puff pastry, the very invention that makes vol-au-vents worth the bother. They even make ready-to-bake cases, in the event you’ve lost the will to live but still have people coming round for drinks. The website also suggests guacamole and asparagus vol-au-vents – not so much a recipe but written permission to cut all remaining corners. While vol-au-vents are generally savoury, they can just as easily accommodate sweet fillings, opening up the possibility of taking your guests seamlessly from canapés through to pudding without ever letting them sit down – surely the way forward. Strawberry vol-au-vents can be made by filling each case with whipped cream and topping them with cut strawberry, while this recipe for sweet custard vol-au-vents is invaluable if only because it teaches you how to make custard in a microwave. Finally, caramelised banana vol-au-vents from Australian Gourmet Traveller offer weary, disgruntled cooks an excuse to spark up the family blowtorch over Christmas. I leave it to you to decide whether that’s a good idea.Foxes get what they deserve Leicester City’s manager, Lydia Bedford, said before a 2-0 defeat of Birmingham pulled her team off the bottom of the table that “getting three points on Sunday doesn’t secure our WSL status”. She is right of course, but the impact of a first win and the side’s first points in the top flight – having had the worst start of a promoted side – is a real sign that the team are no longer willing to be the competition’s cannon fodder. The new year gives the opportunity to continue the fresh start under Bedford after some much-needed rest. For the Foxes, clawing themselves off the bottom before the winter break is just reward for the investment in the women’s set-up and support for the team that the club have provided in recent years, which stand in stark contrast to the struggles of Birmingham. Suzanne Wrack • Match report: Leicester 2-0 Birmingham Toone helps United fly Marc Skinner is starting to shed the cloak of following in Casey Stoney’s footsteps. He was never going to outdo her impeccable touchline fashion but Manchester United had a comfortable afternoon in a 5-0 win against Aston Villa. Ella Toone is thriving in Skinner’s free-flowing style, two goals against Villa taking her tally for the season to five. After the game Skinner said: “She has that quality and it’s my job to keep pushing her and seeing what ceilings she can break. She has great tenacity, great qualities with the ball.” It may be that Skinner can finally get the fans on side after a shaky start as United’s manager. Renuka Odedra Goal-dry Villa walking a tightrope Carla Ward’s Aston Villa have lost six of their past seven league games and Leicester’s win over Birmingham will worry them. Villa do have a safety net, sitting nine points above Birmingham and seven ahead of Leicester, but abysmal defensive form and scarcity of goals are leaving them looking uninspired. United dominated and shut out what little Villa offered in attack. It’s been a story of Villa’s season of sorts, with the team progressing only 7.8 metres up-field per sequence this season on average – the shortest distance of any team. They desperately need goals to pick up points or they risk slipping into the one relegation place. RO Korpela keeps Spurs’ Champions League hopes alive Tottenham continue to hold third spot after a narrow win over Everton. The 1-0 victory courtesy of a Jess Naz curler into the top left corner secured Spurs a first WSL win over Everton. But it was the goalkeeper Tinja-Riikka Korpela who ensured they nabbed all three points. Everton had plenty of shots on target, keeping Korpela busy. The Finland international made a particularly special save, stretching to her right to palm away a Grace Clinton shot hit from outside the 18-yard box. A top-three finish would deliver Champions League football for Spurs, who closed the gap to second-placed Chelsea to a point after the champions’ game against West Ham was postponed. RO Covid postponements add to pressure on teams Coronavirus has again disrupted the WSL after positive cases resulted in three postponements. The results of the games that did go ahead put pressure on Arsenal and Chelsea – whose matches were called off – as United and Spurs both won. None of Brighton, West Ham, Reading and Manchester City, all of whom harbour top-three hopes, played and they have been left with a gap to bridge. ROBereaved families and friends of people who died from Covid have criticised Boris Johnson over a photo that has emerged showing the prime minister at a gathering with wine and cheese in the Downing Street garden with his wife and up to 17 staff in an apparent breach of lockdown rules. The photo was shared with the Guardian after No 10’s denial last week that there was a social event on Friday 15 May 2020 that included wine, spirits and pizza, inside and outside the building. Johnson’s spokesperson said Downing Street staff were working in the garden in the afternoon and evening. However, the picture raises questions over that assertion. Bottles of wine are in evidence, there is a lack of social distancing, and 19 people are gathered in groups across the No 10 terrace and lawn. The Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group said funerals at that time were allowed fewer people in attendance than there appeared to be in the Downing Street garden, and it was “exhausting” to see the “constant, flagrant disregard we have all been held in”. Jo Goodman, a co-founder of the group, said: “It is exhausting for not only those of who us lost loved ones to Covid-19, but for everyone across the country who sacrificed so much to see the constant, flagrant disregard we have all been held in. We’re not sure how much more the prime minister expects us to take before he’ll accept that he has to be open with the public about these events. “This supposed work meeting, with no pen, paper or laptop in sight (instead replaced with vital cheese and wine) shows that he presided over a culture of believing that the rules applied only to other people since early in the pandemic. When this photo was taken strangers had to hold dying loved ones hands, funerals were allowed less people than in the Downing Street garden that day and we couldn’t even hug each other for comfort. “Many of us worry that it may be too late for the prime minister to regain any credibility and authority to implement any future measures to tackle the pandemic. If that proves to be the case it will be time for him to consider what is best for the country.” Others vented their grief and anger on social media. Nazir Afzal, the former chief prosecutor for the north-west of England, said on Twitter: “Here’s Boris Johnson having a meeting (?) in May 2020 whilst the rest of us were complying with Covid rules which included not being able to attend my own brothers funeral because only six of us could and we only had 29 mins to bury him before the next family came.” One medic called out the “absolute level of contempt” demonstrated by the Downing Street picture. Others contrasted the party to the lockdown rules others were adhering to at the time. The photo attracted ridicule from satirists and political commentators.Between them, England’s batters have had 40 completed innings in this series, and in 35 of those they haven’t reached 40. Joe Root has managed it twice, Dawid Malan twice, and Chris Woakes once, with that sparkling 44. Even Jos Buttler, who was absolutely heroic today, has a top score of only 39. The openers have made 109 for eight times out. At No.5 and 6, Ben Stokes and Ollie Pope, coming in against the old ball, have made 113 for eight. Something has to change. Root is right about the mentality: all they want for Christmas is glue. That’s it from us. Thanks for your company and your correspondence, and we wish you a very merry Christmas, even if you make it hard for yourself by supporting England. The last word goes to Bill Hargreaves, a firm friend of the OBO. “Thanks for the great commentary, for today and a great year,” he says. “The pain and humour of hope.” Pain and humour: that’s us in a nutshell. The player of the match is Marnus Labuschagne, the only batter to make significant runs twice. He’s modest too: “Davey [Warner] was exceptional, he took the attack to the bowlers. I tried to absorb the pressure.” “We love your idiosyncrasies,” says Adam Gilchrist, possibly not speaking for all of us. Here’s Steve Smith, tasting victory on his return to the top table. “They showed some really good resistance and fight,” he says, “especially Jos Buttler, who’s usually a dasher, we haven’t really seen that from him before. But we always felt, ‘just a couple of good balls [will do it], we’ll keep going’. The guys played really well. We were able to control the game after the first day – Davey [Warner] and Marnus’s [Labuschagne’s] partnership set it up.” He modestly omits to acknowledge the part played by his own hard-fought 90. “I want to make special mention to Mitchell Starc as well. He led the attack really well.” On a happier note, Root has some warm words for Jos Buttler. “It was heartbreaking to see him get out like that, because it was a wonderful performance from him. A great example to the rest of the guys – that’s the determination, the desire that you need to win out here. His mentality in particular was outstanding.” “The reason it’s disappointing is that we made the same mistakes again,” Root tells Alison Mitchell. “We could have bowled a lot fuller on the first day.” That’s true, but he’s not taking any of the blame himself, for the selection, nor does he mention the fielding, which let the bowlers down badly. “With the bat as well, we need to make bigger scores.” No shit, Joseph. “You look at the second innings, that’s the attitude, the desire, the way we’re going to have to play for the rest of the series. And we’re more than capable of doing it.” Joe Root is about to be interviewed. This is the bit of captaincy he usually does best. “Not bad for England to get within a session of survival,” says Robin Hazlehurst. “Suggests the big tactical error was racing through the overs when bowling. If England’s over rate had been a little slower, they might have taken enough overs out of the game to save it.” Spare a thought for Jos Buttler, who has spent the last five days on a rollercoaster of ridiculous proportions. He has taken two breathtaking catches, dropped some sitters, made a hapless duck, been missed on a pair, put on the hair shirt and mounted a magnificent resistance for 200 deliveries, only to be defeated by the brush of his heel on the base of the stumps. That’s not a game of cricket: it’s a Netflix comedy-drama, written by Jesse Armstrong. For the record, England scored 192 in that innings. More to the point, they survived 113.1 overs, and regained about half of their pride. Anderson fends to gully and it’s all over. Five wickets for Jhye Richardson, and a 2-0 lead for Australia. The series is alive, technically, but for England, even after this brave resistance, the game is up. 113rd over: England 192-9 (Broad 9, Anderson 2) Broad gets four! Easing Starc through backward point, and reminding us that he was once a batter (opening the innings for his school, Oakham). Smith has posted two slips and a gully, when there should really be two slips and three gullies. 112nd over: England 188-9 (Broad 5, Anderson 2) Broad steps even further to leg and swishes at thin air! What is he doing? Jimmy has a stern word. Broad, sobering up, flicks to leg for two, then fends off a bouncer and so nearly gives a catch to gully. Anderson squirts a thick edge in the same direction, but keeps it on the ground. One of the commentators says it should be Anderson hogging the strike. 111st over: England 183-9 (Broad 2, Anderson 0) Broad lives dangerously against Starc, hanging back on leg stump like the tailender he has sadly become. He takes a single and leaves Anderson with two balls to survive. He does well, getting behind the line, and the commentators mention that he’s just become the first person ever to record 100 not-outs in Tests. His nearest rival is Courtney Walsh, with 61. 110th over: England 182-9 (Broad 1, Anderson 0) That was the first time Buttler had ever been out hit wicket in his first-class career. And now it’s down to the old firm, Broad and Anderson, to get through 23 overs. Noooo! A fabulous rearguard effort ends in farce, as Buttler, playing a routine defensive push, goes so deep in his crease that he treads on the base of off stump. And that is that. 109th over: England 182-8 (Buttler 26, Broad 1) Starc is back, so I think Broad is facing his first ball from a seamer. He goes back and glides it past gully. Will it go for four? The Aussies want it to, the Englishmen don’t – and it doesn’t, so Broad is off the mark and Buttler can take the rest of the over. He fends at a short one and comes close to giving a catch to short leg. The next ball is the 200th of Buttler’s innings – a double Dentury, as it’s known, in honour of Joe Denly, who actually liked to play this way. Buttler marks the occasion by twiddling his hat, and manages to drop it. Then he inside-edges, but safely, for a single. Off his 201 balls, he has hit two fours. The Aussies are in a huddle. Steve Smith addresses them from under a baggy green cap so old that the brim is off-white. What’s he saying? “Once more unto Broad’s pad, dear friends.” “This Australian team ain’t that great,” says Rajesh Balasubramanian. “England have contrived to make them appear phenomenal. They have two decent Test bats and two decent bowlers – neither of whom is playing this match. In fact, if you wanted to pick a bowling line-up from among current leading players to bat against on a last-day pitch, you would probably pick Starc and Lyon. India went after Starc in Brisbane and you would rather face Lyon than Warne or Murali or Ashwin or Herath at their peak. Of course now that I have written this, probably Lyon and Starc will clean up the last two wickets.” “Do we have to keep hoping?” asks Chris Purcell. “Can’t they give us a heads up when the wickets are going to go, so we can get on with polishing the tinsel and organising our biscuit barrels?” 108th over: England 180-8 (Buttler 25, Broad 0) Smith turns to his eighth bowler, Travis Head. I’m not sure what he bowls – occasional no-breaks? – but Buttler sees him off and England have made it to the most English of intervals. Jos Buttler, the fastest scorer in the west, has 25 off 196 balls. Give that man a cup of Assam. 107th over: England 180-8 (Buttler 25, Broad 0) Broad has now got through 16 balls. And there are 27 overs to go. Lyon thinks he’s got his man with the arm ball, but Broad reviews and he’s reprieved by the inside edge! 106th over: England 180-8 (Buttler 25, Broad 0) Green is still asking the right questions. And Buttler is still saying “No comment”. He gets a couple of inside edges. Warne comes out with an interesting nugget from the golf course, of all places. “Jos Buttler’s got the yips with his chipping,” he reveals, “o he chips one-handed.” “As a desperate man,” says Phil Withall, “hanging on to fragile straws, I still retain a slim glimmer of hope that England can pull this off. If/when this happens, I’m sure we can expect a lot of newspaper headlines to the effect of ‘The Buttler did it’. Just putting this out there for copyright purposes.” 105th over: England 180-8 (Buttler 25, Broad 0) After that hat-trick of near-misses, Broad is now playing with some purpose, either blocking solidly or leaving decisively. He gets through Lyon’s over as the commentators try to work out what happened to the next meal break. They suspect that Australia have taken a half-hour extension. 104th over: England 180-8 (Buttler 25, Broad 0) Buttler, facing the third ball of this over from Green, plays a nice on-drive but turns down an easy run. He may have got that wrong, as he can’t find a single and has to leave Broad to face the music from Lyon. 103rd over: England 180-8 (Buttler 25, Broad 0) So here’s Stuart Broad, with just the 31 overs to survive. He starts as if he doesn’t plan to see out even one of them – an edge just past gully, a play-and-a-miss to a ball that shaves the bails, and then a pad-up that brings an LBW appeal. Australia review, to no avail, as this ball too was going over the stumps. Lyon’s bounce, his biggest asset, worked against him there. Smith brings in a sixth close catcher and gets his reward! Lyon goes round the wicket, angles one across Robinson, takes the edge and gives Smith a low catch at slip. Robinson needed to go forward, but was perhaps cowed by the extra vulture breathing down his neck. 101st over: England 178-7 (Buttler 25, Robinson 8) Green beats Buttler outside off, with the ball that bothers even Joe Root, then goes the other way, squares him up and draws a leading edge – and then beats him again. That’s the best over since Woakes was out. “Always good to hear from Kim Thonger,” says Brian Withington. “Regarding the infinite monkey theorem (usually applied to the complete works of Shakespeare rather than Wisden), I have idly wondered previously about the way that might go. So they’ve eventually made it all the way through every play flawlessly, every word of every comedy and tragedy, and have ploughed on through the first 17 sonnets, when with bated breath we reach the line: ‘Shall I compare thee to a zxqkygz fqx?’. Just imagine the disappointment of the poor invigilator as he wearily reaches for another ream of Basildon Bond.” 100th over: England 177-7 (Buttler 25, Robinson 8) Robinson continues to live dangerously, prodding, gloving, somehow surviving. Another maiden, and Robinson has survived 37 balls. He’s got character as well as tremendous skill – the one glint of gold in a river of misery for England. 100th over: England 177-7 (Buttler 25, Robinson 8) Starc comes off and here, at last, is Cameron Green, to bowl over no. 100. He’s had a rest that has lasted a full 65 overs and had Shane Warne tearing his widely advertised hair out. Green is on the money, testing Buttler outside off, displaying the pace and bounce of a fast bowler, but not the demeanour. He could be a book by Julia Donaldson: The Shyest Giant in Town. 99th over: England 177-7 (Buttler 25, Robinson 8) Robinson, facing Lyon, again comes close to perishing at short leg. Smith responds by bringing in a fifth close catcher; Shane Warne, in the commentary box, would like a sixth. He’s right: it’s not as if the runs matter. Robinson manages a better shot, working with the turn to take two behind square, and even goes for a mow, which he doesn’t get hold of at all. 98th over: England 175-7 (Buttler 25, Robinson 6) Starc to Buttler, yet again. A maiden, yet again. Just another 36 overs to get through. It’s wildly improbable, but they’ve shown some grit, and Buttler has done enough to save his skin. “Last rites,” says Colum Fordham, picking up on my remark at 7:45. “Very decent of Sam to leave you to accompany England on what almost certainly but not definitely will prove to be their last stand in this Test match. But can England somehow muster the grit that India showed in the second Test last year against the Aussies, which proved to be a turning point in their series? Buttler has everything to play for, and make up for, and Robinson’s no mug with the bat. Yours in hope.” 97th over: England 175-7 (Buttler 25, Robinson 6) Steve Smith waves his arms. “C’mon Gazza!” go the vultures round the bat. “Very good Gazza! But again the upshot is only a single, as Buttler pushes smoothly into the covers. He’s got 25! He really should be raising his bat to acknowledge the acclaim for his quarter-century. Robinson pushes forward too, perilously close to forward short leg, but he gets away with it. 96th over: England 174-7 (Buttler 24, Robinson 6) Starc tries going round the wicket to Buttler, which has a dramatic consequence: a run! The first for 22 balls. Buttler uses the angle to nudge behind square and steal the strike. “Good morning Tim,” says Kim Thonger, sounding chipper. I wonder if he has a theory... “I have adapted the infinite monkey theorem, which states that a monkey hitting keys at random on a typewriter keyboard for an infinite amount of time will type any given text, such as the complete set of Wisden.” Ha. “Developing this, here is the infinite burns theorem. It states that Rory Burns, facing balls at random on a good wicket for an infinite amount of time will EVENTUALLY score the daddy hundred of which Chris Silverwood thinks him capable. Statistics cannot yet be deployed to predict stylishness or panache. Gut feeling is a monkey typing would be more elegant.” 95th over: England 173-7 (Buttler 23, Robinson 6) Steve Smith turns back to Nathan Lyon, who can surely finish this off. But not just yet, as Robinson prods his way through another maiden. 94th over: England 173-7 (Buttler 23, Robinson 6) Starc goes up for LBW against Buttler, to be met with an instant shake of the head from the ump. It pitched outside leg, it was going over off, but apart from that it was a great shout. Starc has a leg slip and a short leg, and he flings two balls in their direction, but Buttler leaves them. He’s got more leaves in him than a copy of Wisden, and he has now survived 150 balls. It’s his third-longest Test innings – longer than all 18 of his fifties, with only the two hundreds taking longer. As Ralf Rangnick would say, Chapeau! 93rd over: England 173-7 (Buttler 23, Robinson 6) Robinson hits a four! With a classy clip off his legs. He can bat, though he has only shown it once on the big stage, when he made 42 on Test debut against New Zealand, six long months ago. He can also be a right old rabbit, and nearly proves it now by inside-edging and nutmegging himself. 92nd over: England 169-7 (Buttler 23, Robinson 2) Richardson gives way to Starc, who’s been the main man in this match with six wickets – including Buttler for nought in the first innings. But he can’t dislodge him this time, giving him too many easy leaves. What he does manage is a maiden, so Neser will have a whole over at Robinson. 91st over: England 168-7 (Buttler 23, Robinson 1) Neser continues and thinks he’s got Buttler LBW, but the umpire reckons it’s going down and he’s right. They take a leg bye, so Buttler is happy to leave Robinson to face four balls. He pushes one of them straight back to Neser – who gets down to it but can’t hold on. Australia really must try and field better. Robinson celebrates with a prod into the on side, which gets him off a pair. Hello everyone and thanks Sam. So good of you to stretch the game out for long enough to allow an Englishman to read the last rites. 89th over: England 166-7 (Buttler 23, Robinson 0) Robinson is hurried as Richardson flies in. Two slips and a short leg wait. Richardson is zeroing in on off bail, Robinson is squared up, two feet pointing down the wicket, and jamming his bat down. He wants to get out of this over. He then cops a short one but it sails over his back - Carey gathers at his shins again. Last ball, defended soundly. That’s me! Thanks for your company. Tim de Lisle will take over now. How far can he take it! Enjoy. 88th over: England 166-7 (Buttler 23, Robinson 0) It’s Neser now, and Buttler still looks in control. Does he try and farm the strike now? He has left and defended to this point. He tries to turn the last into the leg side but it quickens and squirts to the off. Robinson on strike now. 87th over: England 166-7 (Buttler 23, Robinson 0) Richardson continues, Woakes leaves a full one, before he sways from a short one less convincingly. Later on, Woakes creams Richardson through the covers for four. It was overpitched, and hit beautifully. But as you’ve seen, Richardson bowls Woakes with a searing bail trimmer. Huge moment for Australia, and they celebrate accordingly. Bowled him! An absolute ripping delivery from Richardson, nipping back off the seam, cutting Woakes in half, sheer speed and seam in one fell swoop. Strong innings from Woakes, Australia needed that. 86th over: England 162-6 (Buttler 23, Woakes 40) Now Neser comes in to the attack. Starc has been seen off. That’s a win for England. Where is Cameron Green? Scorecards of famous draws now adorn our screens. Faf on debut is the one we’re looking at here. Neser is as accurate as Buttler’s bat face is full. One seams back fractionally, but Buttler has it well covered. Neser is all hands on head, “some mayo” in the reaction, as cricketers are wont to say. It’s a maiden. 85th over: England 160-6 (Buttler 21, Woakes 40) Woakes is jumpy as he plays Richardson. It’s about the only signal this new ball is causing discomfort. Can Richardson get one to move away? The next comes back and Woakes is equal to it. I can see the Fox Sports commentary box on TV, muted. Faces are a little more serious than a few minutes ago when I was told Brett Lee said, of England, “they need something because they’re getting absolutely pumped.” Richardson tries a bouncer, it’s ducked. The wise approach is to presume one wicket will trigger the rest, but these two are looking very solid. 85th over: England 160-6 (Buttler 21, Woakes 40) Lots of angle, lots of leaving. The new ball offers Starc a few modes of dismissal, perhaps it nullifies his classic approach to Jos. He eventually gets one to come back a little but Buttler is prepared - correctly - to leave on length. Starc then heads to the pads, no love. Starc is sweating and breathing heavily, Buttler unflustered. 84th over: England 160-6 (Buttler 21, Woakes 40) Richardson squares Woakes up but he steers it to third for two. The same happens again halfway through the over. Richardson looks most likely to find an edge swinging the ball away, or jagging one back. But both Woakes and Buttler are finding success defending from the crease. The partnership is 55 now. Richardson then beats Woakes, who is hanging his bat out at one on fourth stump. And again. Good over from Richardson, it’s been a while since Australia looked threatening. Mike Atherton, on SEN Radio, has just been asked if he’s “willing to dream?” “Why not?” he replies, with half a laugh. 83rd over: England 156-6 (Buttler 21, Woakes 36) Starc tries short of a length, angling across. Then full of a length, angling across. The next is on the money, and Woakes defends. Starc is up around 140-145kph, but it’s dying off the pitch. He aims for the pegs but it’s too straight, Woakes engineers a leg bye. Harris, under the lid, has to get it. Noting that Woakes and Buttler have brought up their fifty partnership 82nd over: England 155-6 (Buttler 21, Woakes 36) Richardson strikes Buttler on the pad first ball and goes up! Half celebrappeal from Richardson but it’s given not out, and not reviewed. It’s missing leg and height was a problem, too, going over leg bail. The next is a full outswinger that draws Buttler and it beats him. The next few die off the wicket, Carey is back collecting these around the shins. Buttler is a little away from his body in defence, but I think the pitch is becoming increasingly docile here. 81st over: England 155-6 (Buttler 21, Woakes 36) New ball, as expected, taken. You know the drill: Starc, over the wicket, three slips, gully, inswing (usually). If Australia is going to be dangerous, it will be now. Starc has been resting, and the first ball reflects it - a loosener outside off. Starc grins. The next angles across and Buttler defends in straight lines, back down the wicket, head down. The next slams into Buttler, just into the upper-inner thigh. He was squared up. The next is left and we see a bit of off stump as it moves back a little. Buttler is defending well from the crease and that’s how it finishes - the final one turned around the corner for one. Looks like Richardson from the other end. No Cam Green so far... 80th over: England 154-6 (Buttler 20, Woakes 36) So it’s Lyon from the Riverbank End, last one before the new ball. Everything is patted and dead-batted, no problem. Maiden. Can Jos and Woakes get through the new ball? Hmm.. 79th over: England 154-6 (Buttler 20, Woakes 36) Smith starts well! They’re drifting, straightening, some with loop, too. He has completely lost his front arm, to be fair. Buttler then picks the wrong’un. It’s the Smudger of legspinning-old. “Don’t forget the flipper Smudge!” comes the cry. It’s a maiden. He’s a good cricketer. Lyon gets one more before the new ball. 78th over: England 154-6 (Buttler 20, Woakes 36) Marnus retains the ball! Smith backing his spinners - Marnus no doubt grateful. He can’t do anything with it. Smith is on at the other end! Anything you can do... John on Woakes: “Hi Sam. Whether Woakes stays in the side or not (71st over) depends entirely on this batting performance. It’s the only thing he’s got going for him, really, considering his bowling has made insufficient impact so far. Saqib Mahmood instead of Olllie Pope and perhaps Bairstow instead of Buttler are the likeliest changes. It’s a pity about Buttler, but probably shows that you can’t play all forms of the game, all the time, without suffering for it. Mind you, Bairstow plays a lot too, so Foakes for the longer term, I’d guess. John Starbuck” I agree, and unless he somehow saves the match I think his batting contribution is surplus to requirements. 77th over: England 154-6 (Buttler 20, Woakes 36) Shadows just starting to lengthen here in Adelaide, though still a while before we enter meaningful twilight. Buttler is back and across and turning Lyon away, before pushing him into an open cover for two. One then grips sharply into Buttler’s pads but he’s outside the line. Few gremlins in the pitch, hard to see one shooting there, so a good tactic for Buttler. Comfortable again - Australia hanging out for the new ball. 76th over: England 152-6 (Buttler 18, Woakes 36) Marnus spins the first one past Woakes, past Carey, and straight to Smith at first slip. The crowd senses something - either that or they’re bored. Woakes won’t get bored of the next one: a “full bunger”, swiped through cow for four. There’s another full toss, and Woakes clips him wide of mid on for another boundary. Marnus shakes his head. The last is a bit more respectable. Will Marnus get another? 75th over: England 144-6 (Buttler 18, Woakes 28) It’s Lyon, and he’s causing havoc early. Second ball, Buttler aims to sweep but it loops off his arm to leg slip. Blocker Wilson says not out. “I heard two noises,” comes through the stump mic, but they opt against the review. Buttler then drives through the vacant mid-off region for a couple. Labuschagne at the other end! Players back on, we’re underway in a matter of seconds... More selection dilemma gear... This, from Guy: “Morning Sam. This all feels depressingly familiar. Selection wise it’s all about how much the team could improve if changes are made. I’m a Surrey fan and I absolutely love Pope but he seems all are sea here. However I think that that changing after 2 Tests of 5 seems way too 90s. Pope needs an honest chat but if you drop him it’s also Buttler, Hameed and Burns at risk, on runs. Personally I think we should stick at the moment, because Burns finally stuck around, Hameed has oddly looked pretty calm even though he’s been out and he got a pretty impossible ball this innings. Buttler, if he sticks around probably plays himself back in, and while Bairstow is better with the gloves they’ve sunk so much faith in Buttler I’m not sure they’ll change yet.. it’s his last series isn’t it. I’m not that confident Bairstow will be much better but feels like rearranging deckchairs on the Titanic. Everyone needs to get better. Lawrence and Bairstow and Crawley may get games this series but you can hardly drop both openers either. In short: Jesus Christ.” I think it can be simultaneously true to say that Australia were always a big chance of simply outclassing England across the park, in these conditions, but that this England team also has some improvement in them. I would pick Leach more often, stick with Pope, and back them. I agree about Hameed, too. Should Woakes open? This, from Geoff: “Hi Sam. Whatever happens today, at what point is it reasonable to change things up a little and consider Woakes as an opening bat in the Manoj Prabakhar role for the next test? He clearly has the technique for it and while Silverwood and Root obviously rate him, having him at number eight does seem to limit the team that can be picked which everyone seems to agree needs to have Wood and a spinner for the next Test.” If Woakes survives Starc and co in a couple of overs time, let’s look at this properly. Some “trousers” stuff from Eamonn, here: “Can anyone listening to ABC confirm that I wasn’t hallucinating about an hour ago when Kim Hughes told an anecdote about training without a jock strap and struggling to keep his Mitchell Johnson in his trousers? And is anyone like me surprised that where the words ‘commentator’ and ‘can’t keep it in his trousers’ are concerned, the words ‘Shane Warne’ are also not featured? Anyway i don’t think your correspondent of the 59th over needs to worry about the poshness of the batting lineup while it still features Rory Burns, who is such public-school-landed-gentry that he makes up for two or three commoners” Was anyone else listening? Are you listening KP? It looked like more of the same as both teams commenced the session, with Starc and Lyon dominating proceedings from the off. Starc removed Pope, Lyon removed Stokes, and the end felt around the corner. Instead, Buttler and Woakes have managed to dig in, combining attack and defence in strong balance, and assisted by Alex Carey and David Warner’s mix-up, which saw a very catchable delivery split them down the middle early in Buttler’s innings. As the session wore on both bats played Lyon and whomever was rotating through with increased confidence, building the partnership to 37 - but more importantly, 106 balls. Australia will not be concerned, but England can take comfort from the fact the pitch does seem very slow and benign at this point. That said, if I read this right, a new ball is due in 6 overs, which will bring a bit more action, in conjunction with some dimmer light. Woakes and Buttler look as assured as any of their team-mates, but at this juncture, Australia will still fancy their chances. Woakes and Buttler will have to at least bat this entire session to permit the English to dream. Catch you the other side of the break. 74th over: England 142-6 (Buttler 16, Woakes 28) It is Marnus, and he’s ripping it hard before commencing his run-up. The crowd claps as he approaches. The first is well defended, the second is a full toss, the third a half-volley, and the fourth turned into the onside for two. He is stump-to-stump for the remainder, but can’t penetrate. That’s dinner. 73rd over: England 140-6 (Buttler 16, Woakes 26) Buttler is back and across and hits Buttler on the pads but it’s high, and turned down. No DRS. Then next sees Buttler sweep from outside off, he misses - also a shout! - but DRS refused. The third is also missed by Buttler trying to work him to square leg - all safe. Buttler then smokes the fourth via sweep straight to square leg. No run. The fifth is off the bad straight to short leg. Comical appeal. No bat. A few shouts, but nothing forthcoming. Nearly dinner, Marnus’s will be the last (if it is indeed him)... 72nd over: England 140-6 (Buttler 16, Woakes 26) 8 minutes until the dinner break - the big one - and it’s Marnus Labuschagne! (And not Cameron Green). Where is Green? Labuschagne starts short but it’s defended. Later on he’s fuller, it’s gripping hard, and an edge falls short of Warner. The bowling looks good. Harris then comes under the helmet. Woakes pushes the last one away safely. Maiden. 71st over: England 140-6 (Buttler 16, Woakes 26) Lyon still around the wicket to Buttler. He’s playing from the crease, “oh my word!” says Steve Smith as Buttler digs another out. He defends the rest. Following Australia’s retained squad, there’s some conversation about what England might do. How we feeling out there? Ready to swap Bairstow in? Should England be looking at Saqib Mahmood? Does Woakes stay? 70th over: England 140-6 (Buttler 16, Woakes 26) Richardson is again in on the angle, Woakes happy to play back and behind square. He ends up dabbing one through there for four. Richardson seems to have shortened his length in response to the wicket and Woakes’ comfort on the front foot this innings. It may be time for Cam Green, and his height. Partnership is 35 from 81 balls. 69th over: England 136-6 (Buttler 16, Woakes 22) Lyon remains around the wicket to Woakes; he too doesn’t seem to be finding the purchase of 90 minutes ago. So he goes back over the wicket. “5 per cent, Marnus, 5 per cent, Marnus,” we hear through the stump mic. Marnus then bellows something. Lyon goes around the wicket to Buttler, he’s on the front foot...defending. 68th over: England 135-6 (Buttler 16, Woakes 21) A tame edge from a soft-handed Buttler doesn’t carry to Smith at slip, with Richardson bowling wide of the crease. It’s otherwise fairly comfortable for England, the wicket seems to have become quite slow. Richardson tumbles upon delivering his last - other than that everything else looked the same. Bowl, defend. 67th over: England 135-6 (Buttler 16, Woakes 21) It’s Lyon, and Woakes moves into the twenties with a smothered drive square of the wicket for four. He’s batting well. In response, Gareth Lyon comes around the wicket, and the angle looks good for Lyon. Gaz tosses one up and Woakes is back, defending, watching. One then pops up off the thigh pad and Marnus stretches back to take it - there is momentary excitement, but there was no bat or glove. 66th over: England 131-6 (Buttler 16, Woakes 17) Richardson is angling in to Buttler - Buttler goes back and defends, he then leaves, he then comes forward to defend, and the remainder is the same in a different order. Richardson manages another no-ball there, too. England have something small building here. The pitch isn’t offering too much for the quicks. 65th over: England 130-6 (Buttler 16, Woakes 17) Lyon to Woakes, four around the bat. Woakes is watchful, then skips down the wicket and whips Lyon uppishly past mid wicket for two. That’s enough for him; he defends the remainder. 64th over: England 128-6 (Buttler 16, Woakes 15) Richardson is on for Neser, eliciting more bounce than his team mate straight away. He bangs the next in ever shorter, and Buttler produces a beautiful back foot flourish for four. It’s a no-ball too. The pitch looks a bit more docile now - very little for the quicks in terms of bounce. Carey is taking most of them just above his knees. Buttler then runs one past gully for two, all feeling a little more comfortable for England. 63rd over: England 121-6 (Buttler 10, Woakes 15) Buttler sweeps early and crisply for one, before Green cut it off to save the boundary, sliding and throwing in one motion. Woakes is then dancing down the wicket, misses, and Harris under the lid on the offside nearly scoops it back for a runout as Woakes attempts to make his ground. If Harris hits, Woakes is out. But he didn’t, and Woakes survives. 62nd over: England 120-6 (Buttler 9, Woakes 15) Neser is retained, and Woakes finds the boundary again, this time a little less controlled - a loose drive off the outside half of his bat, skewing away past gully. There’s one slip, a gully, shortish backward point, two catching short covers, essentially an umbrella field on the offside. Woakes is fine, he drives past mid-off for two more. Two drop back behind square but it’s a double bluff - I don’t think Neser was getting it up to Woakes’ chest, let alone above the shoulders. 61st over: England 114-6 (Buttler 9, Woakes 9) Buttler seems to play Lyon with a different defensive shot every ball. There’s the prod, the leave, the back foot bunt, the jammed yorker. He’s surrounded by four, he turns it with the spin comfortably to short leg. He’s faced 54 balls. 60th over: England 114-6 (Buttler 9, Woakes 9) Woakes is confident here, he drives Neser through cover point on consecutive deliveries, the first for two, the second for four. I then get a droll text saying “Woakes strokes a four so Mark Waugh starts talking about his lack of wickets”. To underscore it all, Woakes drives again for two. Neser looks a little benign here, ball barely getting up. Carey taking them at his knees. A change is coming. 59th over: England 106-6 (Buttler 9, Woakes 1) Apart from silly mid-off, Lyon is bowling to Woakes with no mid-off. Conditions are fantastic for him. Nevertheless Woakes wrist flicks one to that vacant region. After that, lots of lunging, lots of crease use, all in defence. “We need to be clinical”, said Lyon to spidercam at the break. Sure. Julian King is in: “Morning Pezzylad. It seems England’s travails have coincided with attempts to make the game more egalitarian. The bowlers still have that comforting air of the working class, but maybe our batsmen just aren’t posh enough? Perhaps we just need to start selecting direct from the annual Eton v Harrow match, or find a minor Indian prince? Is the natural confidence of the ruling class what’s lacking? Keep up the good work. Jules” Being from Australia, it’s not for me to say! 58th over: England 105-6 (Buttler 9, Woakes 0) Neser to Buttler, two slips, funky short mid-on, all defended. Drinks. 57th over: England 105-6 (Buttler 9, Woakes 0) Lyon gets the big dog. Stokes came with a plan and he executed with typical conviction, but the risk one might get past him came to fruition. Lyon almost jags Woakes caught behind, but RTS showed no noise. Original call not out, Lyon didn’t like it, Smith alpha’s him - BANG, he’s going upstairs. There’s nothing on the bat, not out. Stokes had been crabbing so far across the crease, and finally Lyon gets one to beat him on the inside. It looked a bit high, but he was so far back that the ball didn’t have far to travel. Lyon knew it was hitting leg. Great review. England in bits. Stokes so far across, given not out, height will be the issue... 56th over: England 105-5 (Stokes 12, Buttler 9) So that’s Starc done, and Michae Neser enters the attack. Lots of chat about who gets that third bowling spot if Hazlewood isn’t fit for Boxing Day. What does everyone think? I tend to think Richardson brings a bit more weaponry, but Neser seems to have the hot hand, and he won’t let you down on a (usually) flat Melbourne surface. He beats Buttler’s edge second ball, arms pumping and hair flying on delivery. He then gets the edge but it’s low and drops short of Smith, who’s standing at 1-and-a-half slip. 55th over: England 105-5 (Stokes 12, Buttler 9) Early single behind square causes fractional hesitation but Stokes and Buttler scamper through. It brings Stokes on strike, and he flat-bat brooms Lyon in front of mid wicket for four. It plugs a little, but there’s no one out there and it trickles to the boundary. Stokes then finds a single to deep point, Buttler then pushes forward of point for one, all very fluent and free! Stokes has four men around the bat now. Perhaps it’s safer to swing. 54th over: England 98-5 (Stokes 7, Buttler 7) Starc gets another, Smith is backing him and Starc must feel fit! The first is a no-ball, which doesn’t really help Buttler - there’s six more. Commentary team wondering whether Carey’s missed catch might be a sliding doors moment in his career. It’s defence, defence, defence here. Rare for Buttler. How long can they maintain the vigil? Starc then targets his ribs and Buttler tucks it tightly past short leg, and gets one. On nurries ethics, Rowan writes: “I feel that we can consider the permissibility of laughing of someone being Out BBW (as my dad calls it) by paraphrasing Oscar Wilde - One hit to the nurries is a tragedy, two... Comedy.” Fair! 53rd over: England 96-5 (Stokes 7, Buttler 6) “Bowled Gareth/Gaz/Nathan”, we hear through the stump mic. Stokes is back and comfortable enough. He opens the face on one and it takes the outside half of the bat, half-edged, half steered one bounce to Smith at first slip. It was an edge, but Stokes sort of rode it. He survives again. On England selections v systems, Nick offers: “Hi Sam. Perhaps England’s chances would be increased by picking either the side mistakenly selected for the the last test or the one they’re ingeniously planning for next one. Or perhaps a combination of the two.” I like it! 52nd over: England 96-5 (Stokes 7, Buttler 6) Starc again - I wonder if this will be his last this spell. Can Buttler see him off? So far, so safe (this over). He’s beaten later on in the over. An edge feels a little inevitable, but Starc will soon tire. Two yorkers to finish! Each well played. The yorker might signal the end of Starc, for now. This from David Griffiths: “Hi Sam! Who was doing Root’s throw downs for his first hit? I’m guessing Leach, who is furious he didn’t get selected ahead of other ersatz spinners on a spinning track...so he let fly with one.More amusingly, I started watching a replay of yesterday’s play on YouTube before realising it was from the last Ashes test in Adelaide in 2017. Took me quite a bit of time to work it out.Bowie’s ‘Always crashing in the same car’ is surely the perfect theme song for this tour? LOL. Cheers, Davorder” Wasn’t it the spin coach who nailed Root? Same idea, I guess! 51st over: England 96-5 (Stokes 7, Buttler 6) Stokes gets two from Lyon’s first ball, working him to leg. It’s then back and across defence for the remainder. Lyon is varying his pace and trajectory, but Stokes is unmoved. There’s a half shout for LBW from the last ball, but they don’t contemplate a review. 50th over: England 94-5 (Stokes 5, Buttler 6) Starc continues to Buttler, and so does the plan. Following the bisection there is talk about the positioning and stagger of the cordon. This is where ex-legends make the big bucks. Starc then gets another edge, is squared up, but it bounces a fair way short of Warner at slip. He’s then too straight, and Buttler gets himself off strike with a flick to fine leg. They take out second slip to Stokes and move him to leg slip. It’s straight, and Stokes works him for one. I suspect you know what I think about that ... 49th over: England 92-5 (Stokes 4, Buttler 5) Stokes pushes Lyon to the on-side on ball one, bringing Buttler in strike. Buttler sweeps and it pops up, but evades Marnus under the lid. Replays show it was off his arm. He connects beautifully with the next, for one. Stokes is back on strike and there’s a big shout for LBW, or is it an outside edge? It’s neither. No review. Chances everywhere here. 48th over: England 90-5 (Stokes 3, Buttler 4) Starc to Buttler: it’s the same plan from the first innings. Fourth stump, fifth stump - pushing across. The first one beats him. There otherwise doesn’t seem to be much swing for Starc. We wait. Buttler pulls out of one delivery as Starc enters his gather. The next, Buttler edges and it bisects Carey and Warner in between first and second slip! Catching height, both could have pouched it. It runs for four. I think it was Carey’s, the first blot in his copybook! Big opportunity missed. Meanwhile, Robert writes in: “Dear Sam. Late night greetings and welcome to the OBO (here in Paris, we call it the Aubéau). Loved your podcast with Ricky Ponting, an absolute knockout. I hadn’t realised that he was now a winemaker. I always knew he was up to something during the seeming half hour of spare time he had during that pull shot of his. I used to think he made himself a cup of tea but now I know he was working on his vignerongame. England to win. Woakes is gonna get a double ton and then Malan’s gonna get 8 fer eff all (I’ve been working on my wine game too).” Cheers, Robert! Very optimistic. 47th over: England 86-5 (Stokes 3, Buttler 0) Lyon to Stokes, around the wicket. He’s happy here, just waiting for it. It’s comfortable enough! 46th over: England 86-5 (Stokes 3, Buttler 0) Starc is around the wicket to Pope, angling in, fifth stump, and Pope is leaving. He changes the angle, and as you saw, nabbed his man immediately. Looking at replays, Pope didn’t need to play at that. He flings his head back in dismay - his place is in jeopardy now. Starc continues the plan to Buttler - as he did last time - and Buttler defends. Starc changed his angle from around to over, and immediately finds Pope’s edge. He’s caught on the crease to a decent length ball, and the angle takes the edge and carries easily to Smith at second slip. He fished at it ... all a little too easy. 45th over: England 86-4 (Stokes 3, Pope 4) It’s Lyon from the other end, unsurprisingly. The first one grips encouragingly. Stokes is in ultra-defence mode, with all those exaggerated movements. He is extremely deep in his crease. Lyon tries an arm-ball, it beats him, there’s a half-shout. Too high. Incredible how deep Stokes is. He does this surrounded by four men: two slips, silly mid off, and a bat-pad. 44th over: England 86-4 (Stokes 3, Pope 4) Starc resumes with four balls left. The Barmy Army defiantly sing Jerusalem. Pope defends in the main. He then clips him beautifully through mid wicket for four. It’s a big day for Pope. Mike Atherton on SEN is currently talking about him, saying he looks “frenetic at times” when commencing his innings. Players are heading onto the ground. We’ll be away shortly. Before we do, I’d love your views. How much of England’s current malaise owes to specific selection/tactical mismanagement versus a broader systemic failure? Is there a team/setup within this squad that could change the fortunes of this series, or is the issue deeper? Ben asks: “Can we laugh at someone getting hit in the nurries?” “Hi Sam, I think that after yesterday’s play society at large is facing an enormous ethical dilemma. Can we laugh at someone getting hit in the nurries?The TV commentary was all sanctimonious (and completely unbelievable) “I hope he’s ok” and “you don’t want to see that” while in other quarters there was a deal of wry humour. Starc seemed to stifle a smile, Stokes didn’t bother.But a bloke’s writhing on the ground with an injury that can presumably have long-term consequences. Can we laugh because he’s a Pom? If a female cricket had the misfortune to suffer something similar can we laugh? Do female cricketers laugh? Can’t imagine it.Anyhoo, food for thought. Perhaps more Grade Cricketer territory so happy to get a response there, perhaps on TGC Fridays. Hope you get a long stint on the OBO, would be fun to see this draw out over a few hours. Cheers” Thanks Ben. Ethics around the hitting of “nurries” is a rich and dynamic area. Personally, I didn’t laugh when Root was hit for a second time until it was clear he was (relatively) okay. After that, fill your boots. “All power to you writing this blog today, Pez,” says JG. “You can’t polish a turd…but you can dip it in glitter!” We’re firmly in the gallows, aren’t we? Need a refresh on yesterday? Here’s Jonathan Liew on “a sometimes comical” day four in Adelaide (for England). Bit going on in the press box yesterday Here’s Geoff Lemon explaining what went down, and what it might mean for the rest of the series. Adelaide’s weather is fine, fine, fine I’m trying to conjure reasons for England to be hopeful. Weather isn’t one. It’s fine and sunny for the entire afternoon, and clear into the evening. Hello all and salutations. If you’re still up in England to savour the final throes of this Test, I don’t know what to say. Are you OK? Why? No, all power to you. Wouldn’t it be incredible if by some unbelievable twist England left Adelaide only 1-0 down? But, that is very unlikely to happen. Instead, we gather today to witness the administering of last rites and all that. Australia needs six wickets, England need to score either infinite runs or bat infinite time. Or at least that’s how it feels. Judging from Nathan Lyon’s turn last night, life is going to be very difficult indeed for the men who come in after Joe Root. At the same time, things are starting to feel a little dicey on the Covid front. I’m told a large swathe of print journos and broadcasters have escaped Adelaide for Melbourne. Though the press may enjoy thinking itself critical to the delivery of the game – the point is more important as it underscores growing fear the virus may be about to compromise all. Anyway, I’m here to parse mainly the former, but as it develops, possibly the latter, too. Is there any hope on either front? Let me know. I’m at sam.perry.freelance@theguardian.com or on Twitter at @sjjperry. First ball is in 40 mins or so. Stokes and Pope … is there any light here?Economic commentators and investors all have their eyes on inflation, and the unexpected decision by the Bank of England to raise interest rates, for the first time in three years, to 0.25% – in spite of the disruption and uncertainty of Omicron. But behind the headlines and the focus on the Bank, the biggest macroeconomic questions facing the UK – which will determine whether families feel the pinch this Christmas and beyond – are all up to the chancellor. Inflation has reached its highest level in a decade, at 5.1%. Yet this isn’t inflation of the 1970s kind, still raised as an economic bogeyman to stoke fear of “wage-price spirals”. The governor of the Bank of England has said there is little risk of this. Inflation is, in fact, outstripping pay rises – so average pay packets are shrinking in real terms. Instead, the main drivers of inflation currently are imported from overseas, such as fuel and energy, vehicles – as car manufacturers wait for the semiconductor shortage to ease – and other imported goods such as garments and furniture. The reality is that the Bank’s decision over interest rates last week is unlikely to bring down inflation levels right away. These prices will remain high, as they are determined by global factors. What matters for decision-making over interest rates is the expected health and shape of the economy in the medium term – say a year’s time – when the effects of policy will be felt. And here, the problem is that the UK economy is likely to be firing on one cylinder, with its capacity substantially below what we would have expected for 2022 prior to the pandemic. That includes the many employers struggling to fill vacancies. Since the start of the pandemic, the workforce has effectively shrunk: when compared to what we’d expect if pre-pandemic trends had continued, there are a million “missing” workers. More than half of the gap is among older workers, with increases driven by retirement and sickness. With the UK economy able to produce less than it could before the pandemic, the Bank’s concern is that low interest rates will lead to inflationary pressures. The Bank of England is not able to address most of these challenges through monetary policy. Even after the increase, interest rates are ultra-low. It is the government, and specifically the Treasury, that can and must do more to shape the future economy and its capacity. As we leave the acute crisis phase of the pandemic, the Bank will want to slowly raise rates – stabilising the economy by preventing financial bubbles. This needs to be accompanied by fiscal policy – with government measures to boost incomes and spending power among those who are struggling, and to invest in future capacity in the economy. That’s why, after his return from a visit to sunny California, it’s imperative the chancellor returns his focus to helping families and businesses. That should include support for families to get through a difficult winter, with many likely to facing an expensive Christmas. He should restore the £20 boost to universal credit, ensure all benefit payments are raised to account for the rising cost of living and boost cold weather payments so that no one goes cold this winter because they couldn’t pay for heating. Businesses, particularly those in hospitality, have raised the alarm as customers have stayed away to avoid catching the ultra-transmissible Omicron variant. To stop companies collapsing, restore business confidence in their future and ultimately to protect jobs, Rishi Sunak should reinstate a version of the furlough scheme, as well as payments to the self-employed. Ensuring the economy’s long-term health will take even more than this. As well as investing to boost productivity, it will mean addressing the problem of the “missing million” workers, with targeted support to help people into good jobs, and supporting businesses to provide a working environment that older people feel safe in, without compromising their health. With health and social care seeing some of the largest numbers of vacancies, fair pay rises at least in line with inflation are needed. And the government must do everything it can to protect public health, inside and outside the Treasury. That means fixing Britain’s woefully inadequate sick pay, which leaves too many facing impossible choices over protecting public health and having enough money for bills. It also means stepping up our contribution to vaccinating the global population, not just the UK. Protecting the public from Omicron will not only allow normal business to resume sooner, but will also avoid a damaging increase in the number of workers suffering from long Covid. Inflation has always provided a context for political contest and manoeuvring, and 2021 is no different, with a chancellor reluctant to further tarnish a reputation for prudence. But failure to step in to boost our economic capacity will only deepen the chancellor’s inflation headache – and could permanently stunt livelihoods. The UK faces a choice between a smaller, low-productivity economy and investing in a stronger recovery, with good jobs and support for people to take them. An astute politician would take the latter path. Carys Roberts is executive director of the Institute for Public Policy ResearchIn 2016, Cameron Glover was a recent college graduate with a budding freelance writing career when a story assignment led her down a life-changing online rabbit hole. “I was researching the sex education industry, and noticed that a lot of the information out there was pretty outdated,” recalls Glover from her home in Los Angeles. The professional landscape was also conspicuously straight and white. As a queer, Black millennial, her interest was nonetheless piqued. Within a year, Glover was teaching sex education workshops and had enrolled in a sex ed certification program, where she soon realized that there was a lack of guidance available for sex education professionals who wanted to run independent businesses. “The resources that were made available were all tailored to help you become employable to someone else,” she says. So in 2019, Glover took matters into her own hands and launched the Sex Ed Business Academy: a business coaching program for sex educators who aspire to launch sustainable sex ed businesses of their own. “My approach is founded on the radical idea that you don’t need to choose between helping people and making money,” Glover says. Glover is leading by example. The Sex Ed Business Academy has blossomed into a six-figure enterprise – one that aims to steer clients toward similar financial outcomes, all in the name of fostering sexual literacy and wellbeing. What sets apart your sex education business strategy within the broader industry landscape? Glover: I firmly believe that not only does sex education work need to be paid accordingly, because it is deeply life-changing, meaningful work, but that people can make a full-time living doing this work. And when I say that, I don’t mean by hustling and overworking and burning themselves out. I mean that, by having a really simple, streamlined business that supports you actually living a full life outside of work. So, my approach tends to focus on creating comprehensive programs instead of offering one-off classes and workshops, and taking that route to build a business. Who’s your typical client? I would say that most of my clients and the people I work with have years or even decades of experience doing sex education work on their own, either through workshops that they’re hosting themselves or that they’re hosting on behalf of an organization. They have a masters, a PhD, they are certified, and they’ve been doing this work for awhile; it’s their passion. But they’re feeling really overwhelmed and stressed out because they’re balancing or offsetting the sex education work that they’re doing with either a full-time job or multiple unrelated side-hustles to make ends meet. They want to be able to pour more into the work that’s meaningful to them. What kinds of programs have your coaching clients gone on to launch? Oh, so many. I have one client who started a program teaching folks that are interested in becoming sex educators at more of a beginner level. Another client works with people over the age of 45 who are rediscovering what their sexuality looks like after certain life milestones. Another person works with middle school-aged youth. It really runs the gamut. I think that’s part of why I’m so fascinated by this work. There are so many different ways to be a sex educator that can lead to a career and a business that you’re excited about, and it can support you living a whole and supported life, as well. You host a podcast about how to become a six-figure sex educator. What kind of feedback do you get in response to your frankness about money? I get a lot of pushback. I think it’s really fascinating, because I find that sex and money often bring up the same emotions for people. They may not even fully believe it, but many people have absorbed ideas that have become normalized in society: that desiring sex is bad, and that desiring money makes you a bad person. It brushes up against people’s edges. I try to approach money as a tool. Like ‘I need to charge a certain amount because I plan on fully funding whatever program I want to fund, without having to ask a bank or take out a loan to do it.’ It doesn’t need to be anything other than a vehicle for what you want to exist in the world. Because of my experiences as Black person, I know what it’s like to be without. I know what it’s like to be on the receiving end of oppression and discrimination, and so many nasty, horrible things. But it also makes me think about how there are so many different avenues for protest and to create change. Having a business that funds the change that you want to see is just another avenue toward positive change.Before it dissolves out into a watery sort of nothingness, this feature debut from Norwegian director Itonje Søimer Guttormsen is an intriguing and subversive docu-type drama about the nature of creativity and how modern-day equivalents of the avant gardist Antonin Artaud might expect to be treated. Birgitte Larsen plays Gry-Jeanette Dahl, who goes by the name “Gritt”. She is a troubled, intense young woman, trying to break into experimental theatre and radical performance artforms, and basically in the unhappy position of being on the outside of outsider art. As the film begins, Gritt has managed to fluke her way to New York, part of a grant-funded Norwegian theatre company; she is employed as the emotional support person for Marte (Marte Wexelsen Goksøyr), a writer-performer with Down’s. Gritt affects a bland sort of insincere friendship with Marte, asking her questions about her career with a listless envy and resentment. Her own grant application for a gigantic installation performance piece called The White Inflammation is turned down and Gritt is angrily devastated, but doesn’t summon up the smallest inclination to attempt a smaller-scale version or to try funding it by some other means. Walking around New York, Gritt chances across an outdoor improv rehearsal by the real-life Living Theatre group and its director Brad Burgess (playing himself), speaks kindly to Gritt and sets her up with an introduction to the director of Oslo’s Theatre of Cruelty, Lars Øyno (again, playing himself). Øyno too takes pity on the poor, desperate Gritt and generously gives her a job: filming the life of refugees for a small video segment in his latest stage production. And Gritt repays him by abusing his trust; she tells the refugees that she will be creating an ambitious multimedia performance under Øyno’s banner, shamelessly using his facilities and props. The furious Øyno finds out – and Gritt simply drops the refugees and flees, where she approaches social services in the midst of a breakdown and a possible schizophrenic episode. Gritt is delusional, and sociopathic, as well as parasitic and predatory. She has all the mannerisms and career-goals of the creative artist but not the creativity or the artistry. But she has something approaching commitment and drive, and might have achieved something with luck or the right kind of tolerant collaborator – Artaud himself was no picnic to deal with. And breaking into the arts tends to involve a certain amount of ruthlessness and CV-manipulation. Watching this, I found myself thinking of Orson Welles, who got his first job in the Dublin theatre by shamelessly lying about his fictional Broadway experience. Gritt finds herself in a borrowed lakeside cabin for an ambiguous (and I felt anticlimactic) sequence in which she is coming to terms with her failure, or recharging her batteries for another assault, or possibly simply indulging in the artistic reveries which have always inspired her in this lonely vocation. Gritt is available on 22 December on Mubi.My Christmas memory begins in early summer 2004, on day two of rehearsals for Stuff Happens, David Hare’s brilliantly funny, heartbreaking excoriation of what took us to war with Iraq in 2003. I get to play Condoleezza Rice in Nick Hytner’s stunning production; Shostakovich, elegantly pointed chair action and top-of-the-range acting! Of-the-moment politics, while playing the thrillingly enigmatic “Condi” on the National Theatre’s Olivier stage, with an audience hungry for answers … heaven. Day two of rehearsals. Nick asks have I read Philip Pullman’s His Dark Materials – no. Have I heard of Serafina Pekkala – no. Would I like to play Serafina Pekkala in his two-part remount of His Dark Materials that autumn running into the spring, again on at the Olivier? Even as I say yes – I was never going to say no – my brain batters away: you have booked a two- week Christmas holiday with your husband and children to stay in your father’s newly completed, decades-long-awaited house in Accra. Their first trip, your first since 1976 – now with the theatre schedule reducing that stay from a fortnight to four days … what are you doing? Being an actor. Yes. Thank you, Nick. My husband heroically takes the children – variously 17, eight and seven – into the unknown, extended-family landscape. I fly out on Christmas Eve. I have forgotten the joyous Ghanaian tradition of applauding as the plane lands. To be surrounded by that enclosed mass of laughter, sharp-witted humour, voices reminiscent of my aunts and uncles, grandparents, cousins, my dad … I cry. The heat that hits as you descend the stairs into the dark of an Accra evening; the then unrevamped Kotoka international airport reminding me of arriving truculent and secretly thrilled aged 13. Awaking on Christmas morning in Accra, in the home my father talked of building since he bought the land in 1970, the decades-old architectural plans finally realised. Walking the red earth road outside the house with my Yeoman of Sussex writer husband, the soil making me cry again; he, sharing discoveries he has made before my arrival, little shops and good conversation. My little chicks with their cousins, as my brother and I had been with ours. Sitting beneath the mango tree and the avocado trees and nascent royal palms. Fresh pawpaw for breakfast, my stepmother diligently overseeing arrangements and guests. The young glamorous aunts of my childhood, still glamorous on the veranda, swapping tales and laughing outrageously; jollof and kelewele and Club beer. Standing early morning Boxing Day between my father and uncle in church, bathed in their voices, effortlessly harmonising all the traditional Anglican Christmas hymns, enriched by African tuning. Returning home sated, abruptly caught by the World Service – a tsunami; other ex-colonies, a different Boxing Day experience. A tearful farewell two days later, leaving family, leaving the red dust … The soil calling to my marrow; knowing from now I would return regularly, no more 28-year hiatus. After our first performances back in the theatre, shaking post-show collection buckets at the exits, actors still in His Dark Materials regalia – huge audience generosity for the victims of the Boxing Day tsunami. My Christmas four days; and as many of us do in unspeakable moments of loss, there but for the grace … And momentarily, we are all appalled gratitude.I can’t remember if I was six or seven years old when my grandma gave me a book for Christmas which, I now realise, probably set the course for my life – an English literature degree, a job in literary journalism. The book was I Like This Poem, edited by the legendary Kaye Webb of Puffin, and it absolutely, entirely delighted me. The genius of this poetry anthology for children – along with Webb’s incomparably appealing selection of poems – is the way it is divided into ages, starting with six and seven-year-olds, and the way each poem comes with an explanation from a real child about why they love it. As a younger reader, there was something deliciously exciting about daring to look at the poems for older children – Ozymandias sent shivers down my spine, without me really knowing what was going on. Looking back at it now, I see Webb put a slice of Shakespeare into her six-year-olds’ section (“Double, double, toil and trouble”), so she never spoke down to the little ones. Hilaire Belloc’s Tarantella (“Do you remember an Inn, / Miranda? / Do you remember an Inn?”) was written about by a child who loved the dancing rhythm of the poem (“And the Hip! Hop! Hap! / Of the clap / Of the hands to the twirl and the swirl / Of the girl gone chancing, / Glancing, / Dancing, / Backing and advancing”). I still remember, vividly, how the child noted the change in rhythm at the end (“Never more; / Miranda, / Never more”), and how I suddenly got a glimpse into how poetry works. I discovered poetry, really, through this book. I used to learn poems from it off by heart to help me sleep – I can still do Lone Dog by Irene Rutherford McLeod and Sea Fever by John Masefield. I can picture Walter de la Mare’s The Listeners and how it sat on the page, and remember how the line where “his horse in the silence champed the grasses / Of the forest’s ferny floor” felt like magic to me (it still does). Alfred Noyes’ The Highwayman, now I think about it, was probably my first venture into my beloved world of romantic literature (“Look for me by moonlight; / Watch for me by moonlight; / I’ll come to thee by moonlight, though hell should bar the way!”) Webb showed me that poems could be funny, whether it was Macavity the Mystery Cat (“he’s called the Hidden Paw”), or Noyes’ Daddy Fell Into the Pond. Pippa’s Song – Pippa is my sister’s name and I was extremely jealous that she had her own poem in the book – still pops into my head on a spring morning; “the hill-side’s dew-pearl’d”. Cats Sleep Anywhere by Eleanor Farjeon arrives fully formed whenever I see our idiot cats in another ridiculous position. I had no idea who Robert Louis Stevenson was, or the joy that Treasure Island would bring me in a few years’ time, but I thrilled to the rhythms of “Faster than fairies, faster than witches, / Bridges and houses, hedges and ditches” in his From a Railway Carriage. I don’t know where my old copy of I Like This Poem is; I suspect at my parents’, and if I make it back there this Christmas I’m digging it out for sure. I’d forgotten the effect this collection had on me until I began writing this article. But I don’t think there’s any book, ever, to have imprinted itself on me so deeply. I think, and hope, my grandma knew how much I loved it, because she would later give me for a birthday my much-read The Book of a Thousand Poems. As an adult I gave her, in turn, Nicholas Albery’s Poem for the Day, writing in all the family’s birthdays. She, a member of the WAAF in the war, is no longer with us, but that anthology is at my parents, and I flick through it and remember her every time I’m there.The Department for Education has asked former teachers to temporarily return to the classroom to assist schools hit by staff absences during the pandemic. We would like to hear from former teachers who are planning to return to the classroom. Why have you decided to return? Have you experienced any issues with the recruitment process? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Jonas Eidevall’s Arsenal face a testing Champions League quarter-final against Wolfsburg, who beat Chelsea 4-0 to knock last season’s runners-up out of the competition last week. Wolfsburg, twice European champions, reached the last eight after topping Group A on goal difference, tied on 11 points with Juventus. Arsenal secured a record 14th quarter-final in 14 campaigns with a 4-1 defeat by the Frauen Bundesliga’s second-placed team, Hoffenheim. Should they progress past Wolfsburg, who sit third behind Hoffenheim with a game in hand, they would meet Real Madrid or Barcelona, who are set to take their relatively new domestic rivalry on to the European stage. Arsenal faced Barcelona in the group stage, suffering a combined 8-1 defeat, meaning they could not be drawn against the holders in the quarter-finals. Juventus will play the seven-times Champions League winners Lyon, who suffered a quarter-final exit last season against Paris Saint-Germain, the team that pipped them to the Division 1 Féminine title, ending a streak of five consecutive wins. Should Lyon, who topped group D, see off Juventus they will play PSG or the Group D runners up, Bayern Munich. Lyon, managed by their former player Sonia Bompastor, suffered their only group stage defeat against the Frauen Bundesliga leaders Bayern, with their former player Saki Kumagai scoring the only goal. The quarter-finals will be played across 22-23 and 30-31 March and the semi-finals across 23-24 April and 30 April or 1 May. A date for the final is yet to be announced but it will be hosted in Turin. Arsenal reached a Champions League qualifier thanks to the third-placed Women’s Super League team entering the competition for the first time. The team, managed then by Joe Montemurro, who is now in charge at Juventus, finished off the pace in the title race.“We are Polish strongmen,” laughs Piotr Zabiec, taking a break from another busy day processing turkeys on a farm near Chelmsford in Essex. “Without us, maybe you won’t have a turkey on your table at Christmas time.” The 41-year-old has left his fiancee and two children at home in the central city of Włocławek, trading his usual work as a health and safety inspector and taxi driver for a month removing giblets from thousands of birds for the turkey producer KellyBronze. It is the first time he has come to the UK to work, encouraged to make the trip by friends who have spent the past few Decembers in Britain. “I’m honest, I came for money,” says Zabiec, explaining he expects to earn £2,500 for a month’s work, about four times his usual monthly salary, joking he might take a four-month break when he returns to Poland. Despite visa hurdles and travel challenges posed by Covid, Zabiec is one of an estimated 3,000 workers – mostly from Poland and eastern Europe – who have travelled to Britain to answer the government’s rather last-minute call for help in getting Christmas turkeys to the nation’s tables on time. The 45-strong temporary team at KellyBronze are some of the foreign workers, including lorry drivers and butchers, who have saved the UK’s first post-Brexit Christmas, after a year of widespread staffing shortages, especially in the food processing and logistics sectors. Following months of pleas from the poultry industry, and weeks of negative headlines, the government announced an immigration policy U-turn at the start of October, allowing up to 5,500 seasonal poultry workers and 5,000 HGV drivers to enter the UK on emergency visas. All of the EU nationals working at KellyBronze who do not usually live in the UK had to apply to the temporary seasonal worker scheme, while some of the others have already received settled status. This year, about 20 of the regular Christmas staff did not make the trip, either because they did not want to fill out the visa paperwork or because they didn’t have a passport, as they have been able to travel freely around the EU – and to the UK before Brexit – using their Polish ID cards. Others nearly did not make it because of delays in receiving their work permit. Dominik Dycka, a farmer, has travelled without incident to the UK in late November for the past seven years. With three other workers on board, he set off in his car on the long drive to Essex 12 days after submitting his temporary worker visa application – he expected a response within 14 days – but before receiving an approval. When he was stopped by UK border officials at Dunkirk, he was told he wasn’t allowed to cross the Channel. This led to a scramble to get his three passengers – whose visas had already been granted – to meet the coach carrying the rest of the workers, so they could travel on to Essex. Meanwhile, Dycka spent a couple of days waiting in vain in a Calais hotel for a response from the Home Office, before driving back to Poland. When his visa finally arrived, days later than expected, the company booked him a flight to the UK. “I felt really bad,” Dycka said, speaking in Polish, translated by a colleague. “They [the border officials] treated me like I had done something wrong. But I didn’t do anything wrong, I just wanted to come to work.” The experience has put the 39-year-old off returning to the UK for the ninth time next year, even though the extra thousands of pounds he earns during December are vital for supporting his parents’ potato and crop farm in Poland. Several of the workers, including those with settled status, said they felt as if they were “interrogated” on arrival at the border despite having all the necessary documents. Yet many say their treatment by officials contrasts starkly with the way they are treated on the farm, where they return year after year. Supervisor Jacek Marciniak, 43, has worked for the family business for two decades. He spends half of the year with KellyBronze, including five months in the spring and summer at the company’s hatchery a few miles away, where the new season’s poults start their life, and then during the pre-Christmas rush. The work is also something of a family affair, with Marciniak’s wife, brother and sister-in-law Patrycja also preparing the Christmas turkeys. The processing work isn’t for the faint-hearted. Clad in white coats, hairnets and face masks, the team spend long days inside the chilly plant, hand-plucking, preparing and packaging the premium birds, which are hung for two weeks after slaughter. But there is a convivial atmosphere, with workers chatting to one other or singing along to songs on the radio. “It’s a very hard job and not many English like to work here,” said Maciek Mirolewicz, who works the rest of the year at a window firm in Corby. “The money is good for us and we have no problem working hard.” The company owner, Paul Kelly, knows the value of his seasonal team, who will process 35,000 turkeys this year. “I give them all a hug when they arrive and give them all a hug when they leave,” Kelly said, surveying the activity inside the processing hall. “I wouldn’t have a business without them.” This year, Kelly has been reminded of what he calls “the dark days”, before Poland and seven other eastern European countries joined the EU in 2004, when he struggled to recruit extra seasonal staff from the surrounding area in rural Essex. “I’m usually a positive person, but the past few years have been a real downer for me,” Kelly says. “Pre-Brexit I was bullish, the demand from lots of people for better-quality turkey was increasing and we could sell more and more. But what if we can’t get them plucked?” He adds he is unable to cut down on labour by automating parts of the process because his more expensive premium turkeys have to be plucked by hand rather than machine. Kelly calculates it has cost the business £500 to bring over each worker on the government scheme, and like many people in agriculture, complains that the decision was made far too late. The British Poultry Council estimates that just over half of the 5,500 visa allocation will be filled, not for lack of demand but because there was not enough time to arrange the workers’ visa applications and travel. Despite pleas from farmers, the government’s annual seasonal worker pilot scheme – which allows 30,000 people from anywhere in the world to work in the UK each year – is restricted to those in edible horticulture, picking fruit and crops. The company, started by Kelly’s grandfather, is celebrating its 50th year, yet he fears future staffing difficulties may force him to reduce the numbers of turkeys he rears. If others make the same decision, a lot more of the 10m turkeys that form the centrepiece of many families’ Christmas dinners would end up being imported from abroad. Thousands of additional workers are needed by the meat-processing industry each year to slaughter and process the festive poultry. However, Britain’s meat-processing sector, two-thirds staffed by non-UK workers, is short of about 15% of its 95,000-strong workforce. It was already struggling to fill vacancies before the pandemic, which – coupled with Brexit – led to many EU nationals returning to their home countries. Meanwhile, Marciniak, who has recruited many of his fellow Włocławek residents to Britain over the years, is aware his compatriots may decide in future to search out well-paid roles elsewhere in the EU. “They can go wherever they want in Europe. There is plenty of work if you want to find it and probably they look for a different place after all that’s happened,” he says. When the job is done and the last birds have been collected by customers from the farm gate, the Polish workers will have departed for home, where they will relax and enjoy Christmas, but with a traditional meal of carp on 24 December instead of a turkey dinner.Venison is one of my favourite meats, with a clean, rich flavour and beautifully tender when cooked either very quickly or very slowly; it’s also packed with nutrients and low in fat. Here, I give it a touch of sweetness with some honey-roast quince in a stunning-looking salad featuring pink leaves, toasted nuts and blue cheese. Honey-roast quince salad with blue cheese, radicchio and seared venison When caramelised, quince becomes sweet and chewy, and makes a welcome contrast to the bitter leaves, toasted nuts and salty-sweet cheese. Prep 20 min Cook 1hr 15 min Serves 6 1 orange 2 medium quince (about 500g), peeled, quartered and cored Salt and pepper 2 tsp runny honey 1 small handful thyme sprigs 1 large garlic clove 1 tsp juniper berries 1 tsp black peppercorns 4-5 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil 1 x 250g venison haunch steak or fillet For the salad 1 radicchio 100g rocket 50g hazelnuts 75g blue cheese (optional) 1 tbsp sherry vinegar Heat the oven to 210C (190C fan)/410F/gas 6½. Cut the zest off the orange with a speed peeler or sharp knife, leaving the pith on the fruit. Cut each quince quarter into three or four slices and lay these out on a baking sheet lined with greaseproof paper. Season, drizzle with the honey and scatter over the leaves from five or six thyme branches. Squeeze over the orange juice, add 50ml water, cover with foil (or another tray) and roast for an hour, until the quince is tender and caramelised in places. Meanwhile, put the orange zest in a mortar with a teaspoon of sea salt, the garlic, juniper, peppercorns and a few teaspoons of picked thyme leaves. Bash to a paste, then work in a tablespoon of olive oil. Rub this all over the venison and leave to marinate at room temperature while the quince is cooking. To prepare the salad, pull off and discard the outer leaves of the radicchio and tear the rest into wide pieces. Wash with the rocket and dry, then lay out the rocket and radicchio in a large salad bowl or platter. Pop the hazelnuts on a baking sheet and toast in the oven for about five minutes, until pale golden. Once cool, roughly chop. When the quince is tender, put a saute pan on a high heat. Once it’s smoking hot, add a tablespoon of oil and saute the venison for only 90 seconds to two minutes on each side. Leave to rest in a warm place for five to eight minutes. Meanwhile, crumble the cheese over the leaves and scatter the chopped nuts on top. Arrange the quince slices on top with any syrup. Whisk the sherry vinegar with the remaining oil, then dress the leaves and season generously with salt and pepper. (You can drizzle over a little extra honey.) Finally, slice the venison into thin strips and lay these over the salad. Serve at once, with fresh bread, roast potatoes or chips – I do love chips and a salad. The simple flex … The salad makes a snazzy starter or a seriously good lunch with chips or roast potatoes on the side. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado10. Cath and Phil Tyler – Some Heavy Hand A set of unreleased recordings and compilation tracks from the Newcastle-based couple glowing with the spirit of the best Anglo-Americana (Cath is originally from New Jersey). The arrangements on Sunshine and Warfare are supple and direct, as if they’re fixing your gaze, with her voice adding beautiful, arresting rallying cries. 9. Various – In the Echo: Field Recordings from Earlsfort Terrace Recorded in disused stairwells, corridors and a former morgue in Dublin’s National Hall, this project by Irish musician Ross Turner plumbs the atmospheric possibilities of traditional music. From the extraordinary raw vocals of Lisa O’Neill on opening ballad, Peggy Gordon, it takes in Irish-Peruvian singers, country songs about Andalucía and breakthrough Irish artists such as Villagers. Read the full review. 8. James Yorkston and the Second Hand Orchestra – The Wide, Wide River A gorgeous album of instrumentals recorded over three days by the Scottish singer-songwriter, acting as musical director with the Swedish collective. Yorkston brought largely unknown pieces to the group, ruminating on the past and ageing, embroidered inventively by cello, violin and nyckelharpa. 7. Patterson Dipper – Unearthing An enchanting set of English classical songs arranged in the folk revival style, anchored by James Patterson’s handsome vocals and John Dipper’s resonant viola d’amore. Its influences include Thomas Hardy poems, Janet Baker renditions of Ivor Gurney arrangements, and Playford country dance tunes, with tamboura, cello and harmonium giving the songs agile spines. 6. Yasmin Williams – Urban Driftwood A meditative instrumental narrative of the US in 2020, written and performed by one of the country’s most talented young guitarists. Folk, pop and west African influences pulse and ripple through the mix, with Taryn Wood’s cello and Amadou Kouyate’s kora adding texture and weather. 5. Various – Future Folk: Friendly Faces; Different Spaces The ambient fringes of folk flower on this small-label anthology, bringing together online lockdown collaborations and home studio recordings. Breakthrough artists of recent years like Bróna McVittie and Andrew Tuttle offer, sun-struck instrumentals, while new talents like Me Lost Me and Scott William Urquhart impress in company. Read the full review. 4. Doran – Doran Influenced by Appalachian ballads, eastern European chants and pagan rituals, this American collective’s debut release is an intimate set recorded in an attic, voices and instruments mingling in the darkness. A capellas and banjo-driven miniatures (led by Elizabeth LaPrelle from Anna &amp; Elizabeth) delicately pin down the mood, while wayward birds and deer people populate its peculiar landscapes. Read the full review. 3. Khasi-Cymru Collective – Sai-thaiñ Ki Sur (The Weaving of Voices ) Also recording as the Gentle Good, the talented, curious Gareth Bonello travelled to the Khasi hills of north-east India for this collaborative project, exploring the conflicted legacy of 19th-century Welsh missionaries in wonderful music. Traditional Indian instruments transform Welsh hymns, improvisations reveal the intricate connections between both cultures and political subjugation is tackled in unsparing lyrics. Read the full review. 2. Rhiannon Giddens and Francesco Turrisi – They’re Calling Me Home An album of beautiful, punchy lockdown laments, delivered by an American and an Italian from their adopted country of Ireland, both pining for home. Giddens’ star power is undeniable, her vocals twisting from gospel blues on Appalachian ballad O Death to delicate opera, somehow without ego. Her banjo playing both chastises and charms. Read the full review. 1. John Francis Flynn – I Would Not Live Always Released in high summer, this brilliant debut has got even better as the year has rolled on, its songs’ heavy atmospheres feeling increasingly meaningful, ancient and eerie. Flynn’s voice will not be for all comers – it’s no-nonsense, without fanciful embroidery – but it delivers traditionals such as Lovely Joan and Shallow Brown with tenderness. Tin whistles, fiddles and tape loops create a fascinating new landscape of folk-horror vibrations. Read the full review.The lights went out at San Siro on Sunday, plunging the stadium into darkness for a few moments before Milan’s game at home to Napoli. All part of the show – switched off so they could be switched back on again – a visual metaphor for a curtain being raised. And why not? This was the last big event of the year at a venue that styles itself as football’s answer to La Scala, the Milan opera house. A Sunday night symphony featuring two of the best teams in Italy, aspiring candidates for a Serie A title. They promised us 90 minutes of captivating drama. They gave us maybe 10, most of those wrapped up in a contrived final act. At kick-off, Milan sat second in the table, with Napoli three points behind. It was not so long ago that these teams were joint-top. At the start of November they had matching unbeaten records – each of them launching their campaigns with 10 wins and a draw. Back then it seemed inevitable that one of the two sides would make it to Christmas in first place. Yet each has experienced their own winter wobble, losing form at a time of year when the fixtures come thick and fast. These are separate stories with their own internal dynamics but injuries to important players are a common thread. Milan arrived for this game missing three-quarters of their first-choice defence – Theo Hernández, Davide Calabria and Simon Kjær – as well as attacking options Ante Rebic and Rafael Leão. Napoli were without their record signing, Victor Osimhen, and the captain, Lorenzo Insigne, as well as Kalidou Koulibaly, Fabián Ruiz and Mário Rui. Any team would suffer the loss of half of its outfield starters. Even so, the lack of fluidity in both teams’ performances was striking. Napoli took the lead in the fifth minute, Eljif Elmas heading home from a corner. It was a well-worked move, Andrea Petagna drawing defenders’ attention in front of the goalscorer and Piotr Zielinski pausing in the middle of his runup before the delivery – reviewing the positions of the defence. It felt like an appropriate way for the game to begin. These teams have scored 11 times each from set-pieces this season – a figure bettered only by Internazionale and Fiorentina. More surprising was the lack of reaction from Milan to falling behind. Indeed, the lack of any action whatsoever. Neither team produced another shot on target in the entire first-half. Closest was Alessandro Florenzi with a volley from 25 yards. Milan generated a brief spell of pressure after the interval, Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Junior Messias demanding saves from David Ospina. But that was about it until Franck Kessié forced the ball into the net in the dying seconds of regular time. It was a well-taken finish, the midfielder showing composure at a moment when everyone around him seemed to have lost theirs, Napoli defenders throwing themselves in front of the ball and Milan players snatching at shots in a penalty-box scramble. Yet it arrived from nowhere, a moment of fortune for a team who had struggled to generate sustained pressure on the Napoli goal. Celebrations did not last long. The referee Davide Massa was invited by the VAR booth to conduct a pitchside review. Olivier Giroud, who started the scramble by heading down a cross from the left, had then fallen while in an offside position. He did not touch the ball again, but it rebounded close to him at one point from the chest of a teammate. The Napoli defender Juan Jesus, who challenged Giroud for the initial header before becoming tangled up with him on the floor, attempted to jab it away. After reviewing the footage, Massa ruled that the striker was interfering with play. It was a crushing moment for Milan, and the start of a heated debate. On the live broadcast for DAZN, former referee Luca Marelli said that the situation was ambiguous because Giroud did not make any move towards the ball. Jesus, unsurprisingly, would have a different take after full time. “The rule is clear – it’s active offside and he didn’t let me play,” the defender said. “I could have done better but I had a man on top of me, and Giroud is a big guy.” Comparisons were inevitably drawn with a goal disallowed for Atalanta during their 4-1 defeat by Roma the night before. When Bryan Cristante deflected the ball into his own net for a second time in the match, VAR overturned the goal because José Luis Palomino had been stood behind him in an offside position. Atalanta were furious, and on procedural grounds they were right to be. That decision was taken directly by officials in the booth, when it ought to have been referred to the match referee for a pitchside review, as happened at San Siro. Ultimately though, the ruling here did appear more clear-cut. Palomino was in a potential scoring position and had a hand resting on Cristante’s back. In any case, both goals were disallowed. Napoli held on to beat Milan 1-0. Their hope is that this win can be a turning point, putting their title challenge back on track. They face struggling Spezia on Wednesday before heading into a winter break when they will hope to recover more players. The return of André-Frank Zambo Anguissa after five games out had already provided a huge lift here, Milan’s attacks breaking repeatedly at the feet of the Cameroonian midfielder. Victory pulled them level with Milan, who have one last chance, at Empoli, to end the year on a brighter note. This team’s defensive frailties have often been to the fore in recent weeks but this was a night to remind us of how badly they miss the spark provided by Rafael Leão, whose electric runs were so often a catalyst in the early part of this season. As impressive as Ibrahimovic’s strike rate is, games like this one and the recent defeat by Liverpool show the limitations in what he can offer at 40 years old. His technique and finishing ability are as sharp as ever but as the Napoli manager, Luciano Spalletti, suggested, those qualities can be neutralised by a high defensive line. It is harder to operate such a tactic when you have a player with Leão’s pace around – as Liverpool discovered during a thrilling first encounter with Milan at Anfield. Opponents earlier in this season were caught between overlooking that threat, and getting punished, or allowing themselves to get pushed back into deeper positions, which in turn allowed Stefano Pioli’s team to occupy more of the pitch. The Portuguese forward is expected back in January, though Milan and Napoli have fresh challenges waiting on the horizon with players from both teams expected to be called up for the Africa Cup of Nations. For now, they sit joint-second. The curtain has not yet come down on either team’s title ambitions, but this was not a night to convince anyone that they can keep up with an Inter side who were crowned as winter champions on Sunday, and who end the year singing from the song-sheet of their new manager, Simone Inzaghi, in ever-more-confident voice.Joe Root criticised his England team for “making the same mistakes” that led to failure in the first Ashes Test after they fell to emphatic defeat in the second match of the series. The captain reserved particular criticism for the bowlers, who allowed Australia to take control of the game in their opening innings, but said that, despite everything, his opponents are “not that much better than us”. Despite an innings of impressive restraint and concentration from Jos Buttler, who scored 26 off 207 balls before clipping his stumps with his heel early in the final session with an unlikely draw in sight, England lost in Adelaide by 275 runs. Root admitted his side had failed in all areas of the game, dropping key chances, bowling the wrong lengths and batting poorly. “That’s the game,” Root said. “You have to be able to put the ball in the right areas for long enough; you have to be able to score big runs; and when you create big chances you have to take them. I think the frustration within our dressing room is that we’ve not executed very basic things well enough for a second game in a row now and we need to respond very quickly.” England came into the match without a specialist spinner and having dropped their fastest bowler in Mark Wood in order to include Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad, players lacking match practice who have struggled to replicate in Australia their success in home conditions and who between them took five wickets in the match. “If you look at the first innings in particular I thought we were just a little bit short with the ball, we didn’t challenge them enough,” Root said. “We need to be braver, we need to get the ball up there. As soon as we did that in the second innings, the amount of chances we created and how dangerous we looked, that’s the benchmark for us moving forwards. We weren’t brave enough at times to get the ball up there and get them driving.” Root’s criticisms were echoed by Steve Smith, who stood in as Australia captain in the absence of the self‑isolating Pat Cummins and said that “in the first innings we made an effort to pitch the ball up, tried to bowl a lot fuller than England perhaps did”. Root said: “You’re looking at half a metre at times. When you’re in the moment, and the amount of times they played and missed and we beat the bat again, you feel like you’re doing the right thing. You just have to be that little bit braver, get the ball up there and accept that every now and then you’re going to get driven, but with the skill and ability we have we’re going to create chances. “The most disappointing thing for me is the amount of no-balls that we keep bowling, and the number of chances that we’ve missed, again, after last week. With the bat we have got the ability. I don’t think that Australia are that much better than us in these conditions, like the scorelines might have suggested in these two games.” England travel to Melbourne for the Boxing Day Test 2-0 down in the series, a position from which they have never recovered to win the Ashes. Saqib Mahmood, who took four wickets in his first 11 balls on debut for Sydney Thunder in the Big Bash League on Sunday, has been put on standby, possibly to join the squad before Christmas, and Root said Buttler’s approach on the final day could be a template for the remainder of the series. “We have to believe,” the captain said. “I’m convinced that we’ve got what we need to win Test matches over here but we’re not going to if we keep missing chances and if we don’t give ourselves an opportunity to get into Test matches with the bat. We’ve got to find ways of building those partnerships, getting in, making big contributions. “That’s something we’ll have to do very well going forward but today has given me a lot of confidence going forward.”The Hugo awards for science fiction and fantasy have been dominated once again by women, with American writer Martha Wells taking the top prize for best novel. Wells took two accolades at what is considered the most prestigious awards ceremony in the science fiction calendar, winning best novel for Network Effect and best series for The Murderbot Diaries. Network Effect and its predecessors follow the adventures of a sentient killing machine known as Murderbot, which develops human traits and would rather make friends and watch TV soaps than fulfil its programming. Wells’ latest novel sees Murderbot intervening between warring factions of alien-controlled humans on a distant colony world. This is the sixth year that a woman has taken the best novel award, with Wells following Arkady Martine last year, Mary Robinette Kowal in 2019, and – for the previous three years – NK Jemisin. It’s a far cry from the first Hugo winners roster announced in 1953, an all-male lineup in which Alfred Bester won for his classic The Demolished Man. It was not until 1970 that the first woman would win best novel, when Ursula K Le Guin took home the award for The Left Hand of Darkness. The prize had previously been dominated by writers such as Robert A Heinlein, Fritz Leiber, Philip K Dick and, in 1966, Frank Herbert for his novel Dune, recently filmed for the second time. Announced at the weekend at the annual Worldcon convention in Washington DC, the Hugos also saw Nghi Vo awarded best novella for her fantasy story inspired by Chinese and Vietnamese culture, The Empress of Salt and Fortune, while Two Truths and a Lie, an eerie mystery about a half-remembered TV show by Sarah Pinsker, won best novelette. Other awards this year went to T Kingfisher – a pen name of American writer and children’s book creator Ursula Vernon – for best short story with Metal Like Blood in the Dark, which appeared in Uncanny magazine. The Best Related Work category was won by Maria Dahvana Headley for Beowulf: A New Translation. Worldcon, the traditional host of the Hugos, is a travelling convention, with a new location every year. While next year’s has been settled on as Chicago, the 2023 convention was at the weekend awarded to a bid from the city of Chengdu in China, which has caused some disquiet because of the country’s human rights record. Two-times Hugo winner Jeannette Ng, born in Hong Kong and living in Durham in the UK, tweeted that her previous acceptance speeches “would have gotten me arrested in China”. Ng had said that John W Campbell, whose name was previously given to the best new writer award, was a fascist who set a tone “of science fiction that still haunts the genre to this day. Sterile. Male. White”, and called for a “free Hong Kong”. The prize was later renamed the Astounding award.Shot on a couple of handheld cameras, this documentary follows three young men – El Loco, Lechero and Carlitos – from north-eastern Colombia as they traverse a thousand miles of rough road, mostly by stealthily leaping on to moving lorries, and scrounging food from strangers along the way. It’s a dangerous journey, but the guys don’t have much to lose given the hardscrabble poverty of their daily lives. The purpose, apart from the fact that it’s just something to do, is to see their football team Atlético Bucaramanga, AKA the Leopards, play for a chance of promotion to division A after eight long years in division B. Self-styled “hooligans,” it’s clear they see this pilgrimage as an act of honour to the club they love as well as something they do in the name of fallen friends. Before setting off for the key game they visit the tomb of one deceased comrade and blow spliff smoke in his direction as an offering. Once on the road, they meet other supporters – a fight nearly breaks out on the sliproad until they realise they are fellow Leopards fans – and survive on the kindness of strangers. Director Andres Torres doesn’t show that much football-stadium violence, but it’s alluded to throughout and the closing credits pay tribute to some of the dead. While it’s hard not to admire the film-makers’ own dedication to tracking their subjects, even if it means the camera shakes like a tabby in a cat carrier as they jump aboard trucks and the like, the hardcore vérité style here is a bit cold. We don’t really get to know these guys at all well, and the film-makers certainly don’t question or examine their self-destructive lifestyle. Ultimately, it’s a bit of a slog, and not that interesting unless you’re really into Colombian highways or the machismo of football fans. • The Fortress is available on 24 December on True Story.Kelly Holmes, Stormzy, Mary Seacole and the violin virtuoso George Bridgetower are some of the inspirational figures honoured in a competition that set children and young people the challenge of creatively celebrating great Black Britons. The winning entries in one of the biggest ever school competitions celebrating Black British history included pictures, poems and videos. The initiative, whose sponsors included the National Education Union (NEU), was run by Every Generation Foundation, a social enterprise aiming to promote the history of diverse communities, founded by the Windrush campaigner Patrick Vernon. He was also co-founder of the 100 Great Black Britons campaign, and the competition entrants were asked to base their submissions on one or more people from that list. Vernon said: “I am just amazed with the fantastic response and quality from entries which were completed during the last Covid lockdown by schools and children. This is one of the biggest school competitions supporting and celebrating Black British history to date. This demonstrates the appetite and hunger for learning and for more inclusion of Black history in the national curriculum.” Lisa Death, from Suffolk, the winner in the preschool category, created a collage paying tribute to Mary Seacole. The Crimean war nurse, who topped the first list of 100 Great Black Britons, based on a public vote, in 2003-4, was also the subject of a poem by the winner in key stage 3, Holly Hicks, from Berkshire. Trevor Sterling, chair of the Mary Seacole Trust, said it was “an incredibly important competition, raising awareness of great Black Britons, which educates and inspires young people”. Scarlett O’Conner was a winner in the key stage one (KS1) category, with her picture of Kelly Holmes, who won the 800m and 1500m gold medals at the 2004 Athens Olympics – a feat still unmatched by any female British runner. Another winner in KS1 was Theo Woodhouse, from south London, who created a model of a racetrack, replete with hurdles, to honour another one of Britain’s greatest ever athletes, the former 110m hurdles world record-holder Colin Jackson. In the oldest category (16-25), Molly Marshall, from Suffolk, won for an essay she wrote on the importance of sport to combatting racism in Britain. She highlighted how the likes of Lewis Hamilton, Dina Asher-Smith and Raheem Sterling are “trying to promote change, which will hopefully make the world of sport and, more importantly, the world a more equal society for Black people”. Mahithi Krishna, from London, was the winner in key stage 2, for her depiction of Edward Enninful, editor-in chief at British Vogue, the first Black person to hold the role. Her school, Kensington prep, said Mahithi was “over the moon and is very proud that she has been able to contribute towards recognition of talented individuals from a Black British background”. Bethany Higgins, from south London, was a runner-up in key stage 4 for her homage to Stormzy. On top of two chart-topping albums, the grime MC has spoken out on issues including the Grenfell Tower fire and police brutality. Last year, he announced he would donate £10m to Black British causes over this decade. A musician of a very different ilk inspired the winning entry in key stage 4. Caitlyn Bailey, from Hertfordshire, created a poster paying tribute to George Bridgetower, a violinist for whom Beethoven wrote the Kreutzer Sonata. Caitlyn said the competition had been “a great opportunity to research in more detail individuals who have made an impact on history but perhaps remained unnamed”.In the days leading up to Christmas, people across the country are rethinking plans and opting to cancel parties or other events in order to voluntarily isolate so they can spend time with their loved ones. The staggering speed at which the Omicron variant is spreading means that people should consider not mixing “with people you don’t have to” during the festive period, Prof Chris Whitty said during the Covid press briefing last Wednesday. Pubs and restaurants have reported a wave of cancellations as people decide to impose their own lockdown to avoid catching the virus. Three people speak about their plans for the countdown to Christmas. ‘We have all agreed to isolate’ Penny, 64, from Pembrokeshire, is eagerly awaiting Christmas Day with her son and his partner, and her daughter who is flying from Sydney. “This will be the first time we have seen each other for two years,” she said. “Assuming this all goes to plan, we are looking forward to the best Christmas. If it falls apart at the last minute, we will be absolutely devastated.” As a result, the family are being extra careful. “We cannot risk any Covid infection preventing our reunion, so we have all agreed to isolate from now on. We will be doing regular lateral flow tests between now and then. Our daughter will of course be PCR-tested before she travels and again on arrival at Heathrow.” As she will need to fly back to Australia after Christmas, the family’s self-imposed isolation will continue throughout the festive period. “While she is with us, we will not see anyone else at all. Many of her old friends have had babies since she was last here, and in normal circumstances, she would of course be meeting them all. This time it is out of the question. “The wider family would love to see her and we usually arrange a big get-together when she is in the UK. But this time she will not be able to see uncles, aunties, cousins or friends. Everyone understands that they will only see her on Zoom.” ‘I’m finding separation from my wife quite difficult’ Peter Martin Copping, 82, who lives inBury St Edmunds, Suffolk, has been mainly self-isolating since the beginning of the pandemic by staying home and working on his garden. His wife, Phyl, 77, has dementia and recently moved into a nursing home, so his main priority is to be able to stay safe in the days leading up to Christmas so he can celebrate with her. “I’ve been promised I can see her on Christmas Day at 2pm, so I’m being very, very careful,” he said. “I go out as little as possible except for food shopping and I keep myself busy by looking after our house and garden.” Copping was invited to Christmas lunch by his sister-in-law but decided against it. “My plan on Christmas Day is to go for a bike ride in the country and then come back here and do myself a meal. I jokingly tell people Christmas meal is two sausages, egg, bacon, chips, and beans, but I have a small turkey joint in the freezer. “My wife and I have been together for 60 years. We met on my first day out of the RAF and we’ve not been apart since. She loves gardening and every time I go into the garden it’s a reminder of her. I’m finding this separation pretty difficult.” ‘In blended families like our own, it’s more complex’ Annette, 51, from Cambridgeshire, has gone into “voluntary lockdown” along with her partner and younger son, 14. Her older son, 17, continued to go to sixth form last week although classes had become increasingly empty. “I would be happier if masks were compulsory in classrooms as he is not comfortable with wearing one because the majority don’t, and he does not want to stand out as one of the few mask wearers.” Annette’s sons plan to spend the first week of the Christmas holidays with their dad, and the second week with her. In order for her sons to be able to spend Christmas with their parents as well as visit elderly relatives, the family has to be extremely careful not to catch Covid. They get vegetable boxes delivered instead of shopping in supermarkets, and decided to decline an invite to a Christmas party at a friend’s house last weekend. “In blended families like our own, it is more complex. If anyone tests positive, none of our plans work any more. We would have to figure out what to do, but it would probably mean the boys missing seeing one of their parents on Christmas Day. “I was grateful to have had my booster jab a month ago, but my partner only had his last week and I am sure many other parents are still waiting for theirs while their children have been in schools where Covid was spreading like wildfire. “If we all make it to new year without testing positive, we will go and visit my parents who are in their 80s and were previously shielding. If all fails, family celebrations will have to be on Zoom, assuming we are all well enough for that.”Like many in his home city of Punta Arenas, Gabriel Boric is of Croatian descent. His father’s ancestors were among the tens of thousands of Croatians who left their homeland at the end of the 19th century to travel to Chilean Patagonia in search of new opportunities. Many others sought fresh starts in neighbouring Argentina over the same period. Chile is now home to one of the largest Croatian diasporas in the world, with an estimated population of between 200,000 and 400,000 people of Croatian descent. Evidence of the community in Chile can be seen in the names of businesses and sports teams, and in the Croatian flags and coat of arms on the walls in bars, restaurants and cafes. The first wave of migration, in the late 1800s, came as Chile and Argentina appealed for migrants to settle in their vast, sparsely populated areas. Before the creation of the Chilean state, the dramatic fjords and inlets of Tierra del Fuego at the continent’s southernmost tip were home to a number of semi-nomadic peoples. But mercenary-led campaigns saw native populations wiped out almost entirely, including the Selk’nam, one of three Indigenous tribes in southern Patagonia, who were subjected to a brutal, genocidal cull. In 1881, Chile signed a treaty to divide Patagonia between itself and Argentina, and began to grant vast tracts of pristine, forested land to wealthy proprietors at the turn of the 20th century. Barely controlled forest fires tore through Patagonia to make way for the colonisers to set up agricultural smallholdings, while others cleared land and built roads to colonise the area. The first Croatians arrived in the aftermath of the phylloxera plague that devastated vineyards on the Dalmatian coast, forcing many workers and growers to pursue livelihoods elsewhere. Many Croats came to Punta Arenas to work in the area’s huge livestock sector, while others headed to the northern mining region of Antofagasta. Over the course of two or three generations, Chile’s Croatian newcomers moved from working as fishermen, builders and cattle farmers or being small business owners to becoming doctors, lawyers, engineers, teachers, journalists, civil servants and politicians. One of Chile’s richest men is Andrónico Lukšić, a business magnate of Croatian descent who is part of a powerful Chilean dynasty that married into the Pinochet-Hiriart clan. Boric’s father, Luis Javier Boric Scarpa, is a chemical engineer. His mother, María Soledad Font Aguilera, is of Catalan descent. When the wealthy, north-eastern Spanish region was plunged into crisis four years ago following the Catalan government’s illegal efforts to secede from the rest of the country, Boric said he was shocked by footage and photographs of Spanish police attempting to stop the unilateral referendum. “The images of the police violence in Catalonia are shocking,” he tweeted. “A big hug from Chile to the Catalan people. More democracy, less repression.”Five-nil now has a life of its own. Whenever England come to Australia for an Ashes tour, it has become traditional to speculate about the prospect of a series whitewash. What started as a comedy routine by Glenn McGrath has become pre-series bravado from home pundits, a performative dance on the ramparts as invaders approach the keep. On most recent tours, though, it has been the visitors who end up living in a state of siege. And after Australia went 2-0 up by winning the second Test in Adelaide, that scoreline is beginning to look very plausible. It is true that England fought hard on the fifth day and night of the match while seeking an unlikely draw, and there will be emphasis on the positives the touring squad can take from that. But the batting resistance was offered by a wicketkeeper and four bowlers, while the specialist operators above them once again combined in surrender. With the ball, meanwhile, those redoubtable bowlers were toothless against Australia when it mattered, and only found their dentures when the game was gone. The 5-0 predictions may be tiresome, but not entirely unreasonable. Up until the turn of the century there had only been one Ashes whitewash in 130 years, and even the most powerful pessimists could hardly worry about how Jack Gregory and Ted McDonald tore through England back in 1921. Things have changed in the last 21 years of Ashes series in Australia. England won three Tests by an innings in 2010-11, but that now looks like a lonely rookery surrounded by the 5-0 before it, the 5-0 after it, and a 4-0 that would have been 5-0 if not for a Melbourne pitch where bowlers could only have made the ball talk through a ouija board. A couple of weeks ago, the current Australians did not look like candidates to add to that list of pastings. There was a removed captain, there were question marks over four of the top seven, and the three better candidates had not played in a year. Last time they did, a fine group of bowlers was nonetheless repelled by an India and Friends touring troupe. Home advantage said Australia should win, but not by a distance. Now distance is all there is. Take Jhye Richardson, a diminutive fast bowler with two Tests to his name and three years of shoulder rehab since playing them. Yet on the final day in Adelaide he took five for 42 to ensure a win that was less than guaranteed. He dismissed both English openers on the fourth evening with bounce that fed the catching cordon from an immaculate line. He dislodged Chris Woakes with an unplayable ball that jagged off the seam to take middle stump. His fast short balls pushed Jos Buttler back until that fateful slip into the stumps, then he finished off the final partnership with another edge. This was in a team deprived of its two best fast bowlers in Pat Cummins and Josh Hazlewood and missing Cummins as captain. In a team in which Mitchell Starc was troubled by twinges in his back, Cameron Green had a problem with his side and Nathan Lyon had put in a mighty shift. Australia desperately needed Richardson to deliver – and he did. Which means that England will face a fresh Cummins in Melbourne, with Hazlewood more likely to return in Sydney, giving a chance for Starc to rest if required. There is only one remaining question mark over a batting spot, and the others have so far found Marcus Harris easy to carry. He will still likely get the chance to join the procession on his home ground. In contrast, the England camp have a litany of problems: a top order that is fast food, spinners they don’t trust to play, fast bowlers they don’t dare to play, a No 8 picked to bail out the batting who doesn’t take wickets, plans that outsmart their authors, rushes of panic in the field, and a captain who is trying to carry the caravan by scoring half the runs and bowling a quarter of the overs. One of his coaches may have whacked him in the groin literally, but his teammates do it metaphorically every day. It isn’t Australian triumphalism or English despair that sees the next three Tests going one way. Outside of that lonely series win a decade ago, England’s win-loss scoreline in Australia for the last 35 years stands at 3-29, which coincidentally is often the local format of the score when they are batting. That is England’s history, but England’s present should be more than enough to worry the current team. Whitewashes are rare because that perfect sequence is unlikely, so it is unreasonable to say it will happen. But it is no longer unreasonable to think it could. The touring supporters might have kept singing until the final ball in Adelaide, but across the home country, the drums are beating.Time and again throughout history, perpetrators of injustice have absolved themselves and justified miserliness and inaction by blaming the victim. Amid allegations of African culpability for the Omicron outbreak and complaints from the global north about vaccine hesitancy and low take-up in the global south, 2021 has seen this shameful story being told anew. But the new variant is not Africa’s fault. Responsibility starts with the governments of wealthy nations that stockpiled hundreds of millions of vaccine doses and that, even when warned about the failure to vaccinate more vulnerable parts of the world, did too little as the virus mutated. It is not Africa’s wariness about vaccines that is the decisive problem. It is a lack of African access to them. Of course, anti-vaxxers sow havoc everywhere but the more accurate picture I have, from my visits to various places in Africa and Asia, is of the mother and her family who walk miles, queue for hours, even wait for days for vaccines to be delivered, because she knows from her experience of polio, diphtheria and tuberculosis that the best chance of her family surviving is getting the shots into their arms. Her determination – her faith in the power of medicine to save lives – is a moral summons to respond. But the latest outbreak also reminds us of a practical imperative: that if we fail her, so too we fail our own families and communities by allowing the virus free rein to mutate and return to haunt even fully vaccinated people. With the World Health Organization forecasting 200 million more cases by next September – and potentially another 5 million preventable deaths – the grim truth remains that until no one anywhere lives in fear, then everyone everywhere will have to live in fear. Instead of lurching from Covid crisis to Covid crisis, we must resolve that 2022 will be the year when we finally bring the virus fully under control. Ours is not a fraught choice between boosters and vaccinating the world. We are manufacturing enough vaccines – 11.2bn doses already, 19.8bn by June – to immunise the whole world. But it is an inescapable and unacceptable fact that of the billions of doses of vaccine administered, only 0.6% ended up in low-income countries, while over 70% have been administered in high- and upper-middle-income countries. Of tests, only 0.4% have been administered in low-income countries, and even basic medical equipment such as oxygen and oral therapeutics remain a luxury, let alone ventilators. An estimated 500 million people who are already poor are being pushed further into extreme poverty because of payments they have to incur for healthcare and the pitifully low 4% full-vaccination rate for low-income countries and 8% rate in Africa are a grim reproach that we appear to value human life in the south far less and far more cheaply than in the north. These inequalities are not just a medical failure but a moral lapse, a stain on our global soul. The great global challenge of 2022 must be to wipe away that stain by finding the money to bridge the yawning divide between the world’s protected rich and unprotected poor – and in so doing end the indefensible but perennial underfunding of global health. I know from my experience of the 2009 financial crisis, when the world economy was underpinned with $1.1tn (£830bn) of support that, in the words of Keynes about a previous emergency, “anything we can actually do, we can afford”. In the first weeks of 2022, we need to achieve for the world what Britain is attempting for our own citizens: to deploy every available nurse, enlist every available community health worker, provide every available test and treatment, commandeer every known distribution agency and summon up the support of the military where necessary. We must show that just as Coca-Cola can get to faraway places not listed on maps and Pfizer can deliver vaccines by drones then so too must we get jabs into arms across communities that have never before known adult vaccinations. So the richest economies should immediately underwrite the urgent request for $23.4bn – which includes $1.5bn to finance the WHO – from ACT-Accelerator, the coordinating agency for vaccines, diagnostics and therapeutics. It may sound like a huge sum, but is more than 200 times smaller than the $5.3tn the IMF estimates will be the Covid- induced loss of economic output by 2026. The $23.4bn breaks down to just 10p a week to be paid by every citizen of the wealthier countries and would not only save next Christmas but be the best investment the world could ever make. Surely making the difference between life and death is worth more than the price of the cheapest biscuit? There are four potential sources of sustainable long-term funding to cover this $23bn, an additional $25bn to build in-country capacity to administer tests and treatments and the $10bn required annually, as recommended by three independent reviews, to prepare for and prevent future pandemics, all of which could be pledged at the vaccines conference to be recalled by the US president, Joe Biden, at the outset of 2022. First, the international community should agree a formula to share the costs fairly between countries in the same way that we fund UN peacekeeping, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, and in the 1960s levied countries to eliminate smallpox. We can no longer rely on the ad hoc, piecemeal lottery of global health funding that is more akin to a whip-round at a charity fundraiser than a serious attempt to move beyond begging-bowl politics. The purest public good of all – control of infectious disease – should be first on the list for a multilateral burden-sharing agreement to finance the WHO and global health, with the US and Europe each offering around 25% of the costs and the rest of the world contributing based on capacity to pay. Second, we must rectify the profound failure of the global system that Covid has exposed. The WHO and those with the global remit to act have the least resources, while the IMF and the multilateral development banks command the most resources, without a specific mandate to act. Another $10bn of World Bank resources, a new IMF vaccine facility and $100bn of the new international money – special drawing rights – should be immediately deployed to build health systems in low-income countries Third, we need to be more innovative by using guarantees from the global north to source the funds we need. Just $2bn of guarantees can be leveraged to create an international financial facility for health that, with $1.5bn of grants, could raise $10bn of additional resources for poorer countries. Finally, we should consider how we can increase the proceeds from Unitaid’s solidarity levy, which since 2006 has raised $1.25bn from hypothecating airline taxes to global health and, with big pharma now admitting it has not done enough, companies that will benefit from the resumption of trade should be asked to join with foundations in our mission to make Covid history. Hope is resilient, but it is also fragile. Hope dies when countries hoard vaccines that others desperately need, when the richest fail to honour solemn promises made to the poor and when we place profit before people. But hope can come alive in 2022 making what once seemed impossible possible. This will begin with first one wealthy country, then two, then half a dozen, then all uniting together, resolving to stop the march of this lethal disease – not only to save lives but to affirm we value all human lives equally. By these acts of solidarity, thousands of mothers, like those I have met across Africa, who are today waiting to see whether a world that fell apart in 2020 and 2021 will come together in 2022, will discover to their relief that we do indeed feel the pain of others and that we do believe in something bigger than ourselves. Gordon Brown is the WHO ambassador for global health financing, and was UK prime minister from 2007 to 2010The failure to vaccinate the world against coronavirus will come back to haunt even fully vaccinated Britons in 2022, Gordon Brown has warned. The former prime minister said the emergence of Omicron was “not Africa’s fault”, and added that new variants would continue to wreak havoc because richer countries such as the UK had “stockpiled” hundreds of millions of vaccines. He rubbished suggestions wealthier nations faced a choice between offering boosters to their own citizens or sharing doses with people living in poorer countries. “Ours is not a fraught choice between boosters and vaccinating the world. We are manufacturing enough vaccines … to immunise the whole world.” Instead, Brown said it was an “inescapable and unacceptable fact” that of the billions of vaccines administered, only 0.6% ended up in low-income countries. Writing in the Guardian, Brown cautioned that “even the fully vaccinated” in Britain remained at risk as long as the virus was given “free rein to mutate” in countries with poor access to jabs. “The grim truth remains that until no one anywhere lives in fear, then everyone everywhere will have to live in fear. “The new variant is not Africa’s fault,” he said. “Responsibility starts with the governments of wealthy nations who stockpiled hundreds of millions of vaccines and who, even when warned about the failure to vaccinate more vulnerable parts of the world, did too little as the virus mutated.” Brown issued a plea to world leaders to fund a $23.4bn (£17.7bn) plan by the World Health Organization and other aid groups to bring Covid vaccines, tests and drugs to poorer countries in the next 12 months. “The great global challenge of 2022 must be to wipe away that stain by finding the money to bridge the yawning divide between the world’s protected rich and unprotected poor,” Brown said. “In the first weeks of 2022, we need to achieve for the world what Britain is attempting for our own citizens: to deploy every available nurse, enlist every available community health worker, provide every available test and treatment, commandeer every known distribution agency, and summon up the support of the military where necessary.” While he accepted the $23.4bn was a “huge sum”, Brown said it was 200 times smaller than the $5.3tn the International Monetary Fund estimated would be the Covid-induced loss of economic output by 2025. “The $23bn breaks down to just 10p a week, to be paid by every citizen of the global north, and would be the best investment in world history,” he added. “Surely making the difference between life and death is worth more than the price of the cheapest biscuit?”“Serious failings” in a rescue operation may have contributed to the deaths of 27 refugees in the Channel last month, according to lawyers representing bereaved family members. Calls for a public inquiry to determine whether “acts or omissions” by British agencies resulted in human rights breaches came alongside separate legal cases against UK and French authorities involved in the operation. On Monday, relatives of two of the men lost at sea have started a legal process in the UK calling for an independent public inquiry to establish the full facts of what happened on the night of 24 November. Meanwhile, Utopia 56, an organisation that supports refugees in northern France, has lodged a complaint in the Paris prosecutor’s office. Hundreds more refugees have made the hazardous sea crossing in the last few days. The BBC reported that more than 900 people crossed during the weekend. The maritime expert’s report was commissioned by the UK lawyers for relatives of two men known or believed to have died in November’s incident, and it comments on potential problems that night. Saman Alipour, an Iranian Kurd, has embarked on the legal action on behalf of his brother Sirwan Alipour. Sirwan’s body has been identified and the family travelled to Tehran to receive his body on Monday. The second person involved in the action is Zana Mamand Mohammad, whose brother Twana is believed to have died in the tragedy. Twana’s body has not been found. Mohammad told the Guardian his family paid $20,000 for Twana’s journey. “I want to open this case so this humanitarian disaster does not go unmarked. I need to get justice and I need to find my brother whether he is dead or alive,” he said. Alipour told the Guardian: “Everybody loved Sirwan. He had dreams which could not be achieved in Iran.” He said he believed that calls to the emergency services made by his brother and others on the boat were not responded to appropriately by the English and the French. “I am doing this legal action not for money but because I have lost my only brother. Now I am alone and spending the worst days of my life. I want to protect people’s rights,” he said. Maria Thomas, of Duncan Lewis Solicitors, representing the relatives, said: “We have submitted pre-action correspondence to the British government requesting that a public inquiry is established to determine whether the acts or omissions of the British agencies involved in coordinating and executing the search and rescue mission on 24 November resulted in breaches of the European convention on human rights. “Independent expert evidence obtained on behalf of our clients indicates that there may have been serious failings, which could have contributed to the significant loss of life. We are expecting the government’s response by 3 January 2022.” The Utopia 56 complaint has been filed against the maritime prefect of the Channel and the North Sea, the Gris-Nez (Pas-de-Calais) regional operational surveillance and rescue centre and the British coastguard. It refers to manslaughter and the failure to provide assistance at sea Emmanuel Daoud, the lawyer representing Utopia 56, said: “The victims and their families are owed truth and transparency. We know that as their boat was sinking, the exiles and refugees sought to contact British and French rescue services, who passed the buck. They did not come to the aid of people who were in distress, and from that moment we consider that the question of responsibility – in the criminal sense of the term – has arisen.” A spokesperson for HM Coastguard said of the legal action launched in France: “It is not appropriate for us to comment on the specifics of this legal action. On 24 November, Her Majesty’s Coastguard received over 90 alerts from the English Channel area including 999 emergency calls. Every call was answered, assessed and acted upon, including the deployment of search and rescue resources where appropriate. We always have and always will respond to anyone in distress, as we did that day.”Britain’s advertising watchdog has stepped in to referee a row over Pret a Manger’s drinks subscription service amid claims it has generated thousands of customer complaints. The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) has advised the coffee and sandwich chain to rethink how it advertises the £20-a-month service, which lets subscribers enjoy five barista-made drinks – including hot and iced coffees, teas, frappes, smoothies and hot chocolates – every day. Some customers have complained they are often unable to get drinks such as smoothies via the deal, as some shops said they were unable to make them. The BBC said it understood the chain – which has about 400 shops in the UK – had received about 5,000 complaints about the deal, which was launched in September 2020. On Twitter, one customer said to Pret: “Every store in London never has smoothies or frappes available! But now I also find you never have whipped cream available! We use the Pret subscription and feel a little let down.” Another said: “Can confirm this as every time I try and get a cold drink with my subscription I’m told it doesn’t cover them.” One customer told BBC News that by mid-afternoon, the mango and pineapple smoothie that he liked was often not available. The Advertising Standards Authority said that after receiving four complaints, it had sent an “advice notice” to Pret advising it to review the adverts for its subscription service, which state: “If our baristas brew it, blend it or steam it, you can have it!” The ASA said: “We noted that their ads should not state or imply that the service was available in all store locations, or that it covers their entire range of products if that wasn’t the case.” An advice notice is issued when the body considers that there are potential problems under its advertising rules, but does not consider the issues so significant that they warrant a full formal investigation. A Pret spokesperson said that while its subscription service had proved “incredibly popular,” the company was “constantly working with our teams and customers to make it better, so that we’re able to continue to deliver the outstanding service our people are known for”.Elon Musk, the world’s richest person and the chief executive of the electric car company Tesla, has said he will pay more than $11bn in tax this year – which could be a record amount of annual tax paid by a single person. Musk, who was earlier this year accused of paying zero federal taxes in 2018 despite sitting on an estimated $243bn (£185bn), said he would pay the unusually high tax bill this year after the sale of millions of Tesla shares. It comes after Senator Elizabeth Warren last week described Musk as “the world’s richest freeloader”. Musk has sold about $14bn worth of Tesla shares since early November, when he asked his Twitter followers whether he should sell 10% of his holdings. Almost 60% of his 67 million followers voted that he should sell the shares. Taxes on the sales are estimated to come in at between $11bn and $12bn. The controversial entrepreneur would probably have had to begin selling down his 23% stake in Tesla regardless of the outcome of the vote, as he faced a massive tax bill on share options that were awarded to him in 2012 and set to expire in August 2022. In order to exercise the options, he is required to pay tax on the gain. Tesla shares have risen by more than 20,000% in the past 10 years. Musk’s tax payments have been a political lightning rod in the US, as rather than collect a salary or bonuses (which are taxed), the billionaire’s wealth comes from Tesla bonus share awards and the rise in the company’s share price (income tax is only paid on share price gains when the shares are sold). A ProPublica investigation earlier this year found that Musk paid a “true tax rate” of 3.27% between 2014 and 2018, and no federal taxes at all in 2018. Warren, a progressive Democrat senator who has long campaigned for tax reforms to try to ensure the super-rich pay more tax, last week questioned Time magazine’s decision to name Musk its person of the year. “Let’s change the rigged tax code so The Person of the Year will actually pay taxes and stop freeloading off everyone else,” she tweeted. Musk responded: “If you opened your eyes for 2 seconds, you would realize I will pay more taxes than any American in history this year.” Tesla shares have dropped by about a quarter since Musk’s tweet about selling his shares. They fell a further 3% on Monday. The company’s market value has dipped to just over $900bn, down from the trillion-dollar valuation it hit in October. Analysts at the investment bank Guggenheim Partners on Monday warned investors that electric vehicle production might fall short of forecasts, and said they feared that Tesla’s share price could be hit as more competitors entered the electric and autonomous vehicle (AV) market at cheaper prices. “We believe EV adoption may fall short of industry forecasts, particularly in the US due to a less onerous regulatory backdrop and limited product launches in key market segments,” the Guggenheim analyst Ali Faghri said. “We also believe Tesla’s scarcity value from a stock perspective is waning, with significantly more EV and AV-focused companies going public over the last 12-18 months, giving investors more options at lower valuations to get exposure to secular growth in EVs and AVs.”European markets have taken something of a fright before Christmas on Monday thanks to concerns about new restrictions to tackle the omicron variant - and Wall Street has followed their lead. Here are the opening snaps from the three main US benchmark stock indices: S&amp;P 500 DOWN 59.17 POINTS, OR 1.28%, AT 4,561.47 NASDAQ DOWN 227.60 POINTS, OR 1.50%, AT 14,942.08 DOW JONES DOWN 455.76 POINTS, OR 1.29%, AT 34,909.68 The mood has improved somewhat over the course of the day, however. The FTSE 100 has fallen by 0.9% to just over 7,200 points - but that is an improvement over the first few hours of trading. The pound has recovered against the US dollar - it is almost flat for the day at about $1.3235. Here are some of the other notable business events from today: Rolls-Royce won the backing of Qatar for small modular nuclear reactors. A $10bn spreadsheet error was among the reasons for a £47m Standard Chartered fine. Ex-Tesco boss Sir Dave Lewis was appointed to lead GSK’s consumer products spinout, which is expected to become one of the FTSE 100’s biggest companies. UK pubs and restaurants have warned of plummeting sales and “decimated” bookings. Data showed UK high streets have also suffered markedly, with falling sales in what should have been their most profitable weekend. The annual shindig for corporate types at Davos has been postponed for the second year in a row. Cruise ship company Carnival has said it will be back to 2019 earnings before various costs by 2023 - but that the first half of 2022 could result in another loss. You can continue to follow the Guardian’s coverage from around the world on our homepage and via our live blogs: In the UK, Boris Johnson and ministers are meeting to consider further coronavirus restrictions for England In our global coronavirus coverage, Thailand is considering ending quarantine-free travel, and the EU is set to back the Novavax vaccine The bounce on European stock markets has run out, it seems. The FTSE 100 is wavering around a 1.1% decline for the day - perhaps it is waiting for direction from the UK cabinet, which is about to meet. However, any leaks (or indeed official messages) are likely to come very near the end of the trading day, if not after. The Dax in Germany is down by 1.8% and France’s Cac 40 has lost 1.1%. The Stoxx 600, which combines all of the above and more, is down by 1.5%. Britain’s largest pub chain JD Wetherspoon has appointed two employees to its board in response to criticisms of its corporate governance. Four out of about 100 managers of Spoons pubs were chosen after shareholders and employees said it would “benefit from having more pub experience at board level”, the company said on Monday. Debbie Whittingham, a regional manager for the West Midlands, and Hudson Simmons, area manager for Sheffield, will join the board, while another two will be “associate employee directors”. Tim Martin, Wetherspoon’s founder and chairman, has previously lashed out at those who have criticised the company’s corporate governance in lengthy letters published on the stock market’s news service. However, he said: Pub and area managers, and other members of pub teams, have always participated in weekly decision-making meetings, which distil suggestions from the ‘front line’. The appointment of employee directors will extend this approach to board meetings and will help to preserve the culture of the company for the future. It was cautiously welcomed by the High Pay Centre, a thinktank focused on pay, corporate governance. Luke Hildyard, the High Pay Centre’s executive director, said: The perspectives workers directors can offer in terms of improvements to customer service and employee relations are obvious. The new Wetherspoons directors would have more credibility and independence if they’d been elected by colleagues rather than appointed by existing board members and it should also be remembered that boardroom representation is a complement not a substitute for full trade union rights and recognition. But this is a positive step by Wetherspoons that will benefit both workers and shareholders in the long term. One to watch on the UK politics front: the prime minister has called a cabinet meeting at 2pm. As Andrew Sparrow points out on the Guardian’s UK politics live blog, there is not usually a cabinet meeting on a Monday, so this is an emergency coronavirus meeting. Dress codes and wine pairings have not yet been released. You can follow updates on the cabinet here: One for the central bank watchers: Germany’s new government has picked a new head of its central bank: “career central banker” Joachim Nagel. Nagel’s predecessor, Jens Weidmann, was perhaps the European Central Bank’s most prominent internal critic -arguing against the stimulus that it has used to prop up the EU economy. (All eurozone central bank heads get a place on the governing council, which sets monetary policy for the bloc.) Nagel, a former Bundesbank board member, will take over on 1 January. Reuters summarised his recent career as: A former board member of the state-owned development bank KfW Bank, Nagel currently works for the Bank for International Settlements, which is often considered the central bank of central banks. Early in his career, he was also a consultant for the SPD, the party that took over government earlier this month and will make the Bundesbank appointment one of its first decisions. Germany’s finance minister under the new coalition government, Christian Lindner, said on Monday: In view of inflation risks, the importance of a stability-oriented monetary policy is growing. He is an experienced personality who ensures continuity at the Bundesbank. The World Economic Forum at Davos has been postponed to the summer because of concerns about the coronavirus variant, it said on Monday. The event, usually held every year at the Swiss ski resort, was scheduled for 17 to 21 January 2022, but will instead happen in “early summer”. In January the World Economic Forum will instead run online meetings. Davos usually serves as an occasion for many of the world’s most powerful people from the realms of business, economics and politics to gather and pontificate about the world’s problems. However, the meeting of thousands of people from all over the world has been difficult to continue during pandemic conditions. The 2021 event was cancelled in favour of online events in the summer. In a statement, the event’s organisers said: Current pandemic conditions make it extremely difficult to deliver a global in-person meeting. Despite the meeting’s stringent health protocols, the transmissibility of Omicron and its impact on travel and mobility have made deferral necessary. The number of shoppers across British high streets fell over the weekend before Christmas, according to new data from Springboard that show people spurned city centre shopping during what should have been the biggest weekend of the year. Retail footfall was 19% down for the week ending on Saturday compared to the equivalent in 2019, Springboard said - although it was higher than December 2020, when the UK government dramatically u-turned to put in place a Christmas lockdown. Shopping centres fared particularly badly, with footfall down by 27% on 2019, but high streets were also down by a fifth on 2019. Retail parks, which are generally accessed by private car and are often open-air, performed slightly better. Weekend traffic overall fell compared to the previous weekend by 8.5% in Central London and by 6.4% in cities outside of the capital. Diane Wehrle, insights director at Springboard, said: The nervousness of shoppers about making in-person shopping visits inevitably meant that large city centres lost out to smaller high streets, particularly over the weekend when footfall declined from the week before in Central London and large cities outside of the capital whilst rising in market towns. There has been a bit of movement on currency markets as well this morning: sterling is down by 0.4% against the US dollar. One pound will buy $1.3195. That in itself is not a huge move, but it puts the pound perilously close to its lowest level since December 2020, when the UK was facing the prospect of belated Christmas restrictions in the hope of limiting the spread of a new coronavirus variant (a familiar tale). If it drops below $1.3165 it will mark a new low for 2021, an unusual situation considering the Bank of England only just last week shocked markets with an interest rate rise - pre-empting the Federal Reserve. However, the Fed has itself also made it clear that it will tighten the US money supply. The prospect of a series of interest rate rises next year has made the dollar more attractive to investors. Mark Haefele, chief investment officer at UBS Global Wealth Management, said the dollar will be, pace the omicron variant, one of the “winners from global growth” during 2022. There has also been a similar bounce on oil markets. The price of Brent crude, the North Sea benchmark, is still down by 3.3% today - but that is a recovery from earlier. Brent crude futures were down by as much as 5% earlier this morning, with one barrel for February delivery going for as little as $69. It is now back at $71.30. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, an investing platform, said: Heavy selling has hit the oil markets again this week with WTI and Brent crude both shedding more than 3% extending losses after a week in the red with Brent already ending down 2.6% as the Omicron variant continues to spread, weighing on the demand outlook and market sentiment. The Netherlands’ latest lockdown from Sunday sparked investor concerns of fresh restrictions in Europe and the US to curb the spread of Covid, prompting fears of a near-term economic slowdown. Brent crude has shed more than 17% from the October high, trading in a descending trendline and retracing around 70% of its prior gains from the August trough. Kit Juckes, a strategist at Société Générale, a bank, is in a festive mood - albeit the wrong feast. “It’s a lot more like Halloween than Christmas,” he said: Oil prices, equity indices and bond yields are lower on a mix of omicron concerns and Senator Joe Manchin’s announcement that he won’t vote for President Biden’s spending bill. Just over half an hour after the FTSE 100 slumped further, it has just regained a percentage point. It is now down by just 1.3% at 7,179 points, having earlier dropped by as much as 2.2%. European stocks have also recovered somewhat: Germany’s Dax is now down by 2.2% and France’s Cac 40 is down 1.4%. All the usual disclaimers apply at this point in the year: a fair few investors will have shut up shop for the holidays, and few of those who remain will have planned any major moves in the absence of central bank activity. That means that there will be lower liquidity and fewer buyers to soak up any sales, so moves can be exaggerated. Nevertheless, that is a notable swing over the course of less than an hour. It may have been partly helped by vaccine maker Moderna. It said on Monday (in an interview published at 10am GMT) that a booster dose of its Covid-19 vaccine appeared to offer protection against the omicron variant. Reuters reported: The vaccine maker said the decision to focus on the current vaccine, mRNA-1273, was driven in part by how quickly the recently discovered variant is spreading. The company still plans to develop a vaccine specifically to protect against Omicron, which it hopes to advance into clinical trials early next year. “What we have available right now is 1273,” Dr. Paul Burton, Moderna’s Chief Medical Officer, said in an interview. “It’s highly effective, and it’s extremely safe. I think it will protect people through the coming holiday period and through these winter months, when we’re going to see the most severe pressure of Omicron.” Some detail on how the UK’s shops fared over the last week - usually one of the the strongest of the year: it was not great. Footfall on and near London’s Oxford Street, the country’s biggest shopping district, was 17% below pre-pandemic levels, according to the New West End Company, which represents about 600 shops. Shopping was 5% below the previous weekend, and across the entire week of the 13th December footfall was down by 29% compared with 2019’s figures. Jace Tyrrell, chief executive of the New West End Company, said businesses were “disappointed” with how the weekend went: With less than five days to go until Christmas day and the probabilities of a circuit-breaker lockdown increasingly on the horizon, the retail and leisure sector is now facing a huge amount of financial uncertainty when it should be enjoying a much needed shot in the arm. We are therefore backing the #BusinessBooster campaign and calling on the government to provide urgent and swift financial support. Temporary measures such as a 100% business rate relief for the first quarter of the year, extension of the VAT reduction and introduction of grants could be the difference between viable businesses avoiding closures and job losses in the new year. The FTSE 100 sell-off has accelerated - it is now down by 2.2%. It has hit the lowest level since the start of December as concern over the spread of the omicron variant ramp up. While the UK government is fielding a lot of questions about parties, the hospitality industry is trying to put the pressure on over the lack of them, given how the current lockdown-lite has affected their bookings. The Guardian’s Joanna Partridge writes: Pubs and restaurants have warned of plummeting sales and “decimated” bookings, as pressure increases on the government to offer urgent financial support to struggling hospitality businesses. The weekend just passed should have been the busiest trading period of the Christmas season, but customers chose to stay away, said Nick Mackenzie, the chief executive of the pub and brewery chain Greene King, which runs 2,700 pubs, restaurants and hotels across the UK. “Demand has dropped, bookings have been decimated, some parts of the country we are 70%, 80% down on 2019, so the situation is pretty unsustainable,” Mackenzie told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Monday. Warnings from the government had led to “lockdown in all but name”, Mackenzie said, and he urged the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, to deliver “quick and effective support”. You can read the full report here: Some interesting detail from the notice detailing the reasons for the errors Standard Chartered made. One key reporting problem was caused by a spreadsheet error in which a workers put the wrong sign - so it read as positive rather than negative. Sure, we all make that kind of mistake, except in this case the error meant the calculation was out by a staggering $10bn. That sounds like a very bad day at the office indeed. Standard Chartered will have to pay £46.5m after it failed to cooperate with regulators at the Bank of England. It was a record fine imposed by the Bank’s Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA), which is tasked with overseeing the UK banking sector’s financial stability. The fines came in relation to reporting errors related to movements of US dollars, amid concerns in October 2017 about the outflow of cash. StanChart made five errors reporting, which “meant the PRA did not have a reliable overview of its USD liquidity position,” the regulator said on Monday. Yet StanChart failed to report one of the breaches until four months later, following its own internal investigation. Somewhat oddly, however, StanChart still managed to qualify for a discount for agreeing to pay the fine. It would have paid another £20m had it not cooperated when faced with a fine for not cooperating. Sam Woods, the Bank of England’s deputy governor for prudential regulation and chief executive of the PRA, said: We expect firms to notify us promptly of any material issues with their regulatory reporting, which Standard Chartered failed to do in this case. Standard Chartered’s systems, controls and oversight fell significantly below the standards we expect of a systemically important bank, and this is reflected in the size of the fine in this case. Two more companies have edged into positive territory on the FTSE 100 this morning: Royal Mail and Ocado. It appears that investors are expecting a lot of us to be stuck at home sending and receiving parcels, like in previous lockdowns. GlaxoSmithKline has appointed former Tesco chief executive Sir Dave Lewis to oversee its consumer products division once it is split from the main pharmaceutical company, it announced on Monday. Lewis will chair the business, which will make its own way from the middle of 2022 with revenues of about £10bn annually - meaning it will likely join the FTSE 100 when it lists itself on the London Stock Exchange. GSK will give up 80% of the equity to other shareholders, while it focuses on pharma in the hope that investors will appreciate a more targeted business. From 2014 to 2020 Lewis was in charge of Tesco, supervising its recovery from an accounting scandal. Before that he held a senior role at Unilever overseeing its personal care products. Lewis said: GSK Consumer Healthcare is a world-class business with significant prospects and a high-quality leadership team. I am looking forward to being part of its exciting future as an independent company and the very positive impact it can have on people’s health all over the world. It is a very broad-based sell-off; there isn’t much happening on markets beyond the reaction to omicron. The below grab from the terminal shows the extent of the selling among the FTSE 100: only miner Polymetal is in positive territory. Everyone else has lost ground, with travel shares like Rolls-Royce and British Airways owner IAG among the big losers. Events and publishing company Informa doesn’t have much to gain from the prospect of new restrictions either - but to be honest there are potential negative effects for almost any sector if the economic recovery is delayed or even thwarted. And the opening snaps are in - steep declines across Europe as expected: BRITAIN’S FTSE 100 DOWN 1.7% EURO STOXX INDEX DOWN 1.5%; EURO ZONE BLUE CHIPS DOWN 1.4% FRANCE’S CAC 40 DOWN 2.1%, SPAIN’S IBEX DOWN 2.5% No Dax yet - which usually means a big move as it takes a few minutes to calculate. European markets will open very shortly. Futures are still looking painful: the FTSE 100 is pegged for a 1.8% decline. The investment arm of the Qatari state has jumped on board Rolls-Royce’s plans to build small modular nuclear reactors (SMRs) which the British engineering stalwart hopes will prove to be a significant new source of revenues. The Qatar Investment Authority (QIA) will invest £85m for 10% of the project, Rolls-Royce announced on Monday. While not a huge amount of money for a company that burned through about £2bn in the last year, Rolls-Royce will hope that the involvement of the Qatari state, which has huge financial wealth stored up from decades of oil sales, will prove to other investors that the SMR business is the real deal. Rolls-Royce already has the backing of BNF Resources UK Ltd and Exelon Generation Ltd as shareholders in Rolls-Royce SMR - plus £210m from the UK government. Rolls-Royce has had a tough pandemic, as long-haul flights that rely on its engines have been grounded. The omicron variant has dealt it another blow in recent weeks. However, it hopes that the SMRs - modelled on the technology powering nuclear submarines - will be considerably bigger than its existing business as it takes a key role in the transition to net zero carbon emissions. The jury is still out for the investment community. Mansoor bin Ebrahim Al-Mahmoud, chief executive of the QIA, said: QIA is investing in the energy transition and funding the technologies that enable low carbon electricity generation. We will continue to seek out investments that align with our mandate to deliver long-term value for future generations through responsible sustainable investments. Warren East, Rolls-Royce’s chief executive, said: I am tremendously pleased to announce that we have further strengthened our relationship with Qatar, through QIA’s investment in the Rolls-Royce SMR business. We have successfully raised the capital we need to establish Rolls-Royce SMR and it is encouraging to confirm that the business is now set up to succeed. Good morning, and welcome to our live, rolling coverage of business, economics, the eurozone and financial markets. Investors have their eyes on one thing this morning: just how bad is the omicron coronavirus going to be for economies across the world. UK and European stock market futures suggest that traders are rattled: the FTSE 100 is on course to fall by 1.9% on opening, while Germany’s Dax benchmark index and France’s Cac 40 are set for declines of 2.4% apiece. The week before Christmas is usually a fairly odd affair on financial markets, as investors lock up their trading terminals and put their feet up. The last two years have been somewhat different. Omicron is the ghost of Christmas past following last year’s holiday lockdowns when the delta coronavirus variant swept across the world. Asian markets have set the tone: Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index dropped 2.2%, while China’s SSE Composite index, which covers Shanghai-listed shares, dropped 1.1% and Japan’s broad-based Topix fell 2.2%. There was no sign in the UK of any new restrictions - but that has not stopped a large proportion of the population from locking down in order to save themselves from a Christmas period of self-isolation. Pubs and restaurants say their business has evaporated like England’s batting lineup. Neither over the weekend have we seen any action from the UK government to help hospitality companies whose Christmas trading period has been destroyed - although health secretary Sajid Javid trailed the possibility of restrictions to come yesterday. The calls for support have been flooding in, including so far this morning from the bosses of restaurant chain Franco Manca, pub chain Greene King, and the boss of the City of London Corporation, which runs London’s central business district, which is already looking like the ghost of Christmas future. Instead, the government is fighting yet another battle over its apparent habit of holding gatherings during lockdowns. Here is the Guardian exclusive picture that has sparked the latest round of criticisms: Deputy prime minister and secretary of state for justice Dominic Raab has this morning opined that the wine and cheese evening constituted work. And let’s not forget that the under-pressure government also faced the resignation of the man who had been tasked with renegotiating key parts of the UK’s trading arrangement with its largest trading partner, the EU. Foreign secretary Liz Truss will take charge of talks over the Northern Ireland Protocol, which Boris Johnson signed up to just two years ago to rush a Brexit deal through.Brighton have given Dan Ashworth permission to speak to Newcastle about the vacancy for a director of football at St James’ Park. Although Brighton hope to retain their technical director, they have decided it would be counterproductive to prevent the 50-year-old from talking to Amanda Staveley and her fellow Newcastle directors. Ashworth, previously the Football Association’s technical director, is highly regarded. While at the FA he was credited with developing the so called “England DNA” and oversaw assorted men’s junior teams enjoying considerable tournament success before his departure in 2018. It was also on Ashworth’s six-year FA watch that England women won a bronze medal at the 2015 World Cup in Canada and reached the final four of Euro 2017 in the Netherlands. Although Newcastle are keen to overhaul the club’s academy and women’s team, their overriding priority is to keep their struggling side in the Premier League. Given Newcastle are second bottom and have won one game, successful shopping in next month’s transfer window seems imperative if they are to defy the odds and survive. Staveley has recruited Nicky Hammond, the former Reading director of football, on a temporary basis to help with January recruitment, but Ashworth’s arrival could further bolster Eddie Howe’s hopes of turning this season around. Despite Nolan Partners, the recruitment specialist engaged by Newcastle to fill their vacancy, speaking to different candidates, the search could end swiftly if Ashworth were to decide to cut short his rolling contract with Brighton.Britain, the US and other western allies have expressed “grave concern” over the “erosion of democratic elements” in Hong Kong, hours after pro-Beijing candidates were confirmed to occupy nearly every seat in the former British colony’s new legislature. “We, the foreign ministers of Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom, and the United States secretary of state, noting the outcome of the legislative council elections in Hong Kong, express our grave concern over the erosion of democratic elements of the special administrative region’s electoral system,” the joint statement said. Sunday’s elections in Hong Kong were marred by record low voter turnout that observers say signals a general political apathy in the city, 18 months since authorities began a crackdown on political dissent in the name of national security. Only 30% of Hong Kong’s 4.4 million eligible voters went to the polls, almost half of the number who voted in the last legislative elections in 2016. In lower-level district council elections in 2019 there was a 71% turnout. The record low turnout came despite pro-Beijing candidates making urgent pleas for more people to vote throughout the polling day. Tik Chi-yuen, of the self-described centrist Third Side party, became the only candidate who is not pro-establishment to be elected. Tik, who quit the Democratic party in 2015 to co-found his own party, has argued that the city’s social workers should be excluded from the mandatory oaths of allegiances to the government which have been imposed on the city’s civil servants and district councillors since Beijing’s implementation of the national security law. The candidate described himself as “moderate and rational” in an interview with Chinese state-backed media. Other moderate and non-establishment candidates, including former members of the democratic camp Mandy Tam and Frederick Fung, lost to their pro-Beijing counterparts in the 20 seats that are directly elected by the public. “It’s not easy to push people [to vote]. I think they are feeling indifferent in the present situation,” Fung told Reuters. All 13 candidates fielded by the DAB and the Federation for Trade Unions, the city’s largest pro-Beijing groups, won seats. The chief executive, Carrie Lam, who was installed by Beijing, said she looked forward to having “pragmatic and rational interactions” with the new legislature to resolve the city’s “deep-seated problems” at a press conference following the election results on Monday. She defended the new system and brushed off the low turnout. “Hong Kong is now back on the right track,” she told reporters. “We cannot copy and paste the so-called democratic system or rules of the Western countries.” Zhao Lijian, China’s foreign ministry spokesman, blamed the low turnout on the pandemic and “anti-China elements bent on destroying Hong Kong and the interference of external forces”. About 12,000 police officers were deployed to ensure a “smooth process” on Sunday, as well as 40,000 government workers. Starry Lee, the head of the city’s largest pro-Beijing party the DAB, said the low voter turnout was not a sign of general discontent with the new system. “I do not believe this [low turnout] is directly related to citizens not agreeing with this electoral system. I believe it needs some time for people to get adapted to this system,” she told reporters on Sunday. Many of the entrances to the 630 polling stations across the city were empty throughout the day. The scenes were in stark contrast to Hong Kong’s lower-level district councils in 2019, when pro-democracy candidates won all but one of the councils. Elsewhere, the city was bustling as residents took advantage of free public transport rides designed to boost voter turnout to instead visit theme parks and go hiking. Some overseas democrats, like Sunny Cheung, who moved to the US to escape prosecution under the national security law, said most of Hong Kong had “consciously boycotted the election to express their discontent to the world”. The previous record low for a legislative election held after the city’s 1997 return from British to Chinese rule was 43.6% in 2000. In 2019, the last major citywide election in Hong Kong for district council seats, the turnout rate was 71% with about 90% of the 452 seats won by democrats. Lev Nachman, a research fellow at the Harvard Fairbank centre for Chinese studies, told the Guardian that the low turnout was a sign of public distrust at the new electoral process. “After 2019, I think this low turnout is a good de facto referendum in how Hongkongers now see their electoral system – as something no longer democratic and no longer worth trying to voice their choice,” he said. Beijing published a white paper titled Hong Kong: Democratic Progress Under the Framework of One Country, Two Systems on Monday to “explain democracy in Hong Kong”. The publication doubled down on Beijing’s claims that Hong Kong’s new “patriots-only” electoral system was crucial for the administration of One Country, Two Systems. But the foreign ministers of the G7 expressed concern for democracy in Hong Kong after the election, saying the new vetting process “to severely restrict the choice of candidates on the ballot paper undermined Hong Kong’s high degree of autonomy” under the principle of “One Country, Two Systems” agreed for the handover of the territory from the UK to China in 1997. The European Union’s foreign policy chief Josep Borrell said in a statement that the poll was “yet another step in the dismantling of the ‘One Country Two Systems’ principle.” Western governments also say they remain “gravely concerned” at the wider chilling effect of the national security law and the growing restrictions on freedoms of speech and assembly. “NGOs, trade unions and human rights organisations not supportive of the government’s agenda have been forced to disband or leave, while media freedoms are being curtailed at pace,” Monday’s joint statement noted. Lam welcomed the white paper at a press conference following the election results on Monday. In response to reporters’ questions, she said the government had begun initial plans to implement local national security laws to complement Beijing’s sweeping legislation implemented last summer. The leader departs for an annual three-day trip to Beijing on Monday, to report to central authorities on the city’s latest economic, social and political situation. Reuters contributed to this reportMarathon legal efforts by Venezuela’s Juan Guaidó to gain control over €1.6bn (£1.3bn) of gold reserves held by the Bank of England have come closer to success after the UK supreme court ruled that Britain unequivocally recognises him as head of state. Although the supreme court referred the case back to the commercial court to study the issue further, it added that it did not believe the UK court could recognise rulings by Venezuela’s highest court, the supreme tribunal of justice (STJ), which has already declared Guaidó’s efforts to gain control of the assets unlawful. The STJ is under the control of Nicolás Maduro, who was re-elected in 2018, and the supreme court said its judgments could not be recognised here so long as the British government challenged Guaidó’s right to the Venezuelan presidency. The long-running and hugely expensive court battle means the reserves will remain under the control of the Bank of England until the dispute over their true owner is finally resolved. The commercial court will be asked to decide if it is able to accept rulings of the STJ, but the supreme court in its judgement gave clear guidance saying the STJ rulings nullifying Guaidó’s actions could not be recognised in the UK courts if they conflicted with the view of the British government that Guaidó is president of Venezuela. An initial high court decision that the UK had indeed unequivocally recognised Guaidó as interim president, and so controller of the assets, was overturned by the court of appeal in October 2020. In response to the supreme court ruling on Monday, largely overturning that of the court of appeal, Zaiwalla &amp; Co., lawyers acting for the Maduro-backed board of the Venezuelan central bank asserted that the UK should stop interfering in the internal affairs of their country, adding: “Mr Guaidó’s recognition flies in the face of the reality on the ground. His appointees have no ability to act on behalf of the Venezuela central bank in any effective way, or to represent it in any international legal proceedings.” But the ruling was encouraging for Guaidó because the supreme court reinstated the overturned high court ruling that English courts are bound by the so-called “one voice” doctrine, a 19th-century legal concept whereby a statement by the UK government as to whom it recognises as the head of state of a foreign country must be accepted as conclusive in the English courts. The judgment is important to how the UK recognises foreign powers and the extent to which UK courts can set aside what it regards as unlawful rulings in a foreign jurisdiction. It also acts as a boost for Guaidó’s sagging US-backed efforts to overturn Maduro. The supreme court said the appeal court had unnecessarily complicated the issue by raising issues such as a potential distinction between head of state and head of government, and by suggesting that the UK government de facto may have recognised Maduro. The supreme court instead pointed to a public statement by the then foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, in February 2019 saying he recognised Guaidó as constitutional interim president of Venezuela. In addition the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office had intervened in the supreme court appeal to make it clear that the UK government recognised only Guaidó as exercising the powers of president of Venezuela. Guaidó had appointed his own board to run the central bank, declaring in May 2020 that this board controlled the bank’s assets abroad.Guardian Women’s Prize competition: Terms and Conditions 1. This prize draw is open to all residents of the UK aged 18 or over. Entry is open to residents of the UK except employees of The Guardian Media Group (and their families), its agents, the prize supplier and any other individual or company associated with this competition. 2. This is a free prize draw. Entrants are not required to make any purchase to enter. Only one entry may be made per person. By entering this prize draw, applicants agree to be bound by these terms and conditions. 3. To enter the prize draw, simply i) follow @guardianclasses on Twitter, ii) like the @guardianclasses prize draw post and iii) retweet the draw post for entrants to be valid. 4. The start time of the competition is 5 January 2022, 09:00 GMT 5. The closing date of the prize draw is 23:59 GMT on 10 January 2022 (the “Deadline”). Incomplete entries or those received after the Deadline will not count. Entry is by online submission via Twitter only. 6. This prize draw is in no way sponsored, endorsed or administered by, or associated with Twitter. 7. The personal information provided by the entrant to enter the prize draw will be used by Guardian Masterclasses to administer this prize draw and to contact the winner only. Guardian Masterclasses will contact the winner by direct message on Twitter, as set out further in paragraph 8 below. Information provided to Guardian Masterclasses by you shall be treated in accordance with Guardian Masterclasses Privacy Policy, details of which can be found here. 8. The prize is one copy of the Women’s Prize for Fiction Journal per winner. There will be five winners. There is no cash alternative. 9. Guardian Masterclasses will select at random five winners from those entries between 09:00 GMT 5 January 2022 and 23:59 GMT on 10 January 2022 (as detailed above). Only the winners will be contacted by Guardian Masterclasses. The winner will be notified by direct message on Twitter on 11 January 2022. The winner will be asked to provide certain additional information (including but not limited to, their UK home address) in order for Guardian Masterclasses to supply and deliver the prize. 10. Guardian Masterclasses’ decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into. 11. Where Guardian Masterclasses is unable to contact the winner to obtain delivery details within 21 days of selecting the winner, or the prize cannot be taken up or is declined, a substitute winner may be drawn or chosen at Guardian Masterclasses’ discretion without further notice to the original winner and the original winner shall cease to be eligible for the prize or any alternative and shall have no claim against Guardian Masterclasses. 12. Guardian Masterclasses reserve the right to disqualify any entrant if the entry: Contains content which may be discriminatory or cause offence on the grounds of a person’s protected characteristic (including but not limited to sex, sexual orientation, marital status, race, ethnicity, religious belief, age or disability) Contains content or a link to content which is unlawful, defamatory, offensive, abusive, threatening, harassing or knowingly incorrect, it has grounds to believe that the entrant has breached any of these terms and conditions Attacks or intimidates another person Invades the privacy of another person Contains content which it deems to advertise commercial businesses or services 13. Winner list requests will only be accepted after the promotion end date (listed above) and no later than 15 March 2022. For the winner list, please send an email with the subject line: “Guardian Masterclasses and Women’s Prize Winners List Request” to masterclasses@theguardian.com 14. The giveaway will be governed by English law. 15. Promoter: Guardian News &amp; Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, N1 9GU.So far, Steven Spielberg’s West Side Story hasn’t had audiences pirouetting and finger-clicking their way to cinemas. There are plenty of reasons why; the main one relating to a certain global pandemic. But one explanation that keeps being proffered is that viewers are simply sick of remakes – and it’s not entirely wrong. Hollywood still has no qualms about bringing back its vintage franchises, of course. But as the imminent returns of The Matrix, Scream, Top Gun, Indiana Jones, Hocus Pocus and Legally Blonde demonstrate, the fashionable way to cash in on a venerable intellectual property is to hire as many of the original cast members as you can and to pick up where you left off. Sequels are in; remakes are out. Remakes, lest we forget, were once central to the cinematic landscape – hardly more remarkable or disreputable than a new theatrical production of an old play. When The Maltese Falcon came out in 1940, it was the third adaptation of the same book within a decade. Some Like It Hot? Pinched from a 1951 German farce, which was in turn pinched from a 1935 French one. Hitchcock’s 1956 classic The Man Who Knew Too Much? A total rip-off of Hitchcock’s 1934 classic, The Man Who Knew Too Much. Still, it’s easy to see why remakes got such a bad reputation, especially if we jump forward to the early 2000s, AKA the Time Just Before Every Mainstream Film Was a Superhero Blockbuster. This was a period when studios seemed to be greenlighting a remake every week. Freaky Friday, The Italian Job, Ocean’s Eleven, The Ladykillers, King Kong ... these are all titles that evoke previous decades. Total Recall and Clash of the Titans also came out as remakes in the early 21st century. Anyone grumbling about Hollywood’s lack of ideas didn’t have to look far for examples. The trend was particularly visible in the world of horror. In the 00s, studios milked their big-name scary-movie franchises by retelling the stories from the beginning. And so, one after another, we got reboots of The Texas Chainsaw Massacre, Dawn of the Dead, The Fog, Halloween, Friday the 13th, and A Nightmare on Elm Street – and that’s not to mention the English-language remakes of such J-horror hits as The Ring, The Grudge and Dark Water. Something has changed since then. Despite its back-to-basics title, the Halloween released in 2018 was a sequel rather than a remake: the film-makers made a point of assuring viewers that they were seeing the same Michael Myers and Laurie Strode as the ones who attacked each other 40 years earlier. A similar principle applies to Nia DaCosta’s Candyman, which came out this year, and David Blue Garcia’s Texas Chainsaw Massacre, which is coming out next year. Meanwhile the director of the 2018 Halloween, David Gordon Green, is reportedly working on a new version of The Exorcist. Initially announced as a remake, it is now being trumpeted as a “direct sequel”. Technology may be significant here: it’s tricky to sell a remake when the original, often superior, rendering of the same plot can be streamed at the touch of a button. What’s more important, though, is the industry’s realisation that it’s not intellectual property that counts, but emotional property. Today’s fiercely possessive fans resent any suggestion that their favourite films might be obsolete, so if you want to win their hearts and minds, you have to pay due deference to the films in question. Consider how warmly Ghostbusters: Afterlife was received compared to Paul Feig’s Ghostbusters in 2016. True, the social-media bile poured on Feig’s all-female version was spiked with misogyny, but Feig didn’t help matters by writing the characters from the 1980s films out of his own. Ghostbusters: Afterlife is less true to the spirit of Ivan Reitman’s anarchic original than the 2016 Ghostbusters was, but because it features Venkman and the gang, fans didn’t take against it. The influence of Marvel and Star Wars can be detected in all of this, too. Both these Disney-owned franchises have shown that it is foolish to try to reset a fictional universe. Fans are paying for the connections between films as much as for the films themselves. Even Home Sweet Home Alone includes a character from 1990’s Home Alone, so it is officially a sequel and not a remake. Not that remakes have vanished altogether. But at the moment a remake is less likely to be a studio potboiler than a prestigious auteur’s artistic statement: Luca Guadagnino’s Suspiria, Denis Villeneuve’s Dune, Spielberg’s West Side Story and Guillermo del Toro’s Nightmare Alley are all cases in which the new director’s personal vision is a major selling point. Otherwise, the remake has moved from the big screen to the small. There are television series of Lee Child’s Jack Reacher and David Nicholls’ One Day on their way – and no one is complaining that they might tarnish their memories of the respective film versions. Perhaps a Netflix mini-series of West Side Story would have been the way to go.Downing Street has defended a photograph showing Boris Johnson, his wife and up to 17 staff seemingly having drinks in the Downing Street garden during the first lockdown, insisting they were discussing work at the time. The prime minister’s spokesperson said that while it was a work meeting after a Covid press conference on 15 May 2020, the fact it happened outside normal work hours meant it was within the regulations for them to be drinking wine. The photo, shared with the Guardian, appears to show several groups sitting or standing closely together. However, Johnson’s spokesperson said it was impossible to tell whether or not people were 2 metres apart, as was the rule at the time for work meetings. Labour has suggested the picture shows apparent law-breaking, with Keir Starmer saying the argument it portrayed a work meeting “is a bit of a stretch by anybody’s analysis”. On Friday, Downing Street denied anything social took place on that evening, following a 5pm Covid press conference hosted by Matt Hancock, then the health secretary. Johnson’s spokesperson said on Monday the photo showed “individual debriefings following a press conference, discussing work issues”. He said: “There were meetings taking place both inside and outside No 10. This shows colleagues who were required to be in work, meeting following a press conference to discuss work.” Asked about the presence of bottles of wine and glasses, the spokesperson said: “These were individuals working outside of normal working hours. It was not against the regulations for those individuals to have a drink outside working hours, but still discussing work.” Covid rules at the time stated that if in-person work meetings had to be held, people should remain at least 2 metres apart. The spokesperson said: “I can’t comment on exactly the level of social distancing based on a single picture from May 2020. Obviously, all individuals required to be in work sought to obey social distancing guidelines.” The picture shows Johnson’s wife, Carrie, sitting next to him, apparently holding their then newborn son. Asked why she was there, the spokesperson said that was because she lived there: “The prime minister’s wife has use of her garden. It is effectively her garden.” The shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, claimed on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that the photo did seem to suggest rules being broken. “I do think there is evidence of law-breaking … The country is sick of it,” she said. Speaking later Starmer said there were “very serious questions to be answered”. The Labour leader said: “Just look at the photo and ask yourself: is that a work meeting going on, or is that a social event? I think the answer is pretty obvious.” Speaking earlier, Dominic Raab had argued the photo simply showed people “having a drink after a busy set of work meetings”, and that other workplaces would have acted similarly. Asked about the photo, Raab, the justice secretary, told BBC One’s Breakfast: “I know how hard that No 10 team were working, as the hub, the fulcrum of the crisis response. I think there’s a lot of exhausted people, and they, as people do in work, were having a drink after the formal business had been done.” Asked why the photo appeared to show people standing more closely together, Raab appeared to argue that this mattered less as they were outdoors, something not mentioned in the guidance: “There is significant difference. It’s always been clear from the public health advice that outdoors you’ve got a much greater chance of reducing the risk because of the ventilation that comes with it.”A senior EU official has said she does not expect the bloc to strike a migration deal with the UK because of disputes over the Brexit agreement. Ylva Johansson, the European commissioner for home affairs, said EU member states had “limited” appetite for an agreement with the UK to manage asylum seekers and migrants, citing concerns over the post-Brexit trade deal and the Northern Ireland protocol. Instead, she said, the focus should be on “practical cooperation” to curb attempts by people to cross the channel from France, such as police cooperation and intelligence sharing. She was speaking before EU and UK negotiators clashed last week over the future of the Irish protocol, the agreement that keeps Northern Ireland in the EU’s single market, which the UK government wants to rewrite. Her comments underscore how the dispute over the protocol is damaging wider EU-UK relations, underlining the task facing the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who took over the Brexit brief on Sunday, following the shock resignation of David Frost. The protocol dispute also means, for example, that British scientists remain locked out of the EU’s €95.5 bn Horizon research funding programme. Speaking to the Guardian and other European newspapers, Johansson said: “We have quite some concerns with the implementation of the TCA [Trade and Cooperation Agreement] and the protocol on Northern Ireland right now, so I should guess that the appetite from member states to go into negotiations for a new agreement [on migration] … is limited.” Last month 27 people drowned in the Channel trying to reach the UK from Calais, with record numbers attempting the perilous journey. The tragedy prompted an agreement between north-western European countries to toughen up action against people smugglers, although the Priti Patel, the home secretary, was disinvited from a meeting because of a Franco-British row about how to handle the issue. Johansson stressed it was important to cooperate with the UK to tackle migrant smuggling networks operating in Germany, Belgium and France to take people to Dover. “I think the most important thing is to find practical cooperation with the UK on these topics and we have to work together on this. I think that should come first before discussing any new formal mandate for negotiating a new agreement.” Her view contrasts with the French government, which is seeking a broader EU-UK agreement to deal with people heading to northern France seeking to reach British shores. France’s interior minister Gérald Darmanin has said France will push for a EU-UK migration treaty when taking over the bloc’s rotating presidency on 1 January. “We need to negotiate a treaty, since [the former EU negotiator] Mr [Michel] Barnier did not do so when he negotiated Brexit.” EU member states did not discuss the Channel at a meeting earlier this month on tackling irregular migration, instead focusing on the situation at the Poland-Belarus border, where people from the Middle East have been trapped in desperate conditions, having arrived in Minsk. The EU commissioner spoke to the home secretary last week, in what EU officials described as a “short and constructive call” where the two agreed “on the need to act in a determined fashion to address the growing phenomenon of migrants crossing the Channel, and that the priority should be to focus on practical, operational cooperation”. Home Office sources gave a similar account of the call, stressing the need for urgent, collaborative and practical action. During Brexit negotiations, Brussels rejected a British proposal that would have allowed the government to return asylum seekers to the EU, a right the UK had as an EU member state. In August 2020 the Home Office said the UK “will be able to negotiate its own bilateral returns arrangements” from the end of that year. The Home Office declined to say what progress had been made in bilateral returns agreements with EU states, with officials saying they did not provide a rolling commentary. A Home Office spokesperson said: “The tragic events that took place in the Channel last month served as a stark reminder of just how dangerous these small-boat crossings are. We maintain that this is a global challenge and we have a shared, moral duty to address illegal migration collectively. We remain committed to working closely with our EU neighbours to find a joint solution to prevent further loss of life.”Fleabag isn’t really the person who got me through 2021. To confess the truth (and now the Hot Priest is saying “Kneel!” in your head, isn’t he?), she also got me through 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and half of 2016, when the show first aired. It’s been an intense few years. Which is precisely why only a show about a self-sabotaging, black-humoured, grief-stricken, sex-obsessed, charismatic and broken nihilist would do. However, 2021 has been different. It’s the first year I’ve rewatched Fleabag since my mum’s death. She died last June in the midst of lockdown. She had breast cancer, just like Fleabag’s mum, whose farts sounded either like “a door opening” or a “suspicious duck”, and who also died. My mum was ill – with a remission in the middle that was like the sun coming out – for eight long years. Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s monstrous/lovable creation (whom she plays with such startling acuity that I actually felt betrayed when I discovered her own mother was alive) was my (evil) spirit guide through much of the darkness. Now she walks with me on this newly laid, even longer road through the wilderness of grief. I can think of no better companion. Before my mum died, I watched Fleabag with a kind of “Brace! Brace!” unhinged obsessiveness. My mum was ill, having chemotherapy, being rushed to A&amp;E with hypoglycaemia, dying in intensive care, but still here. Fleabag’s mother, in the first series, had been dead for three years. Fleabag and her sister were on the other side of the road, and it was as though I was (re)watching them in preparation for how sad and insufferable I would become. Series two, episode four, in which we finally see their mother’s funeral, was a lesson in the extremities and absurdities of grief, and the incapacity of any rituals (or language) to express them. Now I have crossed the road to join them. I have been to my mother’s funeral, with my sister and our father, and have become my own sad and insufferable self. It is oddly satisfying. Even, in a warped and perfectly Fleabag way, healing. At which point I know she would break the fourth wall to side-eye me, which is to say she would understand. Really, it’s the tone of these 12 magisterial episodes that’s so in keeping with the experience of bereavement. Fleabag, like grief, plays out in an overwrought, nosebleed-high register. Both are filled with pain, love and inappropriate laughter. I would never go jogging in a graveyard (largely because I don’t jog), or try to snog Kristin Scott Thomas after she delivered the greatest monologue ever written about women and pain in the history of television, but Fleabag allowed me to live, by which I mean grieve, vicariously through her. I could metaphorically set my stepmother’s Persian house cat free when, in reality, I was lying in bed with my laptop next to my sleeping daughter, weeping silently with my headphones in. So thank you, Fleabag, for not trying to mend my broken heart. Thank you for knowing that grief, like love, is, “awful”. Fleabag superfans (Fleabaggers?) will know that I’m referencing the priest’s beautiful wedding speech here. Which closed with the stunning line: “When you find somebody that you love, it feels like hope.” Thank you, Phoebe Waller-Bridge, for understanding that when you lose somebody that you love, it can feel like hope, too.The highly successful Mandarin-speaking singer-songwriter Wang Leehom has issued a public apology to his ex-wife after a high-profile family row that has gripped the Chinese-speaking world. In a lengthy social media post on Friday, Lee Jinglei accused Wang of emotional abuse, lack of care for his family, infidelity and solicitation of sex workers. The accusation drew particular attention in part because of Wang’s reputation as a “high-quality idol” – a phrase applied to celebrities whose private conduct is deemed praiseworthy. Lee further accused Wang of transferring assets under his name, including those that Lee had helped to earn. Lee said Wang had used her as “a chess piece” to protect himself. “I will not bear the cross for you any more,” she wrote. She also questioned the inequality of roles taken by male breadwinners and women who care for their families full-time, arguing that modern women have the ability to support themselves and should protect their rights and interests in all marriages. Lee’s post quickly spread online, where it was liked by 12 million people on the Chinese social media platform Weibo. Many internet users expressed intense disappointment with Wang, and over the weekend brands including Japanese carmaker Infiniti and Shenzhen-based Chow Tai Seng Jewellery ended their business relationships with him. In a social media post published on Monday, Wang promised to take “responsibility as a father, son and public figure”, and to share the burden of raising his three children with Lee. “Failing to maintain the marriage, bringing distress to the family, and not giving the public a good image of the idol … these are all my fault,” Wang wrote. “I’d like to apologise to my mum and dad, Jinglei and the children. The actual divorce has already been done, and it is no longer meaningful to argue about the past.” Wang’s apology received more than 6.2m likes and 420,000 comments within eight hours on Weibo. Many of the commenters called on Wang to quit the entertainment business. “As a fan for 10 years, I hope you retreat from the entertainment circle and reflect on this … I trusted you so much before, and had your song as a ringtone for 10 years … Now I am extremely disappointed,” one commenter wrote. The overwhelming online response in China also resonated in Taiwan. One Taiwanese online commenter thanked Lee for “defending the dignity of women and mothers” and said that she believed “many people will work hard because of [Lee’s] bravery”. Wang’s supporters defended him, too. “[I] believe in every word you say, and I will support you for ever,” one wrote. The row took a twist on Sunday when Wang’s father accused Lee of making a wrongful allegation against his son. He alleged Lee had “threatened” Wang into marrying her after becoming pregnant with their first child. Lee responded that she was prepared to sue Wang and his father for defamation and demanded a public apology from Wang. The very public family scandal came less than a week after a speech by President Xi Jinping on how artists should conduct themselves. In a rare intervention, Beijing’s Central Commission for Discipline Inspection published an article on Sunday quoting the speech. The article did not mention Wang’s name, but was widely read as a direct criticism against him. “A literary and art worker who does not have moral integrity will not be accepted by the people or by the times … Those who don’t respect themselves won’t get any respect from others,” Xi was quoted as saying. • This article was amended on 23 December 2021. Chow Tai Seng Jewellery is based in mainland China, not Hong Kong.What new measures are thought to be under consideration in England? The prime minister is understood to be considering three options to curb the spread of Omicron. The least restrictive would be asking the public to limit social mixing, without legal enforcement. This would bring England into line with measures in place in Scotland, where people have been advised to reduce their socialising and limit gatherings to three households. A step up from this would be mandatory restrictions on household mixing, the return of social distancing, and forcing pubs and restaurants to close at 8pm. The third option is a return to full lockdown, or something like it, with a two-week “circuit breaker” rumoured to be on the cards. Boris Johnson said on Friday he was not “closing things down”, but increasing pressures on the NHS may prompt a rethink. Given Omicron’s transmissibility, would 2-metre social distancing make a difference? Although Omicron appears to be more transmissible than previous variants, the fundamental mechanisms for transmission probably remain the same – the virus is emitted in aerosols and droplets from breathing, talking, singing, coughing and sneezing. Cath Noakes, a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) and a professor of environmental engineering for buildings at the University of Leeds, said: “We don’t yet know whether people with Omicron emit more virus or whether the balance of transmission at close proximity versus through the air at a longer distance has changed. But regardless, the concentration of aerosols and droplets is always greater at closer distance and hence physical distancing remains an important measure. “However, we know from experience throughout the pandemic – not just Omicron – that in many environments, 2-metre distancing on its own is not enough, and people can be infected when they share a poorly ventilated room with each other.” Another advantage of 2-metre distancing is that it restricts the number of people in indoor settings, reducing the chances of an infectious person being present – and the number of people they could transmit the virus to. For the same reason, the return of social distancing would be extremely bad news for hospitality businesses. How much impact would indoor mixing and hospitality rules have? Mrinank Sharma at the University of Oxford and colleagues recently modelled the effectiveness of 17 Covid-19 measures implemented during Europe’s second wave, and found that restaurant, pub and cafe closures had a large effect, with an estimated reduction in the reproduction (R) number of 12%. Closing nightclubs, or non-essential retail and services such as hairdressers and beauty salons, similarly reduced the R number by roughly 12% each, highlighting the potential risks of brief but very numerous indoor contacts. Closing leisure and entertainment venues such as zoos, museums and theatres had only a small effect – approximately 3%. Sharma said: “We’d expect measures on indoor mixing and hospitality to have strong effect sizes, especially since there are few restrictions at present and transmission is much more likely indoors than outdoors. The stronger the measure, the stronger the reduction in transmission.” Together, the Oxford team estimated a ban on all gatherings and the closure of all non-essential businesses would reduce the R number by approximately 52%. What difference to cases, hospitalisations and deaths would it make to enforce measures before Christmas Day rather than 27 December? With Omicron cases doubling every one-and-a-half to two days, each day counts. Yet whereas the Netherlands has reacted to the new wave of infections by imposing a nationwide lockdown effective from Monday, England has adopted a wait-and-see approach until now. Although this policy is understandable from a societal point of view, it may result in measures being introduced too late to avoid huge pressures on health services, should hospital admissions rise consistently, said Hans Heesterbeek, a professor of theoretical epidemiology at Utrecht University in the Netherlands. “I think we have now learned that we should not wait until we know for certain either way, and that half-hearted measures are not sufficient,” Heesterbeek said. “Acting now decisively, however painful to society, is therefore probably the best approach.” Sharma said: “Five days’ difference of interventions could make a large difference to the numbers of cases in the coming weeks. In general, there is little room for manoeuvre.” However, he added that since the severity of Omicron remained unknown, the effect on deaths and hospitalisations was even more unclear. “It is also unclear whether interventions would reduce R below one, or delay the spread,” he said. Prof Rowland Kao of the University of Edinburgh said: “Broadly speaking, Omicron is doubling in terms of the numbers of cases, roughly every two to three days. This pattern has been consistent since the first rise in cases was seen in November. “Voluntary changes in behaviour and the recent recommendations and requirements from government may slow this down, but there is as yet no evidence to quantify it. If the doubling pattern holds, a four-day delay may mean two to four times worse of a problem.” Are mandatory curbs more effective than strongly worded advice? Public compliance tends to be strong when measures are mandated by law. Not only is there the fear of judgment, or being reported to the authorities, there is also less room for interpretation by individuals. Dr Nilu Ahmed, a psychologist at the University of Bristol, said: “When you have suggestions and very strong recommendations, it means that it’s up to the public to interpret that, and it can put a huge amount of pressure on individuals, because not everyone will interpret it in the same way. “Right now, there are people who don’t want to go and meet family for Christmas, and there are family members who are saying, ‘Well, the law allows it and we might go into another lockdown post-Christmas, so if we’re going to do it, we have to do it now’. That amount of pressure can be really exhausting and cause high levels of anxiety and mental health issues.” Whether mandatory restrictions would be as effective as they were earlier in the pandemic remains to be seen. Images of Downing Street parties and senior politicians or advisers not following their own regulations and laws could result in a backlash if rules were introduced, Ahmed said. “We behave in the ways that our social group behaves, and so if we see if there’s a law prohibiting us from getting together, then we can’t really be the one to break the law – unless everyone else is doing it.”A promise to ensure that people with severe asthma and smokers who want to quit can get the drugs they need has been broken by ministers and the NHS, a health service report reveals. Health charities criticised the persistent lack of access to vital medications for patients in England as very worrying and warned that it could damage the health of those affected. In 2019 the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC), NHS England, Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI) and makers of branded medicines signed an agreement, called the voluntary scheme, to increase the number of patients able to obtain cost-effective medicines on the NHS. It covered five key areas of disease in which receipt of drugs would result in “high health gain”. These were cystic fibrosis, severe asthma, stopping smoking by using the drug varenicline, hepatitis C and atrial fibrillation and thromboembolism, a heart problem. The plan was to ensure that England became one of the best countries in Europe for access to relevant medications. However, a report which NHS England commissioned – but has not published – shows that while the target has been met for cystic fibrosis and hepatitis C, it has been missed for severe asthma and smokers seeking to quit using varenicline. It compares England’s progress against that in 10 other European countries, including France, Spain and Italy. “It’s deeply concerning that England languishes near the bottom of the league table for uptake of biologic treatments for severe asthma, the deadliest form of the condition,” said Alison Cook, the director of external affairs at Asthma UK and the British Lung Foundation. Four in five of the 200,000 Britons with the condition are missing out on drugs because they are not being referred to hospital specialists, she added. However, she welcomed the success in more patients with cystic fibrosis getting medication as “brilliant”. Varenicline, which is better known as Champix, and is made by Pfizer, was withdrawn from use in the UK in June over concerns about the impurity of its key ingredient. Hazel Cheeseman, the deputy chief executive of the smoking health charity Ash, said: “The fact that despite setting this as a priority, the NHS has failed to deliver is concerning, and indicates the entrenched problems of getting smoking cessation taken more seriously in the NHS at a time when they are starting to roll out a big programme to increase support for smokers in inpatient, maternity and mental health settings through the [NHS] long-term plan.” The report, drawn up by the health data analytics firm LOGEX, did not investigate the reasons for the disparities in access between the 11 countries. However, it speculated that “possible factors … may include introduction times, reimbursement policies or national guidelines”, suggesting that NHS England and the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence’s policies may be factors. Dr Andrew Hill, an expert in the drugs industry at Liverpool University, said that high-profile campaigns to secure better access to drugs for cystic fibrosis and hepatitis C may explain why the pledge has been met for those conditions but not for severe asthma and smokers seeking to quit. “There was a four-year stand-off between [drugmaker] Vertex and NHS England from 2015 to 2019” when prices for its cystic fibrosis drug Orkambi could not be agreed,” said Hill, a senior visiting fellow in the university’s department of pharmacology and therapeutics. “During these four years, hundreds of children with cystic fibrosis died without access to the drugs they needed. Families had to form a buyers club to import generic versions of the drug. It was only after intense campaigning that [then] health secretary Matt Hancock finally agreed a confidential deal with Vertex to supply the drugs.” Similarly, Hill added, the drug company Gilead’s decision to charge $84,000 (£63,000) for its hepatitis C drug again led to patients in the UK setting up buyers clubs to import cheap versions of the medicine. Access improved when NHS England used competitive tenders from hepatitis C drugs, which led to several firms making treatments for the disease lowering prices for their products. “Patient groups were fighting for access to medicines for heptatitis C and cystic fibrosis for years before this survey started. We have not seen these intense campaigns for the other drugs in the survey. This could explain the differences seen,” added Hill. Richard Torbett, the ABPI’s chief executive, urged ministers to increase UK spending on drugs, which he said was the lowest among the G7 group of rich nations. “There has been a concerted effort in the NHS to improve access to new medicines – through initiatives like the accelerated access collaborative. But this report shows there is room for improvement, including for asthma patients,” he said. “The UK has the lowest proportional investment in medicines of the G7, and other countries are ahead of the game in the way they diagnose and treat conditions. We need to look to their success if we are to improve patient outcomes in the UK,” he added. A DHSC spokesperson said: “One of our top priorities is improving outcomes for patients with respiratory disease, and the NHS is rolling out tobacco dependence treatment services, on top of local authority services to help more smokers get support.”A senior official apparently pictured sitting next to Boris Johnson during a wine and cheese gathering in the No 10 garden in lockdown last year has no role in helping to investigate other alleged social events, Downing Street has said. Johnson’s spokesperson said Martin Reynolds, a civil servant who has the role of the PM’s principal private secretary, was not involved in the party inquiry, being led by another senior official, Sue Gray. Gray took over on Friday after Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, stepped down from the role following allegations an event had taken place among his staff last year, when all indoor social mixing was barred. A photograph from the evening of 15 May 2020 shows Johnson, his wife, Carrie, and 17 other people in the Downing Street garden, some of them drinking wine. Johnson’s spokesman has insisted it was a work event. At one table on a terrace, Johnson and his wife are sitting with a man identified as Reynolds. Reynolds, who has a partially empty bottle of wine and a cheeseboard in front of him on the table, is talking to another man, believed to be Dominic Cummings, Johnson’s then chief adviser. According to a report by ITV last week, Reynolds had sent an email to Downing Street staff warning them to not delete emails amid the investigation into claims of other parties during lockdown, then being led by Case. Gray took over after claims of the social event in Case’s office on 17 December last year, a day before an alleged party at Downing Street, among those he was looking into. Johnson’s spokesman rejected the idea of a potential conflict of interest, saying Reynolds was not helping the inquiry. “He has no role in that work, which is being led by Sue Gray. He’s not involved in it.” He declined to confirm that it was Reynolds in the photograph. “I’m not going to get into confirming individual staff members, as you’d expect.” The report by Case had been due to be published as early as this week, looking into the alleged party on 18 December, as well as another alleged event at Downing Street on 27 November, and reports of a party at the Department for Education. But on Friday, a series of sources alleged a Christmas event for staff took place in Case’s office on 17 December last year. Some outlets described staff from both the Cabinet Office and other departments mingling in Case’s office and an outside room. The occasion was said to have included drinks, snacks and Christmas decorations. A later Cabinet Office statement said staff in Case’s private office took part in “a virtual quiz” on that date. It said: “A small number of them, who had been working in the office throughout the pandemic and on duty that day, took part from their desks, while the rest of the team were virtual. “The cabinet secretary played no part in the event, but walked through the team’s office on the way to his own office. No outside guests or other staff were invited or present.”The annual Davos gathering of world leaders, billionaires and business chiefs planned for next month has been delayed until the summer amid mounting concerns over the coronavirus Omicron variant. The World Economic Forum (WEF) – which has been putting on the gathering of the global elite at a Swiss ski resort each January for half a century – said it would hold a series of online sessions next month to bring together global leaders to discuss the world’s biggest challenges instead. A full annual meeting is planned for early summer. Regarded as a key event on the calendar for international relations, business and the world economy, the event was scheduled for 17-27 January with a theme of “working together, restoring trust”. However, the organisers said current pandemic conditions made it extremely difficult to put on a face-to-face meeting. It comes amid a fresh wave of coronavirus infections fuelled by the Omicron variant, leading countries around the world to impose tougher travel controls and a return to tighter government restrictions. “Despite the meeting’s stringent health protocols, the transmissibility of Omicron and its impact on travel and mobility have made deferral necessary,” the WEF said. The decision to push back the event is the second year running that Covid-19 has forced changes. The gathering on a remote mountain top in Switzerland would usually welcome about 3,000 people, including the world’s super-rich flying in by private jet to discuss challenges such as the climate emergency, inequality, business, and technology. The last time world leaders gathered at Davos was for its 50th anniversary meeting in January 2020 – before Covid-19 spread across the world – with campaigners including Greta Thunberg and 53 heads of state, including the then US president, Donald Trump. Klaus Schwab, the founder and executive chairman of the WEF, said: “Public-private cooperation has moved forward throughout the pandemic and that will continue apace. We look forward to bringing global leaders together in person soon.”A woman accused of helping to pull down the statue of Edward Colston in Bristol said she was acting out of “allyship and solidarity” with people of colour, a court has heard. Rhian Graham told Bristol crown court on Monday she knew the bronze memorial to the slave trader was a source of offence for many Bristolians and that the council had not responded to calls for it to be removed before the Black Lives Matter protest she attended last year. Giving evidence in her defence, Graham described how she brought rope to the protest, used her expertise as a lighting rigger to tie a noose in it, passed it to others to attach around the neck of the Colston statue, then helped pull it down. Asked by her barrister, Blinne Ní Ghrálaigh, what she hoped pulling down the statue would show, Graham replied: “That was my expression of my allyship and solidarity with people of colour. I believe that by removing that statue we were removing a symbol of great harm and oppression that towered over our community and offended so many. “I believe that act was an act of compassion and solidarity, not violence.” Graham, 30, is accused alongside Milo Ponsford, 26, Sage Willoughby, 22, and “others unknown” of helping to tie ropes around the statue’s neck and using them to pull it from its plinth in Bristol. They are on trial for criminal damage alongside Jake Skuse, 33, who is accused of helping roll it to Bristol harbour, where it was thrown into the River Avon. Graham, an events organiser and lighting rigger, said she did not come from an activist background, but that in the period leading up to the protest on 7 June 2020 she had become increasingly aware of the impact of racism on black people. A turning point had been reading the book Why I’m No Longer Talking To White People About Race by Reni Eddo-Lodge, Graham said, which made her reassess the casual racism she had grown up with as a child in Norfolk. Her voice shook as she told the court: “I never considered myself racist but I don’t think I ever experienced the daily experience of a black person. I felt like I had been a terrible ally. “It was the realisation of the privilege I have just because of the skin colour I have that made me feel like I have to stand in solidarity for black lives.” Re-emphasising her actions were an act of “allyship and solidarity” with the black community, Graham added: “I felt like it would be a good idea to bring a rope with me to the protest and to provide it to the people of Bristol, if they so wished to attempt to pull down that statue.” Graham said she felt “it should be considered a crime” to glorify a man such as Colston. “I believe [pulling the statue down] was justified because it says [on the plaque attached to the plinth where it sat] that it was owned by the citizens of Bristol, of which I am one,” she said. “However, the act of pulling down that statue I believe … was necessary to prevent further harm.” She added: “Jimmy Savile also donated to schools and hospitals, but I’m sure I speak for everyone here when I say we don’t want a statue of Jimmy Savile in our city.” Skuse, Graham, Ponsford and Willoughby all deny criminal damage. The trial continues.Off he stomps in his union jack socks, the pantomime John Bull who caused so much damage by doing his master’s bidding. As David Frost, the former Brexit minister, departs in a self-important huff, his reasons for going illuminate the strange decline of a once great election-winning machine. Frost’s resignation letter – which takes aim at Covid restrictions – usefully captures the Tory party’s deranged state of mind. Its call for “a lightly regulated, low-tax, entrepreneurial economy” brims with a primal yearning to liberalise health, safety and food regulations, and workers’ rights. Recently he warned that Brexit will fail if “all we do is import the European social model”. Of all the airily out-of-touch Conservative party conference speeches, his was the wildest: “The British renaissance has begun!” He walks away just as all the world can see the consequences of Brexit: acute job vacancies, supply blockages, daffodils set to rot in the fields, pigs incinerated on farms and the latest figures from the Office for National Statistics showing £12bn lost in EU trade in October alone. Frost was a bellicose negotiator who lacked the cunning, tact or subtlety for the job, reneging on the Northern Ireland protocol in his own deal: his value was slavish obedience to Boris Johnson, who plucked him from obscurity at the Scotch Whisky Association, after he had left a career at the Foreign Office. But he’s a useful emblem for the state of a party whose fact-denying Brexit disease now infects every other policy. These irrationalists, like the court of King Canute, think the waves of Covid can be commanded by cabinet fiat, defying Sage’s dire warnings that the NHS will be overwhelmed without stronger restrictions now. Ten cabinet ministers, a third, are reported to be resisting. Though Frost’s letter calls for a post-Brexit Britain at the “cutting edge of modern science”, these eccentrics deny science, evidence, probability and numbers. After “freedom day”, where were their preparations for this variant – or the next? They share Johnson’s contempt for the precautionary principle, despite the public seeing security as any government’s first duty: will voters ever forgive him for an NHS meltdown or more preventable deaths after his capitulation on Monday? Look at how out of kilter this party is with most opinion. “High on their own supply,” as one pollster tells me, their ideologies are not shared by Tory voters, or even Tory members, as Prof Tim Bale of Queen Mary University of London, finds. The party has lost the ballast of those “men in grey suits” who used to get a grip on the guy ropes. Now even Graham Brady, chair of the 1922 Committee of Conservative backbenchers, is damning current restrictions as a “disastrous assault on liberty” that evoke the Soviet Union. In contrast, the pollsters at Savanta ComRes find half of voters support a two-week lockdown and 64% would ban large events. The public is not blase about this disease. Meanwhile, in the Sunday Telegraph, a flurry of hand-wringing rightwingers beseech: “We need to return to our core beliefs and remember what makes us Conservatives.” (Danny Kruger MP, co-author of that article, was stood down by Michael Howard as a Tory candidate after calling for “creative destruction” in public services.) Old Labour hands will laugh knowingly at Tories responding to public rejection by diving deeper into their more obscurantist true religions: that’s usually the far left’s affliction. People in Westminster normally worry about getting “cut-through” to voters; everything is upside down when voters see how little cut-through their own views have with the party in power. When exactly did the Tories lose their chameleon talents? Labour used to despair of the party’s skill at remaking its image with whatever it took to tune into the public mood. Remember David Cameron’s pre-2010 brand, his hugging huskies, his “big society” – disguising the austerity axe to come. That self-preserving instinct deserted them the day they set aside caution and chose Boris Johnson, knowing his every fault, his reckless life of alternative truths and his unfitness for any responsible job. The Faustian pact yielded them gold in the 2019 election – but now the price is paid. Their punishment is disaster after disaster. Much worse may happen if the unexpurgated tapes of former No 10 spokesperson Allegra Stratton emerge. Long recordings of her rehearsals exist, reports the Mail on Sunday, where she is thrown all the unanswerable questions about Johnson’s “love children”, “mistresses”, his money and every lifelong wrongdoing. No wonder they scrapped those press conferences. If Downing Street parties took place, 63% of people say the prime minister should resign. The Guardian’s picture of his cheese-and-wine event in May 2020 was taken when the rest of us could meet just one person outside for a single hour, two metres apart. The Tories steel themselves for a possible brutal verdict from Sue Gray, the new head of the inquiry into whether several parties took place in Downing Street and elsewhere (she is dubbed the “battleaxe” by nervous insiders). If the Tories purge their leader, they’ll install someone infected by yet more unpopular small-statery. It’s in their nature. But it’s those who chose Johnson who are the problem, too many of them are the fanatics and fantasists who brought us the great Brexit delusion. Look how Steve Baker just “cancelled” the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, from his 100-strong Clean Global Brexit WhatsApp group of MPs to see quite how divided and factious they are; how remote from voters. Can they recover from this frenzy in time? Never underestimate their focus on power, but what would it take to revive a party that lionised David Frost, and basks in all this outlandish Steve Bakerism? Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistBook now Clear evidence suggests that gender equality leads to better business, and despite time and money being spent on improving the gender matrix, companies still struggle to see results. Visual and verbal communication is one way to bring the unconscious social gender dynamics to the surface and take targeted action towards creative more inclusive workplaces - and in this interactive masterclass with award-winning gender consultant Yael Nevo, you will discover the fundamentals of gender dynamics. Taking place on International Women’s Day, this workshop invites you to participate in interactive workshops and open discussions, to explore how gender dynamics are being reflected in workplace verbal and visual language. You will also learn how to adopt a proactive approach towards the creation of gender equality and diversity in your workplace, and will acquire practical tools that are proven to advance a more sustainable future for your company - and beyond. Suitable for professionals in leadership, middle management, marketing, or HR roles, as well as startup founders, small business owners and freelancers, this inclusive workshop will position you in a positive, action-oriented environment to go beyond common diversity and inclusion work, to solidify the connection between wider social gender dynamics and tangible, measurable ways to achieve long-lasting change. Course content Everything you want to know about gender but were too afraid to ask Gender dynamics and how they play out in the workplace Verbal and visual communication Tools to tackle gender communication Business sustainability: How to future-proof your company Q&amp;A You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 2pm (GMT). This course is for… Professionals in leadership, middle management, marketing and HR roles Those who have recently founded startups, own small businesses, or are freelancers Tutor profile Yael Nevo (she/her) is an award-winning Gender Consultant and Founding Director of Gender Rise, helping companies achieve sustainable gender equality and diversity through strategy, policy, and training. She holds over 19 year of international and multi-disciplinary gender work and study and collaborated with industry leaders such as Virgin StartUp, LSE, UNDP and GIZ. She writes here. You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 2pm (GMT). Details Book now Date: Tuesday 8 March 2022 Times: 2pm-5pm (GMT) Price: £99 (plus £4.47 booking fee) This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 2pm GMT | 3pm CST | 6am PT | 9am ET Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. By enrolling on this masterclass, you’re helping to support the Guardian, and this allows us to keep our quality reporting open to all. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible – but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.We’re leavin’ together But still it’s farewell And maybe we’ll come back To earth, who can tell? Maybe. Probably, in fact. Just not now, not yet. They’re enjoying this ride much too much. After every goal Rayo Vallecano score down in the Independent People’s Republic of Vallekas, someone presses play, the opening bars of The Final Countdown boom across the three sides of the ground, and everyone bounces about, crumbling stands wobbling again as they scat along and swirl their scarves, da-da da daa, da da da-da daa doing the rounds. They’ve been doing it for years, but never as often as they are these days. And if that used to be as close as they were ever going to get to Europe, it’s not any more. Because Rayo Vallecano don’t just leave 2021 and go into 2022 in a European place; they do so in a Champions League place. Let’s say that again, slowly: as it stands Rayo Vallecano are in the Champions League. They might as well be headin’ to bloody Venus, it’s no more unlikely. It’s a minor miracle the tape player still works – not much else does round here – and a major miracle the team are where they are. Rayo have played in Europe only once, in 2000-2001, and that was via the fair-play league. They had finished ninth in La Liga the season before, their highest ever position. Thirteen years later, they were eighth. Last season they were sixth. In the second division. But it’s not just that, and this is not just promoted club overachieves. It is not even promoted club that sneaked up via the play-offs overachieves. It is everything. One former coach described Rayo as the last of the barrio teams, not just in their neighbourhood but of their neighbourhood. They are also a mess. In the words of captain Óscar Trejo – a man who insists: “If I was a fan, I would shout and swear because it’s the only way to open eyes and ‘heat’ ears” – this is a place where it’s “problem after problem”. The smallest club in primera, Rayo have no money, a ground that is literally falling apart, no online ticket sales, a youth teamer with no contract sleeping on the floor, a women’s team without a doctor, opposition medics treating their players, and an owner of whom fans now ask just one thing – repeatedly and to his face. To leave. Somehow the team rises above all that. A side whose normal starting XI only has two players that weren’t there in segunda last season – although one is a tiger – are fourth, a point ahead of champions Atlético. Not long ago, the other regular – full-back Iván Balliu, a former La Masia graduate – joked that they were “direct rivals of Barcelona”, who they currently lead by three places. And when it comes to playing at home, Rayo aren’t just close to Europe now, they’re ahead of Europe. Having collected 25 points from a possible 27, Rayo’s record isn’t just better than Sevilla, Madrid, Barcelona, and Espanyol; it’s better than PSG, Bayern, Dortmund, Manchester City, Arsenal, Liverpool, Internazionale and everyone else in the top five leagues. “A few weeks ago, I posted a message saying: ‘Dreaming of the Champions League,’” goalkeeper Stole Dimitrievski admitted on Saturday night. “All my teammates were laying into me, saying: ‘Delete that.’ And now we go for Christmas in a Champions League place and I’m laughing at them a bit.” That afternoon, Vallecas had belted out another familiar song from a repertoire wider than anyone else’s, rescued from back beyond 2000. “Next year, Rayo-Liverpool,” it runs, and although tongues were wedged in cheeks it didn’t sound that ridiculous. Except that the whole thing is ridiculous really. Maybe the crisis at club level actually helps, Trejo suggesting that all the problems “make you feel and defend the shirt”. Balliu talks about a group that eats together and gives each other gifts – “when I went to Catalonia I came back with wine, Isi arrived from Murcia with fruit, Fran García brought cheese from La Mancha”– and insists that the fans who are noisy, loyal and right on top of them are “our strength”. It might also help that Vallecas itself is a bit different, not exactly modern, not exactly comfortable, still the kind of place it is hard to go, the pitch shorter than normal, the surface not ideal. As for Andoni Iraola, the 39-year-old coach just three years into his career who brought them up from segunda – coach of the year by miles so far – he keeps saying that the fixture list has been “benevolent”, insisting: “I’m convinced that this will turn and in the second half of the season you’ll ask me the opposite.” There’s something in that: away they have won just once – at San Mamés – and the sides Rayo have beaten in Vallecas are those in 14th, 15th, 16th, 17th, 18th and 19th, plus Espanyol and Barcelona, 10th and seventh respectively. Against Celta, who are 13th, they drew 0-0. Yet that’s not really it. Nor is this the story of a team that will inevitably fall a long way, all of this quickly forgotten, even though they probably will slip down the table a little. If European places are likely to be denied, that doesn’t make them deluded or any less deserving. For a start, you still have to get those results and with less than half the season gone the team considered a relegation certainty in August have 30 points. “The coach reads games very well,” Balliu says. “Two or three days before he shares his ideas and you get there it’s exactly the same: what he has done deserves a lot of credit.” Then there’s something else less tangible and maybe more important, a reason to want this to last. Usually when a team comes up from the second division and over performs – at home, on a difficult pitch – it’s all about resisting. Rayo don’t resist: they rip into you. Yes, they are tough at times – Esteban Saveljich has don’t mess with me written all over his face – and, yes, they like a tackle: no team enters more duels. But they are not dirty and they’re definitely not defensive. They are though very direct. They have scored 19 goals at home, joint second with Barcelona and Real Betis behind Sevilla. Only once have they failed to score in their own stadium, and the fact that it ended 0-0 against Celta still doesn’t make any sense; they could have had four or five. Only two teams have taken more shots. There’s a vertigo about Rayo, something wild and wonderful to watch, the place packed and roaring every game now. They come at you from everywhere and from the start. Look at the minutes in which they scored some of their opening goals at home: 3, 9, 9, 26 (although they had fallen behind that day against Elche), 30, 16, 54. This weekend they scored both goals in a 2-0 win over Alavés inside 26 minutes, hitting the post again soon after. Saturday’s opener was a perfect portrait of their play, two men outnumbering their opponents on the left, an overlapping run beyond the defence, the ball pulled back across the box almost from the byline, Sergi Guardiola arriving to finish first time. No team has completed more crosses. Only Athletic produce more sprints, Rayo pressing fast in a first wave then racing back into a deep position if that doesn’t work, as relentless as they are rapid. When they set off they stampede, footballers everywhere. Of the five players to have covered most ground in La Liga, three are Rayo’s – full-backs Fran García and Balliu, plus Álvaro García wide. That list tells you something: this is a team that plays with double wingers, flying through on both sides, even if – pleasingly – Rayo Vallecano are particularly happy on the left wing. No one in La Liga has run faster than García, the stats say. On the other side, Isi Palazón has been superb. Off the front, no one has more assists than Trejo. Organised chaos might be the best description. “That’s a hard thing to achieve,” Iraola admits. “I prefer too much chaos to too much organisation. I prefer us to play at a high pace, even if it means a touch of precipitation, than play at a lower pace and have a bit more control. It suits us.” Breathless and brilliant, it suits everyone else too. “We have to do our bit for the people to enjoy it,” the coach says, and ultimately that is what it’s about: about hope and dreams, the more outrageous and out of this world the better. Football is supposed to be fun and right now there’s nothing in football more fun than a night in Vallecas, where Rayo have taken off.In 1983, Roger Highfield began his career in journalism reporting for a doctors’ magazine on the discovery that human papillomavirus (HPV) was linked to cervical cancer. At the time, cancer was such a feared disease that merely discussing the subject was something of a taboo. “Back then, people didn’t want to talk about cancer because it was so hopeless,” remembers Highfield, now science director of the Science Museum Group (SMG). “Don’t get me wrong, it’s still tough and gruelling for people, but the whole landscape has been transformed into one that’s much more hopeful.” Nearly four decades on, we now know that giving adolescent girls the HPV jab can reduce cases of cervical cancer by 90%, according to a new study in the Lancet, demonstrating that vaccination has the potential to almost eliminate the disease. The story of HPV, its link to cancer, and how vaccines have helped scientists fight back, is one of many inspirational stories covered in the SMG’s new exhibition Cancer Revolution: Science, innovation and hope, which launched at the Science and Industry Museum in Manchester on 22 October, and will move to the Science Museum in London in summer 2022. More than three years in the making, it brings to life humanity’s enduring battle against an illness that has afflicted almost all complex life forms since the dawn of time. Highfield describes how one of the most thought-provoking exhibits is a fossil of Centrosaurus apertus, a horned, plant-eating dinosaur that lived about 76m years ago. Discovered in Canada in 1989, scientists reported in 2020 that they had found it contained a form of bone cancer known as advanced osteosarcoma. “There’s a perception that somehow cancer is a disease of modern life,” Highfield says. “But it’s actually a disease that came about with multicellular life, which has been around for a heck of a long time. We’re getting more cancer because we’re living for longer, and our increasing cancer risk is a consequence.” This fossil is one of a multitude of objects, films and stories which have been curated by the museum’s staff, through hundreds of interviews with doctors, nurses, patients, cancer researchers, and even palaeontologists. “The exhibition takes you inside the story of cancer, metaphorically speaking,” says Terry Kavanagh, a lung cancer survivor who has been living with the disease for 33 years, and was one of several patients on the exhibition’s expert advisory panel who provided their insights for the exhibition. “Step into a tumour, look inside a lung. And while the emotional blur of diagnosis can only be experienced by the patient, the exhibition does reel you in. It gives the public a chance to walk in the patient’s shoes.” For Cancer Research UK (CRUK), the SMG’s partner in taking the exhibition from concept to reality, this immersive experience is vital to educating the public, both about the complexities of cancer as a disease, but also the progress that has been made in treating it. CRUK’s expert knowledge helped shape the exhibition, with the charity offering access to cutting-edge research and the people involved in it. CRUK provides the financial backing for nearly 50% of all publicly funded cancer research in the UK, but, as Iain Foulkes, CRUK’s executive director of research and innovation, explains, this reliance on the charity sector comes with an element of fragility. “Being able to commit long-term funds to research comes down to people’s generosity every year,” he says. “When we started working on this exhibition a few years ago, there was a sense that science was taken for granted a bit, and we wanted to show people how those incremental gains can compound into meaningful breakthroughs in the context of cancer. And we wanted to share our excitement about the future, and where we feel science is taking us.” Such long-term investments are crucial because cancer is fiendishly complex. While scientists once dreamed of finding a single standalone cure for all cancers, this has proven to be somewhat naive. There are a vast range of molecular differences from one tumour to the next, and each cancer cell has its own unique set of interactions with the patient which can lead to resistance against drugs. Katie Dabin, the SMG’s lead curator of the exhibition, says the exhibition highlights the work of researchers exploring the biggest questions: “Why do treatments sometimes stop working? Why does cancer come back in some people but not others? How can we help more people with cancer live better and longer? “As we developed the exhibition, the passion, commitment and ingenuity of cancer researchers and the amazing altruism of patients collaborating within research, has proved hugely inspirational.” One major focal point of the exhibition is a giant 3D tumour, three metres in width, while an animation demonstrates how tumours evolve. “This gives you a sense of the complexity of an advanced tumour and what we’re dealing with,” says Highfield. But through their growing understanding of cancer, researchers have been able to develop ever more advanced methods of targeting its weak spots. Foulkes explains how the exhibition takes the public through the history of cancer treatments, from the earliest radiotherapy machines, to robotic surgery and proton beam therapy. “You see this really crude radiotherapy device where the patient would be positioned under a big metal arm holding a block of radium, and exposed to the radiation,” he says. “And now today we have MRI scanners providing live imaging, which link to linear accelerators delivering incredibly precise doses of radiotherapy which contour to the shape of a patient’s individual tumour, minimising the damage to healthy tissues. It’s leaps and bounds ahead of what it used to be, and that sense of progress is what we wanted to convey.” The coming years are expected to yield even more sophisticated diagnostics and personalised treatments. This could transform many cancers from killers to diseases that can be detected early and cured, or managed chronically over a lengthy period of time. An example featured in Cancer Revolution is the new Galleri multi-cancer early detection test. This is a “liquid biopsy” blood test currently being trialled across the NHS, which holds promise to pick up some of the earliest signs of more than 50 different types of cancer. The exhibition also showcases research at the Francis Crick Institute in central London, where scientists are developing ways to grow organoids – miniature versions of cancer patients’ tumours – allowing them to test individual drugs in the lab. The Crick is currently holding its own exhibition, Outwitting Cancer, featuring work taking place at the CRUK co-founded institute. One of CRUK’s ambitions is to improve cancer survival to three in four patients by 2034. As the charity’s CEO Michelle Mitchell explains, the progress made on protecting people from cervical cancer illustrates what is possible. “Research is driving a cancer revolution, which results in improved care and outcomes,” she says. “As an example, we funded some of the earliest research into cervical cancer screening in the 1950s. Then in the 1990s, our scientists helped prove the link between HPV and cervical cancer [which other studies had underestimated], paving the way for the huge progress in preventing HPV-related cancers.” For Foulkes, the goal of the exhibition is to excite people about the promise that science offers for the future, so they can see that their donations will ultimately make a difference, even if it takes many years for tangible outcomes to emerge. “This is an incredibly complicated disease to unravel,” he says. “You see from the exhibition, just how long it takes. For example, it takes decades to go from basic understanding to discovering a new drug, and getting that drug trialled and accepted into the health service. It’s typically a 10- to 20-year journey. And therefore, I think it’s really important that we excite people about what we’re doing today, so they can see that their continued funding will lead to more improvements to help save more lives.” To explore some of the research featured in the exhibition, visit jointhecancerrevolution.org, or book a free ticket to visit in Manchester at scienceandindustrymuseum.org.uk. To find out more about Cancer Research UK and support its work, visit cruk.orgIn October 2001, the cell biologist and geneticist Sir Paul Nurse received a phone call from Stockholm telling him that he had won the Nobel prize in physiology or medicine. He didn’t quite believe it was true until he saw his name appear on the official Nobel website, confirming he had indeed been awarded medicine’s highest honour. It was the culmination of a remarkable journey for a scientist who had built his reputation through studying a form of yeast used for brewing beer in east Africa, known as Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Nurse was fascinated by the cell cycle, and the processes that control the continuous growth and division of the cells that make up living organisms. The comparatively simple yeast cells provided him with an excellent model to search for genes which govern how this happens. By the mid 1980s, his work had attracted the attention of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund (ICRF), a charity that merged with the Cancer Research Campaign in 2002 to form Cancer Research UK (CRUK). It funded him to find out whether there were equivalent genes in human cells. “At the time, everyone thought this was a bit bonkers,” says Iain Foulkes, CRUK’s executive director of research and innovation. “How on earth could you tell something about the human condition by studying yeast? But it gave us a real insight into how cells divide.” In 1987, Nurse and colleagues published a seminal paper in the journal Nature reporting the discovery of a gene which became known as cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK). We now know that CDK genes, and the proteins they produce, are critical to all cell growth and division. When this process malfunctions, cells proliferate out of control, which is what happens in cancer. This was a landmark moment because, at the time, scientists were still attempting to work out exactly what controlled cell division, and how and why tumours formed. “There was a lot of focus on oncogenes, genes which induce cancer, and also growth factors which induce cells to grow and divide,” Nurse recalls. “From then onwards scientists managed to start identifying the molecules that were central to cancer, because before that it was really completely unknown what was happening.” Nurse’s discovery of CDK genes led to a firm basis for understanding how cells control their reproduction, which is critical for thinking about cancer. It also, eventually, led to a whole new class of cancer medicines called CDK inhibitors, which are gaining importance in the treatment of advanced breast cancer. “It shows you how long it can take for a discovery to turn into something practical,” he says. “But it also shows that sometimes this kind of basic research can have huge implications. To make a major impact, you need to discover new things.” Top: an Imperial Cancer Research Fund lab in the 60s; bottom: Sir Paul Nurse Pioneering work The discovery of CDK genes is just one of many remarkable stories across the 120-year history of CRUK. The charity’s story began in September 1901 when a wealthy businessman called Thomas Rudd authored a letter in the St James’s Gazette proposing a fund for a “cancer klinik” to study all aspects of the disease with a view to finding a cure. At the time, the prognosis for anyone diagnosed with the disease was grim indeed. In 1802 the physician Thomas Denman had written “little is at present known of cancer, but as an incurable disease”, and one hundred years on, not much had changed. Through Rudd’s connections in London, £33,460 (around £4m today) was raised from philanthropists to support research into the disease. In 1904, the fledgling charity gained the support of Edward VII, and the ICRF was born. Over the next few decades, it would help pioneer some of the first ever cancer treatments, beginning with experimental radiation therapy for women with cervical cancer during the 1920s. But one of the most well-known modern cancer medicines originated from an unlikely source. Doctors in the US studying the impact of mustard gas attacks on the immune systems of soldiers during the first world war came to realise that if the gas could wipe out ordinary white blood cells, it could also destroy cancerous tissue. In August 1942, a patient in the US, known only as JD, was prescribed nitrogen mustard to treat his advanced lymphoma. While he only survived for three more months, the drug did briefly halt his symptoms, eventually paving the way for a new class of drugs known as chemotherapies. By this time, a second national cancer charity had been set up in the UK – the British Empire Cancer Campaign (BECC), founded in 1923. It would later become the Cancer Research Campaign. In the late 40s, researchers at an institute funded by BECC – the Chester Beatty Laboratories in London (now the Institute for Cancer Research) – unpicked exactly how these chemotherapies worked, opening the door to newer, more effective, less toxic cancer drugs. Today the success of modern chemotherapies such as cisplatin and carboplatin – which work in a similar manner to nitrogen mustard, and which CRUK helped develop – has increased long-term survival, including boosting testicular cancer survival to 95%. All in all, Foulkes says that as of 2021, there are 11 cancer drugs on the market that directly owe their existence to CRUK, and many more to which the charity’s research has contributed. These range from abiraterone, a hormone-based treatment for prostate cancer, to temozolomide for brain tumours. For many patients, these drugs have proven to be life-saving interventions. In 2012, Alfred Samuels was told he could have just months to live after being diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer, but his prognosis changed remarkably after he began receiving abiraterone as part of a CRUK-funded clinical trial called STAMPEDE. “I’m still here, and I would never have thought that possible,” says Samuels. “I really thought the curtains had closed on me. So far, the treatment has been working and my cancer is being managed well. While I’ll be on the treatment for the foreseeable future, it’s given me the chance to live life.” But the success of CRUK has not just been in the realm of new treatments. The charity’s work has also identified many of the key genes and processes involved in cancer development, including the p53 “genome guardian” protein, and the BRCA2 “breast cancer” gene. One of the charity’s biggest legacies has been in cancer prevention through the funding of studies that have shown the dangers of various factors, including smoking and asbestos exposure. During the first half of the 20th century the number of people dying from lung cancer increased hugely. In 1950, a UK study published by the epidemiologists Richard Doll and Austin Bradford Hill was one of the first to point the finger at smoking. The pair went on to prove their suspicions were right – thanks in part to support from Cancer Research UK. Foulkes says: “We funded long-term population research through which we were able to clearly demonstrate the link between tobacco and cancer. We also funded research into the ingredients within tobacco smoke, which were creating DNA damage and could lead to mutations and tumours, and went on to successfully campaign for action on tobacco, such as the ban on smoking in public places.” Top: Alfred Samuels and his wife Grace; bottom: CRUK-funded researchers in the lab, among them Dr Mariam Jamal-Hanjani, back Looking to the future Now, as we look forward to the coming decade and beyond, the landscape of cancer care is one of increasing optimism. CRUK’s own goal is to improve survival of those diagnosed with cancer to three in four by 2034, by funding research into fields such as personalised therapies and early detection programmes. Michelle Mitchell, CRUK’s CEO, is particularly excited about the outcomes of TRACERx, a landmark multimillion-pound research project which is studying the variation between, and changes in, tumour samples collected from hundreds of lung cancer patients. The aim is to be able to understand the principles underpinning cancer evolution – how patient’s tumours change over time – and so open the door to a new wave of personalised therapies and monitoring technologies. The charity is also focusing heavily on research into detecting cancer. “I think the prospect of early detection, and improvements in early diagnosis, could bring huge improvements in cancer survival, because we know that people’s survival improves considerably the earlier they are diagnosed,” she says. “So I think this is a great opportunity for us to really shift the dial on early detection and diagnosis, which would be a major contribution to improving cancer survival in the UK and worldwide.” To find out more about Cancer Research UK’s work and what the future holds for scientific advances and cancer survival, visit cruk.orgRecent decades have yielded extraordinary progress in cancer survival, but many cancers remain deadly, with half of people diagnosed dying within 10 years. So why hasn’t science found a way to cure more people yet? A major challenge is that scientists aren’t in fact targeting a single disease but a constellation of hundreds of diseases that are lumped together under the umbrella classification of cancer. This came about because all cancers start in the same way, with mutations in genes that control cell function. Such mutations can fuel the unfettered replication of a single cell. If conditions are right, the cell grows and divides, escalating to millions of cells that may clump together to form a tumour – in which no two tumour cells are identical in a single tumour. “I might have been pessimistic that we would ever be able to control these rapidly multiplying clumps of cells,” says Prof Sir Mike Stratton, director of the Wellcome Sanger Institute and a genetics expert. “But time and again, the achievements of cancer research have mitigated that pessimism and converted it to optimism. It isn’t that one drug will wipe the whole lot [of cancers] off the map, but bit by bit we are eroding the mortality rates of many cancers.” Stratton, leader of the Cancer Grand Challenges Mutographs team, which is working on a £20m project to look for unknown causes of cancer, adds: “We’re learning that research – finding out what is actually going on in cancer cells – is the route to new strategies for undermining the ability of cancer cells to behave in the way that they do.” Tumours are different groups of cancer cells, Phospho Biomedical Animation, as featured in the Cancer Revolution: Science, innovation and hope exhibition. With thanks to Dr Jeroen Claus How many types of cancer are there? While cancers may start in the same way, decades of research have shown that they evolve into very different diseases requiring a panoply of treatments. So far, scientists have classified more than 200 types of cancer, and found a myriad of genetic mutations underlying them. Out of around 20,000 genes in the human genome, between 500 and 1,000 have been identified as contributing, when mutated, to a cell becoming cancerous. There is, however, a set of cancers for which the genes are still unclear, says Stratton, who is credited with identifying the breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA2 among others. It’s tempting to think that the way forward is to target all the genes known to be implicated in cancer by launching 500-plus drug development programmes. But not only is this a huge task, it’s by no means certain that the drugs developed would be the answer to “curing” the different cancers. This is because tumours develop considerable genetic diversity as they evolve, and often become resistant to treatments as more mutations occur in cells. Targeted therapies have been approved for a range of cancers including breast, liver and lung cancers, and are helping more people to live longer. For now, though, the search for more “precision” treatments goes on. “There is a set of cancer genes … that are switched off by their own mutations,” Stratton says. “So how do we use those genes in order to develop new therapies?” What are we doing to cure more people? Drug resistance is one of the biggest challenges in cancer – that’s why it’s so important to diagnose cancers early when treatment is more likely to be successful, says Cancer Research UK’s (CRUK) chief clinician Prof Charles Swanton, group leader at the Francis Crick Institute, co-director of the charity’s Lung Cancer Centre of Excellence and a consultant at University College London Hospitals (UCLH). Early diagnosis isn’t always possible, for a range of reasons. For example, there are very few techniques that can detect small, early tumours, and some cancers simply don’t trigger symptoms early enough until they have already spread (or metastasised) – and it is at this stage that the oncologist’s toolkit of drugs often falls short. Top: cancer cells growing in 2D, labelled with fluorescent markers showing cells’ nuclei in blue, their cytoplasm in red, and areas of DNA damage in green. Photograph: Getty Images; below: Robert Insall, professor of mathematical and computational cell biology To help uncover the tricks that tumours deploy to evolve, spread and develop drug resistance, CRUK is supporting the TRACERx clinical study, for which Swanton is chief investigator. By following the progress of hundreds of patients with the most common form of lung cancer from the point of diagnosis onwards, the study views cancer through an evolutionary lens, and uses a vast array of cutting-edge techniques to monitor participants’ disease. According to Swanton, the lessons already learned from tracking these patients are applicable to many types of cancer. For instance, the study has shown that tumours with a high level of genetic diversity have the worst clinical outcomes, and that tumours use an assortment of ploys to elude the immune system, including losing the “flags” on their cell surface that enable them to be recognised as problematic. Overall, says Swanton, the major barriers to successfully treating metastatic cancer are the genetic diversity within tumours, the evolutionary fitness of cancer cells that allows them to adapt, and – of increasing focus – the ways tumours modify their local microenvironment to support their survival. A ‘rogue organ’? The tumour microenvironment is composed of non-malignant cells that have been hijacked by cancer cells to support and nourish the tumour. This allows the cancer to smother the body’s immune defence. Typically half of the cells that make up a tumour are non-cancerous, and include fibroblasts (for structural support), fat cells and endothelial cells (which can form blood vessels that deliver oxygen and nutrients, and eliminate waste), says Prof Fran Balkwill, whose work at the Barts Cancer Institute in London centres on the links between cancer and inflammation. Better understanding of this microenvironment – and potentially “reprogramming” it – could restrict nourishment of this cancerous “rogue organ” and reawaken the body’s immune cells to recognise and destroy it. Already this ecosystem of hijacked normal cells within tumours is being targeted by cancer treatments, whether immunotherapy or chemotherapy, says Balkwill, noting that it is likely that treatments in the future will be combinations of drugs that target malignant cells and this microenvironment. Predicting the evolution of cancer, one patient at a time, as featured in the Cancer Revolution: Science, innovation and hope exhibition. With thanks to The Institute of Cancer Research, London What makes cancer ultimately so dangerous, however, is the suite of signals that induce it to move beyond its primary site into the blood, lymphatic system or other tissues. Typically, chemical signals steer a cancer cell to move in a particular direction, but in many cases we don’t know what they are, says Robert Insall, professor of mathematical and computational cell biology at the Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute in Glasgow. “So, if you’re looking at this theme of why isn’t cancer cured yet, it’s because each cancer has a different suite of signals which it’s responding to.” In the case of melanoma, a serious form of skin cancer, Insall’s research suggests that the cancer cells themselves make their own spreading signals, creating the local instructions that direct them to spread. “Other kinds of skin cancer are not nearly as scary because they either don’t, or rarely, spread. And one of the reasons is that they are not primed to drive themselves outwards in the same way,” he says. “My suspicion is that the most metastatic, the most deadly, cancers have this same property [as melanoma].” Top: Prof Fran Balkwill; below: part of an ovarian tumour viewed down a microscope, with cancer cells in blue and immune cells in brown. Photograph: Barts Cancer Institute What progress are we making? Insights such as Insall’s continue to inform research into the biology of cancer, building on the decades of endeavour that have gone before. This burgeoning knowledge has transformed the way doctors diagnose and treat cancers – in the UK, for instance, survival rates have doubled in the past 40 years for all cancers combined. “On this journey to cure patients with cancer,” says Swanton, “I think we’re about half way there.” The second half of this odyssey demands further research. Research that will not just benefit the cancer patients of tomorrow, but is keeping hope alive for people affected by cancer now who may have limited or no treatment options if their cancer progresses. Eileen Rapley, a participant in the TRACERx study who is being treated at UCLH, and who has also been receiving an immunotherapy drug that has so far kept her cancer at bay, says: “When you’re diagnosed with cancer and you’re suddenly very dependent on other people, being able to contribute something makes it a little more palatable. You feel that at least this cancer is having a positive effect rather than a negative one.” But funding for this type of lifesaving research has come under considerable strain, in large part due to the pandemic, with CRUK needing to reduce its planned spending for 2022-23 from £400m to £300m. “Maintaining investment in cancer research and getting back to where we were in 2017, 2018 and 2019 is going to be absolutely crucial,” says Swanton. “We are now getting to the point of being able to personalise medicines given to patients upon the genetic basis of their disease,” he says. “But we need new medicines to circumvent and overcome drug resistance in cancers that have spread, and new approaches to detect small, early stage tumours, and treat them before they become malignant – that’s where some of the major advances are going to come from over the next five decades.” To find out more about Cancer Research UK’s work and how it is tackling the challenge of curing cancer, visit cruk.org. To donate life-saving funds, visit cruk.org/donate“It was like they were just going to sleep,” says Martin Ledwick. For many years he worked on cancer wards, sitting with people while they were dying. Now, as Cancer Research UK’s (CRUK) head information nurse, managing its telephone helpline and online forum Cancer Chat, this is what Ledwick tells callers who ask about cancer at the end of life. Usually patients become more and more sleepy, he says, and less able to get out of bed. Eventually, they slip into a state of unconsciousness, which can go on for a while before they die. “The questions [people ask] are many and varied, but ultimately they want to know what is going to happen,” he says. “We can give them a broad picture of what often happens and what the possibilities are. “There are still many misconceptions. A lot of people think cancer is a death sentence; these days it really isn’t. And many expect dying with cancer to be painful and undignified. I reassure people that as long as they have good palliative care, most of the symptoms should be controllable; that they or their loved one will be comfortable.” Looking for answers People often find it difficult to talk about death – but it’s something we will all experience. “When I first started nursing, people didn’t mention cancer, let alone death and dying,” says Ledwick. “Over the past 20 years, we’ve become much more open about these things. Being able to talk about death enables people to ask the questions they need to ask.” Scientists, too, are looking for answers. They continue to make new discoveries all the time, but there is still so much they don’t understand. “We know very little about how cancer causes death,” says Dr Mariam Jamal-Hanjani, a cancer researcher at the University College London (UCL) Cancer Institute and a medical oncologist at University College London Hospitals (UCLH), where she treats people with lung cancer. “We know patients die after cancer spreads, but we don’t know why – although we do have some ideas.” Cancer is complex. It’s not just one disease – but hundreds. Every cancer has sub-types, and the millions of cancer cells within a single tumour can be very different from each other. As these cancer cells grow and divide, their genetic mutations lead to a multitude of changes in how they behave. Understanding the way cancer evolves over the course of a person’s illness could shed light on the mechanisms that cause death. Top: DNA Samples for genetic profile testing. Photograph: Getty Images; below: Dr Mariam Jamal-Hanjani What we think we know Cancers by their nature are heterogeneous, or genetically diverse, and they evolve as they grow and every time a person undergoes treatment. “One theory is that cancer can go into overdrive. It becomes so genetically chaotic that it somehow drives the biology of dying. Possibly,” says Jamal-Hanjani. Another theory is that, as cancer spreads and the burden of disease becomes very great, it develops multiple pathways of resistance to treatments. Then the organs begin to fail. “The liver stops working, the heart or lungs fail, or because of a tumour you bleed in the brain,” says Jamal-Hanjani. “That may be physiologically why the patient dies, but we don’t know how cancer is driving that process. And some of our patients don’t have much disease on board but still die of their cancer. So something else must be driving death in those people.” Something like immune exhaustion, which happens when the immune system has been fighting for so long that it just can’t go on. “Your immune system should recognise cancer cells as foreign and attack them before they have a chance to propagate, divide and grow,” says Jamal-Hanjani. But while some cancer cells can escape recognition by the immune system, there’s also a phenomenon called immune exhaustion, where over time the immune cells become less able to recognise cancer cells, allowing them to flourish and multiply unhindered. Finally, there is a phenomenon in cancer called cachexia, a wasting syndrome where muscle and fat is lost, impacting a person’s quality of life and ability to tolerate cancer treatments. People with cachexia often die from heart failure due to loss of heart muscle, or from lung failure as respiratory muscles waste away, leaving breathing compromised. “Somehow metabolism in the body is rewired in favour of the cancer, as opposed to the patient, and we do not know what is driving this process. Even if you feed the patient intravenously, this process is not reversed, suggesting that the cancer cells may somehow redirect the extra calories and energy to benefit themselves.” How we’re trying to find out Scientists need to understand how cancer evolves and spreads and to do that they need access to tissue samples. But as cancer progresses, it becomes increasingly difficult to study. “By the time patients have metastatic disease, they can be quite unwell,” says Jamal-Hanjani. “The cancer may have spread to different sites in the body, such as the brain. You can’t easily take tissue samples from the brain – it’s invasive and can be dangerous for patients. We know brain metastases increase the chances of death significantly and that we need to understand more about the biology that leads to this.” It was almost 10 years ago that Jamal-Hanjani and her colleague, Prof Charles Swanton, group leader at the Francis Crick Institute and co-director of the charity’s Lung Cancer Centre of Excellence, first discussed the idea of research autopsies. “When Charlie suggested it I thought: ‘Who’s going to want to do this? How could we possibly broach such a sensitive subject with our patients?’,” says Jamal-Hanjani, who is a visiting scientist at Francis Crick. Despite this, with nearly £4m funding from Cancer Research UK, the Posthumous Evaluation of Advanced Cancer Environment (PEACE) study was launched in 2016, and has subsequently grown into a national autopsy programme for people who die of cancer. So far, the PEACE team, which includes laboratory scientists, clinicians and data analysts, has recruited more than 300 people with several different types of cancer, and carried out over 180 autopsies. With each autopsy, researchers analyse samples from the original tumour, organs to which the cancer may have spread, and cancer cells and DNA found in blood samples, enabling an extraordinarily detailed picture to be built up of a person’s cancer. The plan is to collect postmortem samples from up to 500 people who have died from their disease. “We have access to an unprecedented amount of tissue,” says Jamal-Hanjani. “We can collect many samples from many sites: the brain, the lungs, the heart, the abdomen. The more samples we look at, the more we can grasp just how heterogeneous these tumours can become and what complex pathways they can adopt to spread across the body.” The team hopes to gain a timeline of biological changes from diagnosis to death – to understand how tumours develop and spread, why and how tumours become resistant to treatment, and how the body reacts to the disease during the final stages. Indeed, findings so far have been eye-opening. Early data from the PEACE study shows that as cancer spreads, it evolves continually, in multiple directions from multiple sites. “It’s giving us real insight into how complex metastatic disease is,” says Jamal-Hanjani. “We’re also seeing parallel evolution. While different populations of cancer cells evolve independently, there does seem to be a preference for certain genetic pathways – order in the chaos. “The more samples we look at, from more patients and more autopsies, I’m really hopeful that we’ll find commonalities that will give us some idea of what we can do in terms of offering people treatments that can help prevent, or at least slow down, the spread of cancer.” She adds: “Some patients are resolute that they want to give their body to cancer research. That’s incredibly humbling. Everything we learn for decades to come will be their legacy.” Top: Eileen Rapley; below: small cell carcinoma, a type of cancer commonly seen in the lung. Photograph: Getty Images ‘I wanted to have the last word’ In 2016, at the age of 73, Eileen Rapley was diagnosed with lung cancer. “This is it,” she thought. But after undergoing surgery, radiosurgery, immunotherapy and radiotherapy at UCLH, her disease is now stable. During her treatments, she signed up to both the PEACE and TRACERx studies. One of the aims of TRACERx, also funded by Cancer Research UK, is to map the differences between individual cancer cells within tumours, tracking lung cancer evolution in unprecedented detail. Rapley hopes the trials will lead to earlier diagnoses and “kinder treatments”. “It was nice to think my having cancer could be of use. And I wanted to have the last word – not the cancer.” ‘To carry on his legacy’ When Mark Sims was diagnosed with skin cancer at the age of 15, he was determined to make the most of every moment. Before his death in 2017, at the age of 28, he had qualified as a doctor, met the love of his life, been best man at his twin brother’s wedding and achieved his ambition to visit all 28 countries of the EU by the age of 28. After his diagnosis, Sims underwent surgery, then, when the cancer spread, he was given targeted cancer drugs to prolong his life and even saw his tumours begin to shrink. When his cancer became resistant to that treatment, he received immunotherapy. Sims, who had enrolled in the PEACE study, dedicated much of his free time to raising money for Cancer Research UK. By the time he died, his online donation page had raised more than £100,000 for the charity. “I’m determined to carry on his legacy and raise money in the hope of saving future lives,” says Sue Sims, Mark’s mother. It was because of the many treatments developed through cancer research that Sims was able to survive for so long after his diagnosis – well beyond the five years doctors had originally hoped for. He, in his turn, left behind a scientific and financial legacy that he hoped would benefit others, giving them the chance to live longer too. To donate to Cancer Research UK’s work, visit cruk.org/donate, or for information about cancer, please visit cruk.org/about-cancer. You can also get support from others affected by cancer using CRUK’s fully moderated online community at cancerchat.org.uk, or speak to a CRUK nurse on freephone 0808 800 4040 9-5 Mon-FriRafael Nadal has tested positive for Covid-19 in a development that could throw his Australian Open participation further into doubt. The 20-time grand slam champion returned to action last week after more than four months out with a foot problem, suffering defeats to Andy Murray and Denis Shapovalov on Friday and Saturday at an exhibition event in Abu Dhabi. Posting on social media on Monday morning, Nadal wrote: “Hello everyone. I wanted to announce to you that on my return home after contesting the Abu Dhabi tournament, I have tested positive for Covid in the PCR test that was performed on me upon arriving in Spain. Both in Kuwait and Abu Dhabi we passed checks every two days and all came back negative, the last being on Friday and having results on Saturday. “I am having some unpleasant moments but I hope that I will improve little by little. I am now confined at home and I have reported the result to people who have been in contact with me. As a consequence of the situation, I have to have total flexibility with my calendar and I will analyse my options depending on my evolution. I will keep you posted on any decisions regarding my future tournaments! Thank you all in advance for the support and understanding.” Nadal’s foot problems flared up after his gruelling loss to Novak Djokovic in the French Open semi-finals in June. He pulled out of Wimbledon and the Olympics and then called time on his season in August after playing an ATP tournament in Washington. Speaking after his defeat by Shapovalov at the weekend, Nadal admitted he could not guarantee his participation at the Australian Open. Most players are due to head to Australia shortly after Christmas for the start of the new season. There are not currently expected to be any quarantine requirements but, with Covid-rates soaring in a number of countries, the virus could well have a significant impact on the tournament.At the age of 14, Gabriel Boric – the great-grandson of a Croatian migrant and an avid reader of Marx and Hegel – formed a city-wide student union in the Chilean city of Punta Arenas. At 21, and by then a law student, he led a campus sit-in for 44 days in Santiago, Chile’s capital, to oust a senior professor accused of plagiarism and corruption. Two years later, in 2011, he was elected figurehead of a massive student rebellion against profiteering private universities, and in 2013 became a congressman for his remote home region. After protests over meagre pensions, living costs and police brutality brought millions more on to the streets from October 2019, Gabriel Boric helped channel public rage into a peaceful outlet: the redrafting of Chile’s dictatorship-era constitution. And on Sunday, Boric, 35, trounced José Antonio Kast – a Catholic law-and-order candidate nostalgic for the bloody dictatorship of Gen Augusto Pinochet – by a 12 percentage-point margin to become the youngest president in Chilean history. Turnout on Sunday was the highest – at nearly 56 percent – since voting became voluntary in 2012. When he takes office on 11 March, Boric will be Chile’s most leftwing leader since Salvador Allende was overthrown in 1973 – and the first from outside the centrist blocs that have swapped the presidential sash since the return of democracy in 1989. The triumph of the avowed feminist and environmentalist has also been hailed as historic by his progressive counterparts across Latin America, who after nearly a decade in the doldrums have won a string of electoral victories in the past year – and are set to notch up even more in 2022. Brazil’s former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva – who pollsters predict will deal a thumping defeat to another far-right dictatorship-apologist, Jair Bolsonaro, in late 2022 – shared a grinning picture of himself wearing a Boric-branded baseball cap, and said he felt “happy for another victory of a democratic and progressive candidate in our Latin America”. As Chile went to the polls, Gustavo Petro, a Colombian former guerrilla who is currently leading in polls ahead of presidential elections in May, favourably compared Boric as a “social democrat” against Kast, the son of a card-carrying Nazi. The Peronist president of neighbouring Argentina, Alberto Fernández, invited Boric to “work together to end inequality in Latin America”. Luis Arce of Bolivia’s Movement towards Socialism (MAS), which returned to power a year ago with an even greater electoral margin after dislodging a rightwing caretaker government, also praised Boric’s win fulsomely, calling it “the triumph of the Chilean people”. In Peru, the leftist teacher turned president Pedro Castillo – who narrowly avoided impeachment earlier this December after a chaotic four months in office – tweeted: “Your victory is shared by all Latin American peoples who want to live with liberty, peace, justice and dignity.” Nicolás Maduro, Venezuela’s authoritarian leftist ruler, praised Chileans “for their resounding victory against fascism”. Andrés Manuel López Obrador, Mexico’s old-school leftwing president, spoke of his “joy” at Boric’s victory, adding that “the people of Chile had “given an example to Latin America and the world”. But some responses to Boric’s win – or the absence thereof – hinted at dividing lines of a generational and philosophical nature within Latin America’s left. The Cuban leader Miguel Díaz Canel expressed his wish to improve ties with the Chilean public and the incoming government – perhaps a nod to Boric’s remarks in July that his “solidarity” was with Cuban protesters and not the country’s Communist government. Daniel Ortega, Nicaragua’s Sandinista strongman, made no comment – perhaps reflecting Boric’s recent comments – soon after Ortega was elected to a fourth consecutive term after first jailing most of the opposition – that the Central American country “needs democracy, not fraudulent elections nor persecution of opponents”. Xiomara Castro, the progressive incoming president of Honduras has also made no comment so far. This reluctance to immediately jump on the Boric bandwagon perhaps reflects not only geographical distance but the gulf between what Javier Rebolledo, a journalist and writer, described as the traditional “Marxist” left and the softer, more Scandinavian cut of Boric’s politics. But few Chileans see themselves as locked in a continental battle between left and right, cautioned Rebolledo. Most are fed up with a threadbare welfare system and a society systematically stacked in favour of the rich, concerns to which Boric has spoken eloquently for a decade. “Boric is part of the path that Chile has been walking for a long time,” he argued. Fears of Venezuelan-style socialism and economic ruin pushed some voters into Kast’s arms. But conversely, the sobering example of racial hatred and mob violence stirred up by Donald Trump, and the deadly incompetence of Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro – on whose watch nearly 620,000 Brazilians have died from Covid-19 – may have helped inoculate Chileans against far-right populism. “Chile today demonstrated that we can choose for ourselves,” said Daniela Pardo, a midfielder for a Santiago football club. She had donned a crown of paper flowers to join the jubilant Boric supporters in the emblematic plaza called Dignity Square by anti-inequality protesters. “In the United States and Brazil, far-right governments terrified the public. It was good to learn that lesson.”The US is “closer to civil war than any of us would like to believe”, a member of a key CIA advisory panel has said. The analysis by Barbara F Walter, a political science professor at the University of California at San Diego who sits on the Political Instability Task Force, is contained in a book due out next year and first reported by the Washington Post. At the same time, three retired generals wrote in the Post that they were “increasingly concerned about the aftermath of the 2024 presidential election and the potential for lethal chaos inside our military”. Such concerns are growing around jagged political divisions deepened by former president Donald Trump’s refusal to accept defeat in the 2020 election. Trump’s lie that his defeat by Joe Biden was caused by electoral fraud stoked the deadly attack on the US Capitol on 6 January, over which Trump was impeached and acquitted a second time, leaving him free to run for office. The “big lie” is also fueling moves among Republicans to restrict voting by groups that lean Democratic and to make it easier to overturn elections. Such moves remain without counter from Democrats stymied by the filibuster, the Senate rule that demands supermajorities for most legislation. In addition, though Republican presidential nominees have won the popular vote only once since 1988, the GOP has by playing political hardball stocked the supreme court with conservatives, who outnumber liberals 6-3. All such factors and more, including a pandemic which has stoked resistance to government, have contributed to Walter’s analysis. Last month, she tweeted: “The CIA actually has a taskforce designed to try to predict where and when political instability and conflict is likely to break out around the world. It’s just not legally allowed to look at the US. That means we are blind to the risk factors that are rapidly emerging here.” The book in which Walter looks at those risk factors in the US, How Civil Wars Start, will be published in January. According to the Post, she writes: “No one wants to believe that their beloved democracy is in decline, or headed toward war.” But “if you were an analyst in a foreign country looking at events in America – the same way you’d look at events in Ukraine or Ivory Coast or Venezuela – you would go down a checklist, assessing each of the conditions that make civil war likely. “And what you would find is that the United States, a democracy founded more than two centuries ago, has entered very dangerous territory.” Walter, the Post said, concludes that the US has passed through stages of “pre-insurgency” and “incipient conflict” and may now be in “open conflict”, beginning with the Capitol riot. Citing analytics used by the Center for Systemic Peace, Walter also says the US has become an “anocracy” – “somewhere between a democracy and an autocratic state”. The US has fought a civil war, from 1861 to 1865 and against states which seceded in an attempt to maintain slavery. Estimates of the death toll vary. The American Battlefield Trust puts it at 620,000 and says: “Taken as a percentage of today’s population, the toll would have risen as high as 6 million souls.” Sidney Blumenthal, a former Clinton adviser turned biographer of Abraham Lincoln and Guardian contributor, said: “The secessionists in 1861 accepted Lincoln’s election as fair and legitimate.” The current situation, he said, “is the opposite. Trump’s questioning of the election … has led to a genuine crisis of legitimacy.” With Republicans’ hold on the levers of power while in the electoral minority a contributing factor, Blumenthal said, “This crisis metastasises, throughout the system over time, so that it’s possible any close election will be claimed to be false and fraudulent.” Blumenthal said he did not expect the US to pitch into outright civil war, “section against section” and involving the fielding of armies. If rightwing militia groups were to seek to mimic the secessionists of the 1860s and attempt to “seize federal forts and offices by force”, he said, “I think you’d have quite a confidence it would be over very, very quickly [given] a very strong and firm sense at the top of the US military of its constitutional, non-political role. “… But given the proliferation of guns, there could be any number of seemingly random acts of violence that come from these organised militias, which are really vigilantes and with partisan agendas, and we haven’t entered that phase. “The real nightmare would be that kind of low-intensity conflict.” The retired generals who warned of conflict around the next election – Paul Eaton, Antonio Taguba and Steven Anderson – were less sanguine about the army. “As we approach the first anniversary of the deadly insurrection at the US Capitol,” they wrote, “we … are increasingly concerned about the aftermath of the 2024 presidential election and the potential for lethal chaos inside our military, which would put all Americans at severe risk. “In short: We are chilled to our bones at the thought of a coup succeeding next time.” Citing the presence at the Capitol riot of “a disturbing number of veterans and active-duty members of the military”, they pointed out that “more than one in 10 of those charged in the attacks had a service record”. Polling has revealed similar worries – and warnings. In November, the Public Religion Research Institute asked voters if they agreed with a statement: “Because things have gotten so far off track, true American patriots may have to resort to violence in order to save our country.” The poll found that 18% of respondents agreed. Among Republicans, however, the figure was 30%. On Twitter, Walter thanked the Post for covering her book. She also said: “I wish I had better news for the world but I couldn’t stay silent knowing what I know.”When associate professor Anthony Byrne first heard news trickling in about an infectious disease at the beginning of 2020, there was an element of fear at St Vincent’s. “We knew what was coming,” he says. “[A colleague in the north of Italy] was telling us about her experiences there, with people dying in the corridors – this infectious disease that causes pneumonia and there’s no treatment … We were really anxious. “We’ve been treating Covid patients for 18 months now,” he says. “We’ve found these patients to be quite challenging to treat and professionally it’s been really difficult.” Pre-Covid, Byrne ran tuberculosis treatment at the hospital and travelled the world treating the drug-resistant disease. “I would much have preferred to have TB last year because I know all about TB, I can treat TB, but Covid, at that time, was very different,” he says. “I was scared because this was a disease that we didn’t know anything about, we didn’t have any treatment.” Months down the track, with the rollout of the vaccine, Byrne says it has been an “honour” to be on the frontline of the pandemic in Sydney. “That’s really what we’ve been, on the frontline of this war, treating these patients and their family and other staff,” he says. “It affects you both as a doctor but also personally, because you’ve got to bring it home. A bit like a soldier on the frontline, you can’t tell war stories, but they’re with you.” Byrne says an incredible amount has been learned in the past 18 months of living with the virus: an effective vaccine, but also better treatments for hospitalised patients. “Where we’re at now in the phase of this pandemic is more it being an endemic disease … So Covid’s not going anywhere, it’s part of the community. “Covid is going to be one of these other respiratory diseases that when you come into St Vincent’s … [it’s] part of the spectrum of respiratory infectious diseases that we treat.” Byrne says as acute Covid becomes less common, with high vaccination rates, what will now be key is managing follow-ups for people with ongoing Covid symptoms. “This has been termed ‘long Covid’… the persistence of symptoms despite partial recovery extending on three months. We’re talking, for people in hospital, 50%; for people not admitted to hospital, 30%,” he says. “I saw a patient just yesterday … He was double vaccinated and unfortunately still got Covid some months later, ended up in intensive care, survived that, and three months later he’s debilitated by fatigue and not back at work. “These people need ongoing care, rehabilitation and support. That’s a role we’ll be playing here in the hospital.”Health experts are nervous about rising Covid hospitalisations, particularly in New South Wales, as political leaders continue to call for calm over skyrocketing case numbers. Across Australia, attention is turning from the Covid case numbers to how many people end up in hospital and the ICU. Given Australia’s high vaccination rates, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said on Monday the focus should be on the impact on the health system rather than the record case numbers. Australasian College for Emergency Medicine (ACEM) president Dr Clare Skinner told the Guardian there is a nervousness among health experts as numbers continue to rise. “It is too early to tell how Omicron will play out for the hospital system. We’re nervous, and we are treating the situation with caution.” “We’re concerned about potential overload on already overcrowded emergency departments, and we welcome conversations with health decision makers on how to create the best systems for optimal patient care.” So what does the data on hospital admissions and ICU patients tell us so far? New South Wales Hospitalisations linked to Covid have been gradually rising in NSW, with the total number of people in hospital at 261 on Monday as the state recorded its highest ever daily case numbers at 2,501. Only 33 people are in intensive care. By comparison, at the peak of the Delta outbreak, NSW had 1,266 people requiring hospitalisation. The number of hospitalisations as a percentage of case numbers has dived, reflecting the smaller number of Covid-positive patients requiring hospitalisations. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, says the figures show the state’s health system can handle the spike in cases, and that the current level of restrictions is sufficient. “In relation to the ICU presentations, which is the key metric for the state, we have 33 people in ICU. Twenty-six of those 33 are unvaccinated. “Getting vaccinated protects you and your family, and that has been the key success for our state in opening up.” But some remain concerned that the number of Covid patients in hospitals will rise significantly due to the spread of Omicron. Dan Suan, an immunologist at the Garvan Institute of Medical Research, said the new variant was much more infectious than any of the previous strains. “Sydney is sleepwalking into a catastrophic disaster in January if we don’t do something about it right now,” he said in a Facebook post. “The only people that are really really protected from the Omicron infection are people who have a normal immune system and have been triple vaccinated.” Victoria It’s a similar story in Victoria, where there has also been a recent uptick in Covid patients in hospital. Victoria’s hospitalisation rates run roughly in parallel to the state’s case numbers, with the state recording 1,302 cases on Monday. 406 people in Victoria are currently in hospital with Covid, with 118 people in intensive care. Queensland Queensland has seen a sharp rise in its hospitalisations as daily case numbers increase. The state recorded 59 new cases on Monday, with 43 linked to the Omicron variant. Of 197 active cases in the state, none are in intensive care with Covid. South Australia There are now five confirmed Covid cases in hospital in South Australia, after the state went months without any cases requiring hospital admission. It comes as the state recorded 105 new cases on Monday, the first time it has recorded over 100 new cases in a day. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morningVoter approval of Scott Morrison has dived 19 points in a year as voters marked down the prime minister for vaccine bungles, sustained controversy over the allocation of taxpayer funded grants, and the extended furore over parliament’s #MeToo reckoning. A year of Guardian Essential data reveals the high-water mark of Morrison’s voter approval was in February, when 65% of survey respondents said they approved of his performance, and 28% said they disapproved. But in the final poll of 2021, only 46% of respondents say they approve of the prime minister’s performance, while 44% disapprove. The last survey of the year has 1,095 respondents. With the federal election now in sight, Morrison remains comfortably ahead of the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, on Guardian Essential’s better prime minister measure. In the new poll, 42% of respondents say they prefer Morrison to Albanese, 31% say they prefer the Labor leader, and 27% of respondents don’t know who they prefer. Morrison approval wanes But Morrison’s standing on the better prime minister metric is now 10 points lower than it was at the start of 2021. Back in February, Morrison led Albanese as “better prime minister” by 52% to 24%. While the prime minister has lost standing with the public, approval and disapproval of the opposition leader has been steady throughout 2021. In the latest poll, 40% of respondents approve of Albanese’s performance and 36% disapprove. The Labor leader’s high point was back in January when 42% of respondents approved and 33% disapproved. Going into the election year, the data suggests Albanese’s challenge is to become better known. The proportion of voters in the survey saying they don’t know whether they approve or disapprove of Albanese remains significantly higher than Morrison. In the final poll of the year, 24% of respondents don’t have a view about Albanese’s performance, compared with 9% for Morrison. While the prime minister battled turbulence on a range of fronts, the Covid-19 pandemic again dominated the political year. Morrison opened 2021 with strong approval for his management of the public health crisis, with the high point recorded in March, where 70% of respondents characterised Canberra’s response as good. Only 12% said it was poor. Omicron interrupts recovery But as public controversy grew about the lack of available vaccines, and Australia battled the Delta wave, approval of the Morrison government’s management of the pandemic slid from a clear majority of respondents to 36% by the end of August. Guardian Essential data indicates Morrison began to recover after the winter, with an uptick in September. By November, 48% of respondents characterised the government’s performance as good. But approval has dropped again over the past month as the Omicron variant has triggered another wave of community anxiety in the run up to summer holidays. In the latest survey, 41% of Guardian Essential respondents say Morrison’s pandemic management is good, and 32% say poor. While the premiers have also suffered a slide in voter approval of their pandemic management – all state leaders remain ahead of Morrison. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In the latest survey, respondents were asked how they would rate their state government’s response to Covid-19. The percentage of respondents who said “good” was 54% in New South Wales, 43% in Victoria, 57% in Queensland, 57% in South Australia, and 78% in Western Australia. Voters are happier in the states that have not endured long lockdowns, and all of the states are past their high-water mark for 2021. March was the high point for NSW (75%), Queensland (75%) South Australia (85%) and WA (91%), and Victoria was May (63%). Voters were asked in the final survey for the year whether 2021 had been good or bad on a range of measures. While the data suggests the second year of the pandemic has created stress and strain, 34% of respondents said the year had been good for them and their family and 31% said good for their finances. Significant minorities thought 2021 had been bad for the economy (47%), politics (42%) and the planet (43%). A majority (60%) thought the year had been bad for small business and 42% thought bad for the average Australian. Respondents were also given a list of issues to assess over the life of the Coalition government. Legalising same-sex marriage topped the list of things voters thought the Coalition had done well since Tony Abbott’s election in 2013 (49% of respondents thought that had been done well, with 21% of that cohort rating the issue as important to them), while 28% thought that had not been done well. Stroll out turns around When it came to Covid-19 vaccinations – which went from the notorious “stroll out” to Australia recording one of the highest vaccination rates in the world – 45% of respondents thought that had been done well, while 40% thought the opposite. Of the not done well cohort, 31% reported that issue was important to them. Around a third of respondents (36%) thought the Coalition had managed the catastrophic summer bushfires in 2019-20 well. But 42% said that disaster was not managed well, and 31% of the negative cohort said the mishandling was important to them. While Tony Abbott won an election in 2013 promising to repeal the carbon price, 35% of respondents now say that issue was not done well, and 16% of that cohort are Coalition voters. Nearly half of the sample (49%) say the Coalition has not handled issues around corruption well (29% say the opposite). Of the not done well cohort, 35% say that particular issue is important to them, and 25% are self-identified Coalition voters. The ratios are similar for the furore triggered by the government’s handling of the alleged sexual assault of former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins. Half the sample says the government bungled the handling of the allegations (29% say the issue was well handled). Of the not done well cohort, 35% of respondents say the issue is important to them. Morrison and Albanese have ended 2021 with a blitz of campaigning in marginal seats ahead of a federal election contest that could be called as soon as the end of January. But the government has scheduled parliament to return in early February, with a budget in the calendar for March.The first time I noticed that my mother bore most of the Christmas workload, she was rushing around our kitchen, shovelling stuffing into the pre-cooked turkey. “I’m like a shark,” she explained, washing her hands so she could start on the gift wrapping at 10 minutes to midnight on Christmas Eve. “If I stop to rest, I’ll die.” At the time I thought it was just another funny thing my mum said, like “Never sit on a public toilet seat!” You know, normal mum stuff. But now that I have kids of my own, I understand. Christmas is a largely joyless season for parents. In fact, between all the impossible gifting, rushing, stress-eating and drinking just to get through the night, Santa himself behaves a lot like a stereotypical mum. Here’s another truth and if you ever bring it up with me, I’ll deny it: I happen to love this chaotic time of pre-Christmas havoc. Do not mistake my enthusiasm. I’m not some sort of rabid Mumfluencer; there will be no homemade gingerbread decorations for the tree, no matching striped PJs for the entire family to pose in, like prisoners in Christmas jail. I love this time for one reason: it’s a focus for all my adrenaline – a bright, sparkly excuse for why I am utterly haggard and manic. See, the most recent Hilda survey (you know, the one undertaken before the pandemic) found that women do more housework than their male partners. It also found that almost one in four women were tired, nervous, restless or depressed “for no good reason”. Huh. No good reason. Really? Just life is it, babes? Ordinary life. But the speed and shock of the end of year festivities, the school stuff, the work stuff, the food stuff, the shopping, the tidying, the Covid testing, the booking of vaccines, the booking of holidays, the postponing of holidays – all of it comes, careening around the corner, providing a water-tight alibi for the emotions I am normally prohibited from expressing. It is something that seems to be experienced by everyone I know. Fellow mothers at the school gate call to me, while we pass each other, rushing to the next thing, “How are you, Nat?” “I’m over it!” I bellow back. I am always over it. It’s not the children, it’s the work around the children that’s required. And the work I must undertake on myself, just to look presentable. I no longer get to call it work; it’s now known as “self-care”. The haircare and the skincare and the edible collagen – and my God, the eyebrows. What is even going on with eyebrows now? I can’t keep up. But I’ve got to keep those shark eyes open. And maybe I secretly enjoy typing this fast on my phone, where every second word is “ducking”. Maybe I feel energised by “researching” the best mince pies in my LGA. Maybe I get a kick out of the Australia Post notifications informing me that the needless purchase of Christmas wine is currently “in transit”. Maybe I have a Basic Suburban Mum compulsion to buy Christmas “outfits” for my small children and myself. Then a “back up” outfit in case the weather changes. Maybe new swimmers for my daughter. Maybe my husband needs another tie, though he now works from home. Maybe an extra pack of shortbread as a gift for the mum who organised the teacher’s gift this year. I don’t know! I’m not really thinking! Do I want the utterly inessential earrings I’m buying for myself gift wrapped? Yes, I most certainly do. I’m delirious. But if I shut my eyes, I’m concerned my adrenalised state will leak out of me, like air escaping an untied balloon, sending it zooming all over the place, until it plops, shrunken and deflated, behind the couch. Which, by the time Christmas arrives, I’m thinking … might be the best seat in the house. • Natalie Reilly is a writer and editor who lives in SydneyAlthough for a lot of us, it’s been a long while between trips, holiday season is finally here and borders permitting, we might be able to head to the countryside or the coast for some much-needed rest and relaxation. This week I spoke to two of the most stylish travellers I know about their tips for taking care of clothes on holiday – and looking good doing it. Pack neat, and smart Aside from neatly folding the contents of her suitcase, designer and creative director, Lucy Folk says she often packs things “on hangers ready to put straight into the hotel cupboard”. This helps any creases fall out before you reach for the garment the next day. This tip is even more handy if you’re travelling by car. Creative director Ashley Helvey says she often hangs garments in the back of the car if she’s driving to her destination. She says, “depending on where and how long I’m going I sometimes pack dry cleaning with their hangers. If kept in their bags they tend to wrinkle less”. Plus, she says “it’s nice to have extra hangers in the place you’re staying”. It’s also useful to pack bras, swimwear and anything else delicate in smaller, individual bags to prevent clasps or hooks from getting tangled and snagging. Any liquids should also be stored in separate bags to prevent leakages from damaging your clothes. Plan your outfits Depending on where you’re going, Helvey suggests wearing a sweater and your coat on the train or plane. She packs one pair of flats and one pair of heels, more blouses than pants or skirts and two dresses. She says a “silk scarf and lipstick always make me feel fresh while travelling”. Folk says, “I like to pack things I can wear from day to night”. She recommends twin sets, “because you can vary your outfit but you still have one strong look”. She says fabrics that are easy to wash and dry, like towelling, are great for travelling, especially for “mums as we need to wash our clothes as much as our kids’ clothes!” Her other tips include robes that can be worn “around the hotel and to the beach”, they can also be dressed “up at night with some festive jewels”. She also likes sarongs because you “can wear them a myriad of ways, they are easy to wash, quick to dry … and they are great to put in your beach bag for a pre-lunch outfit change”. Doing laundry on the go If you’re travelling for an extended period, Folk recommends “washing underwear and socks in the hotel bath or bathroom sink” before hanging them over towel or shower rails to dry. She packs her own washing detergent to be sure her clothes smell fresh and chemical free. Helvey also washes things in the bathtub and travels with her own detergent, she recommends flaked olive oil soap because it’s “easy to travel with as it’s not a liquid”. She says you can “make this yourself by grating olive oil soap with a cheese grater and putting it in a little cotton sack. Add some essential oil and it will also keep your suitcase smelling good.” How to remove creases Folk says she often hangs crushed garments in the bathroom, turns on a hot shower and lets the steam help reduce the creases. “It can work a treat but wastes water,” she says. Helvey has a slightly different method. She lightly wets her garments, then hangs them, or stretches them out flat to dry. For a garment that’s been crushed in your suitcase or needs a refresh after being worn a few times, Helvey carries a steamer with her. She recommends the eSteam by Jiffy and says, “I always bring a steamer and a little lavender oil or rose water to drop in the steamer chamber, the ultimate life hack”.The federal government should fund free or subsidised rapid antigen tests, business and union groups say, as pre-Christmas Covid testing queues grow and stores sell out of the at-home tests. Free or at least cheaper tests would not only save businesses from shouldering the cost, it would send a “market signal” to suppliers that Australia was a willing customer and stop shortages. Since 1 November, Australians have been able to test themselves at home for Covid. The rapid antigen tests are not as accurate as PCR tests but they deliver results much faster and can screen for infections if used regularly. But many retailers have sold out of the tests and prices have fluctuated as the number of infections increased and people get tested before travel or Christmas gatherings. At the same time, global supply chain problems are delaying shipments of rapid tests into Australia, while freight prices and border restrictions are delaying transport around the country. The Council of Small Business Organisations Australia chief executive, Alexi Boyd, said Cosboa had formed an alliance with other groups including the Australian Council of Trade Unions and the Transport Workers’ Union to call for government funding of the tests. “We just need as many options as possible,” Boyd said. “Nothing is the golden ticket out of this but we need as many pieces of weaponry against it as possible.” She said government-funded tests would give businesses protection against infections and therefore snap shutdowns, as well as providing financial support. “Some people may say $15 a pop is not expensive, but if you’re running a hairdressing salon with 20 people on different shifts throughout the day [it can add up],” she said. The UK and Singapore governments offer free antigen tests, as do some EU governments. In Australia the federal government provides tests to health facilities, while there are different situations in different states and territories (for now, South Australia and Western Australia do not allow the general public to use at-home tests). Many businesses have been paying for their own surveillance testing. The ACTU acting secretary, Liam O’Brien, said the tests kept workplaces and the community safe and should be widely available. “The failure of the Morrison government to do what many others around the world have in developing a program where these tests are free and accessible has meant that outbreaks are growing and PCR sites are being overwhelmed,” he said. The peak body for manufacturers and suppliers of rapid testing, Pathology Technology Australia, said free or cheaper tests would help solve the supply issue as well as stopping lockdowns and preventing infections. “We’ve been struggling for some time to get medical and diagnostic supplies,” said PTA’s chief executive, Dean Whiting. “And when it gets here, getting it around Australia is also proving difficult.” The ongoing global supply chain crisis makes it harder to get deliveries from manufacturing countries including the US, Canada, China and South Korea, he said, while freight costs and border restrictions made transport difficult. But the other issue is the “on again, off again” nature of demand for the tests. “The health department and health advice have not embraced rapid testing,” he said. “Because there are poor market signals from Australia, the manufacturers don’t prioritise Australia.” Whiting said a government subsidy would be an endorsement, showing a “clear role” for the tests. Overseas manufacturers had told him that if they saw such a signal, they would open a pipeline to ensure Australia’s testing supply. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Aged and Community Services Australia chief executive, Paul Sadler, said he would like to see rapid testing expanded now that there is fast community transmission. And he said that while the government was delivering tests to aged care facilities, he was worried about a Christmas shortage. Facilities had to have ordered the tests by last Wednesday. Since then, infections have continued to rise and he feared people had not stocked up as much as they needed to. The booster rollout in aged care had been good, he said, but if the New South Wales health minister Brad Hazzard’s prediction of 25,000 cases a day estimate was true, (or “even half that”) aged care homes were at serious risk. The office of the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, passed Guardian Australia’s request for comment to the health department. A spokesperson said the department was working with the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee to develop a “nationally consistent framework” for the use of rapid antigen tests. “The department is also consulting with a range of stakeholders, both within government and industry, to identify where support for (rapid antigen testing) is of most benefit, particularly in specific use cases and settings of national interest,” the spokesperson said. “These consultations will inform the Australian government’s considerations on where to provide additional targeted support to help Australia reopen and provide the confidence Australians are looking for as we adjust to living with Covid-19.”To understand why Paul Kelly would make a Christmas album nearly 30 records deep into his career, it helps to know how he spends his own festive season. Kelly is one of eight siblings and, traditionally, the gatherings feature a large and diverse cast; “the odd stray, new and old flames, gossip, singing”, as he wrote in his memoir, How to Make Gravy, “and much discussion and planning of food”. Branches of Kelly’s family extend through Melbourne, Brisbane and Adelaide. “We’ve all got our children and our children’s children, so if we all got together now it might be too big,” he says. Usually, there’s a get-together on Christmas Eve, where carols will be sung, before people drift back to their own camps and to in-laws for the day itself. But this year Kelly’s eldest brother, Martin – father of nephew and bandmate Dan – won’t be there. He died on 4 December last year, aged 69, after a short illness. “We were fortunate to get up to Queensland last year just before the borders closed,” Kelly says. “It was a really close call, but we saw him two days before he died, and stayed on for the funeral, so we were very fortunate to be able to do that.” Martin’s spirit is all over Kelly’s new album, Paul Kelly’s Christmas Train: a collection of seasonal songs performed by Kelly and collaborators including Emma Donovan, Marlon Williams, Lior and Waleed Aly. “I think of Martin as the heart and soul of this project, he was the older brother who was a big influence on us younger ones,” he says. “He protested against the Vietnam war; he grew his hair long; he was the one playing these weird records – the Moody Blues and Pink Floyd – and bringing new ideas into the house. “How to talk about Marty? He was an unusual man. He was religious, had a strong faith, but it was not narrow, it was very broad. He was a deep humanist. That was definitely in the back of my mind putting this record together. I wanted to make a big-hearted, generous, open record … hang on,” he says, and – just for a moment – Kelly loses his composure. He takes a breath. “I just wish he could have heard it.” While Martin’s death might have provided the spur, Christmas songs have been a growing Kelly obsession for years. His own Yuletide classic How to Make Gravy led to fans dubbing 21 December “Gravy Day”, and in his memoir of the same name he lists “some other Christmas humdingers” – 18 of them, not one of which makes the final 22-song cut of Christmas Train. When this is pointed out, Kelly is surprised: he’d forgotten all about it. “I should have checked that list!” But that, he says, proves a point: Christmas songs are a tradition as rich as the festival they accompany. For five years, from 2007 to 2011, he and his son Declan would perform a two-hour special of Christmas songs on Melbourne radio station 3RRR. They never played the same song twice. “Christmas music gets a bad rap, because people hear the same carols and pop songs in supermarkets and shopping malls,” he says. “There’s so much great Christmas music out there that gets held up by all this stuff.” And Kelly’s “Making Gravy” Christmas tours – in which he headlines a lineup he also handpicks – are rapidly becoming their own tradition. On Saturday at Brisbane’s Riverstage he was joined by locals Ball Park Music and Sycco, as well as Melbourne-based Emma Donovan. As on the Christmas Train album, Kelly often ceded lead vocals to others, including Donovan for The Virgin Mary Had One Son, and Linda Bull for Darlene Love’s classic Christmas (Baby, Please Come Home). On the album, traditional Christian classics (versions of Silent Night and Little Drummer Boy) rub up against Shalom Aleichem, a Hebrew prayer sung here by Lior; and Surah Maryam, a chapter from the Qu’ran which tells the story of Mary, recited by Waleed Aly. “It’s like someone reading a bedtime story to their children, that’s what I really liked about it,” Kelly says. There are also songs that represent Christmas in the austral summer, including Swing Around the Sun by Casey Bennetto, author of the musical, Keating!. It speaks of “miles of scrunched-up paper, yards of burning skin / an alcoholic vapour ’round the yellow-lidded bin”. Kelly couldn’t believe the song hadn’t already been recorded: “We had to put a lot of work into that one, not the least because there’s 19 chords in it.” There’s also a new take of How to Make Gravy. Like many of Kelly’s best-known songs, the song was not a hit on release (it peaked at No 37 in 1996), but has become part of Australia’s cultural fabric. Kelly took some persuading to record it again, simply because “it’s [already] out there. But friends I was talking to about the record – and the band – were really surprised that we weren’t recording it again. We play it so much, it plays us, as much as we play it.” The Christmas Train might not stop here: with so many songs left undone, including those 18 aforementioned humdingers, there might be a sequel. “The ways people listen to music now, with streaming, [means] you can add to things,” Kelly says. “I could do one or two a year for five or 10 years and then we’d have enough to make a third volume.” And that, as he says in his memoir, is the best thing about Christmas: “It comes around every year so you always get another shot.” • Paul Kelly’s Christmas Train is out now through EMI. Kelly is also playing Bluesfest in April in Byron BayBook now Maps are a form of storytelling. They tell us how the world has changed over time, where history sits alongside modernity. They are detailed and sophisticated tools that reveal more about human nature than we realise - from where our ancestors settled and why, to the simple stories about how we fit into a world that is otherwise unpredictable, complicated and messy. In this insightful masterclass with experts from Ordnance Survey, you will discover how maps, and our relationship to them, have evolved over time. You will learn how the way that a map is designed can influence the way in which it is interpreted, and why this means that even the most authoritative map may not be as objective as we think. You will also draw on your new understanding of cartography to create your own geographic data, and will touch on how to successfully display geographic data to tell a story, and how geo data visualisation has evolved and influenced modern-day map techniques. Course content Cartography: an introduction A timeline of historical and modern influential maps Create your own geographic data visualisation An evolution of map techniques You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 5pm (GMT). This course is for… Anyone and everyone with an interest in mapping, cartography, and a history of maps Tutor profiles Paul Naylor is a Technical Relationship Consultant for GeoDataViz, Ordnance Survey, with over 20 years of experience in creating maps and visualising geographic data using a range of GIS, design, and web applications. Paul is also Vice-President and Programme Chair of the British Cartographic Society where he helps inform and educate on the benefits of good cartographic design. Jess Baker is a Technical Relationship Consultant at Ordnance Survey, who focuses on GeoDataViz. During her career there, she has worked on award-winning projects looking at accessible map design. Outside of Ordnance Survey, she volunteers for the charity GIS-E, creating custom maps and visuals to help NGOs around the world achieve development and sustainability goals. You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 5pm (GMT). Details Book now Date: Thursday 17 March 2022 Times: 5pm-8pm (GMT) Price: £89 (plus booking fee) This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 5pm GMT | 6pm CST | 10am PT | 1pm ET Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. By enrolling on this masterclass, you’re helping to support the Guardian, and this allows us to keep our quality reporting open to all. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible – but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.UK nightclubs and gyms have joined hospitality operators in calling on the government to provide urgent financial support, as trade slumps and customers stay away amid rising Covid cases. Several gym operators have written an open letter to the prime minister, warning the sector is “now on a knife-edge fighting for survival”. The independent London gyms, including Frame, which has seven outlets, Triyoga, which has five, and 1Rebel, with nine gyms, said the capital’s fitness industry had been “decimated by a lockdown in all but name”, with attendance slashed. They called for the reintroduction of furlough payments, urgent financial support via grants and a reduction in VAT as the industry heads into its busiest trading period in the post-festive health kick. “While we recognise December was a crucial month for the hospitality industry, January and February are crucial months for the fitness industry and constitute circa 50% of yearly revenue capture,” the letter says. Meanwhile, a third of nightlife businesses are warning that they might have to close for good within a month, unless they receive urgent government financial support, according to a poll of more than 500 nightclubs, bars and pubs by the trade body the Night Time Industries Association. The NTIA found that half of all businesses in the night-time economy warned they will have to cut at least half of the jobs in their workforce if the government does not provide adequate financial assistance. Night-time venues reported that they had lost £46,000 a unit on average in missing sales and cancellations during the festive period. “These venues have faced over 20 months of financial hardship and the Christmas trade period was integral to keeping those surviving businesses afloat in the upcoming year,” said Michael Kill, the NTIA chief executive. “It really is a cataclysmic Christmas.” Joining the chorus of businesses pleading for help from the government are operators of bars, restaurants and cafes, all facing a wave of cancellations. The weekend just passed should have been the busiest trading period of the Christmas season but customers chose to stay away, said Nick Mackenzie, the chief executive of the pub and brewery chain Greene King, which runs 2,700 pubs, restaurants and hotels across the UK. “Demand has dropped, bookings have been decimated, some parts of the country we are 70%, 80% down on 2019, so the situation is pretty unsustainable,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Monday. He urged the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, to provide “quick and effective support”. Mackenzie said hospitality businesses that were severely affected or had had to close needed a range of support measures, including furlough, and he also called for business rates relief, regardless of the size of the firm. “Longer term, we need VAT to be reduced back down to 5% to give us the cashflow to survive into next year. For many businesses, Christmas is about getting cashflow ready to help them survive in January,” he said. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, on Sunday refused to rule out tighter Covid restrictions before Christmas. Some hospitality firms, including the pub chain JD Wetherspoon, have accused the government of already implementing a “lockdown by stealth” after issuing guidance for people to reduce their social contact. “The chancellor better get his act together or it’s going to be a really horrible Christmas for our sector,” said David Page, the chairman of Fulham Shore, the London-listed owner of the pizza chain Franco Manca and the Real Greek restaurants. Sales at Fulham Shore’s 20 city centre restaurants fell last week, Page told BBC Radio 4, although he added that sales had risen at sites in commuter areas and on England’s south coast. “Everybody is in pain at the moment,” Page said. “We have switched to takeaway only in some branches because of Covid and our staff self-isolating. “Cashflow is the problem at the moment,” and he echoed calls for Sunak to give help to hospitality firms. “Especially nearer London and nearer city centres, these businesses have no cashflow. They are paying staff, they’ve got to pay their suppliers. It’s been a bit of a disaster area for smaller businesses over the last two weeks and Rishi needs to do something in the next 24 hours.”Harry Potter’s favorite sport, quidditch, is to receive a new name in the US, in part because its leaders are critical of the controversial views of the fictional wizard’s creator JK Rowling, which the US leagues have called “anti-trans”. Two leagues that operate the sport in the US also cite trademark issues for their decision for the rebranding. The term “quidditch” – a game played by teams on broomsticks chasing balls of various sizes called quaffles, bludgers and the golden snitch – is trademarked by Warner Bros, the studios that brought Rowling’s blockbuster book series to the big screen. The leagues say they will “conduct a series of surveys over the next few months to guide a decision on the new name”. “Quidditch is at a turning point. We can continue the status quo and stay relatively small, or we can make big moves and really propel this sport forward into its next phase,” Mary Kimball, executive director of US Quidditch, said in a statement. In its announcement, coordinated with rival Major League Quidditch, the organization points the finger at what it sees as the author’s intolerance of gender-equality issues. “The leagues are hoping a name change can help them continue to distance themselves from the works of JK Rowling, who has increasingly come under scrutiny for her anti-trans positions in recent years,” the statement says. Rowling’s stance on diversity and transgender issues has been analysed since at least June 2020, when the 56-year-old author posted a series of tweets appearing to take aim at transgender activism. After a backlash, Rowling posted a lengthy explanation of her views in an essay on her website, which also revealed she had suffered from sexual and domestic abuse in her 20s. Rowling said: “I know and love trans people but erasing the concept of sex removes the ability of many to meaningfully discuss their lives.” The essay prompted further reaction. Later that month, four authors resigned from Rowling’s literary agency, accusing it of refusing to issue a public statement in support of transgender rights. A spokesperson from Rowling’s agency, the Blair Partnership, said: “The Quidditch Premier League, US Quidditch and Major League Quidditch have never been endorsed or licensed by JK Rowling.” The sport of quidditch has grown in popularity since it was invented in the Harry Potter novels, and is played in numerous countries under the jurisdiction of the International Quidditch Association. In contrast to the airborne game played by Potter and his friends at the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, ground-based quidditch involves two teams of seven players clutching broomsticks and chasing the balls around a hockey-sized field. Previously touted as a possible Olympic sport, quidditch teams are mixed. The leagues’ statement says: “Our sport has developed a reputation as one of the most progressive sports in the world on gender equality and inclusivity, in part thanks to its gender maximum rule, which stipulates that a team may not have more than four players of the same gender on the field at a time.”Psychiatrists are warning of a surprise rise in problem gambling among the over-65s after the largest increase in online betting since before the pandemic was recorded among the age group. About 620,000 more over-65s are gambling online at least once a month than in 2019 – a bigger increase than any other age group, according to analysis of Gambling Commission data by the Royal College of Psychiatrists (RCP). Campaigners believe isolation at home and increasing reliance on Facebook and TV for contact with the outside world is likely to have exposed over-65s to more gambling advertising and to less regulated, more addictive online gaming. Anxiety caused by isolation during lockdown, financial worries and a disruption of normal routines have also been suggested as possible reasons why more older people have turned to online betting, with the data showing increased online betting outweighs the reduction in use of betting shops caused by social distancing restrictions. “The pandemic has shaken our lives in so many ways and these data show that many more older people are gambling online than were before the start of the pandemic,” said Prof Henrietta Bowden-Jones, the spokesperson for behavioural addictions at the RCP. “Not everyone who gambles will develop a gambling disorder, but some will. Gambling disorder is an illness and if left untreated can lead to significant depression, anxiety and suicidal thoughts.” The risk of addiction is higher with online gambling because of its greater accessibility and lower restrictions on stakes and speed, said Matt Zarb-Cousin, the director of Clean Up Gambling, a group campaigning for industry reform. Limits of £2 a spin have been placed on fixed-odds betting terminals in bookmakers, but not on slot games online where gamblers can place a bet and spin again every 2.5 seconds. “[Older people] are at home, are more vulnerable and are shielding and only have Facebook, their laptop and TV to keep in touch with people [which means] they are being constantly marketed at and the temptation is always there,” Zarb-Cousin said. “They might sign up to bet on racing or sports, but they will be cross-sold the other addictive stuff like slots and will be given free spins and it is quite overwhelming.” Only 8.7% of over-65s gambled online in the year to September 2019 but this rose to 13.5% in 2021, according to Gambling Commission figures that exclude gambling on the national lottery. The number of people across Great Britain who gambled on games excluding the lottery increased by 1.5 percentage points over that period. The surge in senior online gambling was the sharpest rise of any age group. Next came 45- to 54-year-olds with an increase of about 340,000 online gamblers over the course of the pandemic so far. The figures mean counsellors are braced for an increase in older people needing treatment for gambling disorders. “We have not seen a large number of problematic gamblers in their 60s and 70s, but are we going to?” said Bowden-Jones. “Is this going to show as a change in the demographic presenting to NHS [addiction] clinics?” Women also increased their online gambling activity during the pandemic, with the proportion of the female population gambling online rising from 13.2% to 16.2%, while levels of male online gambling stayed roughly stable. GambleAware, which commissions the national gambling treatment service with NHS England, also said it had seen an increase in online gambling among the over-60s, and said it was working to boost awareness of treatments, including accessing the national gambling helpline on 0808 8020133.JD Wetherspoon has promoted four of its managers to provide “more pub experience” to its eight-strong board of directors, after a series of run-ins with employees, politicians and investors. The pub chain flagged the move during its full-year results in October, and on Monday it announced it had appointed four new worker directors – with two named as “employee directors with full plc director status, and two as associate employee directors”. Employee directors remain something of an oddity in the UK – although at one point they looked set to become a new trend, with businesses involving more employees in decision making. In 2016 Theresa May, while campaigning to become prime minister, promised to make big companies appoint them. In the end her proposals were watered down. Wetherspoon’s founder and chairman, Tim Martin, said: “Pub and area managers, and other members of pub teams, have always participated in weekly decision-making meetings, which distil suggestions from the ‘frontline’. “The appointment of employee directors will extend this approach to board meetings and will help to preserve the culture of the company for the future”. The announcement comes after the chain – which has often divided opinion among the UK public – had been involved in a series of rows ranging from its communication with staff during the pandemic, its corporate governance and its founder’s sometimes outspoken views on topics such as Brexit. At the start of the pandemic last year, Wetherspoon’s was pressed into denying it was “abandoning” its 43,000 staff after stating it could not afford to pay them during the Covid-19 crisis until the company had seen details of the government’s furlough scheme. Martin also faced criticism last year for playing down the risks of people gathering in pubs during the pandemic and criticising the government for shutting them down. He has also railed against the City’s focus on corporate governance, with one of his attacks running to more than 3,000 words as part of a statement to the London Stock Exchange that used only 20 words to outline the group’s recent trading. Wetherspoon’s said it had received more than 100 applications for the new employee director roles. The new employee directors are Debbie Whittingham, a regional manager for the West Midlands, and Hudson Simmons, an area manager for Sheffield – who both joined the company as shift managers in the 1990s. The associate employee directors are Will Fotheringham, a regional manager for the Manchester area, and Emma Gibson, the pub manager of the Imperial, in Exeter. • The headline and introductory sentence of this article were amended on 24 December 2021 because an earlier version referred to JD Wetherspoon “area managers” joining the board. As the article went on to make clear, of those who will join as full board directors, one is an area manager, the other is a regional manager. It was further amended on 20 January 2022. An earlier version said that at the start of the pandemic in 2020, Wetherspoon told staff it could not afford to pay them until the company “was reimbursed for their wages by the government”. This has been changed to “until the company had seen details of the government’s furlough scheme”. To clarify: on 23 March 2020, Martin told staff the company could not commit to paying them after 27 March 2020 and warned of a likely delay to further payments before the furlough money arrived.Bayern Munich v Paris Saint-Germain The reigning German and French champions have met once in the Champions League with Paris Saint-Germain securing a 4-1 aggregate win, after a 1-0 first‑leg defeat, in the last eight of the 2016‑17 competition. Both teams look very different today. PSG were eliminated by Barcelona in the semi-finals last season, having beaten Lyon 2-1 away after a 1-0 home defeat to progress on away goals. They also got the better of the seven-times Champions League winners domestically, beating them to the title and ending Lyon’s 14-year dominance of the league. PSG got here by topping Group B without conceding while scoring 25 times in six games., with six goals coming from the Canada forward Jordyn Huitema. Bayern returned to the summit of the Frauen Bundesliga last season after losing out to Wolfsburg for four consecutive seasons. They, too, reached the semi-finals last season but bowed out with a 4-1 defeat by Chelsea at Kingsmeadow after a 2-1 home win. This time they finished runners up in Group D behind Lyon after a surprise 0-0 draw with Benfica in their opening game and a 2-1 defeat at Lyon. Predicted winner PSG Juventus v Lyon Juventus’s reward for reaching a first quarter-final is a tie with the competition’s most decorated side. The Italian champions came through the “group of death” behind Wolfsburg and at the expense of last season’s runners-up, Chelsea. An impressive display to take a point at Kingsmeadow, keeping Chelsea at bay when Emma Hayes’s team had not gone a game without scoring, was a highlight. The striker Cristiana Girelli’s four goals constituted a third of their tally. Under the former Arsenal manager Joe Montemurro, Juventus have continued their growth but getting past Lyon would be a huge statement. The French club have a point to prove, having gone out to PSG last season after five back‑to‑back titles. Lyon have a new manager – their former player Sonia Bompastor – and have their star striker, Ada Hegerberg, back after a lengthy spell out with an ACL injury and some setbacks. The 26-year-old Norwegian holds the record for most Women’s Champions League goals scored with 56, including three in this campaign. The US forward Catarina Macario also scored three of Lyon’s 19 group‑stage goals. Predicted winner Lyon Arsenal v Wolfsburg Arsenal, England’s only team to have lifted a European title, in a historic quadruple-winning season in 2007, have a tough task against Wolfsburg. There are a couple of familiar faces in the German team’s squad, with the Dutch pair Dominique Janssen and Jill Roord having spent time at Arsenal, the latter leaving last summer. Wolfsburg reached the 2013 final with a 4-1 aggregate win against Arsenal before going on to win the competition. This season they topped Group A and knocked out Chelsea in the process with a 4-0 home win after a 3-3 draw at Kingsmeadow. Third in the Frauen Bundesliga, with a game in hand over second-placed Hoffenheim, Wolfsburg have the Champions League’s top scorer this season, Tabea Waßmuth getting eight goals in the group stage. Arsenal stuttered into the knockout phase with a 4-1 defeat against Hoffenheim. Having won three and lost three of their group fixtures, Arsenal have the worst record of the qualified teams and an 8-1 aggregate defeat against the holders, Barcelona, showed Jonas Eidevall’s side are far from being able to compete with Europe’s very best. Predicted winner Wolfsburg Real Madrid v Barcelona The women’s el clásico, elevated to the European stage for the first time, is a much less developed rivalry than in the men’s game. Barcelona have won all three of the clubs’ meetings since Real rebranded the independent side Tacón in 2020, having taken charge of the team the preceding year. The Primera División champions, Barça have scored 24 goals and conceded only one in the group, in their 4-1 home win against Arsenal, with the Ballon d’Or winner Alexia Putellas the team’s top scorer with five. Barcelona are top of the Spanish league with 14 wins from 14, earning an 11-point lead over second-placed Real Sociedad, and have scored 79 league goals, conceding four. Real are struggling to replicate the form that helped them to finish second last season. They are eighth, 22 points behind their quarter-final opponents, and have six wins from 14 games. Real need a miracle to reach the semi‑finals in their debut Champions League season at the expense of a consistently rampant Barcelona. The Catalan club will be surely eyeing their route to the final, with Arsenal or Wolfsburg, who beat them in a one-off game during the pandemic to reach the 2019-20 final, waiting for the winners of this tie. Predicted winner BarcelonaThe New York attorney general, Letitia James, said on Monday her investigation of Donald Trump’s business affairs would continue “undeterred”, despite Trump suing to stop it on grounds of political bias, “because no one is above the law, not even someone with the name Trump”. The New York Times first reported Trump’s lawsuit, filed in federal court in Syracuse, New York. It alleges that James, a Democrat, “is guided solely by political animus and a desire to harass, intimidate and retaliate against a private citizen who she views as a political opponent”. James is investigating whether the Trump Organization manipulated valuations of its real estate properties. In one such instance, as Trump ran for president in 2016, the Guardian reported on differing valuations of a golf club outside New York City. The headline: How Trump’s $50m golf club became $1.4m when it came time to pay tax. The Washington Post and other outlets have reported similar alleged practices at other Trump properties. Last year, investigators working for James interviewed Eric Trump, one of the former president’s sons and a Trump Organization executive. James went to court to enforce a subpoena and a judge forced the younger Trump to testify, after his lawyers canceled a deposition. In an investigation that could only result in civil charges, James recently said she would seek to question Donald Trump under oath. It is rare for law enforcement agencies to issue a civil subpoena for testimony from a person also the subject of a related criminal investigation, partly because the person could simply cite their fifth amendment right to remain silent. It is unlikely Trump’s lawyers would allow him to be deposed unless they were sure his testimony could not be used against him in a criminal case. Trump’s business and tax affairs are also the subject of a criminal investigation run by the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus Vance, which has been in progress for more than three years. James joined that investigation in May. The Manhattan case includes a focus on whether the Trump Organization overstated the value of some real estate assets to obtain loans and tax benefits. In their lawsuit against James, who recently announced a run for governor of New York before stepping back, Trump and the Trump Organization claim the attorney general has violated their rights under the US constitution by pursuing a politically motivated investigation. Trump and the company pointed to public statements James made before she was elected as attorney general. The lawsuit also made a plainly political play of its own, echoing Trump’s language in office and on the campaign trail when it said: “Rather than diligently prosecuting actual crimes in the state of New York – which are steadily on the rise – James has instead allocated precious taxpayer resources towards a frivolous witch hunt.” Trump and the Trump Organization are seeking a court order barring the investigation from going forward. In a statement, Trump’s attorney, Alina Habba, said: “By filing this lawsuit, we intend to not only hold her accountable for her blatant constitutional violations, but to stop her bitter crusade to punish her political opponent in its tracks.” In her own statement, James said: “The Trump Organization has continually sought to delay our investigation into its business dealings and now Donald Trump and his namesake company have filed a lawsuit as an attempted collateral attack on that investigation. “To be clear, neither Mr Trump nor the Trump Organization get to dictate if and where they will answer for their actions. Our investigation will continue undeterred because no one is above the law, not even someone with the name Trump.” James also noted that in August 2020 she “filed a motion to compel the Trump Organization to provide … documents and testimony from multiple witnesses regarding several, specific Trump Organization properties and transactions. “Since then, the court has ruled in Attorney General James’ favor multiple times.” Last month, Trump’s former lawyer and fixer Michael Cohen – who served a three-year sentence for offences including campaign finance violations relating to a payoff to the porn star Stormy Daniels, who claims an affair with Trump – was asked about the prospect of Trump being indicted in the criminal investigation in Manhattan. Cohen said he was confident prosecutors could “indict Donald Trump tomorrow if they really wanted and be successful”. Asked if he was “confident you did help Donald Trump commit crimes”, Cohen told NBC: “I can assure you that Donald Trump is guilty of his own crimes. Was I involved in much of the inflation and deflation of his assets? The answer to that is yes.” In July, the longtime Trump Organization chief financial officer, Allen Weisselberg, pleaded not guilty to criminal charges in what a prosecutor in Vance’s office called a “sweeping and audacious” 15-year tax fraud.Tigrayan forces at war with Ethiopia’s government have pledged to withdraw from neighbouring regions in the north of the country in a sudden step towards a possible ceasefire after more than a year of brutal conflict. Tigray Defence Forces (TDF) outside Tigray have been ordered to return to the region in a “decisive opening for peace”, wrote Debretsion Gebremichael, the head of the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF), to the United Nations in a letter dated Sunday. “We propose an immediate cessation of hostilities followed by negotiations,” Gebremichael said, saying the TDF were withdrawing from the regions of Amhara and Afar. He demanded a raft of measures, including an immediate no-fly zone for hostile aircraft over Tigray and for arms embargos on Ethiopia and its recent ally Eritrea, whose forces have been engaged in the war that started last November. The Nobel peace prize-winning prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, had launched a military offensive against the Tigray People’s Liberation Front, which had previously ruled Ethiopia for 28 years, following mounting tensions between the government and TPLF. The war has killed thousands of people and sparked a humanitarian crisis in northern Ethiopia, with 400,000 facing famine-like conditions in Tigray and 9.4 million in need of food aid in the region. Debretsion said he hoped the TDF withdrawal would force the international community to ensure that food aid could enter Tigray. The United Nations has previously accused the Ethiopian government of effectively operating a blockade halting urgently needed humanitarian assistance, which Ethiopian authorities have repeatedly denied. Ethiopia’s government has yet to respond to the ceasefire offer yet calls for a cessation of fighting have been largely ignored by both the government and the TPLF, with disputes over the conditions for an end to the conflict. Ethiopian authorities called for a ceasefire in June, as Tigrayan forces rebounded and made significant gains, including invading Amhara and Afar. The current ceasefire proposal by the TPLF comes amid continuing conflict and increasing pressure by government and government-aligned forces since November, when Ahmed declared he was joining the conflict on the ground. “We hope that by [us] withdrawing, the international community will do something about the situation in Tigray as they can no longer use [it] as an excuse that our forces are invading Amhara and Afar,” a TPLF spokesman Getachew Reda told Reuters. Other measures urged in the letter were the release of political prisoners and thousands of Tigrayans who have been detained by the government – and for international investigators to look into potential war crimes. Atrocities alleged against all sides in the conflict have only gradually emerged this year, partly a result of a communications blackout in Tigray by Ethiopia’s government as well as widely condemned restrictions on aid agencies, rights groups and observers. Last week a joint report by Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch based on accounts from survivors and witnesses, detailed house-to-house raids and detentions of ethnic Tigrayans and how thousands were being held in prisons and makeshift detention centres. Witnesses and survivors said many were being tortured and starved, or killed in attacks by Ethiopian-aligned forces.Wanted: someone with experience running a pub, a love of isolation and a willingness to mark their appointment by sitting on a throne and having beer poured over their head. A council has begun one of the UK’s most unusual local government recruitment processes while seeking someone to run the Ship Inn on Piel Island, off the coast near Barrow-in-Furness. The downside might be the uncertain weather, or the isolation, or the long hours. On the upside, you can watch seals and birds, enjoy stunning sunsets and, if you have self-esteem issues, know you really will be a king or queen. It would sort of be official. John Murphy has been leading walks to the island for nearly 40 years and says whoever gets the job will need to be “massively dedicated”. “You can’t just nip across to Tesco for a loaf of bread when you’re on Piel Island,” he said. “You’ll need to have dedication and a strong passion for isolation and peace and quiet. It takes a special personality.” Piel Island is half a mile off the Furness peninsula, reachable on a ferry which runs April to September or on a guided walk across the sands. For some the magic is its history, for others it’s the pub. A castle, looked after by English Heritage, was built on the island in the early 1300s by the monks of Furness Abbey in order to deter Scottish raiders. Frank Cassidy, a Barrow Labour councillor, noted the island and its castle bore silent witness to a significant episode in English history. It was there, in June 1487, that the 10-year-old pretender Lambert Simnel and a ragtag army of 8,000 mercenaries landed from Ireland on their way to battle. Simnel, it was claimed, was the real Earl of Warwick and the rightful heir to the English throne. They marched on London but were crushed at the Battle of Stoke Field in Nottinghamshire, the last battle of the Wars of the Roses. “They were defeated,” said Cassidy, “but if they had toppled Henry VII the rest of English history would have been quite different.” Many people go to the island for birthday parties or for a few drinks before camping overnight. “Even if you’re pissed out of your head the views from Piel are pretty amazing,” said Murphy. “I must have slept on every blade of grass on that island, drunk or sober, and I just love it.” Barrow borough council is seeking to a recruit a landlord, on a 10-year lease, in time for the season starting in April. A report to councillors describes Piel Island as a unique place but “any operator needs to appreciate the constraints offered by power, weather, access and its location within an area of site of special scientific interest.” As well as running the pub the successful applicant will need to manage and maintain the island itself. It makes no reference to the island’s more unusual traditions but they unquestionably exist. Whoever is in charge of the pub is crowned “King of Piel” in a ceremony involving a rusty sabre which concludes with buckets of beer being poured over their head. Any punter who unwittingly sits on the throne has to buy drinks for everyone. Barrow, dominated by shipyards building nuclear submarines, is not often regarded as a tourist destination, but that is changing, said Murphy. “Barrow is, rather freakishly, enjoying an increase in tourism, connected to people having staycations. Visitors are realising it’s only 20 minutes off the Lake District but the accommodation is half the price that they pay in the honeypots.” Once in Barrow visitors will discover that as well as Piel Island and the Abbey, there are beaches on Walney Island which are as beautiful as anywhere in the UK. Murphy would love the job himself but, at 73, says he is too old. He has handed the job of leading walks to the island to younger legs, in the shape of Ben Pinder, but he still intends to be on Piel telling its stories. “I absolutely adore Piel Island, I adore its isolation. I also love the fact that Barrow still is an industrial town and yet we have this gorgeous, isolated island within spitting distance.”Clang. Bring out your dead. There was something a little ghoulish about the spectacle down the wires from Adelaide as England’s last-wicket pair attempted to push the second Ashes Test into its final knockings on day five. An Australian Ashes summer always has a strangeness about it seen from 10,000 miles away: those bleached-out greens and blues bounced around the world and beamed into the depths of a northern winter. Watching James Anderson and Stuart Broad fence and fend at the teeth-and-toes assault of the 6ft 6in, 92mph Mitchell Starc, it was hard to avoid the feeling of something hollow-eyed and ghostly; an emblem of the ill health of this tour but also of the wider entropy of English red-ball cricket, a grief that really is going to have to be processed at some point. Not quite yet, though. The undertaker’s cart may be creaking across the cobbles but the ashes of these Ashes are not quite ready to be scattered. At 2-0 down it is still possible to cling to the prospect of a miraculous defibrillation in Melbourne. Perhaps England’s weirdly mute selector and coach, Chris Silverwood, will see progress in this most recent setback. Capitulation over five days in Adelaide follows capitulation over four days in Brisbane. Jos Buttler’s valiant defence on the final afternoon at least provided some sense of stiffening, of a rigor ante-mortis. There was a bracing edge of anger in Joe Root’s post-match analysis that will hopefully be turned not just on the lack of commitment in England’s top six but towards his own captaincy, selection input and on-field leadership. Either way England are faced not just with one must-win Test but three of them in quick succession. And two things stand out. First is the need to distinguish the point at which bad luck and poor resources crash into poor management and poor decision-making. Such were the pre-existing handicaps to this tour – injuries, rustiness, no prep – it is tempting to throw your hands up and say this was always an impossible task. England have a batting lineup that is, on the numbers, one of the weakest the Test team has fielded, doubly hampered by trying to adapt to playing in Australia on the job. What exactly were we expecting? Such has been the downgrading of the first-class structure, the sense of a grudging addendum to the money machine, that there are no obvious alternatives to the current class of semi-achievers. Scan the county batting averages from last year and the outstanding performances in a chop and change season came from some South Africans, Ollie Pope and a small cast of those who have already been tried. This is what we have. The legacy product has been allowed to enter a period of managed decline, like a post-industrial city in the Thatcher years. Frankly, chaps, we see economic growth elsewhere. Get on your bike, ambitious young English batsmen, and hope for a franchise gig. Fatalism, then, is an appealing prospect. And yet, there are still objective standards of competence. Those in leadership roles still have agency. Even on a sinking ship it is possible to arrange the chairs correctly, to organise the final march of the band, to be a good captain and a good coach. With this in mind the most remarkable part of the slow death of this Ashes series is the extent to which it was never really alive in the first place: the lack of aggression, the basic meekness of a 2-0 deficit that has, from the first ball of the first Test, never looked like going any other way. Having spent two years planning – and over-planning – for this series, England’s plans have been comically bad. To walk out at the Gabba with an attack that had never played together was bizarre. Before Adelaide England seemed guilelessly fixated on the prospect of the pink ball under lights, as they were (disastrously) in Ahmedabad 10 months ago. Again, this just feels like low-quality thinking, a first idea that becomes your only idea. Ben Stokes bowling endless 82mph bouncers at Marnus Labuschagne, en route to his hundred, was presumably a pre-cooked strategy. But why persist with it for so long? Surely something in the gut said the dropping of Mark Wood – the one note of aggression in England’s demise – felt a little wrong? So Australia have got to 2-0 with their own weaknesses entirely unexamined. Just turning up, catching the ball and making fewer mistakes has been enough. England lost by 275 runs to a team missing its two best bowlers. You wouldn’t have known. Is there any point in blaming Root? He already looks drained. Perhaps his own race will be run by the end of this tour. Is there any point in blaming Silverwood, who has given his all but simply seems out of his depth? From the breaking of Jofra Archer, to lost matches, lost series and the development of zero new Test cricketers, this has been seriously thin gruel. This is the real failing of England’s long-serving captain and its most all-powerful coach, a failure to stand against the drift, to do anything other than go with the flow, company men to the core. For now this Ashes series can still be revived. On the other hand this regime has also lost eight and won one of their past 11 Tests. How long do you keep rewarding that? Hard choices and a sharpening up in every area are required. Even a degree of resistance in Melbourne would be a start.On Friday 15 May 2020, NHS healthcare assistant Carlos Sia was one of 314 people who died after contracting Covid, passing away in the Worcestershire Royal hospital where he worked. On the same day at the Lister hospital, Stevenage, 98-year-old Marjorie Bourke died of pneumonia and heart failure, alone, her relatives unable to be with her at the time of her passing. In Somerset, Bernadette Tinsley died at home from pneumonia caused by Parkinson’s disease – her children too scared by the risk of Covid to take her into hospital. In the midst of this, the prime minister and more than a dozen staff sipped wine and ate cheese in the gardens behind Downing Street, many standing shoulder to shoulder. It is an image that jars with what was happening around the country. At Kettering general hospital, a minute’s silence was held in memory of all those who had died from Covid; more than 30,000 at that stage of the pandemic. Nationally, many were still clapping for the NHS. A debate was raging over the safety of reopening schools on 1 June. At that point it was illegal for someone to meet both elderly parents at the same time. Social mixing between households was limited to two people, who could only meet outdoors and at a distance of at least 2 metres. In workplaces, guidance said in-person meetings should only take place if “absolutely necessary”. The emergence of the picture of the PM and his staff socialising in the sunshine has been a particularly painful moment for those who lost loved ones – from Covid or other illnesses – as Johnson and his staff enjoyed nibbles on the terrace. Carlos Sia, a healthcare assistant who had worked at Worcestershire Royal hospital died after contracting coronavirus. He left behind a wife and a daughter in the UK and three sons in the Philippines. His colleagues described him as “kind, gentle man with a wonderful smile”. They said they had huge respect for him and loved working with him as he always treated patients with respect, gentleness and care. In a statement released at the time, the trust said: “His quiet, gentle and respectful nature, his generosity of spirit, his sense of humour and his calming influence also made him popular with patients.” It added: “We have lost a valued member of our trust family – and in Carlos’s case, the word ‘family’ has a special relevance, as his wife, Cindy, works [at the hospital] as a healthcare assistant and his daughter, Clair, is a nurse on our acute stroke unit.” Alexander French, 29, from Hitchin, described the pain he and his mother, Valerie French, felt at not being able to be with his 98-year-old grandmother, Marjorie Bourke, when she died of pneumonia and heart failure on 15 May 2020. He said: “My mum and I were allowed to visit her at the hospital to say goodbye but were told that we had to do so separately, and that we could only spend 10 minutes each with her. Neither of us was allowed to stay with my grandma until she passed away, meaning she died alone, aged 98. “My mum still expresses her regret at not being there for her in her dying moments and will carry this guilt with her for the rest of her life.” Claudette Tinsley, 37, a graphic designer from Somerset, described the desperate moment her mother died at home from pneumonia caused by Parkinson’s disease after being told she would be treated among Covid patients if brought into hospital. She said: “The day before 15 May, her health took a turn and the on-call doctor had advised us that, as she had developed pneumonia she would be put with the Covid patients to assess her and that she’d likely catch it. I wouldn’t be able to visit her to help her recover and we knew she wouldn’t have a chance. “He prescribed strong antibiotics alongside medication to ease her passing if they didn’t work,” she added. “Then, on the morning of 15 May, I woke to a panicked phone call to come down quickly and found my brother frantically trying to wake her up but I knew this time we were too late, she had died some time in the night. “My mother wasn’t a statistic, she was a vibrant, loving person who was there one moment and then just gone,” she said. “So whilst No 10 was breaking their own rules, my family was suffering the consequences of what happens when you can’t send your loved ones to hospital any more.” All of this came shortly after the resignation of Prof Neil Ferguson, the epidemiologist whose modelling helped shape Britain’s coronavirus lockdown strategy, for flouting the rules by receiving visits from his lover at his home. The then health secretary, Matt Hancock, claimed to have been left “speechless” by Ferguson’s “extraordinary” behaviour, and said it had been right for him to resign as a government adviser. Hancock added that the social distancing rules were “there for everyone” and were “deadly serious”.Staff shortages caused by a jump in Covid cases have started to impact UK train services ahead of the annual festive getaway, with rail operators across the country announcing cancellations for the rest of the week until Christmas. Britain’s major long-distance operators are among the most affected by employees having to isolate at home because they or someone close to them has the virus. LNER has taken out 16 trains a day until 24 December between London, Lincoln and Leeds to cover “an increased level of absence in drivers and train managers due to coronavirus”, and warned it may have to make more cancellations at short notice for staffing reasons. On the other major line between London and Scotland, Avanti West Coast said services were “subject to short-notice cancellations and alterations due to the impact of Covid-19 on train crew availability”, and passengers should check before they travel. Crosscountry said services were likely to start later and finish earlier, and some trains could have fewer carriages than normal. ScotRail had already cancelled hundreds of services a week earlier due to staff shortages, after tighter rules in Scotland on self-isolation after contact with people with Covid increased the number of absences. Northern, Southern and TransPennine Express all warned of disruption due to staff sickness, while Greater Anglia said it was cancelling services because of a lack of demand, with most rail commuters now following government advice to work from home. Transport for London said about 500 of its frontline staff were currently off work due to a Covid-related illness. A spokesperson said: “The overall proportion of staff currently off work remains low, and we continue to do what we can to mitigate the impact and minimise the effect on our customers.” A spokesperson for the Rail Delivery Group, said: “As we showed last year during the pandemic, we will ensure that key workers can get to where they need to be. “We aren’t able to run every train as planned at the moment but … we will be working hard to give clear, accurate and timely information, and people should check before they travel.” Anthony Smith, chief executive of the independent watchdog Transport Focus, said: “It’s better for some services to be temporarily withdrawn on a planned basis than to have chaotic last-minute cancellations. “These are harder for passengers to deal with and more likely to lead to overcrowding. Passengers need clear, reliable information to plan their journeys. Anyone who has already bought tickets must be told and offered alternatives or their money back.” No trains will run on Christmas or Boxing Day as usual, while engineering work over the festive period will disrupt services into stations including Leeds, Bristol Parkway, London Victoria, and London St Pancras. Covid absences are also affecting parcel delivery firms. Royal Mail said a few local offices might not be able to deliver mail six days a week, due partly to Covid-related self-isolation or higher-than-usual levels of staff absences. A spokesperson said: “We are providing targeted support to the local offices affected … we apologise to customers for any inconvenience.” Hermes said it was experiencing delays in some parts of Scotland, and that the situation was being exacerbated by Scotland’s stricter Covid rules, under which all members of a household are required to isolate for ten days if anyone tests positive for Covid, regardless of their vaccination status, or if they continue to test negative for the virus. The company said: “Our couriers are working hard to address this and we apologise for any inconvenience caused.” Covid-related staff absences have also hit sectors including hospitality, theatre and tourism, with at least five national attractions having to shut in the run-up to Christmas.British politics this week faces an intellectual crisis. It is one of whom to believe. With yet another wave of Covid at full throttle, the cabinet is reportedly split on whether to rely on its one “winner” from the pandemic, vaccination, or whether to return to mass lockdown. There is no disputing that the Omicron variant is highly infectious. There is bitter argument about how to contain it. On one side is a prime minister, Boris Johnson, and much of his party, pleading for no lockdown. Vaccination, they say, is the one sure defence against this disease. What matters is hospitalisations and, at about 1,000 a day, they are far behind the 4,200 of January this year. Deaths are still further behind. Lockdown would savage the economy, even if relieved by state subsidy. It would bring back social and psychological isolation and devastate not just elderly people but often young people, too. The costs would be enormous. These, mostly Tory, politicians, believe the new outbreak should be dealt with via health policy. The NHS coped a year ago, but the service remains desperately inefficient. Only now is it apparently looking at how to expand care of elderly people to relieve hospital beds. Only now is it proposing to treat more patients at home, while making greater use of GPs, pharmacies and private testing clinics. The NHS is there to absorb pressure. That it may need more money cannot justify a return to lockdown. To these politicians, we should bank on vaccination and take a risk. On the other side are the massed ranks of what is called “the science”. While frontline doctors and medical staff face a sudden rise in patient numbers, scientists on the Sage committees face a nightmare. It is that of a relentlessly mutating virus that nobody yet knows whether vaccination can contain, let alone a vaccination that is readily available to all. They are backed by a strident train of statisticians, modellers, researchers and drug corporations. Each of these groups is a lobby with a vested interest in caution. Their motto is protect the NHS; or – by implication – the NHS will fail to protect you. Don’t take the risks, they cry. This year may not be as bad as last, but you don’t know. When you are racing the devil, you do not stop to ask if he is tiring. Lock down now. Both sides in this argument are political because both are playing a political game. They are exploiting fear and toying with risk. The public’s only sensible reply is constantly to demand evidence for what is claimed. Just now we are being told that the Omicron variant may be a weaker and possibly final form of the virus. Some scientists say it is, some say not. Professor of social psychology Stephen Reicher, who sits on a Sage subcommittee, says alarmingly that by 2022 it will be too late for an effective circuit-breaker lockdown, but how and why? What sort of lockdowns are most effective in reducing infection? Why might shops and schools be left open but indoors pubs and restaurants forced to close? Is that a cost-benefit equation? How many more lives are saved by 2-metre distancing compared to 1 metre? What is the real effect of a two-week “circuit breaker”, or is it just a macho gesture? These seem reasonable questions to which the coronavirus bureaucracy must have answers if it is so sure of the solutions. The public should be now be deluged with evidence if it is to trust government with renewed infringements on its liberties. Yet all it gets are bland, unqualified statistics that have lost any shock value. This is now a political battleground, one of lives lost, devastated and diminished, of costs collateral and unseen, and of ever-dwindling faith in authority. The British government is taking the power to apportion those costs across the nation. Its one duty in return is to present evidence. It must give reasons, reasons galore. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistAlmudena Grandes, who has died of cancer aged 61, achieved the rare feat of being both a very popular and a highly serious writer. A bestselling novelist, newspaper columnist, radio commentator and outspoken leftwinger in her native Spain, she became the main literary voice of a mass movement to recover her country’s historical memory. The government of José María Aznar in the early 2000s encouraged rightwing revisionism that falsified the history of the Spanish civil war and prettified Franco. In response, anti-Francoists and their descendants began to speak out against the murders, torture and imprisonments of the dictatorship. Even today, disgracefully, over 114,000 victims of Franco still lie in unmarked graves. “Spain is the only democracy in Europe,” Grandes wrote, “that turns its back on its own anti-fascist tradition.” She embarked on the ambitious project of a series of six novels with the title Episodios de una Guerra Interminable (Episodes in an Endless War), to record the forgotten struggles and suffering of anti-Franco fighters, especially women. Five of the six have been published, selling some 1.3m copies between them. The first, Inés y la Alegría (Inés and Happiness), came out in 2010. It is the story of the communist invasion of the Vall d’Aran in the Pyrenees in 1944, told not in heroic terms of military prowess, but mainly through Inés, cook for the partisans. The fourth, Los Pacientes del Dr García (Dr García’s Patients, 2017) won the Spanish government’s national narrative prize. Grandes’ model was Benito Pérez Galdós (1843-1920), Spain’s pre-eminent realist novelist, whose Episodios Nacionales (National Episodes) covered most of the 19th century. Like Galdós, Grandes focused on the lives and feelings of ordinary people trampled by history. Both were writing historical fiction in order to change the present and shape the future. She also appeared regularly on radio programmes and in 2008 took over the Monday back-page column that Manuel Vázquez Montalbán had made famous in the newspaper El País. She was a supporter of the political coalition United Left and took part in election campaigns, movements against male violence and for women’s rights, and campaigns against repressive legislation. One of four children of Manuel Grandes, who ran a plumbing business, and his wife, Benita Hernández, Almudena was born and brought up in Madrid. She told how she was a fat child who never got a part in the Christmas play. Her intimate revenge was in reading and dreaming of becoming a writer. She studied geography and history at Madrid’s main university, the Complutense – to please her parents, she said, though she would have preferred Latin. Belonging to the generation that came of age in the new post-1977 democracy, she plunged into the Madrid Movida, the youth explosion of freedom following the grey, repressed years of the dictatorship. After graduation she worked as a writer of encyclopedia texts. The research and time limits gave her, she said, the discipline to write. Her first completed book was the taboo-breaking Las Edades de Lulú (1989, translated as The Ages of Lulu, 2005), which won the Sonrisa Vertical (Vertical Smile) prize for erotic fiction. Not just literary porn, the novel explored the difficulties and joys for women in the new Spain, though many feminists saw it as a fantasy for men. Its unexpected success (more than 1m copies sold in 20 languages) gave Grandes the confidence and cash to write full-time. Her 1990s novels were mainly stories of young women finding their feet in the whirlwind of 80s Madrid. Los Aires Difíciles (2002, translated as The Wind From the East, 2006) is a saga of family conflict and secrets revealed, set mainly in Rota, on Andalusia’s Atlantic coast, where Grandes herself spent her summers for 30 years. Like most of her novels, it is long, packed with stories and characters and is almost a typical beach-read blockbuster; but it is slower, with deeper psychology, more like a fine 19th-century novel. Grandes entertained with powerful stories; and also wanted her readers to think. El Corazón Helado (2007; translated as The Frozen Heart, 2010) deals with a family shattered and split by the civil war. It opens with a young woman whom no one knows appearing at the funeral of a wealthy man. This device borrowed from sensationalist novels at once pulls in the reader. Like subsequent novels, it is a sweeping epic, covering decades of history and, in the case of The Frozen Heart, geography from Russia in wartime to contemporary Madrid. Six of her 13 novels have been made into films, including The Ages of Lulu, which was directed by Bigas Luna with Javier Bardem in his first starring role. Grandes is survived by her husband, the poet Luis García Montero, whom she married in 1996, their daughter Elisa, her son Mauro, from a previous relationship, and her stepdaughter, Irene. • María de la Almudena Grandes Hernández, novelist, born 7 May 1960; died 27 November 2021At least five national attractions including the Natural History Museum and Edinburgh Castle have closed because of the surge in Covid cases. The start of the Christmas school holidays is usually one of the busiest times at the Natural History Museum but it will be closed from Tuesday “due to an unforeseen staff shortage”. Other museums closed because of Covid include London’s Wellcome Collection in Euston, the National Army Museum in Chelsea, and the Foundling Museum in Bloomsbury. The British Museum remains open but warned visitors that some galleries may have to close at short notice. The Natural History Museum, the second most visited museum in the UK after Tate Modern, said it would remain closed for at least a week. “We have made the difficult decision to close our South Kensington site from Tuesday 21 December due to front-of-house staff shortages which have been affected by Covid-19 infections and isolation requirements. This is not a decision we have taken lightly but the safety of staff and visitors must always come first,” it said. “If you have bought tickets for wildlife photographer of the year or Fantastic Beasts: the Wonder of Nature for these dates, these will be cancelled and refunded. If you have bought tickets to one of our events we will email you with further information.” The museum’s ice rink, operating outside the building this year for the last time, will remain open. Edinburgh Castle, the second most visited attraction in Scotland, announced a temporary closure on Sunday that remains in place. In a series of tweets, it said: “We are sorry to let you know that we will temporarily close the castle as of 4pm today [Sunday] following a number of staff members testing positive for coronavirus. All members of staff identified are now self-isolating.” On Friday the Wellcome Collection in Euston, north London, announced it was also having to close until further notice after a surge of cases. The Foundling Museum said it had taken the “difficult decision” to close over the Christmas period and would not open again until 4 January. The National Army Museum said would be closed until 5 January “due to the impact of Covid-19”. The Museum Association’s journal reported that many museums had postponed or cancelled events and were rethinking their plans for the new year. A source at an unnamed London museum said it was struggling to keep all of its galleries open after a Covid outbreak among staff. The source was quoted as saying: “It feels a bit irresponsible for us to still be open and interacting with the public as some have tested negative lateral flow in the morning then positive halfway through their work day. We are dropping like flies and I really don’t see how they stay open for the next week.” The closure of museums comes as theatres have had to cancel performances during the festive period, which usually generates about a third of their income. As Omicron cases continue to rise, the government is considering “circuit break” restrictions which could include closing indoor entertainment venues again. But many theatres – including the National Theatre and the Young Vic – have already postponed shows to allow cast, crew and front of house staff to isolate. Of the 46 full members of the Society of London Theatre that had shows running this weekend, 22 cancelled their performances. They included huge tourist attractions such as Hamilton, Matilda, Wicked, The Lion King, and Cinderella. Theatre producer Sir Cameron Mackintosh said the industry was in a “dreadful state”. “It’s literally day-to-day. We spend all morning trying to work out if we can do the show or not,” Mackintosh told BBC News. Bookings for the first part of 2022 were also well below expectations, he added, which was “really worrying” for the industry. “We’ve all used our reserves to get the shows back up,” he said. “We are in a dreadful state at the moment and desperately need the government to help commercial theatre going through the next few weeks.” Theatres have told the Guardian they have been left “in crisis mode”, “on a knife-edge” and “terrified” of what the next weeks will bring. Many believe the industry is in its most precarious position, even after almost two years of uncertainty. Arts union Equity has called on the Chancellor, Rishi Sunak, to take action to protect workers in the creative industries, saying the current situation threatened “the fragile return of live performances”. Sharon Heal, director of the Museums Association, said: “Omicron has had an impact on museum staff because it is so transmissive. A large proportion of people who work in museums work in public facing positions, so they are vulnerable to picking up Covid.” She said the closures are likely to have hit museum’s finances. Heal said: “Christmas and Easter are the two big seasons for museums in terms of visitors, events and retail. And all of that is going to be adversely affected by the new variant. We would like to see some recognition from government that museums are being hit and that funding is needed.”As recently as 2005, less than a year after saddling his fourth Grand National winner, the late trainer Ginger McCain, of Red Rum fame, made a confident prediction that a female jockey would never win the world’s most famous steeplechase. At the time, it had been a decade since a woman had even taken part and only two of the 15 female jockeys who had ridden in the National had managed to complete the race. Sixteen years later, when Rachael Blackmore crossed the Aintree finishing line on Minella Times in April, a landmark moment for the sport was, at the same time, no great surprise. That says a little about how swiftly attitudes can change, and a great deal about Blackmore’s exceptional talent for steering half-ton steeplechasers around jumping’s most demanding tracks as quickly and efficiently as possible. The ride on Minella Times was textbook Blackmore: perfectly positioned from the off, saving ground on the inner and in touch with the lead, and finding a great response from her horse as he jumped the unique Aintree fences for the first time. When Blackmore eased into the lead two out, it was already a case of not if but by how far. Blackmore has never really engaged with talk of glass ceilings or breakthroughs, preferring instead to be seen as a jump jockey who happens to be female. It was the same after her greatest triumph in April, as it had been at the Cheltenham Festival three weeks earlier when six winners, including Honeysuckle in the Champion Hurdle on the opening afternoon, meant she won the award for the meeting’s leading rider for the first time. Blackmore finished the week one short of Ruby Walsh’s record at one Festival and came within a length and a quarter of getting it in the Gold Cup, as her mount A Plus Tard finished second behind Minella Indo in a 1-2 for her main trainer, Henry de Bromhead. De Bromhead saddled six winners over the week, including a unique treble in the “Holy Trinity” of feature events: the Champion Hurdle, the Champion Chase and the Gold Cup. That he was still beaten to the top trainer prize by Willie Mullins tells the story of an unprecedented week for Irish racing, with 23 of the 28 winners. The memory is still raw for British jumping before a 2022 Festival when a similar humiliation would be unthinkable. It was a Festival that helped Irish jumping – and the sport as a whole – to move on from a shocking scandal in February, when a photograph emerged on social media showing Gordon Elliott, one of the country’s leading trainers, posing on a dead horse on his gallops. If Blackmore’s victory at Aintree was the defining image of 2021 on the racecourse, then the Elliott photo was the abiding image away from the track. He was banned for six months by the Irish Horseracing Regulatory Board in early March and lost several stable stars to rival trainers as a result. In July, he parted company with Simon Munir and Isaac Souede after a Panorama investigation reported that their popular chaser, Vyta Du Roc, previously trained by Elliott, had ended his days in a British abattoir. Cheltenham and Aintree, like every major meeting over the jumps and on the Flat before the middle of May, had unfolded in near-silence in front of empty stands. Crowds were still subject to strict limitations in June, when 4,000 spectators saw Adayar give Charlie Appleby his second Derby winner in four seasons at the start of a long summer of success that would ultimately lead to him being crowned champion trainer on the Flat for the first time. Adayar and Hurricane Lane, Appleby’s St Leger winner, are expected to remain in training to lead his title defence next year. It was also 4,000 a day at Royal Ascot a few weeks later, with the Queen among the spectators on the final day, to herald an easing of restrictions and a return to full crowds in mid-July. Oisin Murphy, with five winners, was the top rider at the Royal meeting for the first time and went on to edge a nip-and-tuck battle with William Buick for the Flat jockeys’ championship and claim the title for the third year running. Murphy had widely reported problems away from the track, however, including a fracas in a Newmarket pub and two positive tests for excess alcohol, in May and September. Britain’s best Flat jockey relinquished his licence last week to address his issues with alcohol and admitted misleading the British Horseracing Authority over a breach of Covid protocols in September 2020. and He faces a disciplinary hearing in the new year, which could result in a significant ban. A decision that could potentially have huge significance not only for racing but also many other professional sports arrived on Tuesday, when Freddy Tylicki won his legal case against fellow rider Graham Gibbons over a fall at Kempton in 2016 which left Tylicki confined to a wheelchair. The case, the first involving two jockeys in which the claim has succeeded, raises questions over stewarding, as the incident was deemed accidental at an inquiry on the day. It could also have implications for the future cost of the indemnity insurance scheme which covers jockeys against such claims. Judgment in the Tylicki case came a few days after another landmark decision – by the BHA’s independent disciplinary panel – that Robbie Dunne subjected his fellow jockey Bryony Frost to a seven-month campaign of bullying and intimidation last year. Dunne is considering an appeal against his 18-month ban, but Frost, who has spoken of being isolated by her weighing-room colleagues after lodging her complaint, will hope to move on quickly from the most difficult time of her career, perhaps with a second win on Frodon in the King George VI Chase on Boxing Day on her CV. Frodon is the 5-1 third-favourite for Sunday’s race, while Blackmore is likely to ride the second-favourite, Minella Indo. What, you wonder, would Ginger McCain make of that? Talking Horses on Monday will return on 10 JanAn aspiring artist convicted of murdering one of the UK’s wealthiest landowners and attempting to murder his mother has been jailed for a minimum of 36 years. Thomas Schreiber, 35, killed Sir Richard Sutton, 83, in a knife attack at the multimillionaire’s country estate in Dorset during Covid lockdown restrictions in April. He also injured Anne Schreiber, 66, so badly that she remains in hospital eight months later. Schreiber was found guilty of murder and attempted murder on Friday after a three-week trial at Winchester crown court. He previously admitted Sutton’s manslaughter but denied murder. The judge, Mr Justice Garnham, sentenced Schreiber to life with a minimum term of 36 years for the attack. Sentencing, he told Schreiber: “Your actions have caused utter devastation in the Sutton and Schreiber families.” He added: “You treated Sir Richard’s house and possessions as if they were your own. You showed neither him or your mother any respect. Instead, during your time in their home you displayed a breathtaking sense of entitlement. At times you left Sir Richard feeling like a prisoner in his own home. You are a man with a very bad temper.” Schreiber admitted carrying out the “horror show” attack on the pair on the eighth anniversary of the death of his alcoholic father, David Schreiber, after he said his mother had shouted at him for being “drunk like his father”. He told the court: “I just went completely crazy, I completely snapped and I just launched for her and began attacking her uncontrollably.” Sobbing and shaking, Schreiber’s sister, Rose McCarthy, read her victim impact statement in court directly to the defendant, saying: “You took a knife to our world. In doing so you took away Richard, you took away the most innocent and kindest of men in the most brutal of ways. He never stood a chance. “You also killed our mother. You took her life away and left her trapped in a body she can’t use and is in constant pain.” With the defendant crying in the dock, she added: “Tom, I love you but I struggle so badly with what you have done. What a waste of all these lives for a moment’s anger.” Their sister, Louisa Schreiber, added in her statement: “I miss my mother’s touch most of all. It pains me when she asks me to put her arms around me.” During a break in proceedings, Schreiber, sobbing, spoke to his sisters from the dock, saying: “I am so sorry, I really am. I love you.” In a letter to the judge, the defendant spoke of his “heartfelt shame and total disgust” at his actions. He added: “I have been a coward, hugely arrogant and selfish in my behaviour. I am so sorry for this and wish I had the clarity of thought I have now.” He added: “This was not the actions of a demonic monster but someone in need of help and intervention.” The victim’s son, Sir David Sutton, told the court: “This was a senseless act that has taken away the life all too early of a generous, loving, elderly man who only wanted to enjoy his twilight years.” The attack happened at Sir Richard Sutton’s Moorhill estate near Gillingham, Dorset, which he shared with the Schreiber family following the separation of the defendant’s parents. The trial heard that the defendant was angry with his mother for “abandoning” his father, who suffered from depression, to move in with Sutton and that Schreiber accused her of being a “gold-digging bitch”. Schreiber also felt that Sutton treated him unfairly compared with his two sisters despite him receiving a £1,000 monthly allowance and £100,000 towards buying a house. The court heard that family arguments descended into violence on three previous occasions including once when Sutton hit the defendant with his walking stick in November 2020, causing the cane to shatter and leaving Schreiber “humiliated”. The defendant blamed lockdown for worsening his mental health by forcing him to remain in the “toxic pressure boiler” environment of Sutton’s estate. In March 2021 he told a friend: “My mind is consumed with hatred of the very worst kind towards my family. I contemplate murdering them all morning day and night.” Anne Schreiber – who listened to the sentencing proceedings by video link – suffered up to 15 separate injuries including wounds to her head and body including a partially severed spinal cord that has left her paralysed. Schreiber was also sentenced for driving dangerously when he failed to stop a Range Rover for armed police in a 135mph pursuit after the killing. When he was detained he stabbed himself in the chest and shouted at officers to shoot him.Joy Morrissey MP seems more impressed by the medical advice of elected politicians than that of medical professionals (Chris Whitty v Tory MP Joy Morrissey: who to believe on Covid?, 17 December). Perhaps the next time she needs medical treatment, she should be treated not by her GP or a hospital consultant, but by an elected representative. The question is, would it need to be an MP, or would a local councillor do? Ian Saville London • In your article (18 December) on the Duchess of Argyll and her 1963 divorce, you say “the contraceptive pill [was] made available for single women the following decade”. It was well before then. Thank goodness for an enlightened doctor at Newcastle University in 1967. My life might otherwise have been very different (I’m still with him, by the way). Jan Jeffries Brewood, Staffordshire • I have a lot of sympathy for Tom Kerridge and the whole hospitality industry (The government has hung hospitality out to dry – I’ve lost £65k in bookings this week, 16 December), but I can’t help feeling that had the industry supported vaccine passports, they would now be in a better position – as would we all. Pete Grist London • As an arachnophile, I can’t help regretting that Spider-Man (‘Comic-book crack for generations’: why Spider-Man still has us all in his web, 17 December) shoots streams of web from his hands and not from his bum. What missed potential. Fr Chris Benson Manaton, Devon • When my great-uncle Ellis wanted guests to leave (Letters, 19 December) he’d sit down at the piano and play God Save the King. Vivien Heilbron London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.You report that Nadhim Zahawi plans to encourage former teachers to help fill the gaps left by staff shortages (Omicron leads many UK schools to close early for Christmas, 16 December). How will that encouragement read? Might I suggest: “Dear former teacher, we have made such a complete mess of protecting our vulnerable children and adults in schools, with no masks, distancing, air filtration or adequate ventilation, that many teachers are now absent from school suffering from Covid after repeated exposure to both the Delta and Omicron variants. Please would you, as a former teacher, sacrifice your own health to replace them, even though you probably left the job you loved because of our government’s educational mismanagement and contempt for your professionalism since 2010? “We are especially appealing to retired teachers, as you are of course especially vulnerable to this coronavirus and have probably tried hard to keep yourself safe and healthy for the last two years, not even seeing your grandchildren as much as you would wish. You will be on a zero-hours contract, through an outsourced agency that will take more than half of what the school pays you. We can guarantee that teaching is nothing like the profession you left; you will not be expected to care about the mental health of vulnerable children, but you will be blamed for their attainment in exams failing to reach Ofsted’s arbitrary standards.” I am sure Mr Zahawi will be inundated with applications. Doreen Worthington Lincoln • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The departure of Lord Frost as Brexit minister (Report, 19 December) is the first sign I have seen for some time that the Conservative government may be pursuing some sensible policies. Frost either misunderstood the EU or grossly underestimated its resolve, and has been a disaster in negotiating our exit. His departure is to be warmly welcomed, and one hopes that it leads to a substantial reset of the UK’s approach in that area. Moreover, his additional reasons for leaving the government – that the Covid response is too interfering and the tax policy too socialist – amply demonstrate his detachment from both reality and humanity. As he was only ennobled to complete our EU exit, one presumes he will be handing back his ermine robes? David Smith Accra, Ghana • After Lord Frost’s resignation, Nadine Dorries tried to defend the prime minister in the Conservative WhatsApp group (Report, 19 December), but her post was deemed unacceptable by “libertarian” Steve Baker, who then deleted her from it. Surely any true libertarian should respect this most basic principle described by John Stuart Mill: “The peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is, that it is robbing the human race; posterity as well as the existing generation; those who dissent from the opinion, still more than those who hold it.” Apparently, however, Mr Baker has no respect for this principle. Peter Swann Nottingham • So Lord Frost has resigned because he does not like the direction the government is going in. I had no idea this government had a direction. Pray, tell us more. Kathleen O’Neill Hayling Island, Hampshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Today, 20 December, would have been my son’s 47th birthday. On 19 May 2020, four days after the picture was taken of the prime minister partying in the Downing Street garden (Report, 19 December), my son’s funeral took place. The number of people allowed to attend funerals was limited. In normal times the place would have been full. Church services were not allowed. No singing was allowed. You couldn’t even have an order of service printed. You could only have one floral arrangement, no other flowers. We had to sit at a two-metre distance from each other and wear masks throughout. We all had to leave and go straight home, as holding even a small socially distanced gathering was illegal. You were not allowed to meet indoors or in gardens and pubs, and restaurants were closed. Looking at the picture of a man with no moral compass justifying this as a work meeting is truly insulting. Name and address supplied • As a human resources consultant with considerable experience, it concerns me greatly that according to your recent picture, 10 Downing Street apparently has no “alcohol at work” policy in force. No 10 may be a home, but it is also a workplace, and we have been assured that the photo shows a work meeting. A typical policy states: “The company requires all employees to report for duty free from the effects of alcohol and drugs. It is not acceptable to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs at work or consume alcohol or drugs during hours of work – this includes paid and unpaid breaks.” Staff breaking these rules are normally found guilty of serious misconduct. Surely we need further clarification on this issue? Many organisations will be looking to have outdoor work meetings as the Covid situation deteriorates. Stephanie Gaunt Hastings, East Sussex • The cheese and wine “meeting” marks another shift in the Tory culture wars. Any self-respecting anti-Tory knows that in the 2020s, the pairing is cheese and craft beer. The gathering also underlines what we saw with Dominic Cummings in that first lockdown – a sense of their lockdowns and ours. They can continue to go about their business as they will. Meanwhile, many of those in city flats without access to outside space were being harassed and sometimes arrested by the police in parks. Lockdown by class is probably no more than we should expect in Tory Britain 2021. Keith Flett Tottenham, London • Downing Street tells us that work meetings sometimes included drinks, ie wine. Does this help to explain the poor decisions by No 10 in the last two years? Catherine Wykes Derby • It looks like our garden on most days: a flock of tits feeding on whatever food and drink is available. William Moloney Bishop’s Stortford, Hertfordshire • Babies are banned from working sessions in the House of Commons. How come they’re allowed at working sessions in the No 10 garden? Maureen Vilar Portsmouth, Hampshire • Incredibly, it appears that a piss-up (in a government building for sure, but perhaps also in a brewery) might be the one thing that this government is capable of organising. Dr Paul Somerfield Plymouth • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.A leading figure in Egypt’s 2011 uprising, his lawyer and a blogger have been served lengthy prison sentences in a Cairo court, in a move that observers have branded a further blow to human rights. An emergency court on Monday sentenced activist Alaa Abd El-Fattah to five years in prison on charges of “spreading false news”. Human rights lawyer Mohamed El-Baqer, formerly Abd El-Fattah’s counsel, and blogger Mohamed “Oxygen” Ibrahim were both sentenced to four years in detention on the same charges. The sentences are awaiting ratification by President Abdel Fatah al-Sisi but cannot be appealed against. Egyptian state media reported that the three were sentenced “on charges of joining a terrorist group”. The trial represents the latest in a prolonged string of attacks on Egyptian civil society and human rights, often with particular aim at figures like Abd El-Fattah associated with the protests that overthrew former autocrat Hosni Mubarak in 2011. Human Rights Watch and Abd El-Fattah’s relatives said that “the trial was rife with … due process violations.” All three have been held in pre-trial detention for over two years, including long periods without knowing the charges against them, swept up in arrests targeting prominent civil society figures following a brief spell of anti-government protests. El-Baqer was arrested when he went to a police station in order to defend his client. Passages of Abd El-Fattah’s book You Have Not Yet Been Defeated were written, and smuggled out, while he was held in Cairo’s Tora prison. The three detainees represent a generation of Egyptian activists trapped in the country’s labyrinthine prison system with little end in sight. “He told me through the bars that he’s going to die in prison,” Abd El-Fattah’s mother, Laila Soueif, wrote in an opinion piece for the New York Times. Oxygen reportedly attempted suicide inside prison earlier this year. “This is not a TV show, this is my family’s life [held] captive to Sisi’s prisons since 2013,” tweeted Mona Seif, Abd El-Fattah’s sister. “This is our future frozen indefinitely, or until a time this regime feels content with its vengeance.” Defence lawyers were prevented from viewing case documents clarifying the charges against their clients without the presence of security officials, and hearings lasted just three sessions. Lawyers acting for the defence were not permitted to present arguments in support of their clients. Oxygen was first arrested in 2018, and repeatedly hit with new charges before finishing his sentence or mandated pre-trial detention period, a process that rights observers call a “revolving door” prison system. Abd El-Fattah has been detained repeatedly since 2013, largely for violating a law banning street protests. He was later subject to a lengthy parole that required him to spend 12 hours every day sleeping inside his local police station. He is currently held in a maximum security facility without access to reading materials as punishment. In a rare statement, the German foreign ministry said the trial against El-Baqer shows “where the human rights situation in Egypt is heading”. Egypt’s foreign ministry hit back, calling the German statement “a blatant and unjustified interference in Egyptian internal affairs”. The three defendants, Human Rights Watch added, were part of a group of civil society figures abruptly summoned to trial shortly before Egypt ended a national state of emergency in late October, in place for most of the past 40 years. Observers had hoped that the lifting of the emergency law could provide a small step towards mitigating draconian laws governing protest, free expression and civil society imposed since President Sisi swept to power in a 2013 military coup. Yet the emergency law has been largely replaced by a sweeping anti-terrorism legislation used primarily to target peaceful dissidents.Boris Johnson has held off announcing further Covid restrictions now - although he has hinted that new measures may be announced shortly. In a statement after a cabinet meeting lasting at least two hours, he claimed that the arguments for and against further restrictions - interventions being forcefully demanded by government scientific advisers - were “very, very finely balanced”. (See 5.50pm.) One leading Tory rebel on this issue welcomed this as evidence that the PM was pushing back against “lockdown fanatics”. (See 6.01pm.) But Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, accused Johnson of being “scared of his backbenchers”. Streeting suggested the government should be following the example of the Labour administration in Cardiff, which has already announced that further restrictions will come into force in Wales after Christmas. The UK has recorded 91,743 new coronavirus cases - the second highest daily total on this measure. (See 4.15pm.) Downing Street has defended a photograph showing Boris Johnson, his wife and up to 17 staff seemingly having drinks in the Downing Street garden during the first lockdown, insisting they were discussing work at the time. In his post-cabinet TV interview Johnson said the photograph just showed “people at work talking about work”. UK nightclubs and gyms have joined hospitality operators in calling on the government to provide urgent financial support, as trade slumps and customers stay away amid rising Covid cases. Staff shortages caused by a jump in Covid cases have started to impact UK train services ahead of the annual festive getaway, with rail operators across the country announcing cancellations for the rest of the week until Christmas. At least five national attractions including the Natural History Museum and Edinburgh Castle have closed because of the surge in Covid cases. That is all from me for today. But our Covid coverage continues on our global live blog. It’s here. The UK Health Security Agency has now published its latest Omicron daily overview (pdf). It shows that analysis suggests that at the end of last week 69% of Covid cases in the UK had the S-gene target failure - which is seen as a very reliable indicator for Omicron. In London the figure was almost 90%. Esther McVey, the Tory former cabinet minister, thinks Boris Johnson’s statement tonight (see 5.50pm) shows he is responding to Conservative backbench opinion. She was one of the Tories who voted against the government in all three Covid votes last week - on face coverings, Covid passes and mandatory vaccination for NHS workers. Here is the opening statement that Boris Johnson delivered at the start of his pooled TV interview after cabinet. It sums up his position, which is that he is not announcing further Covid restrictions now, but clearly warning that such measures may be coming shortly. He said: We’ve had a long discussion in cabinet for a couple of hours now, a very good discussion, at which we agreed that the situation is extremely difficult and the arguments either way are very, very finely balanced. Because we’ve got cases of Omicron surging across the country now, we’ve got hospitalisations, rising quite steeply in London, and the obvious conclusion is that of course it was right to go fast for plan B in the way that we did, and also right to double the speed of the booster rollout ... And in view of the balance of risks and uncertainties, particularly around the infection hospitalisation rate of Omicron - how many people does Omicron put into hospital of the infected – and some other uncertainties to do with severity and booster effectiveness and so on, we agreed that we should keep the data from now on under constant review, keep following it hour by hour. And unfortunately I must say to people we will have to reserve the possibility of taking further action to protect the public ... and we won’t hesitate to take that action. But in the meantime, what I would say to everybody is please exercise caution as you go about your lives, please think of the guidance and think protecting yourself and your loved ones. And please get a booster, please get a vaccination. Given that some government sources are hinting that further restrictions are likely after Christmas, possibly starting a week tomorrow (see 2.49am), Johnson’s claim that making an announcement now about new measures would be premature may seem disingenous. His caution is undoubtedly influenced by the fact that some Tory MPs are vehemently opposed to further regulations. But even Labour, which has been demanding more clarity now, has indicated that it is not in favour of new restrictions on social mixing coming into force before Christmas (see 10.57am), and so Johnson, like the opposition, may in part be also just making a judgment about what is acceptable to the public. These are from ITV’s Anushka Asthana, who conducted the pooled interview with Boris Johnson after the cabinet meeting. Boris Johnson also said the government reserved the “possibility of taking further action” to protect public health because of the spread of the Omicron variant, PA Media reports: Following a meeting of the cabinet, the prime minister said they were monitoring the situation “hour by hour”. “Unfortunately I must say to people that we will have to reserve the possibility of taking further action to protect the public, to protect public health, to protect our NHS,” he said. “We won’t hesitate to take action.” Johnson also said nothing was ruled out for the future. Boris Johnson has said the decisions for and against further restrictions are “finely balanced”, my colleague Aubrey Allegretti reports. According to Sage, the argument for further restrictions are not at all finely balanced, but compelling. See 10.33am. The quote is from a pooled TV interview that Boris Johnson has recorded. I will post more from it shortly. Some of the data being studied most closely by scientists and ministers as they consider what to do about Omicron will be the hospital admissions data. Omicron took off in London before anywhere else in the UK, and here are the hospital admission figures for London from the government’s Covid dashboard today. Admissions are still only a quarter of what they were at the peak in January, but the seven-day rolling average has gone from about 90 at the start of November to more than double that in the middle of last week. The actual figure now is likely to be even higher. The UK Health Security Agency has announced that there have been another 8,044 Omicron cases confirmed since yesterday, taking the total to 45,145. That’s a 22% increase. Newsnight’s Lewis Goodall has a useful Twitter thread about some of the theatres and museums that are now closing because of Covid. It starts here. The UK has recorded 91,743 new coronavirus cases, the government’s Covid dashboard says. That is the second highest recorded total ever, beaten only by the figure for Friday last week, when 93,045 cases were recorded. (Comparisons are only appropriate with the second and third waves, because there was very little testing during the first wave, which kept recorded cases very low.) And the total number of new cases over the past week is now up 60.8% on the total for the previous week. Yesterday the week on week total was up 51.9%. There have been 44 further deaths, and week-on-week deaths are still going down, by 5.4% on today’s figure. Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, is also accusing Boris Johnson of dithering over the announcement of new Covid measures. Mark Harper, chair of the Covid Recovery Group, which represents lockdown-sceptic Tory MPs, has urged the government to be more open about the measures it is planning, and the data behind it. Harper’s tweet implies that ministers have already decided what they will do, but have just not got round to telling anyone. That may not be the case; throughout this process decisions have been made at the last minute, after much dither. And although governments routinely keep advice from officials confidential, with Covid there is more transparency than in most other areas of policymaking. The main advice is coming from Sage, the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, and a raft of papers considered at its last meeting, on Thursday last week, is now on its website, as well as the minutes (pdf). The Department for Education is urging former teachers in England who have time available to return to the classroom next term to help cover for absent staff. As it explains in its news release, “the Omicron variant is expected to continue to cause increased staff absence levels in the spring term, and some local areas may struggle to find sufficient numbers of supply teachers available unless former staff come forward.” The Disability Charities Consortium, which represents major disability charities, has written an open letter to Boris Johnson saying it has “grave concerns” that governmment measures announced to deal with Omicron do not pay enough concerns to the needs of disabled people. It is particularly critical of the lack of fresh guidance for the clinically extremely vulnerable, and it says disabled people are having problems getting booster jabs. On this point it says: We have had sight of a letter from the DHSC [Department of Health and Social Care] dated 17th December that encourages priority access for the clinically vulnerable including disabled people. We know that disabled people do not have the same flexibility for attending appointments as others, especially if relying on support from carers or personal assistants. Those who require facilities such as accessible parking and toilets face less choice in where they can get a booster. For many, walk-in centres are not an option due to long queues. Whilst the latest letter is positive about queue management, we urge the government to monitor the take up of the booster amongst disabled people and ensure all venues and information are accessible for disabled people across the country, and to give priority access to disabled people. The Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities has announced that it is providing £28m to councils in England to help them get rough sleepers vaccinated. Michelle O’Neill, the Sinn Féin leader in Northern Ireland and deputy first minister, has described today’s court ruling on the DUP’s boycott of ministerial meetings with the Irish government (see 2.17pm) as an “embarrassing indictment” of the party. She said: The DUP declared publicly that they are engaged in a political boycott of North-South Ministerial Council meetings in protest at the Brexit protocol. Today the high court stated that they cannot force DUP ministers to act in good faith who are wilfully disregarding the rule of law and in breach of the ministerial code of conduct through their boycott of the North-South Ministerial Council. The court acknowledges that the DUP is in plain breach of their obligations. This is an embarrassing indictment of the DUP and their continued juvenile antics in the executive. According to ITV’s Anushka Asthana, a Zoom briefing about Covid that Sir Patrick Vallance, the government’s chief scientific adviser, was due to hold with MPs this afternoon has been postponed. According to the Times’ Steven Swinford, Boris Johnson is not likely to announce further Covid restrictions today. UPDATE: The Sun has had a similar briefing. DUP ministers who are boycotting cross-border political meetings as part of a protest against Brexit’s Northern Ireland protocol are in “abject breach of their solemn pledge”, a high court judge has said. However, as PA Media reports, Mr Justice Scoffield declined to make any order mandating the ministers to set a date and agenda for the next meeting of the North South Ministerial Council (NSMC), citing concerns about the courts getting involved in ongoing political matters. PA says: The judge also said that given recent violence in Northern Ireland attributed to opposition to the protocol, it was incumbent on political leaders to be seen to be upholding the law. Belfast businessman Sean Napier has already secured a court judgment that declared the DUP boycott as unlawful. However, that ruling has not prompted a change in the DUP policy of non-engagement. Napier’s lawyers sought a further ruling compelling DUP first minister Paul Givan to engage with Sinn Féin deputy first minister Michelle O’Neill and the Irish government to set a date and agenda for the next plenary meeting of the NSMC. It cannot happen without the participation of the DUP and the party is currently not engaging in the cross-border political structures set up under the Good Friday agreement, with the exception of meetings related to health issues. The party contends that the Brexit protocol and its associated barriers on Irish Sea trade have damaged east/west relations and, as such, it should not be business as usual when it comes to north-south relations. Mr Justice Scoffield refused to grant the mandatory order against the DUP ministers, but reaffirmed his earlier declaration that their policy was unlawful. NHS England has said that more than 1.5m booster jabs were administered over the weekend. There were 830,403 on Saturday, an all-time record, and 726,195 yesterday. In a news release, NHS England said: In the week since the prime minister declared the fight against Omicron a national mission, NHS staff and volunteers have stepped up and delivered more than 4.6m doses of the Covid booster vaccine, a full 85% more than the previous seven days. The NHS has also delivered over 1m first and second doses in December so far. Some 443,919 first doses and 568,129 second doses in December have been delivered as people continue to come forward for their initial jabs with vaccinations offering the best protection against coronavirus. Independent Sage, the independent group of scientists that has been critical of government Covid policy, often because it favours tougher restrictions, has published a document explaining how people can draw up a household plan for safe mixing over Christmas. There is a link here. And here is a full summary of the lobby briefing. Boris Johnson will chair a cabinet meeting to discuss the Covid situation at 2pm, Downing Street said. (See 12.33pm.) The PM’s spokesman restated the claim that No 10 staff photographed having a drink in Downing Street last May, when lockdown restrictions were in force, were attending a work meeting. This is what No 10 told the Guardian yesterday, although Dominic Raab, the deputy PM, claimed this morning they were having a drink after meetings. The spokesman resolved this apparent contradiction by saying the gathering took place “after normal working hours”, but that it was a “work meeting” because staff were discussing work. Asked why drink was involved, the spokesman said it was after normal working hours and having a drink was not against the rules. Asked why Carrie Johnson, the PM’s wife, was there, the spokesman said that because the family live at Downing Street, it’s her garden too. He would not discuss why she seemed to be participating in the meeting. Asked if Sue Gray, the senior civil servant who is investigating the propriety of No 10 parties during lockdown, would include this in his inquiry, the spokesman said that was up to her. Asked if Martin Reynolds, the PM’s principal private secretary, was one of those photographed, the spokesman would not say. But he said Reynolds was not involved in the Gray inquiry, so there was no conflict of interest. Asked if No 10 would publish the minutes of this “meeting”, the spokesman said not every meeting involved minutes being taken. The spokesman sidestepped a question about whether Johnson preferred guidance to restrictions as a means of controlling Covid. Asked about this, the spokesman said: “We will take any necessary steps in the interest of protecting lives and livelihoods.” He also said that at times both approaches had been used. You have seen we’ve in the past introduced some things in guidance in the past and some things in regulation. We’ve got the position as set out through plan B and we’re keeping that under review. The spokesman defended Johnson’s non-attendance at yesterday’s Cobra meeting (see 11.09am and 11.19am) He said that Johnson had chaired other meetings on Covid over the weekend. And he said it was appropriate for Steve Barclay, the chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, to chair this meeting because it focused on the devolved administrations. The spokesman did not rule out the possibility of the isolation rules being changed, so that people who test positive don’t always have to isolate for a full 10 days. Ministers are reportedly considering this plan. Asked if that was correct, the spokesman said: We will keep anything like that on the isolation period under review based on the latest clinical advice and we would update if that were to change. Laura Kuenssberg will step down as the BBC’s political editor at Easter and take on a senior presenting and reporting role, the broadcaster said. The Downing Street lobby briefing has finished, and No 10 has confirmed that Boris Johnson will be chairing cabinet at 2pm. It will take place virtually. Prof Chris Whitty, the government’s chief medical adviser, and Sir Patrick Vallance, its chief scientific adviser, will update ministers on the Covid situation. No 10 has not announced a press conference later, although it has not ruled one out either. The PM’s spokesman would not say whether ministers would be asked at the meeting to approve new restrictions. I will post more from the briefing shortly. Keir Starmer has said that to claim that the Downing Street staff gathering in the garden last May, featured in a photograph obtained by the Guardian, was a work meeting is “a bit of a stretch”. He told Sky News: Everybody will have looked at that photograph and to suggest that that is a work meeting is a bit of a stretch by anybody’s analysis. I think there are very serious questions to be answered, but just look at the photo and ask yourself is that a work meeting going on or is that a social event? I think the answer is pretty obvious. Starmer also said the photograph was taken at a time when some family members had to miss funerals. He said: During that period there were funerals of people where very few people could go and mourn those that had tragically died. That is the real contrast: that picture, which as I say is a real stretch to pretend that is a work meeting, versus and up against pictures of those who have lost someone and not been able even to go to the funeral. Prof Carl Heneghan, a GP and director of the Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine at the University of Oxford, has been one of the UK scientists most sceptical about the case for ongoing lockdowns or Covid restrictions. In an interview with BBC Radio 4’s Today programme this morning, he said people were already moderating their behaviour in response to the threat posed by Omicron without the need for new laws. He said: If you’re in Greater London now, [population in] the workplace is down by 40%, public transport down by 40%. In the City of London, it’s up to 60%. So people are able to respond to information or adapt their behaviour accordingly. The question here is when are we going to treat people like adults? People will moderate their behaviour accordingly. That’s what we need to trust people to do going forward because that’s the only sustainable policy. Heneghan said that moving to annual winter lockdowns would be a mistake. He explained: This time last year, there were over 2,000 people being admitted. So we’re in a very different place with the presence of vaccines, the presence of the boosters, antivirals on board, and you have to reflect on that information. We’re in deep, deep trouble here of potentially talking ourselves into annual winter lockdown. Because what happens is this is as good as it gets. According to the Sun’s Harry Cole, confirmed by the BBC, Boris Johnson is chairing a cabinet meerting at 2pm. Cabinet does not normally meet on a Monday, so this will be an emergency Covid one. In an interview with broadcasters this morning Keir Starmer said Boris Johnson should produce a plan for dealing with Covid. Labour was ready to support further measures, he said. But the government needed to produce a plan. Starmer said “obsession with party management” was holding the government back. That was the wrong priority, he said. He went on: We don’t have access to all the information the prime minister and the government have got. They’ve got that information. I think people are crying out for some leadership, they want us to say to the prime minister, ‘Where are you? Come up with a plan – don’t hint at restrictions – come up with a plan. Let us see [it].’ And we the opposition should say, as we’ve said before, if it’s a plan that we think is right and in the public interest, we will support it. UPDATE: Starmer also accused Johnson of a vaccum of leadership. He said: What I want to see is a government, a prime minster, that gets a grip, that puts a plan forward that we can all get behind. But where is he? There’s a vacuum of leadership at the moment. The infighting is going on in the Tory party when the focus should really be on the public interest and public health. At the moment, my frustration is that the prime minister is completely absent. Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, the DUP leader, told the BBC this morning that he thought the resignation of David Frost as Brexit minister had weakened the government’s negotiating position with the EU over the Northern Ireland protocol. He said: From the conversations I had with Lord Frost, he was concerned that there is still a very substantial gap between the EU and the UK in the negotiations. He felt, I think, that we were fast approaching the time when the UK government needed to take unilateral action. I do think that it harms the government’s position when you lose your chief negotiator in these circumstances and I think that the prime minister needs to get to grips with this issue. Donaldson also said that, unless the EU agrees to UK demands for changes to the protocol, Johnson should trigger article 16, suspending parts of it, early in the new year. He said: In July the government accepted that the conditions had been met to trigger article 16 and for the UK government to take unilateral action to remove the barriers to trade between Northern Ireland and Great Britain ... I think we have reached the point now where if we don’t get progress then the UK government has to call it, and that is why I am saying the prime minister is faced with a choice, and I think that choice will come very early in the new year. This can’t go on. I am saying to the prime minister, it is time for you to act, this is simply unacceptable. Keir Starmer has criticised Boris Johnson and Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, for missing yesterday’s meeting of Cobra, the government’s emergency committee, which was discussing Covid. Here is a question from below the line. And here is an answer, of sorts. This is the readout that the Cabinet Office sent out yesterday evening. This afternoon Steve Barclay, the chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, chaired a constructive Cobr [sic - it is the media who call it Cobra, not government] meeting between the UK government and the devolved administrations to discuss potential workforce disruption arising from the omicron variant, and plans to prepare for that. They agreed to continue to monitor the emerging data over the coming days, working closely with businesses and public agencies across the UK to understand the impact on industry and services. During the meeting the UK government announced it would be doubling funding for the devolved administrations – meaning they can now spend an additional £860m, up from the initial £430m announced earlier this week. The UK government and the devolved administrations agreed it was important to continue to work together and have regular discussions. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, questioned whether the money for Scotland was new. In her interview on the Today programme this morning Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, implied that Labour does not favour the introduction of further Covid measures before Christmas. Asked if Labour favoured restrictions for England for Christmas Day, she replied: I want everything to be done to protect the family Christmas. And that is what I think mums and dads and grandparents around the country are desperate to hear from the government now, what can be done to protect that. Reeves also said that the latest Covid numbers were “alarming” and said: “Anybody who has looked at them with any seriousness knows that inaction is no longer an option.” She went on: And I would like to do what is necessary to protect the family Christmas and that means listening to the scientists about what can be done to ensure that people can meet up for that limited period of time. But in Wales, for example, they’ve got a roadmap for straight after Christmas of closing down some of those biggest venues. In backing further measures taking effect in England just after Christmas, Labour is in line with what Sage is demanding. See 10.33am. Reeves also said the government should improve sick pay, to make it easier for people to isolate, and focus on improving ventilation. With ministers considering what further Covid measures they may announce, it is worth recalling what Sage, the government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, is recommending. Here is the key extract from the minutes (pdf) of a meeting held on Thursday last week. The minutes were released on Saturday. They say: Without intervention beyond those measures already in place (‘plan B’), modelling indicates a peak of at least 3,000 hospital admissions per day in England. Some scenarios have significantly worse outcomes during the first few months of 2022 but there are many uncertainties. If the aim is to reduce the levels of infection in the population and prevent hospitalisations reaching these levels, more stringent measures would need to be implemented very soon. The earlier interventions happen the greater the effect they will have (high confidence). This may also mean that they can be kept in place for a shorter duration. Illustrative scenarios from SPI-M-O suggest that measures equivalent to those in place after step 2 or step 1 of the roadmap in England, if enacted early enough, could substantially reduce the potential peak in hospital admissions and infections compared with plan B alone (medium confidence). The timing of such measures is crucial. Delaying until 2022 would greatly reduce the effectiveness of such interventions and make it is less likely that these would prevent considerable pressure on health and care settings. A reversion to steps 1 or 2 from the roadmap out of lockdown would feel to many like a return to lockdown. The Sage scientists are often criticised by Tory MPs for allegedly usurping the rule of ministers and this advice is phrased in such a way as to imply that Sage is not telling ministers what they must do (“If the aim ... more stringent measures would need” etc). But the minutes also make it clear that Sage does want to see new measures coming into force before 2022. Boris Johnson will face strong criticism from his party if he endorses any further restrictions, but delaying their introduction until after Christmas would somewhat lessen the political backlash. This morning Dominic Raab, the justice secretary and deputy PM, said that ministers had not yet taken a decision about further Covid measures. According to a report by Charles Hymas and Tony Diver in the Daily Telegraph, confirmed by the BBC, ministers are considering three options, ranging from exhortation (similar to the approach in Scotland) to lockdown. The Telegraph reports: The Telegraph understands that the prime minister has been presented with three options drawn up by officials for further restrictions to curb the spread of Omicron. The lowest level of intervention would see families asked to limit indoor contacts, without legal enforcement. However, Mr Johnson is also weighing up option two, which would mandate curbs on household mixing, the return of social distancing and an 8pm curfew on pubs and restaurants. Option three is the return to full lockdown. Presenting ministers with three options, one of which seems unduly complacent and one of which seems unduly coercive, is one of the oldest tricks in the Whitehall book for officials minded to steer policy in a particular direction. Option two often seems the best bet. David Frost has given a briefing interview this morning to a broadcast journalist following his resignation as Brexit minister at the weekend. Here are the key points. Lord Frost claimed his resignation was over policy, not over Boris Johnson’s leadership. He said: This is absolutely not about leadership. This is about policy differences. I’m absolutely confident that this country has got a great future under Boris Johnson’s leadership if we can get the policies right. This seemed to be the main point that Frost wanted to make, and it was clearly intended to be supportive. Perhaps he has been concerned by some of the reports suggesting his departure was a grievous blow to Johnson. But the problem with his argument is that policy is a matter of leadership; a different leader might choose a different policy. He claimed that he did not resign because of differences over Brexit policy. After saying how closely he had worked with Boris Johnson, he went on: We have never disagreed in any way about Brexit policy. Right up to the last day we have been absolutely aligned on this and Liz Truss [the foreign secretary, who has taken over from him as chief Brexit negotiator], I’m pretty sure, is going to do a great job. In his resignation letter (pdf) Frost cited two policy issues that he said had prompted his resignation; Covid restrictions, and the “current direction of travel”, in terms of taxation and regulation, generally. But many commentators thought Frost was being disingenuous, and that a dispute over Brexit policy was the key factor. This is what George Parker, the FT’s political editor, posted on Twitter on Saturday night. And here is the start of a Twitter thread on Frost’s resignation from Charles Grant, director of the Centre for European Reform, a thinktank. And here is one of Grant’s conclusions. Frost repeated the point he made in his resignation letter about his resignation being driven by his opposition to Covid restrictions. He denied a claim that the timing was designed to cause maximum damage. He said he intended to quit in the new year, but that it was brought forward because of a leak. He refused to say if he thought more cabinet ministers might resign over Covid restrictions. Asked if there would be further resignations, he replied: I can’t speak for anybody else. I can only say what I think, which is that I don’t support coercive policies on Covid. The prime minister’s got some very difficult decisions to take and I’m sure he’ll be thinking very hard of them. Good morning. Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, was doing broadcast interviews for Labour this morning and of course she was asked about the Guardian picture showing No 10 staff holding what looks very much like a drinks party in the garden at Downing Street, when social gatherings like this were not allowed. No 10 says it was a work meeting. But Reeves ridiculed this claim. When it was put to her on the Today programme that staff in the picture were at work, she replied: I don’t know what you do at work, but I don’t spend my time drinking glasses of wine and eating cheese ... I don’t take my husband to work either. Carrie Johnson, the PM’s wife, is pictured at the gathering. Reeves went on: That wasn’t a picture of people at work. That was a picture of people enjoying themselves, and not just with colleagues, but also with family as well. So, yes I do think there is evidence of law breaking, not just on this occasion, but on multiple occasions. Dominic Raab, the justice secretary and deputy prime minister, has been on the airwaves for the government this morning and, on the Downing Street picture, he stuck to the line that it was a work gathering – although he also road-tested the novel argument that it could not have been a party because people were wearing suits. He told Times Radio. The point I’d make is the rules that you were referring to were all the social mixing rules. This was not a social gathering. It is palpably not a social gathering, because you had people in work suits, following meetings that they were having at work. Most of the questions in the Raab interviews, though, were not about the picture, but about whether or not the government will announce fresh Covid restrictions before Christmas. But in response to these questions, almost nothing he said took us on much from what we learnt when Sajid Javid, the health secretary, was on the Andrew Marr Show on Sunday not ruling this out. “I’m not going to trail things where decisions haven’t been made,” Raab told Today. By the end of the day the position might be clearer. We will get a lobby briefing at 11.30am, and the BBC says it is possible there might be a press conference later, although this has not been confirmed. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comThe approval of a new protein-based Covid-19 vaccine by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) has led to hopes that it could play an important role in persuading millions of Germans who have refused jabs from existing vaccines to get protection against the disease this winter. The EMA approved the two-dose Novavax vaccine on Monday afternoon. The German government’s vaccination advisory board is expected to follow suit and allow for its use soon, a move that would be welcomed by health experts who are bracing for a huge and imminent wave of infections caused by the new Omicron variant. The first doses of Novavax are expected to be administered in Germany in the new year. The rollout of the vaccine – called Nuvaxovid – by the US-based drugmaker Novavax has been repeatedly hampered by a series of lengthy delays including production issues. It is making its appearance in the battle against the virus about a year after the novel mRNA vaccines produced by Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna, and the viral vector vaccines made by Oxford/AstraZeneca and Johnson &amp; Johnson. While those four simulate a virus in the body, Nuvaxovid uses a more traditional type of technology. It has been found to have an efficacy of over 90% in preventing symptomatic infection with the Alpha variant, and is currently undergoing further tests to check its ability to protect against the Omicron variant. Reluctance in Germany and other German-speaking countries to take the novel mRNA vaccines is put down to mistrust in the new technology, with people mainly citing safety concerns about side-effects or long-term health impacts, largely because of the apparent speed with which they were introduced. In fact, the number of side-effects suffered has been very low despite the billions who have already taken the vaccines worldwide, as the head of the Robert Koch Institute, the German government’s disease control agency, has repeatedly said. The new Covid jabs made by Novavax and the French-Austrian manufacturer Valneva, whose VLA2001 is also based on the more conventional method, are typically characterised as a Totimpfstoff, or “dead vaccine”, even though experts say the term is not scientifically accurate. In November, Karl Lauterbach, the then health spokesperson for the Social Democratic party, who has since become the health minister, said that because of the popular use of the term “dead vaccine” among vaccine-hesitant Germans, the term would also generally be applied by health experts. The Nuvaxovid vaccine is more accurately described as a protein vaccine, which in contrast to classical vaccines is genetically produced and contains minuscule particles from a version of the virus’s spike protein grown in moth cells in the laboratory that prompt the formation of antibodies in an individual. Valneva, which is still waiting for approval, is made up of Covid-19 virus that has been deactivated and cannot reproduce. Both vaccines require the addition of a so-called proprietary adjuvant to boost the recipient’s immune response to them. The EU has secured 100m doses of Novavax and 60m doses of Valneva, with 4m Novavax doses immediately destined for Germany. Across Europe, but in particular in Germany, experts are hoping that both vaccines will have the effect of persuading those who have so far turned down the offer of a vaccine to change their minds, at a time when raising immunity levels by vaccination is one of the key weapons against halting the virus’s spread. So far, just over 70% of Germans are fully vaccinated. Unless this figure climbs to between 80 to 90%, the nation’s immunity will not be high enough to dampen the virus. In a survey by the German pollster Forsa this autumn, 56% of participants said their vaccine willingness would rise if vaccines based on so-called “classical methods”, such as Novavax and Valneva, were approved. Only 5% said they would be lured to have a vaccination by monetary reward or the threat of being excluded from activities as a result of their unvaccinated status. About 14 million German adults are yet to have the first two doses of a Covid vaccine. However, in a survey of unvaccinated people, 40% said they were merely hesitant and could indeed be persuaded if “dead vaccines” were available to them. Nevertheless, experts have warned against expecting a significant rise in those willing to receive Novavax or Valneva jabs. Dr Thomas Aßmann, a GP and vaccinator in Lindlar, about 30km (19 miles) east of Cologne, said: “I am a bit sceptical. If we take into account that the new mRNA vaccines they are fearful of have now been successfully administered around 7 to 8 billion times, I am concerned that those who say they’re holding out for the ‘classic’ vaccines will now look at the figures and say Novavax can’t be trusted yet,” he told the broadcaster NTV. “We must just hope that the new vaccine is good and stable and have a long efficacy, particularly against Omicron.” Even Lauterbach, whose first two weeks in office have been dominated by his attempts to accelerate a vaccine drive, particularly booster shots, ahead of the expected emergence of Omicron as the main variant in Germany from around the end of the year, is sceptical. “We should desist from assuming that Novavax will be a gamechanger,” he told the Bild newspaper in an hour-long interview broadcast live on Sunday night. He said based on studies and the fact that the mRNA vaccines had been administered between 7bn and 8bn times worldwide, they were “a whole lot safer”. Confronted in the interview by a woman whose gynaecologist had urged her she should not get vaccinated because of a risk of thrombosis, Lauterbach shot back: “I would advise her to get a second opinion.” Lauterbach has said he backs a proposal that is expected to be put before the Bundestag in January to bring in a nationwide vaccine mandate. He acknowledged the importance of enabling those who wanted a traditional vaccine to be able to access it before the introduction of any such measure.It’s 5.30am. The alarm goes off. Dominic Raab is awake almost immediately. He’s always been a light sleeper. Dom gets out of bed and cranks out 50 press ups, the veins on his arms bulging pleasingly. He’s always prided himself on having the best guns in cabinet. Raab strips off and wanders naked towards the bathroom. There’s nothing he likes more than an ice-cold shower. As the water pounds his body, he checks for tell-tale signs. Sure enough, there are traces of blood under his finger nails. He must have been on another killing spree the night before. The anger management course really is proving worse than useless. He tries to remember where he had been so he could retrace his steps and remove the evidence, but his mind is a blank. More bodies to add to the cold case count. Just as well the police now only investigate crimes that have yet to be committed. Psycho Killer. Qu’est-ce que c’est? That was as about as good as the day got for the justice secretary. By 7am Raab was in the broadcast and radio studios for the morning media round, trying to explain why yet another party wasn’t really a party. The May 2020 party couldn’t have been a party because everyone was wearing suits was his first explanation. One that didn’t survive contact with reality when it was pointed out to him that a lot of people go to parties dressed in suits. “Um, well … ” Dom bluffed. At least it wasn’t a fancy dress party. Raab had another go. It wasn’t a party. It was just 19 people divided into three separate groups in the Downing Street garden having a drink on a sunny evening after a hard day’s work in No 10. “That’s odd,” said every interviewer. “Because No 10 had been very keen to stress that what the picture showed was everyone working flat out while getting a bit pissed.” Dom could feel his anger levels rising and mouthed a quick “wanker” before he tried another explanation. The meeting had begun indoors and had only moved outdoors when everyone realised they needed a great deal more space to split into several sub-groups. Just a shame they had forgotten their laptops and notebooks. Perhaps they all had photographic memories. By now, it was hard to tell who was the most confused. But Dom ploughed on regardless. It was all perfectly normal and within the rules, even though the government had explicitly stated that it wasn’t. After all, no one else in the country was knocking back the vino with a large number of mates after a day in the office. No photos had emerged of doctors or nurses getting completely trashed after a day trying to keep Covid patients alive. Well maybe they ought to have, snapped Raab. It was well known that a few shots could steady the hands before delicate microsurgery. Having finally more or less agreed the party was a continuation of a work meeting that had got out of hand and the rest of the country had been total mugs for not realising those kinds of gatherings were totally permissible, the questions moved to the cast list. Was one of those present, Martin Reynolds, Boris Johnson’s principal private secretary? Absolutely. It had been vital he had been there so that he would be able to give impartial evidence about what had taken place for any inquiry once Simon “Off The” Case had been stood down for having parties of his own. And what was Carrie doing there? “Easy,” said Raab. The prime minister’s wife often turned up to cabinet and had a few helpful suggestions to make about how to hold the best parties that weren’t parties. Boris was very inclusive that way. She had also come down from the upstairs flat to see if anyone wanted to use Wilf’s paddling pool and it was a very warm evening. And while she had everyone’s attention, did anyone know of anyone other than Lord Goldsmith who would pay her £100k a year for doing next to nothing? She and Boris were feeling a bit broke. Still, at least Raab had the rest of the morning off to watch Lord Frost explain why he had resigned from the cabinet when he still thought Boris was a superb prime minister. Just one that was making all the wrong decisions. Apparently the Northern Ireland protocol was a bit trickier than everyone had expected. Whoever would have guessed? But hey, the whole country could have a laugh at Liz Truss trying to negotiate Brexit. Come the afternoon, Dom was back in No 10 for a cabinet meeting to determine the government’s response to the Omicron variant. “I have a great plan,” said Boris. What is it, everyone had asked. “We’re going to do absolutely nothing for the moment.” Not even a press conference? “Are you mad?” said Johnson. Always a delicate question given the psychological makeup of the government. “That way we would be bound to be asked questions about the party. And about how we daren’t implement further measures before Christmas as the rest of the Tory party would go nuts and we’d have another major rebellion on our hands.” “So we’re going to ignore the scientists?” “Absolutely. Who cares if a few more people die? What matters is dithering. Party before country. Saying we are thinking very hard about new measures but while doing nothing. Just another day or so and there’s no chance of recalling parliament before Christmas. The time to look decisive is sometime next week. Or the one after. I’m not sure which.” A Farewell to Calm by John Crace (Guardian Faber, £9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. • The headline of this article was amended on 24 December 2021 in line with editorial guidance on mental health terms.Laura Kuenssberg has confirmed she will step down as the BBC’s political editor at Easter but will remain with the corporation in “a senior presenting and reporting role”. Here are the BBC journalists tipped to be possible replacements. Vicki Young Despite serving as Kuenssberg’s deputy and being a regular face on television screens, she has studiously maintained a low profile. She is also a lifelong BBC employee, which could make her a relatively uncontroversial appointment at a time when the broadcaster is dealing with a hostile government. Jon Sopel Recently returned from the US after almost a decade in Washington DC as North America editor, where he covered the Trump presidency and still found the time to write books and do the Americast podcast. Currently taking time off, the 62-year-old could be a safe pair of hands due to his extensive experience in political journalism. Amol Rajan Any mere mortal might think that being the BBC’s media editor, a presenter on Radio 4’s Today programme, the occasional host of The One Show, a sometime stand-in for Zoe Ball on the Radio 2 Breakfast show, rotating presenter of Radio 4’s Start the Week, and host of the Rethink podcast might be enough jobs for one man. But would he be willing to give all that up for one of the most prominent reporting jobs in the country? His recent monstering by the Daily Mail for presenting a documentary that suggested the royal family traded media access for positive press coverage may have made that harder. Ros Atkins His “assertive impartiality” viral videos, explaining the slow collapse of Boris Johnson’s government in excruciating detail, have lit up the internet in recent weeks. Chris Mason Another ubiquitous presence on television and radio, his years of early starts and willingness to do any broadcast slot have made him popular within the building – while appearances on the podcast Brexitcast (now Newscast) raised his profile further. Last year he turned down a job with Times Radio to stay with the public broadcaster. With the BBC desperate to look and sound less London-centric, it could help to be a native of Grassington in the Yorkshire Dales who regularly travels around the country presenting Radio 4’s Any Questions. Faisal Islam Escaped Westminster lobby journalism when he gave up the Sky News political editor job to join the BBC as economics editor in 2019. Any return to his old beat might cause tension with the government – his reporting on the impact of leaving the EU was perceived as hostile by many in Downing Street who wanted Brexit to presented as a triumph by the national broadcaster.It is Monday afternoon at Brockway Medical Centre in Nailsea and parked outside is the unmistakable bright red Bristol City team bus. Fresh from training, players and staff file into an outdoor marquee before, one by one, being called in for their Covid vaccination booster, after 98% received two jabs. It is an encouraging number, given the English Football League revealed that, as of November, one in four of its players did not intend to get jabbed. “Did it hurt?” the club’s chief executive, Richard Gould, asks the teenage midfielder Alex Scott, who smiles and shakes his head. The message on flyers outside the north Somerset practice, in line with government and EFL advice, is clear: “Get vaccinated, get boosted, get protected.” In September the league facilitated a meeting between Jonathan Van-Tam, the government’s deputy chief medical officer, and managers and captains to outline the benefits of the vaccine, as well as addressing questions and myths. In the Premier League Wolves’ first-team bubble are fully vaccinated and Morecambe of League One are 100% double-jabbed and set to follow Bristol City – whose manager, Nigel Pearson, has suffered with Covid – by receiving their boosters on Tuesday. Gould says it has not been a case of “banging the table” to encourage uptake within the squad. “We’ve spent time sitting with the players, educating them, giving them the information to be able to make their own decisions about it,” says Bristol City’s club doctor, Thom Phillips. “We’ve not forced anyone to do anything; we’ve not cajoled anyone into doing it. We’ve had honest conversations with everyone about their own personal reasons for wanting it or not wanting it. We’ve had a couple of group sessions. It’s about discussing their concerns, their questions and addressing them with a good amount of time and care. “I’d like to think myself and my GP colleagues, like the ones here, are doing a good job of having conversations with everyone in our community, in encouraging them to come and get vaccinated.” The England manager, Gareth Southgate, previously suggested some players have been swayed by conspiracy theories on social media. “There is a lot of misinformation out there and what I hope we’ve done here is spoken to our players and given them good, reliable sources of information to make their own decisions,” says Phillips. “Some of them [players] have never had a vaccine before. Some of them wanted to know how it worked, some of them wanted to know about the side-effects. “The one that we came back to was about young people [being] concerned about the risks and we had honest conversations about them and they have made good decisions.” Last week the EFL mandated its clubs to adhere to ‘red protocols’ at training, which include daily lateral flow testing – subject to availability – social distancing, staggered use of facilities and the wearing of masks indoors. City, Phillips says, are working with “skeleton staff” at their training base. Nineteen of the EFL’s 36 matches were postponed last weekend and on Monday Stoke announced their fixture at Barnsley was one of seven EFL games that will not go ahead on Boxing Day. “It’s a bit difficult going back to the future, especially when we’ve got so many jabbed, but I can see why the EFL has introduced the protocols,” Gould says. “We want supporters to come and watch football. We don’t want another season interrupted by Covid.” Phillips has a quiet word with the odd player after their booster and in a few hours he has 150 vaccinations to administer at a Covid clinic in Cwmbran, where he is a GP. Meanwhile, a couple of fans spot their favourite player boarding the team coach. Are there any big City fans in the practice? “No comment … we may have some Bristol Rovers fans,” says a smiling GP Dr Jon Rees. “The Bristol City squad coming here for their boosters is a real lift for our staff and a real positive message to emphasise the importance of getting your booster now. They are setting a good example to the rest of the Premier League and the Championship. We would love to see that rolled out.”Major retailers are having to offload Christmas trees for £1 or less after shoppers shied away from UK high streets and retail centres in the last weekend before Christmas. B&amp;Q has cut the price of its fresh trees – some costing £49 or more – to £1 or less at stores around the country. One shopper posted a picture on social media of trees priced as little as 10p in Abingdon, Oxfordshire. Homebase, which had already cut the price of all its fresh trees to £10 about a week ago, slashed prices to £5, while in some stores they were only £3.50. Industry insiders said some of the major chains appeared to have overbought trees in reaction to last year when many sold out about two weeks early. The Garden Centre Association said its members had mainly been cautious and so had mostly almost sold out. Iain Wylie, the chief executive, said Christmas trade in some areas had been affected by concerns about the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 and anyone with too many trees would need to discount heavily now to clear them. “You can’t just leave them – they are not worth a penny after Christmas,” he said. Tree sellers may not be the only retailers with too much stock, as central London and other city centres were hit particularly hard by the decline in visitors on the peak shopping weekend of the year, according to the latest data from the shopper counting service Springboard, which recorded a 2.6% fall in visitors across UK shopping centres, high streets and retail parks compared with the previous week. Analysts said there was “growing nervousness” among consumers caused by the rapid rise in Omicron cases. Diane Wehrle, Springboard’s insights director, said a rise in the number of shoppers out and about at the beginning of last week had “dwindled with each day that passed”. Shopper numbers across the UK fell on Sunday compared with the same day in the previous week, an almost unheard-of pattern at a time of year when shoppers are usually flocking to high streets in preparation for the festivities. Overall, footfall across UK retail destinations rose by 5.5% from the week before but was 19% lower than the same week in 2019. “The nervousness of shoppers about making in-person shopping visits inevitably meant that large city centres lost out to smaller high streets, particularly over the weekend, when footfall declined from the week before in central London and large cities outside of the capital while rising in market towns,” she said. The New West End Company, which represents hundreds of businesses operating on Oxford Street and other central London shopping streets, said visitor numbers over the weekend were down 5% on the previous week. Its chief executive, Jace Tyrrell, called on the government to “provide urgent and swift financial support” such as 100% business rates relief for the first quarter of 2022 and grants to prevent business closures. “West End retail and hospitality businesses will have been disappointed with the turnout on the critical final weekend of Christmas trading, with footfall down by 17% from pre-pandemic levels. With less than five days to go until Christmas Day and the probabilities of a circuit-breaker lockdown increasingly on the horizon, the retail and leisure sector is now facing a huge amount of financial uncertainty when it should be enjoying a much-needed shot in the arm,” he said. Homebase said: “From tomorrow, all real cut trees will be reduced to £5, giving every tree the chance to have a home this Christmas.” B&amp;Q was approached for comment.Voluntary sector leaders have called for a rerun of the process for choosing the next head of the charities regulator, saying they have no confidence in the appointments system after the shock resignation of the new watchdog chair. Martin Thomas, whose appointment as chair of the Charity Commission was approved by a committee of MPs this month, quit last Friday, just days before he was due to take up the job, over allegations he had acted inappropriately while chair of a women’s charity. Thomas’s decision to stand down has further thrown into confusion an appointment that has been beset by long delays, complaints of political interference and lack of diversity. The charity regulator for England and Wales has been without a full-time chair for 10 months. According to the Times, Thomas was subject to four formal misconduct complaints while at Women for Women International UK, including an incident in 2018 when he mistakenly sent a picture of himself in a Victoria’s Secret lingerie store to a female employee. He had meant to send it to the charity’s chief executive as part of a conversation about whether to accept a donation from the company, with him arguing the photo was evidence against taking the money. This and two other complaints were not upheld. He told friends he only discovered from the press last week that a fourth complaint against him – regarding comments he had allegedly made to an employee on a Zoom call – had been partially upheld. He had left the charity in the summer and claims he was unaware of the finding against him when he applied for the Charity Commission job. Many in the voluntary sector have questioned why the appointments panel – chaired by two senior Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) civil servants – was unaware of the complaint partially upheld against Thomas, despite the charity formally notifying the Charity Commission. The National Council for Voluntary Organisations (NCVO) said Thomas’s appointment raised serious questions about whether proper due diligence had been carried out, and called for the process to be started again from scratch. “We want to see a strong, credible and impartial Charity Commission capable of fulfilling its role regulating our sector and that has the confidence of charities in England. Restarting is the only way to restore the faith in the process and, ultimately, in the permanent chair of the Charity Commission,” said Sarah Vibert, the interim chief executive of the NCVO. Members of the DCMS select committee, which approved Thomas’s appointment, are understood to be “annoyed” they were not made aware of the allegations against him. It follows controversies over the ministerial attempts to appoint favoured candidates as chair of the media regulator Ofcom and the BBC. The Labour party called for a fully transparent and independent re-run of the appointment process. The shadow culture secretary, Lucy Powell, said: “This process has been a shambles from the start, compounded by the fact that the Conservatives have messed around with this post for years.” Charities believe that the process had been marked by allegations of political interference after the former culture secretary Oliver Dowden said before interviews for the post that the new chair would be expected to pursue charities which stray into so-called “woke” and “political” activities. There had also been disappointment in the sector at the lack of diversity on the longlist for the chair role. Of the seven people interviewed for the £62,500-a-year job, only one was female and one black, Asian or minority ethnic. The appointment of Thomas was initially generally welcomed in the sector, after a pre-appointment scrutiny hearing with MPs at which he demonstrated experience of the voluntary sector and understanding of charity law. There had been fears ministers would appoint an openly political “culture warrior” to the role. Thomas, who declared no political interests in his application, also sought to downplay reports that he was a friend of Boris Johnson. The prime minister is a patron of Downside Up, a children’s charity chaired by Thomas. The charity gave Johnson a Russian watch as a gift in 2014, when he was mayor of London. • This article was amended on 21 December 2021 to clarify the details of the incident involving the photo of Thomas in a Victoria’s Secret store.The boy whose case inspired the portrayal of a demon-possessed child in the 1973 horror movie classic The Exorcist has been named. The US magazine the Skeptical Inquirer named the then 14-year-old boy, previously known as Roland Doe, who underwent exorcisms in Cottage City, Maryland, and St Louis, Missouri, in 1949. Ronald Edwin Hunkeler died last year, a month before his 86th birthday, after suffering a stroke at home in Marriottsville, Maryland. In adult life, Hunkeler was a Nasa engineer whose work contributed to the Apollo space missions of the 1960s and who patented a technology that helped space shuttle panels withstand extreme heat. One of his companions, a 29-year-old woman who asked not to be named, told the New York Post that Hunkeler was always on edge about his Nasa colleagues discovering that he was the inspiration for The Exorcist. “On Halloween, we always left the house because he figured someone would come to his residence and know where he lived and never let him have peace,” she said. “He had a terrible life from worry, worry, worry,” she added. Hunkeler eventually retired from Nasa in 2001 after working at the agency for nearly 40 years. William Peter Blatty, who wrote the 1971 novel and the film based on the same name, first heard about Hunkeler’s apparent demonic possession when he was a senior at Georgetown University in Washington DC. His professor, Eugene Gallager, who was also a priest at Georgetown, the oldest Catholic and Jesuit university founded in the US, told Blatty about Hunkeler’s reported possessions and subsequent exorcisms. Born in 1935 and raised by a middle-class family in Cottage City, Hunkeler began experiencing paranormal activities at 14 when he reported hearing knocking and scratching sounds from behind his bedroom walls. The Rev Luther Schulze, Hunkeler’s family minister, eventually wrote to the Parapsychology Laboratory at Duke University, in North Carolina, in March 1949 and explained how “chairs moved with [Hunkeler] and one threw him out [of it.] His bed shook whenever he was in it.” Schulze also explained how the family’s floors were “scarred from the sliding of heavy furniture” and how “a picture of Christ on the wall shook” whenever Hunkeler was nearby. The family eventually sought the help of William Bowdern, a Jesuit who conducted more than 20 exorcism rituals on Hunkeler in the span of three months. Writing in his diary on 10 March 1949, Bowdern noted how Hunkeler entered a trance-like state as 14 witnesses watched during one of his exorcisms. There was a “scratching which beat out a rhythm of marching soldiers. Second class relic of St Margaret Mary was thrown on the floor. The safety pin was opened but no human hand had touched the relic. R started up in fright when the relic was thrown down,” Bowdern wrote. Hunkeler was then relocated to St Louis to be treated for demonic possession. “It seems that whatever force was writing the words was in favor of making the trip to St Louis,” Bowdern wrote. “On one evening the word ‘Louis’ was written on the boy’s ribs in deep red [scratches.] Next, when there was some question of the time of departure, the word ‘Saturday’ was written plainly on the boy’s hip. As to the length of time the mother and the boy should stay in St Louis, another message was printed on the boy’s chest, ‘3 ½ weeks’. The printing always appeared without any motion on the part of the boy’s hands.” Hunkeler was admitted to the Alexian Brothers Hospital in St Louis on 21 March 1949. Nearly a month later, Hunkeler “broke into a violent tantrum of screaming, cursing, and voicing of Latin phrases” as Jesuit priests allegedly cast the demon out of his body. He “has been freed by a Catholic priest of possession by the devil, Catholic sources reported yesterday”, wrote Washington Post reporter Bill Brinkley in an article on 20 August 1949. Shortly before his death, a Catholic priest showed up at Hunkeler’s home unexpectedly to perform last rites, said his companion. “I have no idea how the Father knew to come but he got Ron to heaven. Ron’s in heaven and he’s with God now,” she told the New York Post.Last week’s £264m penalty and criminal conviction for NatWest for money-laundering failures still takes the prize for the most spectacular collapse we’ve seen in years in a bank’s controls department. The saga, almost unbelievably, involved black bin bags, stuffed with as much as £700,000, getting through the system. But more mundane control failures also count, and Standard Chartered, the Asian-focused but London-listed bank, limped into view on Monday with a £46.5m fine from the Bank of England’s Prudential Regulation Authority. It’s a thumping penalty in its own right – the biggest imposed by the PRA acting in a solo capacity – and, beyond the dry technicalities of US dollar liquidity reporting requirements, one can understand why the regulator is annoyed. The problem wasn’t just the size of Standard Chartered’s spreadsheet errors, which in one case amounted to $10bn, according to the PRA. It was also the fact that the bank seems to have taken a relaxed view of its obligation to report material mistakes promptly. The delay was four months in one instance. A regulator charged with keeping the system safe understandably takes a dim view of a failure to be “open and cooperative”; it needs accurate and timely data. Standard Chartered’s shareholders also have a right to grumble. It’s now six years since Bill Winters arrived as a hot-shot chief executive, declaring he would invigorate the bank by sweeping away complexities and put previous regulatory entanglements in the past. On his watch, the share price has gone nowhere and growth is perpetually promised around the next corner. Collecting a large fine from the PRA rather sums up an underwhelming run. More broadly, one can applaud what may be a new regulatory zeal to be tougher with banks on controls and reporting processes. HBSC was hit with a £64m penalty from the Financial Conduct Authority for “serious weaknesses” in anti-money laundering processes last year. If the intent is to force superbly paid boardrooms to pay attention to detail, so much the better. Some of the failures sound shockingly basic. Ex-Tesco boss looks a good fit for GSK consumer division Even Elliott Management, trying to stir things up in the wings, surely can’t find much to grumble about in the appointment of Sir Dave Lewis to chair GlaxoSmithKline’s soon-to-be-demerged consumer division, which owns brands such as Advil, Centrum vitamins, Panadol and Sensodyne. Lewis is ex-Unilever, a company with which GSK’s consumer division will be compared, and, while his six years as chief executive of Tesco didn’t do much for the share price, he restored stability after the supermarket chain’s wild years. He hasn’t chaired a public company, but never mind. The high-profile appointment is also a reminder that the business, which will get a name by the time it is launched in independent form in the middle of next year, is a big operation. If the City analysts’ estimates of £45bn-plus are correct, it’ll be a top-15 FTSE 100 company with a market capitalisation more than twice that of Tesco. Size is perhaps the reason why Elliott’s call for GSK to consider offers for the business has failed to drum up interest. From the point of view of the renewal of the UK stock market, however, that’s a good thing. A demerger isn’t quite a new arrival, but a large new listing adds variety. And do not be surprised if the predicted rate of sales growth, a critical metric for global consumer companies, eclipses Unilever’s. WEF moving from Davos to Zoom could raise its credibility The last gathering of the World Economic Forum (WEF) in Davos took place in January 2020 and is mostly recalled for then-president Trump’s declaration that the new coronavirus was nothing to worry about. “It’s one person coming in from China,” he said, soon after the first case had been detected in the US. “We have it under control. It’s going to be just fine.” Now next month’s Davos meeting has been postponed in the face of the inevitable, just as last January’s was. There’ll be a “digital convening” of business leaders, politicians and the usual crew of billionaires instead. Actually, the new set-up sounds like an excellent permanent arrangement. Pre-Covid, it was impossible to take seriously a discussion about global inequality (to take one regular Davos theme) when it was happening in an elite Swiss ski resort with key speakers flown in by private jet. After Covid, a Zoom-only affair would be a small step towards restoring credibility.Kidnapped missionaries in Haiti found freedom last week by making a daring overnight escape, eluding their kidnappers and walking for miles over difficult, moonlit terrain with an infant and other children in tow, according to the agency they work for. Ransom money was raised to pay for the release of the missionaries who were abducted on 16 October, but a dozen of them managed to flee, navigating by the stars to reach safety, Christian Aid Ministries said on Monday Seventeen people from the missionary group – 12 adults and five minors – were seized shortly after visiting an orphanage in Ganthier, in the Croix-des-Bouquets area. The group included 16 Americans and one Canadian. Their captors from the 400 Mawozo gang initially demanded millions of dollars in ransom. Five other captives had earlier reached freedom. It is still unclear if any ransom was paid. CAM general director David Troyer said supporters of CAM raised funds for possible use for a ransom, but he refused to say whether money was paid for any of the releases. “Other people who sought to help us provided funds to pay a ransom and allow the negotiation process to continue,” David Troyer, director of Christian Aid Ministries, said during a news conference at the group’s Millersburg, Ohio, headquarters. “After many days of waiting and no action on the part of the kidnappers, God worked in a miraculous way to enable the hostages to escape,” Troyer said. The 12 who fled last week carried the infant and 3-year-old, wrapping the baby to protect her from the briars and brambles, said CAM spokesperson Weston Showalter. “After a number of hours of walking, day began to dawn and they eventually found someone who helped to make a phone call for help,” he said, his voice beginning to choke. “They were finally free.” The 12 were flown to Florida on a US Coast Guard flight, and later reunited with five hostages who had been released earlier. CAM displayed photos at the news conferences showing the freed hostages being reunited, along with a video of the group singing a song that had inspired them during their captivity. The missionaries were taken hostage on their way back from the orphanage on the afternoon of 16 October. “They had no idea what was ahead of them,” Showalter said. Only five or 10 minutes after getting under way, they saw a roadblock up ahead. The group’s driver – the one Canadian in the group – turned around, but a pickup truck pursued them, and “gang members surrounded the van,” Showalter said. He said early reports that the driver was a Haitian national were not accurate. He said the hostages were initially crowded into a small room in a house, but were moved around several times during their captivity. They were not physically harmed by the kidnappers, Showalter said. He said the main physical challenges included the heat, mosquitoes and contaminated water for bathing, which led some of them to develop sores. Sometimes the young children got sick, but all the hostages emerged from captivity in good health, he said. The adults received small food portions, such as rice and beans for dinner, although the captors provided plenty of food suitable for the small children, he said. The hostages gathered during the day for prayer and religious devotions, and sometimes sang loud enough for each other to hear when they were in separate rooms, Showalter said. They also sought to encourage other hostages who were being held for ransom in separate kidnappings, Showalter said. Over time, the hostages agreed to try to escape, and chose the night of 15 December to flee. “When they sensed the timing was right, they found a way to open the door that was closed and blocked, filed silently to the path they had chosen to follow, and quickly left the place they were held, despite the fact that numerous guards were close by,” Showalter said. None of the freed hostages were at the press conference.The Queen is to celebrate Christmas at Windsor Castle, breaking with the tradition of spending festivities at Sandringham in Norfolk for a second year. Sources said the decision was a personal one taken after careful consideration and that it reflected her precautionary approach during the pandemic. Downing Street has been informed of her decision. The 95-year-old monarch is not expected to be alone. Family members are said to be planning to visit her on Christmas Day. Sources stressed that all appropriate guidelines would be followed and sensible precautions would be in place. Unlike at Sandringham, where members of the royal family gather and walk to St Mary Magdalene church, greeting members of the public outside, there is not expected to be any public church visit on 25 December. It is not yet known which family members she will welcome on the day. The Christmas Day plans for the Prince of Wales and Duchess of Cornwall, who reside at Highgrove in Gloucestershire, are still being confirmed. The plans of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge are not yet publicly known. Last year they spent the festive season at Anmer Hall, their Norfolk home, with their three children, George, eight, Charlotte, six, and Louis, three. The family members who live nearest to the Queen are the Earl and Countess of Wessex and the Duke of York. It is the Queen’s first Christmas since the death of the Duke of Edinburgh, aged 99, in April. Last year she and Prince Philip spent the day privately at Windsor Castle, where they had been shielding throughout the lockdowns. It was the first time in 32 years that the monarch was not with her family on the Sandringham estate. Last week the Queen cancelled her traditional Buckingham Palace pre-Christmas family party, at which she was expected to host 50 or so members of her extended family including Charles and Camilla, for the second year running as the Omicron variant sends Covid cases soaring. The Queen has been carrying out light duties only since 20 October, when concerns for her health were heightened after her doctors ordered her to rest and she spent a night in hospital undergoing tests.Premier League clubs have discussed driving up vaccination rates in their squads by creating separate rules for players yet to get a Covid-19 jab. On a day when it emerged that 16% of top-flight players are unvaccinated and a record 90 positive tests had been recorded among players and staff in the week up to last Sunday, a two-tier system was raised at an emergency meeting. Proposals include unvaccinated players travelling separately to games, facing an additional check to get into stadiums and having meals away from vaccinated teammates. The moves are designed to guard against more fixtures being cancelled as the clubs decided to press on with the season. A complication for the league is that under government guidelines unvaccinated players must isolate for 10 days if deemed a close contact of anyone who has tested positive, even if they produce negative results. This increases the likelihood of postponements by reducing the pool of players available to a club. On Monday the league said that 77% of its players were double-jabbed and that 84% had received one, two or three vaccinations. On Friday Serie A said that 98% of its players had received two jabs. The plans discussed by the Premier League’s clubs remain under consideration but it is expected that some form of differentiation for unvaccinated players will come into effect. The league has said it will publish updates on its vaccination figures each month from the end of January. The 90 positive cases dwarf the previous high of 42 recorded a week earlier. Ten Premier League matches were cancelled because of Covid during the seven days in question, across which 12,345 tests were administered. There were 41 positives from Friday to Sunday alone. Players and club staff do daily lateral flow and twice-weekly PCR tests. The issue of unvaccinated players is also a concern for managers as they approach the January transfer window. Jürgen Klopp has said Liverpool would not sign an unvaccinated player and Steven Gerrard and Mikel Arteta have said it will be taken into consideration at Aston Villa and Arsenal. Klopp has said it would be complicated to create separate areas for vaccinated and unvaccinated squad members. The top-flight clubs decided to press on with the season after talking through three options with regard to the calendar: to carry on playing; to defer one fixture per club from the three rounds scheduled to be played from 26 December to 3 January; and to stop playing entirely while the outbreak gripped. A handful of clubs favoured option two, with one of them understood to be Liverpool, who took their lead from Klopp. He feels that it is irresponsible to make the players play twice from Boxing Day to 28 December when squads are stretched because of Covid issues. Liverpool have four players in isolation because of positive tests. The vast majority of clubs, mindful – principally – of the potential for a horrendous fixture pile-up that could derail the season, indicated a readiness to play on. It was also acknowledged that it would be problematic to fairly postpone specific fixtures or rounds with some, plainly, easier for certain clubs than others. No clubs wanted to pause the season and Brentford and Chelsea, who have publicly raised concerns in recent days, were among those who voted to continue. “It is the league’s collective intention to continue the current fixture schedule where safely possible,” the Premier League said. In an attempt to reduce or eliminate the number of last-minute postponements, clubs have been asked to update the league every day on the availability of their players. Aston Villa v Burnley on Saturday was the latest match called off about two hours before kick-off. It is understood the league is paying for more PCR labs to help speed up daily testing. The EFL has said it will press on with its league and Carabao Cup fixtures. The Football Association has scrapped replays in the third and fourth rounds of this season’s FA Cup to try to help ease potential congestion, with extra time and penalties used if necessary.In a documentary broadcast this month to mark the 30th anniversary of the collapse of the Soviet Union, Vladimir Putin told interviewers that during the subsequent economic chaos, he had to supplement his KGB income by moonlighting as a taxi driver. The personal struggles of Russia’s president in the 1990s were offered as a poignant vignette, symbolising the humiliating consequences of what Mr Putin has called “the greatest geopolitical disaster of the 20th century”. In different circumstances, western leaders might be tempted to roll their eyes at the pretensions of one of the world’s most powerful bullies to victimhood. But Mr Putin’s 30th anniversary reminiscences were of a piece with an aggressively revanchist mood in Moscow, as tensions on Russia’s border with Ukraine continue to grow. About 100,000 Russian troops remain massed close to eastern Ukraine, along with heavy weaponry and other hardware transported across thousands of miles. Western intelligence officials believe that no final decision has been taken by the Kremlin on whether to launch a military operation, after having backed separatist pro-Russian rebels in the Donbass region since 2014. But it seems clear that the sabre-rattling reflects a new determination to reassert Moscow’s eroded authority in what Mr Putin considers Russia’s legitimate “sphere of influence”. On Friday, the Kremlin issued a series of demands to Washington and Nato that would, in effect, rewrite the security settlement that has emerged in former Soviet territories and satellite states. Along with a guarantee that Ukraine would never become a Nato member, Russia demanded the removal of Nato troops and weapons from the eastern European countries that have joined the alliance since 1997. The likelihood of Moscow being granted an effective veto over the deployment of Nato troops and missiles in countries such as Poland and Romania is zero, and the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has been reassured by Nato that the path to Kiev’s membership remains open (although there is no timeframe). But the combination of massed troops on the Ukrainian border and Mr Putin’s willingness to publicly demand the impossible seems extremely ominous. This week, the Kremlin upped the ante still further, requesting an “urgent” response from Washington and Nato to its demands. Faced with a game of brinkmanship that is escalating week by week, the west has little option but to demonstrate a desire to keep talking and make it clear to Mr Putin that a heavy price in sanctions will be paid in the event of a Russian military incursion. Western solidarity with Ukraine has been bolstered by the new German government’s willingness to block the completion of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, while last week it was reported that the Biden administration was considering sending military helicopters originally intended for Afghanistan. There may also be room for negotiation on issues relating to Nato military exercises and missile placement, if corresponding concessions are offered by Moscow. Ultimately, however, Ukraine and its western allies are in the uncomfortable position of waiting to find out what the Kremlin’s true intentions are. Having nurtured a decades-long sense of deep resentment at the decline in Russian regional influence and authority, Mr Putin has decided to force a crisis. It must be hoped that he can be convinced that military action would entail such isolation and economic damage that it would be utterly counterproductive.A public that feels cheated by its prime minister knows that the holiday season will be cut short for the good of the NHS. The only question is when. Boris Johnson isn’t prepared to say what his plans are – for fear of a backlash, not from voters but from a mutinous party. Ordinary people want to, and will, do the right thing – perhaps only grudgingly in the reasonable belief that they have been deceived. The Guardian obtained a picture that showed Boris Johnson drinking wine with staff in the Downing Street garden. This looked like a social gathering, not a meeting – one which, by some accounts, turned into a late evening party. It took place when Covid rules meant that funerals were kept so small that some family members could not attend. People tweeted to say that they were fined for breaking the lockdown at the time. The No 10 gathering appears, to the wider public, confirmation that Mr Johnson wants people to do as he says, not as he does. Mr Johnson’s behaviour, and the suggestion that he is beholden to no one, has provoked a crisis of government. Caught between the spread of a highly infectious Omicron variant and a Tory revolt, the prime minister dithered and delayed. His own scientific advisers say that there are likely to be between 1,000 and 2,000 Covid hospital admissions a day in England by the end of the year. The case for more Covid restrictions, they say, is overwhelming. Yet cabinet ministers dismiss the modelling – signalling to backbench rebels that they are with them. Others are perhaps afraid of being blamed for cancelling Christmas when people begin travelling around the country. Mr Johnson calculated that he was too weak in office to risk a Commons showdown with his party over new restrictions. Policy is being decided by Tory MPs, many of whom have no plan beyond “let Omicron rip”. Yet tighter restrictions are surely in prospect. The devolved parliaments have taken tougher stances than No 10. Even if Omicron is less severe than the Delta variant, its prevalence will probably see the number of serious cases rise. Ministers are placing their faith in the rollout of booster jabs. But that will only go so far. The NHS, say experts, will struggle to cope without a plan to limit social interactions. This would need public buy-in. That means government proposals being outlined in good time so families can plan ahead for the Christmas holidays. Curbing people-to-people contact needs to be properly structured, with the enforcement of restrictions matched by appropriate levels of government financial support. Parts of the hospitality and entertainment sector are already shutting themselves down. Furlough may need to be reinstated. Everybody wants the return of the familiar routine of the pre-Covid years, but that requires government competency. Two years of living with mask-wearing, tests, lockdowns and travel bans have not been helped by the prime minister’s claims that Covid would be “beaten”, or that Britain’s reopening after lockdown was “irreversible”. Mr Johnson’s record of recent misjudgments has wrecked the government’s sense of authority. What might finish it off is that the “garden party” will be added to the list of events to be investigated by Whitehall’s Sue Gray. Her probe may see more Downing Street resignations. Mr Johnson might keep his job, but it is hard to see how he will escape responsibility for a culture of rule-breaking.The former chancellor George Osborne’s family wallpaper business has said that Brexit added £400,000 to its costs, as the company’s sales slid more than 16% during the Covid-19 pandemic. Osborne &amp; Little, which is controlled by Osborne’s father, Sir Peter Osborne, said the UK’s exit from the EU had “an immediate adverse effect on profits” from January 2021, with unforeseen costs such as increased shipping payments and taxes on EU goods imported to the UK before being exported back to Europe. The company also said it had experienced “supply delays” that had affected trading despite strong demand from shoppers who wanted to revamp interiors as they spent more time at home during the coronavirus lockdowns. Accounts filed at Companies House said the London-based company, where George Osborne sits as a board director, set up a new distributor in Germany in March this year to help improve the flow of goods and reduce costs. The complaints about higher costs come despite Osborne &amp; Little calculating in 2016, at the time of the UK’s vote on Brexit, that there would be “limited impact” in the short-term from leaving the EU, but that if sterling remained weak, it would bring a “material benefit” to the business. Sales fell to £24.3m in the year to 31 March, with the UK and Europe down 18% and its biggest market, the US, down almost 15%. Despite the Brexit problems, Osborne &amp; Little moved to a pre-tax profit of £558,000 from a pre-tax loss of £542,000 a year before as it cut costs elsewhere, including reducing staff numbers. The numbers were also boosted by operating income from £510,000 in furlough payments and £128,000 in coronavirus business interruption loan scheme from the government during the year. The group borrowed £3.5m in total from the CBIL scheme and also received a £615,000 “paycheck loan” from the US government. The accounts said Covid had a “huge impact” on the UK but that sales rose 30% in the seven months to 31 October, compared with the same period in the previous year, with a similar increase in profits. The company said collections designed by the decorator Nina Campbell had performed exceptionally well. The continuing effect that Brexit is having on the UK economy was highlighted last week in the food and drink sector, with exports slumping 16% over the first nine months of 2021, a fall that was largely attributed to a 24% decline in sales to EU countries.A World Cup every two years would create a $3.5bn “solidarity scheme” to support football in less developed countries, the Fifa president, Gianni Infantino, has said as he revived the controversial plans. “It’s the reverse of the Super League,” he said. “It’s about opportunity for all. That is the fundamental principle of this project.” Infantino presented a feasibility study into a biennial men’s World Cup to international federations on Monday and included in the information was research conducted by the consultancy Nielsen that claimed the switch would create “a combined additional $4.4bn (£3.3bn) in revenue from the first four-year cycle”, a 62% increase from current levels. Infantino said the growth in revenue would enable the creation of a new fund, which would support individual associations and allow for a development scheme for players and coaches. That scheme would be implemented by the former Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger, who said it had been devised to “give everyone the chance to play top-quality football who wants it”. In October Infantino had apparently stepped back from a biennial World Cup after it was vehemently opposed by Uefa and the South American federation, Conmebol, and many other critical voices. Infantino said at the time the plans could go ahead only if they “bring everyone together”. Since then, Uefa and Conmebol have announced closer ties between the organisations including a shared ‘Nations League’ with South American national sides competing in Europe. Separate studies conducted by Uefa and the World Leagues Forum have claimed a World Cup every two years would have substantial financial impacts on regional associations and on club competitions. On Monday Infantino said it would create opportunities for financial redistribution but the precise details would be confirmed only if the plans were voted through. The fund, he said, “will obviously have to be invested in accordance with different criteria to ensure that money is invested in the right places. We need first to go through and take a decision to go ahead.” Infantino denied a doubling of World Cups would lead to any loss of prestige for the tournament, saying, “the cake only becomes bigger”. The changes would mean moving the Africa Cup of Nations to the autumn and European Championship finals to odd years but it would also mean a men’s international tournament being played in the same summer as the women’s World Cup. Fifa’s lead on the development on the women’s game, Jill Ellis, said a biennial women’s World Cup was still planned, alongside a global club tournament. Infantino said the full feasibility studies would be published in the coming days but he would not commit to putting the plans to a vote at the Fifa Congress in Qatar in March. “It will take the time it takes to come to this good decision,” he said.Good morning. The number of Australians hospitalised because of Covid is rising. Moderna is developing a vaccine to protect against Omicron. And voter approval for prime minister Scott Morrison takes a nosedive. Health experts are nervous about rising Covid hospitalisations in Australia, particularly in New South Wales, as political leaders continue to call for calm over skyrocketing case numbers. Across Australia, attention is turning from the Covid case numbers to how many people end up in hospital and the ICU. Given Australia’s high vaccination rates, Scott Morrison said on Monday the focus should be on the impact on the health system rather than the record case numbers. Here’s what the data on hospital admissions and ICU patients tell us so far. The pharmaceuticals company Moderna has said a booster dose of its Covid vaccine appeared to protect against the fast-spreading Omicron variant in laboratory testing and that the current version will continue to be its “first line of defence against Omicron”. The decision to focus on the current vaccine, mRNA-1273, was driven in part by how quickly the variant is spreading. The company plans to develop a vaccine specifically to protect against Omicron, which it hopes to advance into clinical trials early next year. The former United Kingdom prime minister Gordon Brown said if rich countries carry on stockpiling millions of vaccines while low-income nations do not have access to them, coronavirus and its variants will continue to haunt fully vaccinated countries. Voter approval of Morrison has dived 19 points in a year as voters marked down the prime minister for vaccine bungles, sustained controversy over the allocation of taxpayer funded grants, and the extended furore over parliament’s #MeToo reckoning. A year of Guardian Essential data reveals the high-water mark of Morrison’s voter approval was back in February, when 65% of survey respondents said they approved of his performance and 28% said they disapproved. But in the final poll of 2021, only 46% of respondents say they approve of the prime minister’s performance, while 44% disapprove. Australia The federal government should fund free or subsidised rapid antigen tests, business and union groups say. Free or at least cheaper tests would not only save businesses from shouldering the cost, it would send a “market signal” to suppliers that Australia was a willing customer and stop shortages. 2021 was a tumultuous year in Australian politics that many would prefer to forget. This video highlights the highs and lows of Australian politics this year. The NSW government has approved the construction of a $600m gas-fired power station backed by the Morrison government in the state’s Hunter region. Surging demand at Covid testing clinics across Australia has led to waiting times of up to five days for results, with travellers now worried they won’t get a negative result in time to travel across state borders for Christmas. The world Gabriel Boric has vowed to unite Chile, fight “the privileges of the few” and tackle poverty and inequality after winning a decisive victory over his far-right opponent to become the South American country’s youngest leader. Downing Street has defended a photograph showing Boris Johnson, his wife and up to 17 staff seemingly having drinks in the Downing Street garden during the first Covid lockdown, insisting they were discussing work at the time. Donald Trump has sued the New York state attorney general, Letitia James, seeking to halt her long-running investigation of his business practices, the New York Times first reported on Monday. Elon Musk has said he will pay more than $11bn in tax this year – which could be a record amount of annual tax paid by a single person. Musk, the world’s richest person and the chief executive of the electric car company Tesla, was earlier this year accused of paying zero federal taxes in 2018. A senior European Union official has said she does not expect the bloc to strike a migration deal with the UK because of disputes over the Brexit agreement. Recommended reads “Christmas is a largely joyless season for parents,” says Natalie Reilly. Between all the impossible gifting, rushing, stress-eating and drinking just to get through the night, Santa himself behaves a lot like a stereotypical mum. “I love this time for one reason,” says Reilly. “It’s a focus for all my adrenaline – a bright, sparkly excuse for why I am utterly haggard and manic.” There’ll be a big absence at Paul Kelly’s family Christmas this year: the singer’s older brother, Martin, who inspired an album he didn’t live to hear. Martin’s spirit is all over Kelly’s new album, Paul Kelly’s Christmas Train, a collection of seasonal songs performed by Kelly and collaborators including Emma Donovan, Marlon Williams, Lior and Waleed Aly. “How to talk about Marty? He was an unusual man. He was religious, had a strong faith, but it was not narrow, it was very broad. He was a deep humanist. That was definitely in the back of my mind putting this record together. I wanted to make a big-hearted, generous, open record.” And while Martin’s death might have provided the spur, Christmas songs have been a growing Kelly obsession for years. His own Yuletide classic How to Make Gravy led to fans dubbing 21 December “Gravy Day”. In this extract from Mark Lanegan’s new memoir Devil in a Coma, the alt-rocker recalls how Covid-19 put him in hospital for months this year – and gave him a series of hallucinogenic visions. “I dreamt several of my ex-girlfriends and ex-wives, many of whom detested me in real life, were all in harmony with each other,” Lanegan writes. It’s easy to despair at the climate crisis or to decide it’s already too late – but it’s not. Here’s how to keep the fight alive, says Rebecca Solnit. Listen From questionable Covid treatments to life-saving inventions and discoveries about the natural world, Guardian Australia medical editor Melissa Davey and science writer Donna Lu talk to Laura Murphy-Oates about the best and worst science stories of 2021. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport An Ashes whitewash looked far-fetched two weeks ago – but not any more. A comprehensive victory achieved without their captain and two best bowlers means talk of Australia winning 5-0 again is not just for laughs. Media roundup A coalition of writers and artists representing Sydney’s Arab community are calling on performers and spectators to boycott the Sydney festival in January in response to their $20,000 partnership with the Israeli embassy in Canberra, according to the Sydney Morning Herald. A southern council in Tasmania has moved to ban any inflatable devices following the tragic jumping castle accident that left six children dead last week, the Mercury reports. Coming up Today there is a parliamentary inquiry into social media and online safety. And NSW train delays are likely after an overnight strike. And if you’ve read this far … How to stay chic on holiday: pack a robe and wash your undies in the sink. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.There have been a series of explanations as to why Boris Johnson, his wife and 17 other people were photographed with wine and cheese in the Downing Street garden during the Covid lockdown in May last year. Johnson’s spokesman on Friday, after sources told the Guardian and Independent about the event: In the summer months Downing Street staff regularly use the garden for some meetings. On 15 May 2020 the prime minister held a series of meetings throughout the afternoon, including briefly with the then health and care secretary and his team in the garden following a press conference. The prime minister went to his residence shortly after 7pm. A small number of staff required to be in work remained in the Downing Street garden for part of the afternoon and evening. Johnson’s spokesman on Sunday, after seeing the photo: As we said last week, work meetings often take place in the Downing Street garden in the summer months. On this occasion there were staff meetings after a No 10 press conference. Downing Street is the prime minister’s home as well as his workplace. The prime minister’s wife lives in No 10 and therefore also legitimately uses the garden. Dominic Raab on Monday: I think there’s a lot of exhausted people, and they, as people do in work, were having a drink after the formal business had been done. Johnson’s spokesman on Monday: This shows colleagues who were required to be in work, meeting following a press conference to discuss work … It was not against the regulations for those individuals to have a drink outside working hours, but still discussing work. Johnson on Monday: This is where I live, it is where I work. Those were meetings of people at work, talking about work.• An article described Prof Robert Dingwall as a government science adviser (A cold? It might be Covid, 16 December, p5). In fact, he left his position on the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation’s Covid-19 subcommittee in the summer. • NatWest is part of NatWest Group, not “the Royal Bank of Scotland group” as an article said. The latter changed its name to the former in 2020 (NatWest fined £264m…, 14 December, p33). • Other recently amended articles include: New Chanel chief could signal end of ‘colonialist approach’ to fashion New Zealand honours ‘extraordinary’ bravery of 10 during Christchurch attacks NSW records Australia’s highest daily Covid cases since pandemic began as scrapping of mask mandate condemned Passenger rush to beat French entry deadline causes long freight queues The Big One: Canada floods show British Columbia is not ready for a powerful earthquake Premier League and beyond: 10 talking points from the weekend’s action Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.New Covid restrictions are unlikely to be imposed before Christmas amid deep cabinet divisions but Boris Johnson warned further measures remain on the table, with data on the threat of Omicron monitored “hour by hour”. The prime minister was accused of failing to follow scientists’ advice on the need for immediate restrictions while leaving millions of people and businesses in limbo after a two-hour cabinet meeting ended with no decision on Monday. During the meeting, scientific advisers briefed ministers on the latest data including a steep rise in hospitalisations in London, with the UK’s highest number of Omicron cases, while 91,743 people tested positive for Covid on Monday across the UK. Afterwards, the prime minister said the arguments for and against stricter measures were “finely balanced” and the situation was “extremely difficult”. With some people having already departed on Christmas breaks, government sources told the Guardian that fresh curbs were unlikely to be imposed before 25 December – though an announcement could be made in coming days on rules to be brought in before New Year’s Eve. Measures under consideration include limits on households mixing indoors, social distancing and curfews for the hospitality sector. Parliamentary authorities are preparing for a possible request for the Commons to be recalled on Tuesday 28 December for a vote on any new measures. Among cabinet ministers pushing for swift action were Sajid Javid, the health secretary, and Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary. However, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, were said to be holding out for “incontrovertible evidence” that a plan C for tackling Omicron was needed. Among the plans considered by cabinet on Monday was a return to “stage two” of England’s roadmap out of lockdown, which came into effect on 12 April. People were only allowed to socialise indoors with members of their own household or support bubble, while outdoor socialising was limited to the rule of six or two households. Johnson said hospitalisations were rising “quite steeply” in London, where Omicron has hit hardest so far, adding that while he understood the strain on hospitality firms, the current plan B restrictions “can be very helpful to us and the country” at slowing the spread of the variant. The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, announced the cancellation of the capital’s New Year’s Eve celebration in Trafalgar Square “in the interests of public safety” on Monday. The event had been due to be attended by 6,500 people. The number of UK vaccines administered within 24 hours broke 1m for the first time this weekend, it was confirmed. Just over 50% of over-12s have now also received a booster dose. Prof Christina Pagel, the director of University College London’s clinical operational research unit, said that waiting for more definitive evidence of Omicron’s spread could cause the NHS to be overwhelmed and may mean it is too late to avert a crisis. She urged ministers to “follow Sage advice and return to step two of the roadmap immediately to prevent thousands of infections over the coming days and then monitor the situation hour by hour so that measures can be lifted as quickly as possible, hopefully even in time to enable limited household mixing over Christmas weekend”. A Department of Health source stressed that while Javid believed responding as early as possible to threats like Omicron was still the best way forward, the possibility of new restrictions remained unclear. They said: “We want to be as open with people as we can, but it’s not easy. There is new data coming in all the time that we have to look at, from several places. We’re basically scouring for a signal within the noise.” A former minister said Johnson appeared to be hamstrung by some of his top team. They said: “I don’t really see how it is scientifically defensible [not to act immediately] but it also feels about right in political and publicly-possible terms. The data about transmission points inexorably towards an approach that says ‘better safe than sorry for the sake of the NHS’. But it would also be unforgivable to be too cautious.” A Tory MP resistant to new restrictions vowed to go ahead with their Christmas and New Year plans regardless of any new rules. They said: “If he tries to push ahead with new restrictions without convincing evidence, Boris is a dead man walking.” Another backbencher, Esther McVey, said ministers had “for once pushed back on the scaremongering by the lockdown fanatics”. After the cabinet meeting ended with no certainty on restrictions, Labour accused Johnson of being “too weak” to stand up to his own MPs. Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, said: “While businesses across the country wonder if they can continue to trade, and families make frantic calls about whether they will see each other this Christmas, true to form the prime minister has put his party before the public. “Rather than set out a clear plan for the country, he has chosen to protect himself from his own MPs by simply not saying anything. Boris Johnson is unfit to lead.” Kate Nicholls, the head of UKHospitality, said the industry needed notice of any restrictions that were to be placed on it next week, with financial support crucial. She said firms were in limbo, having lost up to 60% of their trade while still having big rent and rate bills as well as staff wages. Greg Parmley, the chief executive of Live, which represents live music companies, said the government’s stance was “merely an excuse to withhold desperately needed financial support as sectors like live music and entertainment buckle under the weight of the latest Covid wave”. Dehenna Davison, the Conservative MP for Bishop Auckland, said: “In the last two days, I’ve had pubs and restaurants contact me asking if they should place food and drinks orders. I’ve had emails from people asking if they should postpone their wedding for the fifth time, or if they can see their mum on Christmas. We really need some certainty.”A mother and her teenage son have been found guilty of killing a 17-year-old boy in a machete attack in south London. Nichola Leighton, 36, and her son Tyreese Ulysses, 19, had been on trial along with three teenagers over the death of Levi Ernest-Morrison. On the evening of 10 April, Leighton drove Ulysses to the scene of the attack after becoming “furious” with the victim for repeatedly knocking on her door looking for her son, jurors at the Old Bailey were told. Armed with knives, Ulysses had gathered a group of friends after learning that Ernest-Morrison was “bothering” his mother. They jumped out of Leighton’s red Suzuki 4x4 jeep and some of the group chased the victim and one of his friends, before he was caught and fatally stabbed. The attack in Sydenham took just 30 seconds before the group sprinted back to the waiting car, driven by Leighton, prosecutor Bill Emlyn Jones told the court. Emlyn Jones said: “That evening, when Levi and the others came knocking on her door, Nichola Leighton was furious. She rang the police about it and told the police that if the boys came back, she was going to batter them. But before she had phoned the police, she contacted with her son Tyreese Ulysses. “The prosecution say that having heard from his mum that Levi and his friends had come round to his mum’s house and were bothering her, he then rallied the troops.” Leighton admitted driving the boys to the scene but denied being aware they were armed, while her son claimed they only wanted to scare off the gang. She was found guilty of murder and having an offensive weapon. Her son admitted having a weapon, and was cleared of murder but convicted of manslaughter by a majority of 10 to two after a jury deliberated for more than 40 hours. Two teenagers, aged 16 and 17, were also unanimously convicted of murder after admitting to having weapons. The jury was discharged after failing to reach a verdict on a murder charge for a 15-year-old. The defendants were remanded into custody to be sentenced on 28 January 2022.Unite is launching an independent inquiry into how the building costs of a hotel and conference centre in Birmingham spiralled into a “potentially significant loss” for the trade union. The inquiry follows reports at the beginning of the year of leaked accounts seeming to indicate that the union had overspent on the 170-room hotel and 1,000-person conference centre. Unite, which is Labour’s most generous backer, later confirmed that the initial projected costs had been £57m, but that this had soared to £98m, an increase it defended as the result of safeguarding employment practices on site. Sharon Graham, the recently elected Unite general secretary, said: “While the audit of the Birmingham hotel and conference centre gave the accounts a clean bill of health, a recent expert valuation has now estimated its value as being considerably lower than the costs incurred in developing the site. This represents a potentially significant loss to Unite and has to be investigated.” She said she had commissioned a QC to lead the inquiry, supported by an external law firm, to review the costs and establish the reasons for the gap. She added that the terms of reference for the inquiry would be agreed in January and that an update was scheduled for March, although no other information would be available in order not to prejudice the investigation. The outcome will be made public “in a timely fashion”, Graham said, pledging that if any moneys were found to “do everything possible to recover all moneys due back to the union”. In April, Labour MPs, including the party leader, Keir Starmer, called for an independent inquiry into the Birmingham scheme. Questions over propriety were raised after it emerged that the contract to build the hotel and conference centre was awarded in 2015 to the Flanagan Group, a Liverpool company run by Paul Flanagan, an associate of Len McCluskey, the union’s then general secretary. Another contract on the project was given to a company owned by the son of Joe Anderson, Liverpool’s former Labour mayor. Flanagan and Anderson have since been arrested on suspicion of bribery as part of a Merseyside police corruption investigation not linked to Unite. A Sky News documentary that drew a connection between these events was labelled a “shallow attack on our union” by Unite, which described them as “unrelated”. The union said accountability had been “built into the process to ensure that … we got value for this union’s money”. In a letter written to the Guardian, McCluskey said the project was a “sensible investment” that would build income and save money on expensive commercially run premises. “This project bears no resemblance to the systemic rinsing of the country going on in Westminster and Whitehall, and it is ridiculous to claim equivalence,” he wrote.Gun purchases accelerated in the US during 2020-2021 compared to 2019, with more than 5 million adults becoming first-time gun owners between January 2020 and April 2021 compared to 2.4 million adults in 2019, a study on new gun ownership reveals. The survey, conducted by Professor Matt Miller at Northeastern University and published today in the Annals of Internal Medicine, shows that between January 2019 and April this year, around 7.5m people, or 2.9% of all US adults who had not previously owned guns, purchased them. Most, or about 5.4 million people, brought the weapons into homes that had not previously had them. “The proportion of gun sales to new gun owners compared to existing gun owners is around the same at 20%,” Miller told the Guardian. “What changed is the volume of gun purchases.” According to the study, the total number of gun purchases rose from 13.8m to 16.6m between 2019 and 2020. Of those, approximately half of all new gun owners were female and nearly half were people of color. According to the study, 55% of new gun owners were white, 20.9% were Black and 20% Hispanic. But that distribution, says the author, was in place before the onset of the pandemic. “New gun owners are more likely to be Black and they’re more likely to be female,” Miller says. What concerns researchers is not that gun sales increased during the pandemic, but that more households now have firearms, potentially exposing more families to the risk of having guns in the home. “The health consequences of the recent surge in personal and household gun ownership will be borne not only by the US adults who have recently become new gun owners but also by the millions of others who live with them, including an estimated 5 million children who have been newly exposed to household firearms since 2019,” the study said. Within that increase in ownership, Miller says, “there’s a disproportionate increase in exposure to guns among African-American households”. How much of the increase can be attributed to the pandemic is unclear, since background checks upon which most gun studies are extrapolated does not record reasons for sales. “Coinciding with the WHO’s declaration of the pandemic in March 2020, there as an acceleration of gun sales superimposed on a more gradual increase that was apparent over the previous 15 years, and that acceleration was fairly dramatic,” Miller says. “There were close to 1.5 million more new gun owners in 2020, a substantial increase over 2019.” While guns statistics are notoriously difficult to apply to real life events, the increase in gun sales doesn’t necessarily suggest a rise in violent crime, or necessarily a rise in accidents and suicides. But about 5.4 million of 7.5 million new gun owners over the past two years had previously lived in homes without guns. According to the study, that increase collectively exposes another 11m people in those homes to the risk of household firearms. “For those 5 million children, 5 million new gun owners and 6 million adults they live with, the risks are imposed on them are imposed the first day the gun enters the home,” says Miller. “We know that that when a gun enters a home, the increase in the risk of suicide to the owner rises fourfold, and increases the risk to other people in the home, including children.” Depending on whether the trend for new gun owners continues, it may take time for the increase to be picked up in population-level statistics. “Even if we don’t see an immediate rise in gun suicide and accidents in the population as a whole, that still doesn’t mean that people in those homes haven’t been placed at higher risk.”The jury began deliberating late on Monday afternoon in Ghislaine Maxwell’s sex-trafficking trial in New York. Closing arguments had wrapped up in federal court in Manhattan earlier on Monday with a simple, chilling message. “She was a grown woman who preyed on vulnerable kids,” prosecutor Alison Moe told jurors. “She targeted a girl whose father had just died. She targeted a girl whose mother was an alcoholic. She targeted a girl with a single mom who was struggling to raise her daughters. “Maxwell was a sophisticated predator who knew exactly what she was doing. She ran the same playbook again and again and again.” The 59-year-old Briton was arrested in New Hampshire in July 2020 for alleged involvement in the sexual abuse of minor teenagers by Jeffrey Epstein, her longtime boyfriend. The financier and convicted sex offender, who mixed with powerful associates including Prince Andrew and former presidents Bill Clinton and Donald Trump, was arrested in July 2019 for crimes against girls as young as 14. He killed himself in custody about a month later. Maxwell pleaded not guilty to all charges. Four of her siblings – Kevin, Isabel, Christine and Ian – attended court on Monday. Approaching the courthouse, they walked arm-in-arm. In court, they spoke with their sister in French. As Moe detailed the allegations, the siblings appeared to look down much of the time. Maxwell sometimes scribbled notes. “She manipulated her victims and she groomed them for sexual abuse,” Moe said. “She caused deep and lasting harm to young girls.” Prosecutors say Maxwell’s romantic relationship with Epstein, from the early 1990s until the early 2000s, showed her complicity in his crimes. “Maxwell and Epstein were partners,” Moe said. “They were partners in crime who sexually exploited young girls together. “Ladies and gentlemen, when you’re with someone for 11 years, you know what they like. Jeffrey Epstein liked underage girls. He liked to touch underage girls. Maxwell knew it.” Moe pointed to photos that showed Epstein and Maxwell with “doting looks … cheek-to-cheek, arms wrapped around each other”. She showed pictures of Maxwell and Epstein swimming naked and Maxwell “massaging his foot with her breasts”. Maxwell was Epstein’s house manager. “She managed all the details down to the lotion and the oils,” Moe said. “She was in on the whole thing. “Remember that you see nothing, hear nothing, say nothing,” Moe added, referring to a manual Maxwell for staff at Epstein’s mansion in Florida. “In that house, behind closed doors, Maxwell and Epstein were committing horrifying crimes.” Moe recapped testimony from four accusers. There was Jane, whom Epstein started to sexually abuse at age 14. She said Maxwell was sometimes present for, and participated in, his abuse. “There were hands everywhere,” said Jane, who testified about group sexual encounters. Jane, who testified pseudonymously, said she met Maxwell in summer 1994, while attending a youth arts camp in Michigan. There was Carolyn, who was also 14 when Epstein started to abuse her in the early 2000s. Once, before a massage, Carolyn said Maxwell “came in and felt my boobs and my hips and my buttocks and said … that I had a great body for Mr Epstein and his friends”. Carolyn, who testified with her first name, said Virginia Giuffre, a longtime Maxwell and Epstein accuser, introduced her to them. Maxwell allegedly said: “You can bring her upstairs and show her what to do.” Kate, another accuser to testify pseudonymously, said she was 17 when she met Maxwell in Paris around 1994. Not long after Maxwell introduced her to Epstein in London, she said, Maxwell called to say Epstein’s masseuse had canceled and could she give him a massage. Kate said Maxwell led her to Epstein, who initiated a sexual encounter. Kate said she saw Epstein, and had sexual encounters, several times over the next few years. Another accuser, Annie Farmer, said she went to Epstein’s property at 16, in spring 1996. Maxwell, Annie said, said she wanted her to experience a massage. “She said to get undressed and get [under] the sheet on the massage table, and I did … She pulled the sheet down and exposed my breasts, and started rubbing on my chest and on my upper breast.” In court on Monday, Moe said: “They’re not all suffering from the same mass delusion. Being molested is not something you forget, ever. You remember an adult woman groping your breast. You remember a middle aged man touching your vagina. You remember feeling scared and frozen and trapped and confused.” Moe contended that Maxwell’s willingness to procure girls stemmed from money. From 1999 to 2007, Epstein gave Maxwell around $30m, the court heard. “You don’t give someone $30m unless they’re giving you exactly what you want, and what Epstein wanted was to touch underage girls,” Moe said. “When Maxwell took that money, she knew what it was for and now you do, too.” Moe also pointed to a Maxwell’s “little black book with her victims’ names in it”. Concluding after more than two hours, Moe told jurors: “When you consider all of the evidence, and use your common sense, you will reach the only version consistent with the evidence: Maxwell is guilty.” Defense attorney Laura Menninger insisted the allegations against Maxwell were the “product of erroneous memories, manipulation, and money”. “The money brought the accusers to the FBI with their personal injury lawyers sitting right there next to them … the government played you a montage of Epstein’s houses, his bank accounts, his artworks, his cars, his planes, his helicopters, his bank accounts, his message pads – just like a sensationalist tabloid would.” When Epstein died, Menninger said, prosecutors “pivoted” to Maxwell. Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732).Mandy (BBC Two) is a curious creation, and this is a curious Christmas special. Diane Morgan’s short, tart comedy series arrived in the middle of 2020 with a sideways pout, an outstanding roster of northern royalty guest stars and six episodes that barely stretched to 15 minutes each. The first series was best watched in one sitting: lumping it all together gave it more heft than watching it in short snatches. By the end of the series, I started to feel as if I got the tone and had locked on to the dry, edge-of-surreal mood of it. Morgan is, of course, a brilliant comedy performer. From Philomena Cunk half-arsing her way around Britain, to Liz puncturing the middle-class uppityness of her fellow parents in Motherland, her characters possess the ability to turn a deadpan line or a withering putdown into a lethal weapon. Mandy isn’t dry or droll, as such. She flops around town getting herself into scrapes, while smoking and ensuring her beehive remains perfectly perched. That is about the extent of it, although if you see each episode as an extended run-up to an outrageous, over-the-top gag, then its pace starts to make more sense. Whether Mandy is killing several members of the public due to negligent banana processing, watching a death by glitter ball or taking part in a wedding with a Shaun Ryder cameo, you mostly watch to see how bizarre the ending will be. She will be back for a second series next year, but, for now, here is a festive instalment. Mandy, you won’t be surprised to learn, does not like Christmas. She doesn’t seem to like much of anything – but Christmas, in particular, grinds her gears. “Christmas is just a con to make the poor feel poorer and the rich feel smug,” she says, as she gets her nails done on Christmas Eve by her one true friend, Lola. Mandy hates how commercialised it is, hates black-and-white films, hates turkey and hates bread sauce. I was ready to take umbrage at this point, as I beg to differ, but it does explain why she feels this way in great detail later on – and, well, fair enough. Rather than celebrate in any meaningful fashion, Mandy would rather get sozzled alone on the sofa in front of Die Hard, with nothing but a bottle of Tia Maria for company. Nevertheless, Lola gives her the gift of a video doorbell, so she can see who is at the door without having to get up to do so. This present kicks off a (Marley’s) chain of events that very closely resemble A Christmas Carol. As always, the guest actors are impeccable: Johnny Vegas, Pearce Quigley and John Cooper Clarke are on ghostly duties, as past, present and Christmas to come. It also leans heavily on a sitcom staple that is always worth a go when it flashes back to Mandy’s teenage years and the origins of her dislike of Christmas. This isn’t so much about clever quips or witty one‑liners as it is about physicality; Morgan’s ability to bend and twist her creation into shape makes Mandy instantly recognisable. She has an easy way with her co-stars; watching her and John Cooper Clarke – or someone who claims to look very much like him – sit and consider having a fag while the world carries on around them makes me think there is an alternative Christmas special in that. I would love to see Morgan and Cooper Clarke sitting and watching stuff for far more than 15 minutes. As is the way with Mandy, it settles for building up to one proper, belly laugh of a visual gag – and it really did make me laugh, for its sheer, outrageous silliness. This being Christmas, though, it eschews the usual catastrophic ending and opts not to add to the Mandy body count. There is an argument to be made that Mandy does have a bit of a heart, buried quite deeply under those fluffy jumpers of hers, but here it is allowed to wriggle its way closer to the surface. It is the season, after all. It still has an unusual pace to it. It feels stretched out yet crammed in, slight and overstuffed, with some scenes feeling as if they run on too long and others as if they needed more polishing. But that sense of being bent out of shape can add to the surreal cartoonishness of it – and it does continue the sense that Mandy is unlike anything else on TV. In fact, it has much in common with Tia Maria, Mandy’s choice of festive tipple. It is camp, retro and enjoyable for a glass or two, but you probably don’t need much more than that.Democrats will keep working on Joe Biden’s Build Back Better spending plan “until we get something done”, Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer told colleagues on Monday – a day after a stunning move by Joe Manchin of West Virginia drew accusations of betrayal from the White House and seemed to leave the president’s agenda dead in the water. In a letter to colleagues, Schumer wrote: “We are going to vote on a revised version of the House-passed Build Back Better Act – and we will keep voting on it until we get something done.” He also put senators on notice that they will “consider voting rights legislation as early as the first week back” next month, a timeline for another part of Biden’s agenda and an olive branch to disillusioned progressives. Build Back Better had been delayed as the White House and Democrats in Congress sought accommodation with Manchin and fellow centrist Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, key votes in a Senate split 50-50 and controlled by Vice-President Kamala Harris. In his letter, Schumer spoke of “moments of deep discontent and frustration” before Manchin’s decision to use Fox News Sunday to say he was a “no” on the spending plan, which is valued at about $1.75tn and would expand health and social care and seek to combat the climate crisis, among other priorities. Manchin cited the cost of the plan and worries including inflation, the debt and the Omicron coronavirus variant, and said: “I’ve always said this ... if I can’t go home and explain it to the people of West Virginia, I can’t vote for it. “I cannot vote to continue with this piece of legislation. I just can’t. I’ve tried everything humanly possible. I can’t get there … This is a no on this piece of legislation. I have tried everything I know to do.” Manchin also put out a statement. The White House responded with a fierce rebuke, accusing the senator of going back on his word – an accusation reportedly included at Biden’s insistence. In a local radio interview on Monday, Manchin said he had reached “wit’s end” over the negotiations but refused to blame Biden either for the talks breaking down or for the angry statement. “This is not the president, this is staff … they drove some things that are absolutely inexcusable,” he told West Virginia Radio, without further explanation. “I just got to the wit’s end of what happened.” Manchin also claimed to have been “far apart, philosophically” with Democratic leaders for months. “We’re in a 50-50 Senate, you all are approaching legislation [like] there is 55 or 60 Democrats,” he said. On Monday, Schumer said Manchin’s move would not “deter us from continuing to try to find a way forward”. Listing provisions including a child tax credit, he said: “We were elected to address these many needs and we will not stop fighting until we do.” Also on Monday, the progressive New York congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, attacked Manchin’s “betrayal of working class families” but said she did “not believe the situation is beyond repair”. Speaking to MSNBC, she said the White House and Democratic leaders had the tools to move legislation. “It’s really about time we take the kid gloves off and we start using them to govern for working families in this country,” she said. “Our leadership needs to step up. It takes the president of the United States, who I believe needs to be more forceful on the filibuster, he also needs to lean on his executive authority and say, ‘If you’re going to get in the way, we’re going to find other ways to do it. You’re either with us or not, but this train is moving.’” Ocasio-Cortez said it was a “farce” that Manchin held so much sway. “This idea that we can just go on Fox News and legislate through television … and threaten to vote no is unacceptable.” Goldman Sachs lowered its US GDP growth forecast, as did Mark Zandi, chief economist for Moody’s Analytics, following Manchin’s move. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said on Monday afternoon that she would not “relitigate” Manchin’s announcement of opposition on Sunday and her subsequent statement that was sharply critical of him. Manchin holds one card which would change the rules of the game. Should he decide to switch parties – thereby ceasing to be the only Democrat in high office in a state that voted solidly for Donald Trump – Republicans would regain control of the Senate. Some analysts doubt Manchin would take such a drastic step but concede that his stance makes it harder for Democrats to know the best way forward. On Monday, the website Axios cited “people close to” Manchin as saying if he did leave the party, he would probably become an independent but still caucus with the Democrats. In his radio interview, Manchin was asked if there was still a place for him inside the Democratic party. He said he “would like to hope there was still Democrats that feel like I do”, but added that could change, CNN’s Manu Raju, tweeted. Schumer’s pronouncement that the Senate would consider voting rights legislation next month is also significant because it indicates a stronger line on reforming the filibuster, which requires 60-vote majorities for most legislation. Manchin and Sinema are both opposed to changes. Schumer said continued Republican opposition to voting rights efforts – guaranteed given it is being pushed in answer to Republican moves to restrict voting and make it easier to overturn elections – would prompt consideration of filibuster reform. “Members will be given the chance to debate on the Senate floor and cast a vote so that their choice…is clear and available for everyone to see.” Reuters contributed reporting