Donald Trump revealed he received a booster shot of the Covid-19 vaccine, drawing boos from a crowd of his supporters in Dallas. The former president made the disclosure on Sunday night during the final stop of The History Tour, a live interview show he has been doing with the former Fox News host Bill O’Reilly. “Both the president and I are vaxxed,” O’Reilly said at the American Airlines Center, drawing some jeers from the audience, according to video shared online by O’Reilly’s “No Spin News.” “Did you get the booster?” he asked the former president. “Yes,” Trump responded. “I got it, too,” O’Reilly said, eliciting more hectoring. “Don’t! Don’t! Don’t! Don’t! Don’t!” Trump told the crowd, waving off their reaction with his hand. While Trump has expressed opposition to vaccine mandates, he has long taken credit for the vaccines developed on his watch, a stance he reiterated during the interview. “We got a vaccine done,” he said, telling supporters that wariness of the vaccine was “playing into the hands” of his opponents. “Don’t take it away from ourselves. You’re playing right into their hands when you sort of like, ‘oh the vaccine’ … no mandates, but take credit.” At the same time, he has refused to urge his supporters to take them, even though Republicans remain far less likely than Democrats to be protected. For instance, while other world leaders, including Mike Pence, Joe Biden, and Kamala Harris received their doses publicly to promote the lifesaving medicine, Trump chose to receive his in private – an acknowledgement of the unpopularity of the vaccine with large swaths of his base. While he has blamed the Biden administration for high levels of vaccine skepticism, he repeatedly undermined public health recommendations while in office, encouraging the use of unproven treatments and playing down the threat the virus posed as he tried to prioritize economic recovery and secure a second term. Trump had told the Wall Street Journal in a September interview that he “probably” wouldn’t get a booster shot. The US government has been urging all eligible Americans to get booster shots as quickly as possible as the country faces a surge in the new, highly contagious omicron variant, which recently overtook delta to become the dominant variant in the US.After weeks of embarrassing headlines over lockdown gatherings and criticism over his failure to heed scientists’ advice ahead of Christmas, Boris Johnson has found himself the target of some rather different negative publicity. Chants of “Stand up if you hate Boris” could be heard as spectators packed Alexandra Palace in London for the 2022 PDC World Darts Championship on Monday evening. Public health experts have warned the event was “Covid spreаding on steroids”. Earlier on Monday, millions of people and businesses were left in limbo after a two-hour cabinet meeting on new Covid restrictions ended with no decision being taken. Prof Keith Neаl, а public heаlth expert аt the University of Nottinghаm, said the championship – which is expected to draw in 80,000 fans – should not have gone ahead with fans in attendance. “There is no concept of social distancing and they will not be wearing masks because they are drinking,” he said. Johnson may have hoped to score points by delaying new Covid measures but Downing Street’s failure to apologise for a photograph showing him, his wife and up to 17 staff seemingly having drinks during the first lockdown in May 2020 appears to have put his face squarely back on the public’s dartboard.We will be shutting down this live blog but opening up a new one here. Thanks for joining us and following along. You can also keep up-to-date with all the latest developments here. Health officials in Texas say the state has recorded the first death related to the Omicron Covid variant. It is believed to be the first known recorded Omicron death in the United States, according to a statement from Harris County health officials. The victim was reportedly a man in his 50s, who was unvaccinated and had underlying health conditions. The statement read: The death reported this afternoon was of a man between the ages of 50-60 years old who was unvaccinated and had been infected with Covid-19 previously. The individual was at higher risk of severe complications from Covid-19 due to his unvaccinated status and had underlying health conditions.” County Judge Lina Hidalgo made the announcement during an afternoon news conference. “My phone was ringing, I’m sure you guys noticed, and it was our public health director telling me we just had our first Omicron-related death,” she said. Omicron is now the dominant version of the coronavirus in the US, federal health officials said on Monday, racing ahead of Delta and other variants and accounting for 73% of new infections last week. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention numbers showed nearly a six-fold increase in Omicron’s share of infections in only one week. In much of the country, omicron’s prevalence is even higher. It’s responsible for an estimated 90% of new infections in the New York area, the south-east, the industrial midwest and the Pacific north-west. Since the end of June, the Delta variant has been the main version causing US infections. As recently as the end of November, more than 99.5% of coronaviruses were Delta, according to CDC data. Read the full story here. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you taking over from my colleague Léonie Chao-Fong. First up, some numbers out of Australia. New South Wales has recorded 3,057 new Covid cases – another record number. Sadly, there have also been two deaths. Victoria’s numbers have remained relatively stable, with 1,245 Covid cases today. But there have been six lives lost overnight. Tasmania recorded four new Covid cases. According to Seven News prime minister Scott Morrison is supportive of an indoor mask mandate in light of the Omicron variant spreading throughout Australia, but not further lockdowns. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, for today. Before I hand over to my colleague Samantha Lock, here’s a quick roundup of what’s been happening so far: The UK government held off announcing further Covid restrictions but its prime minister, Boris Johnson, warned further measures remain on the table, with data on the threat of Omicron monitored “hour by hour”. Johnson was accused of failing to follow scientists’ advice on the need for immediate restrictions while leaving millions of people and businesses in limbo after a two-hour cabinet meeting ended with no decision on Monday. Schools, bars, gyms and cinemas in Quebec will close as of Monday as public health officials race to slow the spread of the Omicron variant. All non-essential workers are being asked to work from home and restaurants will have to reduce their capacity to 50% and limit their hours from 5am to 10pm. London’s New Year’s Eve celebration event in Trafalgar Square will not take place because of the surge in cases of the Omicron Covid variant in the capital, the city’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, has said. The European Union’s drugs regulator has given the green light to a fifth Covid vaccine for use, granting conditional marketing authorisation to the two-dose treatment made by the US biotech company Novavax. Donald Trump was greeted with boos from a live audience after revealing he has received a Covid-19 vaccine booster shot. The former US president dismissed the crowd’s negative response and claimed his administration was responsible for developing the coronavirus vaccines. Moderna said a booster dose of its Covid vaccine appeared to be protective against the fast-spreading Omicron variant in laboratory testing and that the current version of the vaccine would continue to be Moderna’s “first line of defence against Omicron”. Britain reported 91,743 new Covid cases on Monday, the second-highest figure since the start of the pandemic, as the Omicron variant continues to spread rapidly. The number of deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid test was 44. Queen Elizabeth will celebrate Christmas at Windsor instead of her usual choice of Sandringham over Covid safety fears, according to a palace source. The monarch usually spends the festive holiday at her estate in Norfolk and sources have said the decision was “a personal one after careful consideration and reflects a precautionary approach”. The Russian maker of the Covid Sputnik V vaccine is due to submit its latest data by the end of December, with manufacturing site inspections expected to follow in February, a World Health Organization official said. Panama has detected its first case of the Omicron variant of Covid, the Central American country’s health ministry said. Omicron accounted for 73% of infections in the United States for the week ending 18 December, federal health officials have said. A week ago, data by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention showed Omicron had caused some 3% of recent infections in the US. In the New York area, the Southeast, industrial Midwest and the Pacific Northwest, the variant is responsible for an estimated 90% of new infections. Staff at one UK hospital have been told they may not be able to take any annual leave as the Omicron variant causes soaring hospitalisations, the Independent has learned. In an email seen by the paper, University Hospitals Birmingham Foundation Trust was forced to tell staff last week they could not make any new holiday requests and that current leave may be cancelled as it is experiencing “significant pressures”. Doctors at Barts Health Trust, which runs three hospitals in London, have also been warned it may have to cancel “some or much” of its planned operations in January to cope with the coming Covid surge. The trust suggested it will have to rely on staff volunteering for extra shifts to avoid cancelling leave and redeploying workers. Premier League clubs in England have discussed driving up vaccination rates in their squads by creating separate rules for players yet to get a Covid-19 jab. On a day when it emerged that 16% of top-flight players are unvaccinated and a record 90 positive tests had been recorded among players and staff in the week up to last Sunday, a two-tier system was raised at an emergency meeting. Proposals include unvaccinated players travelling separately to games, facing an additional check to get into stadiums and having meals away from vaccinated teammates. The moves are designed to guard against more fixtures being cancelled as the clubs decided to press on with the season. A complication for the league is that under government guidelines unvaccinated players must isolate for 10 days if deemed a close contact of anyone who has tested positive, even if they produce negative results. This increases the likelihood of postponements by reducing the pool of players available to a club. On Monday the league said that 77% of its players were double-jabbed and that 84% had received one, two or three vaccinations. On Friday Serie A said that 98% of its players had received two jabs. Read the full article by my colleagues Jacob Steinberg, David Hytner and Paul MacInnes here: London’s New Year’s Eve celebration event in Trafalgar Square will not take place because of the surge in cases of the Omicron Covid variant in the capital, the city’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, has said. At least five UK national attractions including the Natural History Museum and Edinburgh Castle have closed during the Christmas school holidays, usually one of the busiest times of the year. The approval of a new protein-based Covid-19 vaccine by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) has led to hopes that it could play an important role in persuading millions of people in Germany who have refused jabs from existing vaccines to get protection against the disease this winter. The EMA approved the two-dose Novavax vaccine on Monday afternoon. The German government’s vaccination advisory board is expected to follow suit and allow for its use soon, a move that would be welcomed by health experts who are bracing for a huge and imminent wave of infections caused by the new Omicron variant. The first doses of Novavax are expected to be administered in Germany in the new year. The EU has secured 100m doses of Novavax and 60m doses of Valneva, with 4m Novavax doses immediately destined for Germany. Across Europe, but in particular in Germany, experts are hoping that both vaccines will have the effect of persuading those who have so far turned down the offer of a vaccine to change their minds, at a time when raising immunity levels by vaccination is one of the key weapons against halting the virus’s spread. So far, just over 70% of Germans are fully vaccinated. Unless this figure climbs to between 80 to 90%, the nation’s immunity will not be high enough to dampen the virus. Read the full article here: Donald Trump revealed he has received a Covid-19 vaccine booster shot during a live interview show with former Fox News host Bill O’Reilly. O’Reilly confirmed he also received a booster shot, though neither said which one they received. The former US president was booed by a portion of the audience but he appeared to dismiss the crowd’s negative reaction. “Don’t, don’t, don’t, don’t, don’t!” he said. “That’s all right, it’s a very tiny group over there.” During the same show, Trump said his administration was responsible for developing the coronavirus vaccines. “Look, we did something that was historic,” he said. “We saved tens of millions of lives worldwide when we, together, all of us, we got a vaccine done.” “This would have been the Spanish Flu of 1917 ... This was going to ravage the country, far beyond what it is right now. Take credit for it,” he added. His comments come as a relatively large percentage of Republicans have refused to get even initial doses of the vaccines. A recent study by the New York Times showed approximately 60% of Republican adults have received their first shot, compared with 91% of Democrats. Good evening from London. I’m Léonie Chao-Fong, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next few hours. In Quebec, Canada’s second-most populous province, schools, bars, gyms, casinos and cinemas will be closed as of Monday in order to combat the rapid spread of the Omicron variant. All non-essential workers are being asked to work from home and restaurants will have to reduce their capacity to 50% and limit their hours from 5am to 10pm. The new measures will come into effect at 5pm local time on Monday. The province’s health minister, Christian Dubé, urged Quebecers to cut down their personal contacts after a record 4,571 new cases were recorded. “The situation is critical. The explosion of cases is overwhelming,” he said in a press briefing today. Here is a round-up of all the top Covid headlines today from the UK and around the world: The European Union’s drugs regulator has given the green light to a fifth Covid vaccine for use, granting conditional marketing authorisation to the two-dose treatment made by the US biotech company Novavax. The Omicron variant of the coronavirus is spreading faster than the Delta variant and is causing infections in people already vaccinated or who have recovered from the Covid disease, the head of the World Health Organization said on Monday. Moderna said on Monday that a booster dose of its Covid vaccine appeared to be protective against the fast-spreading Omicron variant in laboratory testing and that the current version of the vaccine would continue to be Moderna’s “first line of defence against Omicron”. Bereaved families and friends who lost loved ones to Covid have criticised Boris Johnson over a photo that has emerged showing the prime minister at a gathering in the Downing Street garden with wine and cheese alongside his wife and up to 17 staff in an apparent breach of lockdown rules. Britain reported 91,743 new Covid cases on Monday, the second highest figure since the start of the pandemic, as the Omicron variant continues to spread rapidly. The number of deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid test was 44. In the UK, at least five national attractions including the Natural History Museum and Edinburgh Castle have closed because of a surge in Covid cases. Belgium’s health ministers have agreed to start vaccinating children aged between five and 11 against coronavirus. Britain’s Queen Elizabeth will celebrate Christmas at Windsor instead of her usual choice of Sandringham, a palace source said on Monday, as the Omicron variant continues to spread rapidly. Italy reported 137 coronavirus-related deaths on Monday against 97 the day before, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of new infections fell to 16,213 from 24,259. Israeli ministers on Monday agreed to ban travel to the US, Canada and eight other countries amid the rapid, global spread of the omicron variant. The Russian maker of the Covid Sputnik V vaccine is due to submit its latest data by the end of December, with manufacturing site inspections expected to follow in February, a World Health Organization (WHO) official said on Monday. Panama has detected its first case of the Omicron variant of Covid, the Central American country’s health ministry said on Monday. China must be more forthcoming with data and information related to the origin of the Sars-CoV-2 coronavirus, the head of the World Health Organization has said. Royal Caribbean Group has said 48 people on its Symphony of the Seas cruise ship tested positive for Covid. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, for today. I’ll be back tomorrow morning but for now I shall leave you with my colleague Léonie Chao-Fong, who will keep you across all the Covid news throughout the evening. Goodbye. Queen Elizabeth will celebrate Christmas at Windsor instead of her usual choice of Sandringham, a palace source has said, as the Omicron variant continues to spread rapidly. “The decision was a personal one after careful consideration and reflects a precautionary approach,” the source said. “There will be family visiting Windsor over the Christmas period and all appropriate guidelines will be followed.” Chris Ship, ITV News’s royal editor, tweeted that the decision taken by the monarch was a “personal one”. Panama has detected its first case of Omicron, the Central American country’s health ministry has said. A 50-year-old who worked in mining and recently travelled to South Africa was found to have contracted the variant, said Luis Sucre, the health minister. The Russian maker of the Covid Sputnik V vaccine is due to submit its latest data by the end of December, with manufacturing site inspections expected to follow in February, a World Health Organization has said. Rogério Gaspar, the WHO’s regulation director, gave the new timelines for the vaccine made by the Gamaleya Institute at a WHO briefing for journalists in Geneva. Coronavirus cases surged in New York City and around the United States over the weekend, dashing hopes for a more normal holiday season. In New York, new Covid cases rose 60% in the week that ended on Sunday as the Omicron variant spreads rapidly around the US northeast. New York has set records for the most new cases reported in a single day since the pandemic started for three consecutive days. The rise in cases has set off alarm bells for public health officials, who see Omicron fast becoming dominant in the United States and fear an explosion of infections after holiday gatherings., Reuters reported. With the new variant in circulation, the number of Covid cases is now doubling in one and a half to three days in areas with community transmission, the World Health Organization said on Saturday. China must be more forthcoming with data and information related to the origin of the Sars-CoV-2 coronavirus, the head of the World Health Organization has said. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said there had been “many failures” during the pandemic because of a lack of rules or obligations under the WHO’s current 2005 International Health Regulations. “We need to continue until we know the origins, we need to push harder because we should learn from what happened this time in order to [do] better in the future,” Tedros told a news briefing for Geneva journalists. Italy reported 137 coronavirus-related deaths on Monday against 97 the day before, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of new infections fell to 16,213 from 24,259. Italy has registered 135,778 deaths linked to Covid since its outbreak emerged in February last year, the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain and the ninth-highest in the world. The country has reported 5.4 million cases to date, Reuters reports. Patients in hospital with Covid – not including those in intensive care – stood at 8,101 on Monday, up from 7,726 a day earlier. There were 73 new admissions to intensive care units, down from 78 on Sunday. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 987 from a previous 966. Some 337,222 tests for Covid were carried out in the past day, compared with a previous 566,300, the health ministry said. In Australia, the federal government should fund free or subsidised rapid antigen tests, business and union groups say, as pre-Christmas Covid testing queues grow and stores sell out of the at-home tests. Free, or at least cheaper, tests would not only save businesses from shouldering the cost, it would send a “market signal” to suppliers that Australia was a willing customer and stop shortages. Since 1 November, Australians have been able to test themselves at home for Covid. The rapid antigen tests are not as accurate as PCR tests but they deliver results much faster and can screen for infections if used regularly. But many retailers have sold out of the tests and prices have fluctuated as the number of infections increased and people get tested before travel or Christmas gatherings. At the same time, global supply chain problems are delaying shipments of rapid tests into Australia, while freight prices and border restrictions are delaying transport around the country. Britain reported 91,743 new Covid cases on Monday, the second highest figure since the start of the pandemic, as the Omicron variant continues to spread rapidly. The number of deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid test was 44. The Omicron variant of the coronavirus is spreading faster than the Delta variant and is causing infections in people already vaccinated or who have recovered from the Covid disease, the head of the World Health Organization said on Monday. “There is now consistent evidence that Omicron is spreading significantly faster than the Delta variant,” Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told a news briefing at the WHO’s new headquarters in Geneva. “And it is more likely people vaccinated or recovered from Covid-19 could be infected or re-infected,” Tedros said. Kuwait will require anyone who has been vaccinated against Covid for nine months to get a booster shot, the government tweeted on Monday. Kuwait will also require travellers to quarantine at home for 10 days unless they receive a negative PCR test for coronavirus within 72 hours of their arrival. Countries across Europe have moved to reimpose tougher measures to stem a new wave of Covid infections spurred by the highly transmissible Omicron variant, with the Netherlands leading the way by imposing a nationwide lockdown. All non-essential stores, bars and restaurants in the Netherlands will be closed until 14 January. South Africa’s president has returned to work after a week of isolation after testing positive for Covid. Cyril Ramaphosa had mild symptoms and was treated at his official residence in Cape Town by the military health service as the country battled a wave of the virus dominated by the highly transmissible Omicron variant. His office said: President Ramaphosa repeats his call for everyone in the country to stay safe by being vaccinated, wearing face masks, washing or sanitising hands frequently, maintaining a social distance and avoiding gatherings. Ramaphosa is to chair the last cabinet meeting of the year on Wednesday. What Covid rules are being considered to tackle Omicron in England? Boris Johnson is understood to be looking at three options to try to curb spread of the new variant. My colleague Linda Geddes explores what could happen in the coming days. The failure to vaccinate the world against coronavirus will come back to haunt even fully vaccinated Britons in 2022, Gordon Brown has warned. The former prime minister said the emergence of Omicron was “not Africa’s fault”, and added that new variants would continue to wreak havoc because richer countries such as the UK had “stockpiled” hundreds of millions of vaccines. He rubbished suggestions wealthier countries faced a choice between offering boosters to their own citizens or sharing doses with people living in poorer countries. “Ours is not a fraught choice between boosters and vaccinating the world. We are manufacturing enough vaccines … to immunise the whole world.” Instead, Brown said it was an “inescapable and unacceptable fact” that of the billions of vaccines administered, only 0.6% ended up in low-income countries. Writing in the Guardian, Brown cautioned that “even the fully vaccinated” in Britain remained at risk as long as the virus was given “free rein to mutate” in countries with poor access to jabs. “The grim truth remains that until no one anywhere lives in fear, then everyone everywhere will have to live in fear. “The new variant is not Africa’s fault,” he said. “Responsibility starts with the governments of wealthy nations who stockpiled hundreds of millions of vaccines and who, even when warned about the failure to vaccinate more vulnerable parts of the world, did too little as the virus mutated.” Cuba has vaccinated more of its citizens against Covid than most of the world’s largest and richest countries. It is a milestone that will make the poor, communist-run country a test case as the highly contagious Omicron variant begins to spread around the world, Reuters reports. The Caribbean island has vaccinated more than 90% of its citizens with at least one dose, and 83% of the population is now fully inoculated, placing it second globally behind only the United Arab Emirates among countries of at least 1 million people, according to official statistics compiled by Our World in Data. While many of its neighbours in Latin America, as well as emerging economies globally, have competed for vaccines produced by wealthier countries, health officials say Cuba vaulted ahead by developing its own. Infections and deaths from Covid have plunged on the island in recent weeks, falling to less than 1% of their peak on 22 August, when fewer than half its citizens were vaccinated. Nearly all of Cuba’s children aged two to 18 have now been vaccinated with homegrown vaccines. Royal Caribbean Group has said 48 people on its Symphony of the Seas cruise ship tested positive for Covid. It said the passengers who tested positive were asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic, Reuters reported. The European Union’s drugs regulator has given the green light to a fifth Covid vaccine for use, granting conditional marketing authorisation to the two-dose treatment made by the US biotech company Novavax. The European Medicines Agency decision to grant conditional marketing authorisation for the vaccine for people aged 18 and over, which must be confirmed by the EU’s executive commission, comes as many European countries are battling surges in infections and amid concerns about the spread of Omicron. Novavax says it is testing how its shots will hold up against the variant, and like other manufacturers has begun formulating an updated version to better match that variant in case in case it is eventually needed, the Associated Press reports. In the UK, at least five national attractions including the Natural History Museum and Edinburgh Castle have closed because of a surge in Covid cases. The start of the Christmas school holidays is usually one of the busiest times at the Natural History Museum but it will be closed from Tuesday “due to an unforeseen staff shortage”. Other London museums closed because of Covid include London’s Wellcome Collection in Euston, the National Army Museum in Chelsea, and the Foundling Museum in Bloomsbury. The British Museum remains open but warned visitors that some galleries may have to close at short notice. The Natural History Museum, the second most visited museum in the UK after Tate Modern, said it would remain closed for at least a week. Belgium’s health ministers have agreed to start vaccinating children aged between five and 11 against coronavirus. Ministers said the vaccination is highly recommended for children with conditions that put them at high risk for complications from Covid. Those children will be invited to receive their jabs as a priority before the end of the month. EU regulators last month approved a reduced-dose vaccine made by Pfizer-BioNTech for use in the five-to-11 age group. To counter a new spike in case of the virus, which has already claimed 27,900 lives in Belgium, the government has tightened rules for schools and nurseries, bringing school holidays forward and asking children aged six and over to wear masks. In addition, classes must close when two children from the same class test positive. Bereaved families and friends who lost loved ones to Covid have criticised Boris Johnson over a photo that has emerged showing the prime minister at a gathering in the Downing Street garden with wine and cheese alongside his wife and up to 17 staff in an apparent breach of lockdown rules. The photograph was shared with the Guardian following No 10’s denial last week that there was a social event on Friday 15 May 2020, including wine, spirits and pizza, inside and outside the building. Johnson’s spokesperson said Downing Street staff were working in the garden in the afternoon and evening. However, the picture raises questions over that assertion. Bottles of wine are in evidence, there is a lack of social distancing and 19 people are gathered in groups across the No 10 terrace and lawn. The Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group said funerals at that time were allowed fewer people than there appear to be in the Downing Street garden and it was “exhausting” to see the “constant, flagrant disregard we have all been held in”. Jo Goodman, the co-founder of the group, said: “It is exhausting for not only those of who us lost loved ones to Covid-19, but for everyone across the country who sacrificed so much to see the constant, flagrant disregard we have all been held in. “We’re not sure how much more the prime minister expects us to take before he’ll accept that he has to be open with the public about these events. “This supposed work meeting, with no pen, paper or laptop in sight (instead replaced with vital cheese and wine) shows that he presided over a culture of believing that the rules applied only to other people since early in the pandemic. “When this photo was taken strangers had to hold dying loved ones hands, funerals were allowed less people than in the Downing Street garden that day and we couldn’t even hug each other for comfort. “Many of us worry that it may be too late for the prime minister to regain any credibility and authority to implement any future measures to tackle the pandemic. If that proves to be the case it will be time for him to consider what is best for the country.” Hello. I’m Tom Ambrose and will be bringing you all the latest Covid news from around the world throughout the day. We start with the news that bookings have opened for children aged 12 to 15 in England to get their second dose of a coronavirus vaccine. All those in that age group who are eligible will be able to book their second jab through the NHS’s online national booking service if their first dose was more than 12 weeks ago, in line with updated guidance from the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI). Second doses will also be offered through existing school immunisation services from 10 January. The push to get young people vaccinated comes as cases of the new Omicron variant are rising rapidly across London and the rest of the UK. On Saturday and Sunday, nearly 1.7 million jabs were delivered in England in a renewed effort to increase vaccination rates. Rollout of the vaccine to 12- to 15-year-olds in schools began in September, and more than 1.3 million young people have had a jab so far. More than 75,000 are eligible for a second dose. The Natural History Museum has been forced to close its doors from Tuesday due to “front-of-house shortages” as a result of Covid-19. The South Kensington museum will remain closed for one week in the hope that “staffing levels will have recovered”. In a statement, it said: “We have made the difficult decision to close our South Kensington site from Tuesday December 21 due to front-of-house staff shortages which have been impacted by Covid-19 infections and isolation requirements. “This is not a decision we have taken lightly but the safety of staff and visitors must always come first. “If you have bought tickets for Wildlife Photographer of the Year or Fantastic Beasts: The Wonder of Nature for these dates, these will be cancelled and refunded. If you’ve bought tickets to one of our events we will email you with further information.” Moderna Inc said on Monday that a booster dose of its Covid-19 vaccine appeared to be protective against the fast-spreading Omicron variant in laboratory testing and that the current version of the vaccine would continue to be Moderna’s “first line of defence against Omicron”. The vaccine maker said the decision to focus on the current vaccine, mRNA-1273, was driven in part by how quickly the recently discovered variant is spreading, Reuters reports. The company still plans to develop a vaccine specifically to protect against Omicron, which it hopes to advance into clinical trials early next year. “What we have available right now is 1273,” Dr Paul Burton, Moderna’s chief medical officer, said in an interview. “It’s highly effective, and it’s extremely safe. I think it will protect people through the coming holiday period and through these winter months, when we’re going to see the most severe pressure of Omicron.” The company said a two-dose course of its vaccine generated low neutralising antibodies against the Omicron variant, but a 50 microgram booster dose increased neutralising antibodies against the variant 37 fold. A higher, 100 microgram booster dose of the same vaccine drove antibody levels even higher – more than 80 times pre-boost levels. Israeli ministers on Monday agreed to ban travel to the US, Canada and eight other countries amid the rapid, global spread of the omicron variant. Prime minister Naftali Bennett’s office announced the decision following a cabinet vote, AP reports. The rare move to red-list the US comes amid rising coronavirus infections in Israel and marks a change to pandemic practices between the two nations with close diplomatic relations. The US will join a growing list of European countries and other destinations to which Israelis are barred from traveling, and from which returning travellers must remain in quarantine. A parliamentary committee is expected to give the measure final approval. Once authorised, the travel ban will take effect at midnight on Wednesday morning. The CEO of BioNTech, the German company behind the Pfizer vaccine, has said early data on the shot’s efficacy against the Omicron variant looks “reassuring”, but warned that vaccines alone would not stop the pandemic. Ugur Sahin tole Le Monde in an interview that preliminary data from Britain and South Africa suggested “an efficacy of around 70% after the third dose, and around 20% to 40% after the second dose”. He said he thought South Africa’s estimate of 70% efficacy against severe forms of the infection after just two doses appeared on the low side. “The rate of primary infection is high in South Africa,” Sahin said, “so the control group, the one our vaccine is being compared to, is undoubtedly better protected than a conventional population. So I’m waiting for the next real-life UK data on the subject.” Sahin said he was waiting for real-life data to assess the accuracy of a German study suggesting a rapid drop in efficacy to about 25% after three months, even after three doses. “There will be a loss of effectiveness against Omicron over time, it is very likely, but we still have to measure the speed,” he said. “I will not base predictions on preliminary laboratory data but on real-life data. It’s obvious we are far from the 95% effectiveness that we had against the initial virus. But after the third injection our vaccine seems to provide 70% or 75% protection against any form of the disease, which is still a good result for a vaccine in general – and I think we will be well beyond that for severe forms.” However, Sahin warned that the vaccine alone will not stop the pandemic. “Even triple-vaccinated people can transmit the disease, and they will have to be tested, especially around vulnerable people,” he said. “With the Omicron variant becoming dominant, protective measures will remain essential, especially this winter.” He said BioNTech was on target to deliver an mRNA vaccine tailored to Omicron by March, subject to regulatory approval. He said the virus’s spike protein remained “an essential target” for vaccines. But the company was also evaluating “other targets, located elsewhere on the virus” and carrying out “initial research work on different types of vaccines”, he said. South African president Cyril Ramaphosa has returned to work after finishing a week of self-isolation due to testing positive for Covid-19, his office said on Monday, Reuters reports. Ramaphosa, who was given Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccine in February, tested positive on 12 December and received treatment for mild symptoms. “The president has returned to duty and will chair the final cabinet meeting for 2021 on Wednesday,” the presidency said in a statement. In the past few days, a nationwide outbreak believed to be linked to the new Omicron variant of the coronavirus has been infecting more than 20,000 people a day, even though the number of new recorded infections dropped below that over the weekend. Shadow chancellor Rachel Reeves said the UK government has got to “come out of hiding” and “put in place that pathway to getting on top of the virus and the infection”. Reeves said people want the “advice and the knowledge” to know that they can spend Christmas with their families but do it in a “safe way”. She told Good Morning Britain: “If you look at Wales, for example, they have pre-announced a package of measures that will come in just after Christmas to get a control of this virus. “The Sage minutes, the government got those last Thursday. Four days on now, we haven’t heard from the prime minister, we haven’t heard from the chancellor and they have access to much more data and advice than any of us. “The Labour party are ready to support the government in whatever measures are needed to protect public health.” Deputy prime minister and justice secretary Dominic Raab has said 12 people have died with the Omicron variant of the coronavirus, and 104 are in hospital with it. Raab did not confirm whether he is one of the 10 cabinet ministers who reportedly questioned modelling on the Omicron surge. He told Times Radio: “If you look at Omicron, what we actually know is that it spreads very rapidly. “We have got 104 hospitalisations at the moment which are Omicron-based, we have had 12 deaths. But there’s a time lag in the data and so we don’t know quite how severe it will be. “The one thing we do know is that those that get the booster jab get over 70% effective protection, which is why the strategy we have got, I believe at the moment subject to being reviewed constantly, is the right one which is encouraging people to get their boosters. “I think 53% of adults have now had their booster and then proceeding with plan B, which is encouraging people to work from home where they can and masks in particularly crowded places.” He added: “I think that is the right strategy until we’ve got firmer, harder data.” Asian stock markets followed Wall Street lower on Monday amid concern about the coronavirus’s latest variant and tighter Federal Reserve policy, AP reports. Shanghai, Tokyo, Hong Kong and Sydney retreated at the start of a trading week that ends with many closing early for Christmas. Wall Street fell on Friday as traders took money off the table after the Fed indicated it would fight inflation by speeding up the withdrawal of economic stimulus. Meanwhile, the spread of the omicron variant fuelled fears that renewed curbs on business and travel might worsen supply chain disruptions and boost inflation. Australia’s prime minister Scott Morrison is set to hold an unscheduled national cabinet meeting as Omicron cases rise Morrison will meet premiers and chief ministers for what he has characterised as an “informal” meeting of the national cabinet after a surge in Omicron cases as Australians travel in preparation for their Christmas break. The prime minister told reporters in Brisbane the unscheduled leaders meeting, likely on Wednesday, would “give everybody an update on the most recent information we have” and also enable the states and territories to share information. While the leaders meeting self-evidently reflects the changing circumstances, Morrison played down the significance of the discussion. “We are looking forward to catching up, it’s not unusual we would be meeting more regularly with Omicron being where it is.” The prime minister said the conversation would be a “good opportunity” to update each other on all the relevant public health information ahead of the Christmas break. Read the full story here. Hello I’m Samantha Lock with you on the live blog today. Thanks for following along for all the latest coronavirus developments. If you’ve just joined us, here is a quick snapshot of all the most recent news stories. UK health secretary Sajid Javid has made clear that fresh Covid restrictions could be imposed before Christmas to slow the spread of the Omicron variant, with ministers set to make a decision in days. A photograph of Boris Johnson pictured with wine and cheese alongside his wife and up to 17 staff in the Downing Street garden in May last year has been shared with the Guardian. The leaked photo raises questions over No 10’s insistence a “work meeting” was taking place. Thailand is considering whether to reinstate mandatory quarantine for foreign visitors due to concerns over the spread of the Omicron variant, the nation’s public health minister said on Monday. Germany is reporting a daily addition of 16,086 confirmed Covid cases and 119 deaths. A 19-year-old Australian man who sparked 7-day lockdown has been fined $35,000. The EU’s drug regulator will decide on Monday whether to approve a Covid jab by Novavax, which uses a more conventional technology that the US biotech firm hopes will reduce vaccine hesitancy, AFT reports. US senators Elizabeth Warren and Cory Booker confirmed they have tested positive for Covid-19. Belgian police intervened to disperse stone-throwing youths on Sunday after the latest protest march in Brussels turned violent against anti-coronavirus measures. US infectious disease expert Dr Anthony Fauci said the Omicron variant is “raging around the world”, in an interview with NBC’s Meet the Press, adding that “the real problem” for the US hospital system is that “we have so many people in this country who are eligible to be vaccinated who have not yet been vaccinated.” The Netherlands has entered a strict lockdown that meant the closure of non-essential stores, restaurants, hairdressers, gyms, museums and other public places until 14 January to push back the new wave. Thailand is reporting its first locally transmitted case of the Omicron variant found in a Thai woman who tested positive after contracting the virus from her husband, a Colombian who returned to Thailand from Nigeria in late November, a health ministry official told a daily briefing on Monday. “She is potentially the first in Thailand to get Omicron from an overseas traveller, her husband, and the first locally transmitted case,” said Chakrarat Pittayawonganon, an official from the Disease Control Department. Both the husband and the wife had been fully vaccinated with the AstraZeneca vaccine, he said. The couple had one high-risk contact, a taxi driver, who was being quarantined and pending a second coronavirus test due on Wednesday, Chakrarat added. Epidemiologist Prof Mary-Louise McLaws has spent the past week dialling in to meetings of the World Health Organization’s [WHO] infection prevention and control group, and said; “I don’t know of any outbreak manager who would not support wearing masks at the very minimum” in cities where Covid-19 cases are rising. McLaws said: WHO keeps reminding the world that vaccines are not the only answer because this virus keeps changing. Vaccines certainly reduce the risk of death and severe infection. But you do need other measures, like physical distancing, and masks.” Most eminent virology, infectious diseases and epidemiology experts agree that it is clear public health measures beyond vaccines are needed, especially as Omicron spreads rapidly. There is some disagreement, however, as to whether governments should mandate those additional measures, and which measures would be most useful to mandate. Read the full story here. Here is a snapshot of the Covid situation unfolding right now in Australia. The nation’s most populous state of NSW recorded 2,501 new local Covid-19 cases. The numbers are nearly double that of Victoria, a reversal of a weeks-long trend of more infections below the border. There were 1,302 new coronavirus cases recorded in Victoria with no deaths. The national capital of the ACT recorded 13 new infections on Monday, with a large number of cases believed to have stemmed from people who tested positive after arriving in Canberra from interstate. Three new Covid cases were also reported in Tasmania. South Australia recorded triple digit Covid cases, officially recording 105 new cases. he Northern Territory recorded three new Covid cases and lockdown has been extended by 48 hours until 5pm Wednesday. Queensland recorded 59 new Covid cases as Omicron becomes the dominant strain. Prime minister Scott Morrison says he will discuss the rising number of Omicron cases and the issue of state borders with the premiers at an unscheduled meeting of national cabinet. Germany is reporting a daily addition of 16,086 confirmed Covid cases and 119 deaths. The figures, released by the Robert Koch Institute are a significant drop on recent days. Thailand’s public health minister said on Monday that his ministry will propose reinstating mandatory quarantine for foreign visitors due to concerns over the spread of the Omicron variant. The proposal would scrap the current quarantine waiver for vaccinated visitors and revert to hotel quarantine and the “sandbox” programme, which allows free movement within a specific location, Anutin Charnvirakul told the Inside Thailand television show. He said the proposal will be made to the government’s Covid-19 taskforce “soon”, without elaborating further, Reuters reports. The minister’s remarks come weeks after Thailand reopened to foreign visitors in November, ending nearly 18 months of strict entry policies that contributed to a collapse in tourism, a key industry and economic driver that drew 40 million visitors in 2019. Anutin said Thailand had detected 63 people infected with the Omicron variant so far, with one case of local transmission within the same household and the rest imported cases. South Korea has just released its daily Covid report with another 5,318 confirmed coronavirus cases reported in the past 24 hours and 54 deaths. Thailand has also reported 2,525 new coronavirus cases and 31 deaths. Malaysia recorded another 3,071 local Covid cases and 19 deaths. A 19-year-old man who travelled to Byron Bay, on the border of NSW and QLD, with his father who had Covid-19, sparking a seven-day lockdown of the area, has been fined $35,000. Kristian Radovanovic did not appear for his sentence as he has since travelled to Serbia with his father to care for his grandmother, the court was told on Monday. He pleaded guilty to four charges after the family travelled to NSW’s northern rivers region to buy a farm in late July and failed to abide by public health orders. For not using a QR code and failing to wear a mask in a general store Kristian Radovanovic was fined $5000 and $7500 respectively, and for not wearing a mask nor using a QR code in a taxi he was fined $12,500 and $10,000 respectively. The magistrate said all offences involved a disregard for public health and safety. Read the full story here. The EU’s drug regulator will decide on Monday whether to approve a Covid jab by Novavax, which uses a more conventional technology that the US biotech firm hopes will reduce vaccine hesitancy, AFT reports. Novavax’s jab, a protein-based vaccine of the kind used around the world to protect against many childhood illnesses, would be the fifth coronavirus shot authorised for the European Union. Approval would also be a boost for the Maryland company, whose jab has been plagued by delays. The European Medicines Agency (EMA) said its human medicines committee would hold an extraordinary meeting to decide on Novavax on Monday, and “will communicate the outcome”. The EU has already signed a deal to buy up to 200 million doses of the two-shot vaccine pending approval by the watchdog. Novavax says its vaccine showed 90.4% efficacy against Covid-19 in a North American trial. Chief executive Stanley Erck said the firm “looks forward to providing an additional vaccine option in Europe, built on a proven, well-understood technology platform”. The vaccine “may help address major obstacles to global vaccination, including global distribution challenges and vaccine hesitancy”, Erck added. Indonesia and the Philippines have already approved the Novavax jab, while Japan has agreed to buy 150 million doses. Novavax says it has also filed for approval in Britain, India, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and with the World Health Organization. The first death of a child with Covid-19 in New Zealand has prompted calls for Māori children to be prioritised in the next stage of the vaccine rollout, as the country grapples with racial inequalities compounded by the pandemic. A Māori boy, under the age of 10 and who had tested positive for the virus, died last week, becoming the youngest New Zealander to die with Covid, the Ministry of Health confirmed. It is unclear whether Covid-19 was the cause of the boy’s death, as New Zealand records all deaths of people considered active Covid cases in its official count. It is the country’s 49th death of a Covid-positive person since the start of the pandemic. Māori make up an estimated 17.1% of the population but they have accounted for 32% of all Covid-19 related deaths. Our reporter in New Zealand, Eva Corlett, has the full story here. As things heat up over in Downing Street over alleged lockdown breaches by senior ministers back in May last year, the Guardian can share a photograph of Boris Johnson pictured with wine and cheese alongside his wife and up to 17 staff in the Downing Street garden. The leaked photo raises questions over No 10’s insistence a “work meeting” was taking place. Johnson’s spokesman has said Downing Street staff were working in the garden in the afternoon and evening. At the time social mixing between households was limited to two people, who could only meet outdoors and at a distance of at least 2 metres. In workplaces, guidance said in-person meetings should only take place if “absolutely necessary”. View the controversial snap from our earlier story here. US senators Elizabeth Warren and Cory Booker have confirmed they have tested positive for Covid-19, as the US deals with another surge in cases and the emergence of the Omicron variant. Warren, 72, a progressive Democrat who ran for the presidential nomination in 2020, tweeted that she was vaccinated, had received her booster shot and was experiencing mild symptoms in a breakthrough case of the virus. “Thankfully, I am only experiencing mild symptoms and am grateful for the protection provided against serious illness that comes from being vaccinated and boosted,” the Massachusetts senator wrote, using the occasion to also urge anyone not vaccinated to do so. Booker, a Democratic senator for New Jersey who also ran for president in 2020, said in a statement on Sunday he had tested positive for Covid after feeling symptoms a day earlier. “Fortunately, my symptoms are relatively mild. I’m beyond grateful to have received two doses of vaccine and, more recently, a booster - I’m certain that without them I would be doing much worse. I encourage everyone who is eligible to get vaccinated and boosted,” he said. Read the full story here. Belgian police intervened to disperse stone-throwing youths on Sunday after the latest protest march in Brussels turned violent against anti-coronavirus measures. The crowd of around 3,500 mainly young, black-clad and hooded protesters marched from the Gare du Nord railway to a park in the city’s European quarter, AFP reported. The protesters clashed with riot officers protecting the route to EU headquarters, where officials were meeting African leaders. The stone- and bottle-throwers were dispersed back into the Jubilee Park by riot police, and plain clothes officers made several arrests, an AFP journalist saw. Belgium is recording around 10,000 new Covid cases per day as the Omicron variant spreads in Europe, and authorities have again begun to tighten public health rules. Prime Minister Alexander De Croo’s government will meet on Wednesday to decide on any new measures, and the neighbouring Netherlands has already ordered a Christmas lockdown. Belgium has run a relatively successful vaccine campaign and has begun issuing booster shots, but a vocal minority is wary of compulsory jabs and certificates or opposes lockdown measures. Hello and welcome back to our Covid blog this Monday. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be bringing you all the latest developments from across the world. First up, let’s start with some words of caution from the White House’s top medical adviser, Dr Anthony Fauci. The infectious disease expert said the Omicron variant is “raging around the world,” in an interview with NBC’s Meet the Press, adding that “the real problem” for the US hospital system is that “we have so many people in this country who are eligible to be vaccinated who have not yet been vaccinated.” Fauci repeated such dire predictions on CNN’s State of the Union. “One thing that’s clear is [Omicron’s] extraordinary capability of spreading, its transmissibility capability,” he said. “It is just raging through the world. “This virus is extraordinary. It has a doubling time of anywhere from two to three days in certain regions of the country, which means it’s going to take over.” On Sunday, Belgian police were forced to intervene to disperse stone-throwing youths during a protest march in Brussels. The crowd of mainly young hooded protesters clashed with riot officers in the latest protest against anti-coronavirus measures. Here’s a round-up of all the developments you may have missed. The Netherlands entered a strict lockdown that meant the closure of non-essential stores, restaurants, hairdressers, gyms, museums and other public places until 14 January to push back the new wave. Germany followed France and tightened restrictions from Britain, mandating a 14-day quarantine for incoming travellers to avoid an Omicron wave. Pressure builds on UK prime minister Boris Johnson after the Guardian published a picture of him with wine and cheese in the No 10 garden, suggesting a social event, during a strict UK lockdown. No 10 insists the meeting was for work. Poland confirmed seven Omicron cases in total as an official warned the variant is spreading at “unprecedented rate”. A further 15,976 Covid cases were recorded. Peru, the country with the highest Covid deaths per capita and sixth-highest total death toll, detected its first four Omicron cases. The UK recorded above 80,000 new daily cases for only fourth time since pandemic began, and clocked another 12,000 Omicron cases – taking the tally to over 37,000. Health secretary Sajid Javid refused to rule out new restrictions on the Sunday broadcast round. Cases are up 72% in one week. Anthony Fauci, the top US infectious diseases expert, said the Omicron variant has “extraordinary spreading capabilities” and is “raging through the world”. Ireland said Omicron is now the dominant strain of Covid after an estimated 52% of its cases – 5,124 new cases on Sunday – were from the highly mutated variant. The head of Germany’s domestic intelligence agency warned of political violence from the country’s anti-vaccine movement with its connections to the far-right. Iran detected its first case of Omicron. Israel’s prime minister, Naftali Bennett, said on Sunday the country is in a fifth Covid wave and urged people to step up vaccinations. US Senator Elizabeth Warren tested positive for Covid after a routine test. She has mild symptoms. 30,000 people in Vienna, Austria commemorated the country’s 13,000 people who have died from the virus with a “sea of lights” march. Italy detected 24,259 new Covid infections, a 62% climb on the 15,010 new cases on Sunday two weeks ago. Sri Lanka will require Covid vaccine certificates for entry to public places from New Year’s Day. Russia recorded 27,967 new Covid infections, a 13% slide on the 32,031 new cases on Sunday two weeks ago. France reported 48,473 new Covid infections, a 15% climb on the 42,252 new cases detected on Sunday two weeks ago. Brazil’s health regulator Anvisa asked for greater law enforcement protection on Sunday after a flurry of threats following its decision to approve Covid vaccines for children aged five to 11. President Jair Bolsonaro, who has played down the virus’s risks, has publicly pressured the agency over the decision. Hello and welcome back to our Covid blog this Monday. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be bringing you all the latest developments from across the world. First up, let’s start with some words of caution from the White House’s top medical adviser, Dr Anthony Fauci. The infectious disease expert said the Omicron variant is “raging around the world,” in an interview with NBC’s Meet the Press, adding that “the real problem” for the US hospital system is that “we have so many people in this country who are eligible to be vaccinated who have not yet been vaccinated.” Fauci repeated such dire predictions on CNN’s State of the Union. “One thing that’s clear is [Omicron’s] extraordinary capability of spreading, its transmissibility capability,” he said. “It is just raging through the world. “This virus is extraordinary. It has a doubling time of anywhere from two to three days in certain regions of the country, which means it’s going to take over.” On Sunday, Belgian police were forced to intervene to disperse stone-throwing youths during a protest march in Brussels. The crowd of mainly young hooded protesters clashed with riot officers in the latest protest against anti-coronavirus measures. Here’s a round-up of all the developments you may have missed. The Netherlands entered a strict lockdown that meant the closure of non-essential stores, restaurants, hairdressers, gyms, museums and other public places until 14 January to push back the new wave. Germany followed France and tightened restrictions from Britain, mandating a 14-day quarantine for incoming travellers to avoid an Omicron wave. Pressure builds on UK prime minister Boris Johnson after the Guardian published a picture of him with wine and cheese in the No 10 garden, suggesting a social event, during a strict UK lockdown. No 10 insists the meeting was for work. Poland confirmed seven Omicron cases in total as an official warned the variant is spreading at “unprecedented rate”. A further 15,976 Covid cases were recorded. Peru, the country with the highest Covid deaths per capita and sixth-highest total death toll, detected its first four Omicron cases. The UK recorded above 80,000 new daily cases for only fourth time since pandemic began, and clocked another 12,000 Omicron cases – taking the tally to over 37,000. Health secretary Sajid Javid refused to rule out new restrictions on the Sunday broadcast round. Cases are up 72% in one week. Anthony Fauci, the top US infectious diseases expert, said the Omicron variant has “extraordinary spreading capabilities” and is “raging through the world”. Ireland said Omicron is now the dominant strain of Covid after an estimated 52% of its cases – 5,124 new cases on Sunday – were from the highly mutated variant. The head of Germany’s domestic intelligence agency warned of political violence from the country’s anti-vaccine movement with its connections to the far-right. Iran detected its first case of Omicron. Israel’s prime minister, Naftali Bennett, said on Sunday the country is in a fifth Covid wave and urged people to step up vaccinations. US Senator Elizabeth Warren tested positive for Covid after a routine test. She has mild symptoms. 30,000 people in Vienna, Austria commemorated the country’s 13,000 people who have died from the virus with a “sea of lights” march. Italy detected 24,259 new Covid infections, a 62% climb on the 15,010 new cases on Sunday two weeks ago. Sri Lanka will require Covid vaccine certificates for entry to public places from New Year’s Day. Russia recorded 27,967 new Covid infections, a 13% slide on the 32,031 new cases on Sunday two weeks ago. France reported 48,473 new Covid infections, a 15% climb on the 42,252 new cases detected on Sunday two weeks ago. Brazil’s health regulator Anvisa asked for greater law enforcement protection on Sunday after a flurry of threats following its decision to approve Covid vaccines for children aged five to 11. President Jair Bolsonaro, who has played down the virus’s risks, has publicly pressured the agency over the decision.It’s an effort to disentangle this year’s stresses and lockdowns and abandoned plans from last year’s. It is difficult to track time when many of life’s markers are gone and the future is chronically uncertain. Eventually the year’s story comes back into focus, defined, of course, by the pandemic’s path. This time last year Sydney’s northern beaches were locked down. Then there was the brief and patchy reprieve until Delta breached our hermit nation’s defences in June, and we endured the grinding lockdowns in New South Wales and Victoria through winter and spring, the hospitalisations and deaths, waiting for the government to procure sufficient vaccines for us to outpace the virus. We enjoyed another hesitant return to something closer to normal, a few reunions, some restaurant meals, a few weeks back at work, and now Omicron, and that sense of rising uncertainty all over again. Above everything this is a story of fatigue, of a soul-deep weariness with separations and sadness and Zoom calls and cancelled plans and personal, daily, risk assessments, of fear and confusion. It is a story of trying to understand the future when we cannot plan for it, of trying to find satisfaction and meaning in the imperfect present, of moderating expectations while clinging to hope. We seem to have learned some lessons; the rollout of booster shots for aged care residents and staff is better than previous deadly disasters, although it’s more of a scramble in rural areas and Indigenous communities where vaccination rates were already lagging, and our analysis shows the slow initial rollout means it could take until well into next year to hit an 80% booster vaccination rate. We are ranking almost last out of 70 countries. While governments, even those ideologically disinclined, have more or less followed scientific and medical advice through the pandemic thus far, their decision making now seems infused with the public’s general exhaustion with rules and restrictions, even though many experts are urging caution, at least until they understand this new variant better. For the federal government, Omicron’s uncertainties are ill-timed. Scott Morrison wants to make plans, pandemic notwithstanding, because the federal election must be held by May. He is already rehearsing his re-election pitch, in which his own embrace of unprecedented restrictions and record government spending are inscribed in the history books as heroic, crisis-necessitated aberrations, while we all watch Covid-19 receding in the “rearview mirror”. That’s a tough sell, even tougher if cases are still climbing, and lives and businesses are still interrupted. “The reach of government in this pandemic is not some new norm … It has a use-by date,” he explained to the audience at the Sydney Institute’s annual dinner, warning them against “the left of politics” who want to “build back better”, because that was code for maintaining a bigger role for government. I’d argue that Covid has exposed the weaknesses in our society like a fluorescent marker dye, highlighting the underfunded hospitals and public schools, the inadequate Indigenous and rural medical services, the transformative impact of a liveable rate of unemployment payment, before it was snatched away again. I think building back better means fixing those inequities to benefit us all, and it cannot be conflated with a generalised weariness with government interventions. I guess that’s a debate for the election campaign. The desire to see the pandemic fading into history also seems to be accelerating a return to politics as it was played before the jolt of an existential crisis. We all saw the speed with which dangerous falsehoods can spread but the government seems to have its eyes on the polls rather than public health, refusing to rein in its own members disseminating misinformation on their taxpayer-funded websites. We saw how essential trust in institutions was when we faced down a crisis, but the prime minister is openly ridiculing the NSW state corruption commission in an unsuccessful attempt to woo a candidate for his party’s political gain. There were some other stories to grab the nation’s attention this year. Strong and determined young women, in particular Brittany Higgins and the Australian of the year, Grace Tame, forced the Australian parliament into a moment of #MeToo reckoning and are demanding a meaningful response. And while the Morrison government took a wholly inadequate target to the Glasgow climate summit, with no new policies to achieve it, Labor’s more ambitious policy was met with almost universal acclaim from industry and business groups. With climate-minded independents focusing the minds of inner-city Liberals, it is possible we are seeing the final sputtering years of Australia’s mind-numblingly stupid “climate wars”? For Guardian Australia, this year was one of expansion, into new ways of delivering our journalism to different audiences, via podcasting, video, Instagram and TikTok. The pandemic has also underlined the importance of state governments and next year we will be establishing state bureaus in Victoria, NSW and Queensland; a pilot project we hope will soon extend to other states. And so we all face 2022 much as we did 2021, with hope and determination but without certainty or the luxury of definite plans. Researchers say one of the best ways to combat temporal disintegration – an extreme form of losing time perception in the pandemic – is to be careful about the news you consume. My Guardian Australia team and I will continue to work to bring you the most timely, factual, contextualised news and analysis, whatever 2022 might bring. Thank you for reading, for your feedback and for your support. You can support our journalism by making a contribution or becoming a digital subscriberCommunities in New South Wales’ far west are bracing for flooding as inflows from multiple tributaries across the state continue to increase, but locals say the State Emergency Services (SES) have not been proactive in helping them prepare. The Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) has announced that rainfall has left catchments saturated and water storages full, increasing the risk of riverine flooding and dangerous flash flooding this summer. For communities in the state’s far west, the threat of severe flood risk increases the more inflows from multiple tributaries across the state continue to increase. The BoM estimated that the Darling River at Tilpa is expected to exceed the minor flood level (nine metres) by the end of December, with major flooding above 12 metres predicted around the third week of January. Justin McClure is the vice president and the immediate past president of the Tilpa Community Committee and a member of the Wilcannia SES. He says the SES need to be more organised to help the town which does not have an active SES unit, considering the situation is one that “won’t take much to magnify into a major threat”. McClure says a water level of 12 metres is manageable but just another metre could affect people’s lives. “The way this one’s lining up, with a lot of rain forecast for southern Queensland, anything could happen,” McClure says. He says the current predictions will see the equivalent volume of Sydney Harbour going past Tilpa every week, but an even bigger flood could see the same volume going past Tilpa every day. “And if that happens we need to be prepared.” McClure wants the SES to commit a boat to Tilpa, assess the town’s levy bank, build the levy bank up, and make sand supplies available. He says the SES have been preoccupied and under-resourced while dealing with the crisis in the north of the state while it was current, but he would like to see the organisation take a more proactive approach to help locals prepare for floods before the situation becomes critical. McClure says the SES have since been in contact with him and the local community. However, McClure says, “we only seem to get support when there’s a disaster or a disaster pending … Instead of being proactive, they want to be reactive because it creates a media storm and they get more funding from that situation.” In Menindee, the community are on standby for flooding as inflows going down the system are equivalent to the entire 1700-gigalitre volume of the Menindee Lakes, meaning Water NSW has had to start making increasingly larger releases from the lakes. The SES released a statement on 10 December to say they had “a six-week window to get plans in place”, but the BoM announced Monday that the river level is expected to exceed the minor flood level (8.5 metres) during Tuesday this week. Menindee local Graeme McCrabb says town meetings arranging necessary precautions such as emergency accommodation have yet to take place. He says very little has been done by SES so far; most of the work being done at the moment is land holders repairing and reinstating levy banks. Menindee’s local SES unit disbanded after a lack of support for volunteers saw 14 SES volunteers transition to become Rural Fire Service (RFS) volunteers. The RFS volunteers, who now have more than 30 members of a varying range of demographics including many women and traditional owners, have not been able to access SES equipment despite wanting to help the town prepare for flooding. “The biggest problem is the town doesn’t get any information back and it’s difficult for SES to get information when they don’t have any local members,” McCrabb says. The “clear solution” McCrabb says, is one agency. “It’s too difficult to try to run two agencies in town. We don’t have enough people.” McClure also believes the two agencies in regional towns should be joined. “It’s the same people doing the same job. Unfortunately they get blinded by their own bronze and the bureaucracy is more important … than helping people, which is their role.” Dave Fleming, a farmer from Walgett, where minor flooding is already occurring with predictions of flood levels exceeding moderate levels next week, is also frustrated by the bureaucratic procedures when it comes to flooding. “I respect and congratulate the SES volunteers, however the hierarchy aren’t worth feeding,” Fleming says. He says the situation hasn’t improved since flooding in Walgett in 2012 saw the SES dismiss the local Walgett SES volunteers, with no locals allowed to be part of the briefing, to the detriment of the situation. A NSW SES spokesperson told Guardian Australia that NSW SES volunteers had been working with local communities for the past seven weeks in the state’s far west to prepare them for floods. The spokesperson said members had been hosting multiple community meetings to help increase awareness and undertaking flood mapping to help inform their response. “As the flood water has arrived in areas, our members have helped those communities respond,” the spokesperson said. “This response is anticipated to continue in coming weeks, with resources already beginning to be deployed further downstream. More will follow as the flood water slowly makes its way south, with affected communities expecting the arrival of NSW SES members in their towns well before the flood water peaks.” Roy Butler, the MP for Barwon, an electorate which covers a vast stretch of NSW from Lightning Ridge to Broken Hill, agrees that there should be a more proactive, rather than reactive, approach taken to natural disasters. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter Having seen some of the planning documents, Butler says the SES have comprehensive plans for the worst case scenario. However, he says in the longer term, “we need to look at harmonising training packages for SES and RFS. Volunteers in the west are a thin market … having silos within agencies is not the way to do it.” Butler also believes equipment from both RFS and SES organisations can be shared, but that the process of “harmonising” the two organisations is not something that can be achieved in a week or a month. This article was amended to clarify Justin McClure’s title. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityAs Australians crawl to the end of this second, though by no certainty final, year of the global pandemic, two discrete and sometimes contradictory tellings of 2021 are taking form: the story of “me” and the story of “us”. Like 2020 before it, this has been a year of intense disruption, all of us challenged not only adjust to new norms but, critically, to accept constraints on our individual freedoms in the name of our collective health. From lockdowns, to vaccines, to border restrictions, “me” has been asked to play second fiddle to “us”. Along the way the project of government has taken on a heightened significance, not just in organising our response to the pandemic but in dealing with a wave of historic reckonings on gender, climate and technology that will have profound impact on the futures of us all. In our final Guardian Essential Report of the year, Australians look back on 2021 with some revealing self-reflections giving texture to these competing frames of reference. In short: it’s been a better year for “me” than it has been for “us”. Almost counterintuitively, Australians say that for all the disruptions it has been a net positive year for them and their families. Indeed, “me” has the strongest positive rating in this series of benchmarks that we have been asking at the end of each year since 2013. There is a shared resilience embedded in these figures, suggesting that for many the forced limits have also carried unexpected upsides to their health, wealth and happiness. For nearly a third of Australians, it has also been a good year financially, the first time we’ve seen a net positive response to this question. The housing boom has seen a significant increase in personal wealth for those in the market; a growing inequality between classes and generations that is the inevitable end-point of government economic policy: a transfer from “us” to the property-owning “me” driven by close to zero interest rates and tax privileges. On first blush these are heartening figures for an incumbent – a voting public feeling good about their personal situation are less likely to seek a change to their national leadership. Over the coming months the PM will do his everything in his power to reinforce that this is a boat that should not be rocked, all the while whipping up fear of change, pitching a safety proposition that draws a rhetorical line from the threat of Covid to that of China to social media’s abrogation of responsibility on creating safe online spaces. The PM will go about his business with all the righteous zeal of a Willy Loman, desperate for that last big sale. But there is a sense the magician of the 2019 campaign may have given up his tricks, his tendency to appear to be doing things while actually doing nothing now a character trait, his lack of any real commitment to leadership embossed in his own words: “I don’t hold a hose, mate.” He will approach next year’s election employing the same techniques of micro-targeting as the digital platforms he purports to tame, banking on the belief that if the right voters are thrown the right goodies then it will be proof enough the government cares about the “me” he needs to convince to survive. But he will do so facing multiple headwinds, on one flank the movement of community independents who articulate a more ambitious vision of government; on the other Clive Palmer’s latest yellow campaign demanding nothing from government at all. He will attempt to please all, sending out carefully coded messages of comfort to the small minority who have demanded to put “me” first when it came to vaccines. His risk is the more than 90% of us who rolled up our sleeves, positioning Australia at the front of global take-up despite spending much of the year lagging in a botched stroll-out from a leader who tried to convince us it wasn’t a race until the Delta variant determined that it was. The parallel universe that the anti-vaxxers inhabit has been individually curated for them by the big tech platforms whose toxic trade in personal behavioural data distorts reality and amplifies anger. After starting the year withdrawing services in Australia to protect its commercial interests from government regulation, Facebook was shamed by whistleblower revelations that it was fully aware its trade in micro-targeting “me” is doing irreparable damage to “us”. What is also striking in these figures is the sense that while we are doing OK individually, the plight of other people – the hypothetical “average Australian” – is not so great. I’m not sure what drives this divergence, perhaps the general outbreak of empathy through the pandemic, but for once we appear to be looking outside our own personal cocoon and seeing the world through each other’s eyes. After what now appears a false dawn in 2020 that trust in our institutions was on the rise, our regard for government and politics deteriorated in 2021. In February #MeToo came to Canberra when Brittany Higgins’ claims put the culture of Parliament House under scrutiny. It triggered the Jenkins inquiry into parliament’s workplace culture and culminated in a landmark report. National Audit Office revelations of the breadth of government spending rorts in grants programs and the PM’s steadfast refusal to make good his promise to create an integrity commission are likely to have contributed to this decline. So too the deterioration in relations between the federal government and the states. After 2020’s year of collaboration, 2021 was a reversion to type. By mid-year New South Wales and Victoria entered a second round of lockdowns, the federation fractured with the PM playing states off against each other, his dream of a late 2021 coronation turning to dust, with public confidence in his government’s handling of the pandemic plunging from the high 70s to less than a majority. Globally, the looming spectre of catastrophic global heating injected another factor, the wellbeing of future generations, into our considerations. Australians judged 2021 the worst year for the planet since we started asking these questions, with the incrementalism of Glasgow and our own government’s ongoing obstruction of climate ambition a dark cloud on horizon. Now an election showdown approaches and the party that has always defined itself by “us” has an opportunity to end three terms of transactional, opportunistic, me-centric government. Labor’s year has been one of relative stability; steady lines of approval and primary support a contrast to the PM’s rollercoaster. Determined not to fall into the traps of 2019, the party has ducked and weaved away from showdowns on climate and tax that could be easily weaponised. With a commitment to a more expansive role for the state in economic reconstruction, Labor has an opportunity to tap into the rising concerns about “us”. In job security, enhanced wages and a commitment to Australia’s industry, the building blocks of a national economic agenda are taking place. Likewise, a commitment to early learning, Tafe and the ailing universities follow the global move to build national wealth by tapping our social capital. Labor’s challenge for 2022 will be to articulate a politics of “us” that talks to the individual “me”. The “me” and the “us”. Of course, the choice is never binary but the emphasis in 2022 will matter. Will the contented “me” feel secure enough to vote for a stronger “us” or will the majority of “us” be content to just keep the focus on “me”? All this lies ahead of us.When Dan Johnson first heard the commotion coming from the Proserpine riverbank in north Queensland, he thought he had just snagged a really good fish. It wasn’t until he took a closer look that he realised he had hooked a shark, and local celebrity “Boofhead” – a four-metre crocodile – was coming for his catch. “It was coming so fast,” Johnson said. He whipped out his phone, planning to share the video with a couple of friends. “He’s coming, he’s coming,” shouted the onlookers before Boofhead lunged forward and made a meal out of the small shark. Johnson described it as a “powerful” display of “the circle of life”. “We were so close,” Johnson said. “He’s a really dirty old croc and he has a deep gurgle that he does.” The fishing spot is just six minutes from Johnson’s home and he says he often sees carloads of visitors from as far as “Brazil, Spain, London and Tasmania” trying to get a glimpse of the crocodile. But he said it was rare to get such a close look. According to Johnson, the crocodile is named Boofhead by locals because “he’s got a wide, ugly head on him”. “He’s just a little local sort of celebrity,” Johnson says. He said fishers were often warned to watch out for him, as he is infamous for pinching bait out of crab pots. Johnson’s wife, Ebony, 14-year-old daughter, Lily, and dog, Taddy, also got to witness the spectacle on Saturday afternoon. Lily is visiting from Melbourne for the school holidays and it was one of her first times seeing a crocodile. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “It is quite confronting for a child to see up close,” he said but added they would be eating meat that night and the only difference between what she saw and their dinner is “we won’t have to kill it”. Johnson’s main message for people who encounter crocodiles in the wild is to admire from a distance: “Don’t feed or throw things at it or try [to] get its attention. “It is crazy the power these things have, they are to be respected and admired.”Health workers have warned that intensive care numbers are not the only metric the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, should be considering as he resists mask mandates, with senior clinicians warning staff are exhausted and even quitting their jobs altogether as they face a third year of Covid. Respiratory physician and president of the Royal Australasian College of Physicians (RACP), Prof John Wilson, called for state and territory governments to reintroduce or maintain mandatory mask wearing, QR code check-ins, and restrictions on numbers of people at indoor public venues where Covid is spreading. The call came as NSW reported a record 3,057 cases on Tuesday. Perrottet on Monday rejected calls for more government-mandated health restrictions and said it was time for “personal responsibility”. He described intensive care presentations as “the key metric for the state” to monitor in relation to Covid-19, and said the numbers were low. There are 39 people with Covid-19 in intensive care in NSW. But Wilson said the health system comprised more than just intensive care, and that health workers across the system were furloughed due to being sick with or exposed to Covid-19, or were quitting their jobs due to exhaustion. “The phenomenon of job walkaway is a real one,” Wilson said. “Health is a sector where people have been asked to go the extra yard many times, time after time, and put together with a situation where they have families that they haven’t seen, where their own health is at risk, where the industrial incentives have not matched the clinical demand, it’s not surprising that some are actually leaving. “Of course natural attrition in the workforce will also occur, but there are factors like Covid-19 and the lack of response that actually speed up that decision making, and I think we’re seeing some of that right now.” Guardian Australia asked NSW Health about the number of health workers furloughed, but is yet to receive a response. Wilson said the RACP wants governments to listen to their chief health officers first and foremost. “If not checked, a surge in cases will further burden our already exhausted health systems due to an overwhelming rise in hospitalisations,” Wilson said. “The relaxation of restrictions in some jurisdictions, especially those associated with mask-wearing, QR code check-ins and large gatherings, can have dire consequences.” The RACP has been joined in their concern and call for restrictions by the Australian Medical Association, and leaders from Australia’s top infectious diseases research institutes. Later on Tuesday, AMA president, Dr Omar Khorshid, will hold a press conference where he is expected to urge national Cabinet to institute a national plan to tackle Omicron, citing concern from infectious diseases physicians. He described Perrottet as “reckless”. “DIY contact tracing, watered-down check-in requirements, the abandonment of mask wearing mandates, and the removal of density limits are together, a recipe for disaster and by the time hospital admissions and ICU cases grow beyond whatever benchmark he is working to – it will be too late.” But the prime minister, Scott Morrison, echoed Perrottet’s comments saying on Tuesday that “we have to move from a culture of mandates to a culture of responsibility”. “That’s how we live with this virus into the future,” he said. The comments have alarmed some health workers in NSW, who say the entire system is stretched. A clinician at one NSW hospital said the public health unit where she works is dealing with many more Covid-19 cases in people from vulnerable settings than at the Delta peak earlier in the year. “Aged care and disability care predominate, both residential and community settings,” she said. “There are cases of Covid in staff, carers and clients. Not many seem really sick yet and most are vaccinated, but it is early days. Getting staff to provide ongoing personal care to cases and close contacts in becoming very difficult. They need training in PPE and often key staff are required to isolate as close contacts of the client or staff cases.” The public health and disability workforces were also losing staff, she said. “It’s a casualised workforce with often no entitlements so there is not much loyalty to employers,” she said. “I would think most who work through an outbreak do so for the clients, to whom many of these low paid carers are incredibly loyal. But transfer to hospital for elderly or disabled cases with high care needs is becoming more difficult. “Hospital transfer and health hotels have been our safety net to stop transmission and provide care to vulnerable people. I can see these options being exhausted in the lead up to Christmas.” Managing outbreaks is labour intensive, she said, requiring coordination between public health, clinicians, hospital executives, the private provider and the department of health. “Everyone is stretched,” she said. “Everyone is faced with the dilemma of how we can safely and compassionately do less. People, particularly those in aged and disability care, have borne a disproportionate burden of loss of quality of life during Covid. It’s particularly galling to me that they stand to lose out yet again, for the sake of ‘freedoms’ for the general population that surely could have been bestowed more slowly and mindfully.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A health worker in regional NSW said it was not just Sydney being affected. She said her hospital is experiencing “severe staffing issues all across the hospital from the emergency department to ICU to maternity”. “We are not coping with day-to-day operations, let alone a Covid outbreak,” she said. “In January, we are expecting an extra 15,000 people to travel to our area for a county music festival from all over the country. Has there been planning, funding or just anything from the state government? There hasn’t.” Staff are tired from filling multiple roles for the last two years during the pandemic, she said. “My comment to the premier is that we do not have the resources to deal with this, or the planning and leadership we need to steer this ship. Is there a national leader out there who understands what is going on, who can pull this nation together and have us all moving in one direction together instead of individually states?”. Do you know more? melissa.davey@theguardian.comThe Australian Electoral Commission has launched legal action against Liberal MP Andrew Laming for allegedly failing to disclose his political links on a Facebook page which appeared to be operating under the guise of a grassroots community group. The federal court proceedings come after Guardian Australia revealed in April that the Queensland MP was operating 35 Facebook groups – with at least one for each suburb in his electorate. The AEC is launching action based on just one of the 35 sites, which was called “Redland Hospital: Let’s fight for fair funding,” set up by Laming ahead of the last federal election to campaign against Labor. It is the first time the AEC’s authorisation requirements for social media will be tested in court after disclosure laws were updated following the 2016 election to explicitly include social media posts. According to the AEC website, the penalty for a breach by an individual can be a fine of up to $26,640. In a statement, the AEC said it had instituted federal court proceedings against Laming “alleging he failed to authorise Facebook posts leading up to the 2019 Federal Election”. “The AEC alleges that Dr Laming published unauthorised electoral matter in the form of a Facebook page, ‘Redland Hospital: Lets fight for fair funding’ and that this contravened the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 requirement that material promoting one candidate or political party over another comply with the authorisation requirements of the Act.” “The AEC will not be making any further comment as this matter is now before the Court.” According to the Australian Electoral Commission, political authorisation is required for “information that is a matter communicated, or intended to be communicated, for the dominant purpose of influencing the way electors vote in a federal election”. “This includes, but is not limited to, a communication that expressly promotes or opposes a candidate, political party, member or senator.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Laming, who holds the bayside seat of Bowman, will not contest the next election after a series of controversies earlier in the year led to him losing preselection in April. In October, Laming withdrew his apology to two Brisbane women over online comments that he previously acknowledged caused “significant distress” saying he did not believe the women were genuinely upset. He was ordered by the prime minister, Scott Morrison, into empathy training in March before returning from personal leave, blaming a diagnosis of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder for his behaviour. Despite some MPs within the Coalition wanting stronger action taken against Laming for the complaints made about his behaviour and the Facebook pages, Morrison has defended the outgoing MP. In May, Morrison said that Laming had “formed a view since [March] that the issues that were the subject of complaints made against him have now altered and there have been new facts that have come forward”. Morrison highlighted the “many good things” Laming had done as a member of the government, saying he “[expects] him to keep working hard for his electorate all the way to the next election”. Laming said in a statement: “I respect the AEC decision and I will assist them to resolve the matter by conciliation.” Laming claimed that he was being investigated for five posts which “amount to just 2% of the page posts, with an average reach of six people.” “The entire page is less than 1% of the reach of my AEC-authorised pages,” he said. The statement said he “had consistently acknowledged he has multiple community Facebook pages in order to better tailor information relevant to those communities”. “These community pages were in full operation when requirements were tightened for social media authorisation. My office was confident at the time that we were complying by avoiding federal electoral matter. “Where there was perceived doubt at the time, individual posts on this page were correctly authorised. I do not dispute the AEC view that the page did in-effect promote me and was critical of another political party, and for those reasons, page authorisation should have occurred and for that I apologise.”Australian trucking representatives say a meeting this week between the industry and the federal government over a looming shortage of AdBlue revealed the government does not know how much of the diesel exhaust fluid remains in the country. It came as the minister for industry, energy and emissions reduction, Angus Taylor, announced a deal with fertiliser manufacturer Incitec Pivot to secure local production of refined urea for the supply of AdBlue. Industry experts welcomed the agreement, but feared it had come too late to prevent disruption caused by supply problems, especially in regional and rural areas. Under the new agreement, Incitec Pivot will “rapidly design, trial and, on completion of successful tests, scale up manufacturing of significant quantities of Technical Grade Granular Urea (TGU), a critical component of AdBlue”. It comes on top of Australia’s acceptance of Indonesia’s offer to provide 5,000 tonnes of refined urea in January, enough to make a month’s worth of AdBlue. Taylor said the announcement was a step in the right direction to provide the trucking industry with certainty. “Australia currently has adequate stocks of AdBlue stock on hand, but this agreement with Incitec Pivot will enable domestic production of TGU … to ensure current supply chain disruptions don’t impact on Australian businesses,” Taylor said. David Smith, the chair of the Australian Trucking Association, said the deal was “fantastic” as more onshore manufacturing was needed in Australia. However, Smith said it would not provide Australia with urea immediately, and the government could not provide a timeframe for when the local supply will become available. Smith said a meeting held between the government and industry late on Monday afternoon revealed the government’s AdBlue taskforce still did not know how much product suppliers had. He said the meeting confirmed the Incitec Pivot deal “probably won’t start until the end of January” while the supply from Indonesia would not arrive in Australia until January either. Smith said the situation was concerning as “if we’ve already got hotspots where service stations have run out or are rationing, what the hell is it going to look like late January”? “It’s going to get worse before it gets better.” A department of industry, science, energy and resources spokesperson told Guardian Australia the statement that the government still does not know how much AdBlue is in the country “is incorrect”. “The Australian government has commercial-in-confidence data from AdBlue and refined urea suppliers about their current levels of stock on hand and in transit to Australia,” the spokesperson said on Tuesday morning. “At the National Coordination Mechanism (NCM) meeting yesterday, stock levels were shared with stakeholders in terms of weeks of supply. There are 7.2 weeks of stocks to hand and on water. The government is working with industry to ensure these numbers are updated regularly.” Warren Clark, the CEO of the National Road Transport Association (NatRoad) also attended the meeting on Monday and confirmed it revealed the government still did not know how much product suppliers had. The ACCC has not authorised suppliers to discuss their volumes yet. Smith described the Incitec Pivot plant as old and in need of refurbishment. According to current predictions, there is enough urea for AdBlue to last until the end of February, but Smith said there were hotspots that needed attention. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter He said in areas such as Goondiwindi and the Illawarra, supplies were almost out, while in Western Australia, there were rations in place of 50L of AdBlue per truck. While rationing was not a problem in metropolitan areas, more than 50L was required for long distance hauls, he said. Smith said that having the necessary supply for trucks to transport produce from the recent grain harvest remained a concern. He believed it would be “late April or early May before we’ll get through the worst of this”. Tony Mahar, the chief executive of the National Farmers’ Federation, said the government’s announcement comes as “a welcome relief”. However, Brendan Booth, a farmer outside Dubbo, said his concerns went beyond ensuring the freight distribution of his corn. “The bigger question is why have we created a road industry that’s so reliant on this product we haven’t guaranteed supply of in Australia,” Booth said. He said AdBlue is an example of the bigger looming problems with food security and product supply in Australia due to reliance on foreign industry rather than local manufacturing. He said measures such as the company payroll tax meant the bigger the company is, the more they’re penalised for doing business in Australia, leading many companies to take manufacturing offshore. For farmers, Booth says “land prices, cost of abiding by regulation, water prices, everything’s gone up, apart from what we’re being paid”. “The consumer is not going to make an active choice to support a local business until they realise what happens when there is no local business,” Booth said. Clark agreed: “We need to be self sufficient, especially on these chemicals which are critical to the sovereignty of the supply chain.” He said rural and regional areas had been worst affected by the shortage. “There’s some major freight routes now, coming through from South Australia to Brisbane where they’re already out of AdBlue,” Clark said. He said the government’s announcement has shored up long-term supply but there’s still concern for the immediate future. Clark said the immediate impact on Australia Post, deliveries of pharmaceuticals and deliveries to supermarkets were the most pressing. “The problems with this goes through everything, possibly affecting garbage collection in rural and regional areas.” Scott Davidson, the chairman of NatRoad said: “since late last week, we have been hearing from operators, some of them quite large, who no longer have adequate supply to keep their trucks on the road.” Catherine King, the shadow minister for infrastructure, transport and regional development, wrote an opinion piece on Thursday calling the AdBlue shortage “the crisis we didn’t have to have”. King said the trucking industry has known restrictions placed on export of urea from China would eventually hit Australia’s AdBlue supply and have been calling for action since early November. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityNew Zealand has announced a suite of measures to strengthen its defence against the Omicron variant, including pushing back the start of its quarantine-free border reopening to the end of February. The Covid-19 response minister Chris Hipkins said the reopening delay will be disappointing for those who had made travel plans over summer, but added that waiting until the end of February would increase New Zealand’s overall protection and slow Omicron’s spread. “Covid-19 keeps throwing new curve balls and we have to respond in a way that continues to protect lives and livelihoods without putting in place restrictions and lockdowns unless absolutely necessary,” Hipkins said. Last month, the government had announced a staged reopening of the international border, which has been closed since March 2020. It was set to reopen to New Zealand citizens and visa holders coming from Australia from 17 January, then from the rest of the world, and finally to all other vaccinated visitors from the end of April. Hipkins said: “All of the evidence so far points to Omicron being the most transmissible Covid-19 variant yet and public health advice says that soon, every case that comes into MIQ [managed isolation and quarantine facilities] will be Omicron.” Travellers returning to the country will now be required to provide a pre-departure Covid test 48 hours before travel, rather than 72 hours, and the government is temporarily lengthening time in MIQ from seven to ten days. It will also accelerate the booster vaccine rollout by shortening the gap between second and third shots, meaning 82% of the vaccinated population will be eligible for it by the end of February. Omicron has emerged at a time when New Zealand’s daily community case numbers are trending downwards – 28 announced on Tuesday – and as the country surpasses its 90% double vaccination rate for the eligible population (12 years and over). There are 22 Omicron cases in managed isolation but none so far detected in the community. The new “traffic light” system to help contain the virus has been operating for just under thee weeks, and was designed to signal an end to lockdowns, in favour of other measures such as limits on gathering sizes, and restrictions for unvaccinated people. “In moving to the traffic light system, we signalled that we would be adjusting to more of a reactive stance when it came to protective measures and would apply them when case numbers grew and the health system came under pressure,” Hipkins said on Tuesday. “Omicron has changed that. When it does arrive, we expect that it will spread fast, and that’s what we’re seeing in other places. To slow that spread, we may use the red traffic light settings earlier on. That will give us the best chance to avoid returning to more restrictive alert level settings.” He said it was not the government’s intention to move to lockdowns unless absolutely necessary, for example if a widespread outbreak put the health system under considerable strain.In what feels like a devastating sense of deja vu for the music industry, Faith No More, Jimmy Barnes and the Hoodoo Gurus have cancelled Australian shows in the lead-up to Christmas, among many other acts that have been spooked by the December spike in Covid-19 cases and the emergence of the Omicron variant. Posting on his Facebook page at the weekend, Barnes said he was “absolutely heartbroken” over the outbreak in Newcastle, where his band was scheduled to deliver three concerts in December. Last week new Covid infections in the Hunter region accounted for almost a third of cases in New South Wales. The state recorded an unprecedented 3,057 cases on Tuesday. “In the interest of the community’s health and safety and the approaching family Christmas holidays, both our family and [the venue] Lizotte’s Newcastle have made the difficult decision to postpone the three December shows to a date still to be confirmed in early January,” Barnes posted. “We urge the local Newcastle community to seriously consider deferring any social events in Newcastle until after Christmas in order to help keep family Christmas gatherings safe, and to help protect their loved ones, the vulnerable and our essential workers.” The in-house booking manager for one of Newcastle’s most popular live music pub venues told Guardian Australia he had cancelled seven gigs in the past week, with bands expressing concerns at the prospect of finding themselves in lockdown on Christmas Day. Spencer Scott from Hamilton Station hotel said he probably should have seen the writing on wall when he booked two hardcore punk rock groups to perform last weekend. The bands were called Plague Dwellers and I Hate People. After a potentially infectious case was traced to one of Newcastle’s largest live music venues, the Cambridge hotel, posted on its Facebook page on 13 December: “Our staff have all gone to get tested and once they come back negative we’ll be back to rock n roll.” The next day the Cambridge announced it was postponing its Hiatus Kaiyote show scheduled for the following evening. On 16 December, it threw in the towel. “We are going to sit it out until after Christmas,” it posted on Facebook. “We have a role to play in our community and at the moment that means limiting everyone’s chance of exposure … Be safe and see you after Xmas.” The same day NSW Health announced that Newcastle’s Lunar Electric music festival scheduled for 18 December had been cancelled, under a public health order. In a Facebook post on Saturday Ben Cavenagh, a stage manager for the event, wrote: “Lots of lost jobs, lost income, and just a feeling of going around in circles again. Really tired of this.” Widespread cancellations across Australia The retreat of live music in the Hunter is being replicated across the country. This month Frontier Touring and Triple M announced the postponement of a Hoodoo Gurus and Dandy Warhols’ December tour to April 2022. In the Sydney, the past week saw the cancellation of a number of live music events, including the Bad Vibrations festival, the Loose Ends Xmas party and Christmas Time in the Inner West. The ticket retailer Oztix told Guardian Australia more than 300 of its events over the Christmas period – from 1 December to 7 January – had either been rescheduled, postponed or cancelled altogether. “One trend we’re seeing again and again that is really worrying is a member of a band or a band’s touring party becomes a close or casual contact and has to isolate, forcing the entire tour to stop,” an Oztix spokesperson told the Guardian. “So, a tour may have been rescheduled 2-3 times already, the band finally starts the tour, gets a few shows in … and they have to cancel. That’s always the real heartbreaker.” Renewed calls for national insurance scheme On Monday a coalition of live music and entertainment industry bodies reissued a plea to the Morrison government and state and territory leaders to urgently deliver a government-backed insurance scheme to protect the live performance sector from crippling cancellations. In November a Senate committee inquiry concluded that an insurance guarantee to future-proof the industry was not the responsibility of a federal government because it was Australia’s states and territories that made the call on border closures, lockdowns and social distancing measures. Only Victoria has since instituted its own state-run live music insurance product. The statement from the live performance coalition, which includes the copyright agency Apra Amcos, the Australian Recorded Music Industry Association and the Association of Artist Managers, said the emergence of Omicron showed the pandemic crisis was far from over. “For an industry getting back on its feet, investing nationally and working hard to get shows back on stage and touring, the ongoing threat of future business disruption is very real,” the statement said. While the Victorian development was welcome, the live performance coalition said a national scheme was urgently needed to reflect the industry’s “national economic and employment footprint”. The I Lost My Gig Collective has estimated that, on average, the Australian live music sector has lost about $64m in income each month since March 2020, totalling $880m in lost income so far. A survey conducted by the collective found that 99% of respondents had no income protection or event cancellation insurance. Support Act, the charity that is delivering crisis relief services to artists, crew and music workers, has received $40m from the federal government since May 2020. During this time the charity has delivered financial assistance to 2,540 members totalling $8m (compared with 389 people totalling $1.1m in 2019), and provided more that 7,000 grants totalling $15.2m. Most of the funding was related to performing arts workers whose livelihoods have been impacted by Covid-19.The NHL will begin a leaguewide shutdown Wednesday amid an increase of positive Covid-19 test results among players across the league, ESPN confirmed on Monday night. Beginning the annual holiday break two days early means five additional games will be postponed, bringing the total this season to 49. Two games slated for Tuesday are still set to go on as scheduled. The league and NHL Players’ Association on Sunday said in a joint statement they were attempting to avoid a leaguewide shutdown and were making decisions on a team-by-team basis. The latest shift gives all 32 teams an extended break before players, coaches and staff can gather again Sunday to skate and undergo coronavirus testing. Under the terms of the collective bargaining agreement, the Christmas break typically prohibits team activities before 27 December. Games are still scheduled to resume that day. The latest wave of coronavirus-related shutdowns Monday led to the closure of facilities for 10 teams. Of the 49 postponements, 44 have come over the past two weeks with the delta and omicron variants spreading across North America. More than 15% of the league’s 700-plus players are in virus protocol, and the resulting schedule disruption almost certainly has doomed the possibility of Olympic participation. A final decision on the Beijing Games is expected this week, and the odds of NHL players returning to the Olympics for the first time since 2014 have cratered. The Columbus Blue Jackets, Montreal Canadiens, Edmonton Oilers and Ottawa Senators on Monday became the latest teams to pause all activities because of positive Covid-19 tests. The Boston Bruins, Colorado Avalanche, Detroit Red Wings, Florida Panthers, Nashville Predators and Toronto Maple Leafs also have their facilities closed, and the Calgary Flames just reopened theirs to players, coaches and staff not in protocol. The US and Canadian women’s hockey teams were set to play a pre-Olympic game Monday night in St Paul, Minnesota, but that was canceled because of Covid-19 concerns. Much about the omicron coronavirus variant remains unknown, including whether it causes more or less severe illness. Scientists say omicron spreads even easier than other coronavirus strains, including delta, and it is expected to become dominant in the US by early next year. Early studies suggest the vaccinated will need a booster shot for the best chance at preventing an omicron infection but even without the extra dose, vaccination still should offer strong protection against severe illness and death.An 11-year-old child has been granted bail after being held on remand in the Northern Territory’s infamous Don Dale detention centre, sparking renewed calls to raise the age of criminal responsibility. The Indigenous child was granted bail on Tuesday with his case adjourned to 12 and 13 April, where the issue of his criminal capacity is to be considered in view of his young age.He was one of 35 Indigenous children held in Don Dale, which is located in the former adult prison, Berrimah. The 2017 Northern Territory royal commission into the protection and detention of children recommended that Don Dale be permanently closed. That did not happen and more children are incarcerated in the Darwin facility than there have ever been. In an interview with Guardian Australia, the child’s barrister, John B Lawrence SC, spoke out against the continued incarceration of children around the country, particularly in Don Dale. “The racist component of Australia’s history explains everything here, to be honest. We could talk to the cows come home about how abhorrent this is and how disgraceful it is, and both continue to get worse. But how do we fix it?” he said. Lawrence, a former president of the Northern Territory Bar Association and former president of the Criminal Lawyers Association, said he believed “the only means available” to make positive change now was “lawful, peaceful civil disobedience”. “It’s very clear to me now that the only way that any progress can be achieved is by people to now take direct action – to force the powers that be to change their policies in relation to this issue,” he said. “My suggestion is that prominent Aboriginal leaders, perhaps in the company of prominent other Australians, should band together and come up to the Northern Territory and picket, or vigil, or handcuff themselves to the very gates of this horrible place called Don Dale and say, enough’s enough. This has to end right now.” The former adult prison was “derelict and dystopian”, he said. “The country’s got to look in the mirror and start growing up about this matter.” The appeal comes as Indigenous organisations around the country raise the alarm, again, about the dangers of youth incarceration. The First Peoples’ Assembly of Victoria has called for the Victorian state government to raise the age of criminal responsibility and “stop locking up our children”. The Indigenous body elected to negotiate a treaty in the state has written to the Victorian attorney general, Jaclyn Symes, to stress the need for immediate change, saying a treaty must not be used as an excuse to stall reform. “This does not need to, nor should it, wait for treaty,” reads the letter, signed by Aunty Geraldine Atkinson and Marcus Stewart. “It is a much-needed, sensible, compassionate, evidence-based and simple reform that community overwhelmingly supports. We want the government to stop locking up our children.” Children as young as 10 across Australia can be arrested by police, remanded in custody, convicted by the courts and jailed. Australia’s attorneys general last month agreed to support a proposal to raise the minimum age from 10 to 12 after the federal government faced pressure from more than 30 UN countries. But the independent Indigenous group has urged Symes to listen to the experts and legislate a change to 14 years, recommended by Victoria’s Commission for Children and Young People in June. There were nearly 600 children aged between 10 and 13 in custody in 2018-19, according to data from the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. More than 60% were Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander. The ACT is now the only state or territory committed to changing the age of criminal responsibility to 14, while the WA government passed a similar motion in October. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Northern Territory supports in-principle raising the age of criminal responsibility to 12. Kate Worden, the Minister for Territory Families and Urban Housing and acting attorney general, said in a statement to Guardian Australia that services for at-risk children needed to be established and effective first. “Work is underway to assess our current reforms to ensure they are meeting this objective.” She said over the past four years the NT government had “worked hard to ensure that the Territory’s youth justice system is reformed”. “We have reformed our youth detention system and it is not what it was in 2016,” Worden said. Both Victorian Labor and the Liberal/Nationals in March rejected a Greens bill to raise the state’s age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 14, and the minor party is urging the government to reconsider supporting its stance. “This reform could happen tomorrow, we just need the political will,” the Greens justice spokesperson, Tim Read, said on Tuesday. A Victorian government spokesperson confirmed it was “working to develop and consider a proposal” to up the minimum age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 12. “In the meantime, we’re continuing to tackle the root causes of youth offending, because the best outcome for young people is to avoid contact with the justice system in the first place,” she said. with Australian Associated PressFor decades, scientists warned that urban encroachment on pristine habitats would unleash dangerous new viruses. Covid-19 should not have been a surprise – and, since viruses always mutate, neither should Omicron have been. Just as Omicron replaced Delta, something else will replace Omicron. It might be a fresh variant of Covid; it might be something completely new. “[A]nother pandemic is coming,” says Debora MacKenzie in her book Covid-19: The Pandemic That Never Should Have Happened, “and no one can predict which pathogen will cause the next one.” That doesn’t mean we can’t prepare. Even as we deal with Omicron, we need a long-term strategy, so that we’re not caught unawares countering each fresh outbreak. Here are four necessary (though perhaps not sufficient) slogans to arm ourselves with. 1. Make vaccines free, everywhere and for everyone In the 1950s, when a journalist asked virologist Jonas Salk who owned the polio vaccine, he replied, “Well, the people I would say. There is no patent. Could you patent the sun?” Humanity eradicated smallpox by treating vaccines as a public good, created (for the most part) by publicly-owned agencies and distributed on the basis of need. But that was before big pharma, in what journalist Alexander Zaitchik calls “a profoundly undemocratic expression of concentrated corporate power”, pushed for the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Trips) of 1994, an agreement that transformed vaccines into private intellectual property. Thanks to Trips, the horror of Covid-19 delivered a massive payday for pharmaceutical corporations like Pfizer and Moderna, even as they declined to license the technology to manufacturers in developing nations, arguing, controversially, that the lack of expertise, resources and manufacturing capacity in those regions makes doing so pointless. To date, the world’s poorest nations have received only a woeful 0.6% of available Covid vaccines, an obscene disparity and one that creates a pool of permanent illness in which the viral mutations can develop. As the People’s Vaccine Alliance (an organisation backed by Amnesty International and a stellar array of former and current world leaders) says, no one’s safe until we’re all safe. A pandemic in which more than two million people have died should not be a cash grab. Patents must be abolished. If the corporations can’t deliver vaccines to everyone, they should be nationalised and replaced by institutions that will. 2. Rebuild health and science The Covid-19 crisis revealed the international consequences of underfunded and neglected health services. Medical staff have performed heroically during the pandemic but everywhere they are burnt out and exhausted. Governments must invest massively in medical resources, reversing the austerity of the last decades and creating the specialised facilities – from purpose-built quarantine centres to emergency wards to stockpiles of protective equipment – that will be needed. That means more frontline staff in every setting from hospitals to old age homes; it also means more researchers and scientists. In Australia, the university sector continues to collapse, having lost a staggering 20% of its pre-pandemic workforce. Ongoing budget shortfalls threaten both teaching and research. Medical expertise and research capability can’t be created overnight. We must start rebuilding now. 3. Create community-driven, health-focused responses Pandemics disproportionately affect the poor, the marginalised and the oppressed. The people most at risk from viruses tend, in other words, to be those who fear or distrust the authorities. That’s why the response to a medical emergency should not centre on police and soldiers. Many governments reacted to the emergence of Covid-19 with punitive measures such as curfews, military patrols and new criminal laws. But a health crisis is neither a war nor a policing operation. There’s a much better model to follow. The remarkably successful campaign against HIV/Aids was spearheaded by activists from communities directly affected by the pandemic. It was they who disseminated information, offered services and induced behavioural change, even as they fought against prejudice and discrimination. With a frightening disease spreading, agency and outcome can’t be separated. A population that takes charge itself, that translates health messages into its own idiom, that collectively decides on what to do and how, will deliver far better results than the sternest policeman. Because a pandemic exposes social inequality, the best responses will necessarily entail a fight for social justice – and, as such, they will be led by the oppressed themselves. 4. End the war on nature We can and should plan to mitigate the effects of novel viruses. But we will only reduce their frequency if we curtail the ecological destruction that contributes to pathogens crossing into human populations. As cities expand into previously uninhabited wilderness, habitat loss brings animals and birds into unnatural proximity with people, allowing viruses to find human hosts. The impoverished fringes of sprawling metropolises, and the industrial agriculture associated with them, provide an ideal setting for mutations – and in a globalised world, an infection in one place becomes an infection everywhere. That’s why scientists worry so much. As MacKenzie warns, there are lots more coronaviruses out there – and plenty of fresh horrors we’re yet to encounter. We can’t keep playing whack-a-mole with each new crisis. We know what’s coming. If we don’t plan to counter it, tomorrow will be like today, except much, much worse. Indeed, Covid-19 should be understood not as an additional disaster piled upon a calamitous heap of fires, floods, heatwaves and tornadoes, but as a specific manifestation of a broader environmental emergency.In a way, that might even be good news (or, at least, as close as we get now), since the fight against the pandemic isn’t a distraction from the fight against climate change. Rather, the two represent two facets of the same campaign, an increasingly desperate struggle to salvage the future.The leads of Sex and the City’s recent reboot And Just Like That have responded to sexual assault allegations made by two women against their fellow castmate, Chris Noth. Cynthia Nixon – who plays Miranda in the series and its reboot – shared a statement on social media, signed by herself, Sarah Jessica Parker (Carrie) and Kristin Davis (Charlotte). “We are deeply saddened to hear the allegations against Chris Noth,” they said in the statement on Tuesday. “We support the women who have come forward and shared their painful experiences. We know it must be a very difficult thing to do and we commend them for it.” In the wake of the allegations, Chris Noth will no longer be part of the CBS series The Equalizer. Universal Television and CBS made a joint announcement Monday that Noth, best known for his character Mr Big on the show Sex the City, would no longer be part of filming “effective immediately”. Noth has played a former CIA director on The Equalizer, which stars Queen Latifah. Noth will appear in at least one upcoming episode. Noth’s representatives had no immediate comment on The Equalizer decision. Two women accused Noth of sexual assault in a story reported last week by the Hollywood Reporter. The women describe similar alleged rapes by the 67-year-old actor more than a decade apart. Both say they met Noth in their early 20s. Noth vehemently denied the allegations, which date back to 2004 and 2015. In a statement to the Hollywood Reporter, Noth called the claims “categorically false”. “These stories could’ve been from 30 years ago or 30 days ago – no always means no – that is a line I did not cross,” he said. “The encounters were consensual. It’s difficult not to question the timing of these stories coming out. I don’t know for certain why they are surfacing now, but I do know this: I did not assault these women,” he added. One of the women who accused Noth of assaulting her said his reprisal of his Mr Big character on the Sex and the City sequel, And Just Like That, prompted her to speak out about the actor. Noth’s demise in the first episode of the show led to widespread attention. The Associated Press contributed reportingJapan has hanged three men in the country’s first executions for two years, media reports said on Tuesday, amid criticism of its use of the death penalty. The Kyodo news agency said the justice ministry had identified the men as Yasutaka Fujishiro, 65, who murdered seven of his relatives in 2004, and Tomoaki Takanezawa, 54, and Mitsunori Onogawa, 44, who were convicted of killing two employees of a pachinko parlour in 2003. As one of only a small number of developed countries that still uses the death penalty, it has resisted calls for abolition from the European Union, human rights groups and thousands of Japanese lawyers and legal professionals. Tuesday’s executions were the first under the new prime minister, Fumio Kishida. Japan hanged three death row inmates on 26 December 2019, and 15 a year earlier, including 13 members of the doomsday cult that carried out a deadly sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway in 1995. Japanese government politicians point to high levels of public support for the death penalty, amid criticism that inmates typically spend years in solitary confinement and are given only a few hours’ notice of their execution. In a 2009 report, Amnesty International accused Japan of subjecting death row inmates to “cruel, inhuman and degrading” punishment. The deputy chief cabinet secretary, Seiji Kihara, would not comment on Tuesday’s reports, but defended the use of the death penalty in Japan, where more than 100 people are awaiting execution. “Whether to keep the death sentence system or not is an important issue that concerns the foundation of Japan’s criminal justice system,” he told reporters. “Given that atrocious crimes keep occurring one after another, it is necessary to execute those whose guilt is extremely grave, so it is inappropriate to abolish capital punishment.” Doubts about the safety of convictions that carry the death sentence grew in 2014, when Iwao Hakamada was released after spending more than 45 years on death row. Hakamada, who is 85 and in poor health had been sentenced to hang in 1968 for the murders two years earlier of a company president, his wife and their two children. The former professional boxer and his supporters said he confessed to the murders only after allegedly violent police interrogations, adding that evidence in his case had been planted. In December last year, Japan’s supreme court overturned a ruling blocking a retrial for Hakamada – a move that could lead to an acquittal. Last month, two death row inmates in Japan launched a legal action against the government, claiming that the practice of not informing inmates of their execution until only hours before they are hanged was “inhumane”. The prisoners have demanded and end to the practice and ¥22m (£146,000) in compensation.The Morrison government has released an update to Australia’s cornerstone policy to protect the Great Barrier Reef as it tries to stop the ocean icon being placed on a list of world heritage sites in danger. Environment groups said the updated Reef 2050 plan, released without fanfare late on Monday, fell short because it was linked to the government’s “inadequate” plan to cut greenhouse gas emissions. A foreword to the plan, co-signed by the federal environment minister, Sussan Ley, and Queensland’s minister for the Great Barrier Reef, Meaghan Scanlon, said the reef is under threat from marine heatwaves that caused three mass bleaching events in 2016, 2017 and 2020. The ministers wrote: “These events, combined with other major impacts to the reef, have affected the communities and industries that depend on it for their livelihoods and way of life.” Scientists are concerned about forecasts showing large parts of the central and northern sections of the reef could bleach again by the end of January. The ministers wrote that the updated plan, the first major revision in five years, “provides a pathway for accelerated action to conserve the Reef’s Outstanding Universal Value, and we are committed to investing the time, effort and resources required to implement it”. A key advisory group to the plan “expressed strong concern” last month at the delay to its release, which had been expected before the last world heritage meeting in July. Guardian Australia understands that committee has been asked to make further recommendations for action that could be added to the plan before next year’s world heritage meeting, scheduled for June in Russia. UN science advisers said earlier this year the reef should be placed on the “in danger” list, but a world heritage meeting in July ignored that advice. Instead, the committee said a UN “reactive monitoring mission” should be held to assess the reef and the updated plan. That mission is still not scheduled but is expected in the first half of 2022. The committee raised concerns about the effects of mass coral bleaching events and said there was insufficient progress on cutting pollution levels in the reef’s waters – a key measure scientists say will give corals better resilience against rising ocean temperatures. Australia has to report back to Unesco on the state of the reef and its plans before 1 February next year. The world heritage committee is scheduled next July to decide if the reef should go on the “in danger” list – a prospect the Morrison government has lobbied hard to avoid. Richard Leck, head of oceans at WWF Australia, said: “This new plan shows the Australian government is failing to do all it can to keep the future of the reef as safe as possible, especially from climate change. “The plan prioritises limiting the impacts of climate change by contributing to global efforts to reduce emissions. But it then repeats the inadequate commitments made by the prime minister at the recent climate conference in Glasgow.” The Morrison government has set a target to reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050, but its plan to get there using investments in technology has been roundly criticised. According to the government’s own modelling, the technology-led plan will leave Australia about 226m tonnes short of net zero by 2050. The government says it is on track to cut emissions by up to 35% by 2030, based on 2005 levels. But analysts say even if those cuts were achieved, it would not be in line with keeping global heating below 2C. Leck said keeping global warming below 1.5C was crucial for the reef’s survival. He said: “We know the pressure the tourism industry is under and we know how much Australians love the reef and how proud they are to be its custodians. But this plan risks the world heritage status of the reef.” Leck said there was so far insufficient funding to meet targets to reduce pollution flowing into the reef’s waters from the land. Simon Miller, a spokesperson for the Australian Marine Conservation Society, said: “The climate crisis is by far the biggest threat to our reef, so the lack of ambition detailed in the Reef 2050 Plan to tackle this issue is disgraceful. “The current plan does little to address the root cause of global warming – burning fossil fuels, which heats the ocean and causes the coral bleaching events which have beset all but 2% of the global icon since 1998.” Miller said the plan did make progress on tackling water pollution and illegal and unsustainable fishing, but those steps needed to “go further, faster”. A spokesperson for Ley said: “Australia has always been confident that, following a reactive mission, the World Heritage Committee will be reassured about the international scientific leadership we are showing on the reef.” The plan reflected “significant planning and scientific advice” and the government would work with Queensland and would “receive any advice on future enhancements to the plan, as has always been the case”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On the threat of bleaching, the spokesperson’s statement said: “We look at all scientific forecasting and recognise that local weather conditions will play a key role in determining any reef impacts,” adding it was “too early to make firm predictions” about what could happen in the coming months. Queensland’s Department of Environment and Science said in a statement the state government had “delivered much stronger protection for the reef – banning dredge spoil dumping, enacting new pollution regulations, land clearing laws and new net free zones.” “However, the science is clear – the reef needs greater protection.” The department said $2bn had been committed for cleaner energy, $500m for the Land Restoration Fund and $270m over five years for water quality protection in the reef catchment. The statement added: “Both governments have also agreed to ask the reef advisory committee and the reef independent expert panel on additional ideas to prevent an in-danger listing, and to consider those ideas prior to the next meeting of the World Heritage Committee in June 2022.”In this lovely cliff-enclosed town, St Mary’s church is further encircled by a dozen yews which create a dense green palisade around the churchyard. It has also given rise to an inner sphere of gloom about the building, and perhaps it’s this that is implicated in the beautiful shape to one yew next to the church. It’s a big, multi-stemmed veteran that must have been pruned recently, and the invasion of light has triggered large amounts of growth right along each of its branches from trunk to twig-end. But the new stuff has grown bolt upright and at right angles to the limbs. These old and newer parts remind me of an entire wood of thick dark trunks with an understorey of green twiggy growth, but all emanating from a single organism. Churchyard yews are steeped in ancient magic and mystery. One myth is that their wood was used in the making of longbows, and the trees were sited in medieval churchyards where livestock had no access to their poisonous leaves. All parts of it – except the red arils of the fruits – are toxic, and a farmer friend recently told me how a gardener, unversed in the ways of yew, slung cuttings over a wall that killed nine of their cattle. Yews love Derbyshire’s limestone, but their bad reputation has chased many of them out on to the bare cliffs and crags, where neither farmers nor cows can reach them. However, churchyard trees like these in Cromford were never planted to supply the manufacture of bows, because that timber came mainly from Iberia. Our area certainly retains some wonderful ecclesiastical representatives. A yew at St Helen’s in Darley Dale has a medieval waistline of over eight metres, and another near here, known as Betty Kenny’s Tree, was reputed to be 2,000 years old and credited as the origin of the nursery rhyme Bye Baby Bunting. The Cromford yews are also legendary, if only among naturalists, because their copious seeds are a winter lure for one of the most elusive, beautiful and sought-after of all Britain’s birds, the wonderfully misnamed hawfinch. To date, however, this bit of yew magic continues to elude me. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryScientists have reacted with dismay to Boris Johnson’s decision not to impose fresh restrictions to curb the spread of Omicron, emphasising that waiting until the new year would “almost certainly be too late to have a material impact on the epidemic”. Because the rate of growth in infection rates may already have plateaued or fallen by then, it may also be too late to know what impact those restrictions would have had if they had been introduced earlier. “We are damned if we do and damned if we don’t,” said Paul Hunter, a professor of medicine at the University of East Anglia. The prime minister announced after a cabinet meeting that he would not be introducing any further Covid restrictions for now, adding: “The situation is extremely difficult and the arguments either way are very, very finely balanced.” Data on the hospitalisation rate for those infected with the Omicron variant would be kept under “constant review”, he said, with government sources hinting that further restrictions were likely after Christmas, possibly starting a week tomorrow. Yet, with Omicron infections currently doubling within 48 hours in most regions of the UK, the country may already have reached a ceiling where the rate of growth begins to fall and case numbers plateau. Hunter believes that point could come within days, with or without interventions. “If we implement control measures now, they are unlikely to be sufficient to reverse the growth, only slow it,” he said. “But there may still be benefits in slowing the peak, in terms of flattening the curve.” One solution that appears to be on the table is a return to the “step 2” measures introduced as part of the roadmap out of lockdown earlier this year – chiefly, people only being allowed to socialise indoors with members of their household or a support bubble, and outdoor socialising being limited to groups of six people or two households, including at pubs and restaurants. Prof Christina Pagel, the director of UCL’s clinical operational research unit, said: “Waiting for definitive evidence that it could cause the NHS to be overwhelmed will be too late to avert the crisis. Instead, the government should follow Sage [the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies] advice and return to step 2 of the roadmap immediately to prevent thousands of infections over the coming days and then monitor the situation hour by hour so that measures can be lifted as quickly as possible, hopefully even in time to enable limited household mixing over Christmas weekend.” Other scientists took issue with the prime minister’s claim that the scientific arguments for further restrictions were “finely balanced”. Trish Greenhalgh, a professor of primary care health services at the University of Oxford, said: “Mr Johnson claims that getting booster vaccinations ‘could not be more urgent’ but refuses to apply the same standards of urgency to the full range of preventive measures needed. There are strong scientific arguments for people to immediately cease the activities that are known to cause transmission of this exceptionally contagious variant.” Large indoor gatherings of unmasked people should be cancelled, and well-fitting, high-filtration masks should be worn at all times indoors, especially in crowded settings, such as on public transport, she said. Yet other scientists highlighted the negative impact on people’s mental wellbeing of continued uncertainty around coronavirus restrictions. Dr Charley Baker, an associate professor of mental health at the University of Nottingham, said: “Clear statements are required that set out exactly what paths are under consideration and which parameters need to be met for each path. Delay, prevarication and constant rumour leaves us all very much struggling as we try to prepare for the onslaught of the difficult days ahead.”Bereaved families have accused Boris Johnson of showing “flagrant disregard” for the public as ministers struggled to explain the justification for a wine and cheese event in Downing Street at the height of lockdown. A Cabinet Office inquiry into other alleged government parties in breach of Covid rules could be expanded after the Guardian published an image showing the prime minister alongside his wife and up to 17 staff in the Downing Street garden in May 2020. Amid growing fury over the photograph, Johnson said on Monday: “Those were meetings of people at work, talking about work.” Labour dismissed Downing Street’s explanation and said it amounted to evidence of law-breaking. The Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group said the lack of any signs of work, with red wine and a cheeseboard visible rather than laptops or pens, showed Johnson “presided over a culture of believing that the rules applied only to other people”. In a sometimes confusing series of explanations over the course of Monday, Boris Johnson, his deputy, Dominic Raab, and Johnson’s spokesperson all sought to argue that the 19 people, split into four groups across the Downing Street terrace and lawn, were not gathered socially. Raab told the BBC that Johnson and his staff were “were having a drink after the formal business had been done” and that this was common practice among other workplaces that had remained open during the lockdown. Speaking later, Johnson’s official spokesperson stressed that work was in fact continuing during the drinks event, with the photo showing “colleagues who were required to be in work, meeting following a press conference to discuss work”. Asked why several groups, including Johnson’s, had bottles and glasses of wine, the spokesperson said: “These were individuals working outside of normal working hours. It was not against the regulations for those individuals to have a drink outside working hours, but still discussing work.” In a TV clip recorded later in the afternoon, Johnson reiterated this argument, saying: “This is where I live, it is where I work. Those were meetings of people at work, talking about work.” There was also some apparent uncertainty about why the photo showed people standing together, when regulations said they should keep 2 metres apart for work meetings in person. Raab appeared to argue this did not matter as they were outside, while Johnson’s spokesperson said you could not tell from the picture how close together they were. At a government press conference directly before the May 2020 gathering, the public were told that, socially, “you can meet one other person from outside your household in an outdoor, public place but please keep 2 metres apart”. The shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, told the BBC the photo seemed to show “evidence of law-breaking”. Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, said: “Just look at the photo and ask yourself: is that a work meeting going on, or is that a social event? I think the answer is pretty obvious.” A leading lawyer and expert on Covid regulations, the barrister Adam Wagner, said he now doubted whether the gathering, particularly as described by Raab, did comply with the rules of the time. In the first lockdown, Wagner said, people could gather in a non-public space if there was a reasonable excuse such as work. But this did not seem to be the case here, he told Sky News. “Having heard Dominic Raab say that this was a drink after the formal business had ended, after a press conference, doesn’t sound convincing as a work gathering. It sounds a lot like a social gathering.” After a series of reports about other alleged parties in the winter of 2020, when all indoor social mixing was barred, Johnson commissioned an inquiry into any potential wrongdoing. This was headed by Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, but he stepped down on Friday following allegations that a social event had taken place among his own staff. Case’s alleged gathering was a day before another alleged party at No 10 on 18 December 2020, which was the original focus of the inquiry. Sue Gray, another senior official, will now lead the inquiry, which has been widened to cover other alleged events. Asked whether it could be expanded again to examine the photo of the Downing Street garden in May last year, the Cabinet Office pointed to the terms of reference of the inquiry, which say it is able to investigate “credible allegations relating to other gatherings”.‘Wave like you mean it,” the hotel manager tells his staff as they line up on the beach waiting for the next boatful of guests to arrive at the luxurious White Lotus resort. With that line, Mike White’s immaculate six-part creation is set. On to the beach come the clientele, awed by the beauty of their surroundings but already taking the humans on the shoreline for granted – checking that their needs (wants) have been anticipated, extracting further efforts from those they are sure exist only to serve, and soon demanding (in what in Shane’s case will evolve into a series-long war of attrition with the manager, Armond) apologies and upgrades whenever minor mistakes are made. The White Lotus had many superficial similarities with previous glossy hits such as Big Little Lies. It looked gorgeous, had an array of affluent white characters living what they considered ordinary and what most would consider easeful, glamorous lives, and a murder-mystery woven in. White’s purpose, however, couldn’t have been more different. The initial focus on the guests soon broadened to include the staff, their stories and their various entanglements with those whose beds they changed, massages they gave and egos they indulged in the name of hospitality. In the process it became many things. It was a set of scabrous character studies, whose highlights included self-confessed “insane alcoholic” Tanya straddling the line between neediness and outright narcissism and perfectly played by Jennifer Coolidge, and the gruelling vileness of Olivia (Sydney Sweeney) the pretty, privileged teen who has weaponised wokeness in order to burnish her untouchability when in a just world the hypocrisy should burn in her veins hard enough to kill her. It was a tragicomedy or a hysterically funny drama that folded in every kind of comic moment, from alpha mum Nicole’s fretting over lumpen, screen-addicted scion Quinn (“so alienated”) because there’s never been a harder time to be a straight, white male, to Rachel’s giddily awful mother-in-law, to the simple joy of Armond’s scatological revenge in the finale. Above all it was a social satire, the luxury resort providing a picture of America (and/or any other country currently contorting itself around the requirements of late western capitalism) in microcosm. The disparity between the haves and have-nots was on permanent display. It was not just the fact that the guests assumed money could buy them their own way, we realised as the story unfolded and especially as it reached its startling yet credible conclusion, but that they were right. White’s show held up to the light the way class structures – perhaps enshrined most clearly in the increasingly emotionally exploitative relationship forced on spa therapist Belinda (Natasha Rothwell) by Tanya – are embedded so deeply and so firmly entwined with racism that they seem almost invisible (to the beneficiaries) and immutable (to all). And it showed the inexorability of two vital truths; nobody really cares about anything as long as they’re all right – and that although an actual turd may be contained in a suitcase, metaphorical shit always rolls downhill. Add to these meaty themes a brilliant ensemble cast (including Steve Zahn, Connie Britton, Molly Shannon, plus Jake Lacy playing brilliantly against type as overbearing manbaby Shane) and a cracking good story, kept from slipping into soapiness by delicate dialogue and a firm hand on the narrative reins, and you felt rather like you’d been treated to a luxury holiday yourself. Special mention must go to Murray Bartlett’s hugely funny and in the end hugely moving performance as Armond, a recovering drug addict who had been clean for five years before the latest arrivals proved too much for him. Highly strung but professional and capable until almost the last, his undoing stands for the unsustainability of all power imbalances. A man and a society can only take so much.The UK’s newly appointed chief post-Brexit negotiator, Liz Truss, said she would speak to her EU counterpart, Maroš Šefčovič, on Tuesday amid renewed calls to rip up the controversial Northern Ireland protocol. The cabinet minister, who is also the foreign secretary, said she wanted to negotiate “a comprehensive solution” to the agreement, which requires post-Brexit checks on goods arriving in Northern Ireland from Great Britain. Allies added that she wanted to “hit the ground running”, but offered no further details on how she will handle the technical discussions about customs arrangements, which could have wide political ramifications. No EU-UK talks had been scheduled in the last days before Christmas, until the surprise weekend resignation of Lord Frost, who had been Boris Johnson’s chief Brexit negotiator. Ministers remain under pressure from Conservative hard Brexiters and Northern Ireland’s Democratic Unionists to resolve an issue they argue has led to the creation of a border down the Irish Sea – and damaged the integrity of the United Kingdom. Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, the DUP leader, told the BBC that he had been led to believe by Frost that the talks were struggling to progress: “He felt, I think, that we were fast approaching the time when the UK government needed to take unilateral action.” Article 16 of the protocol allows one side or the other to rip up part of the agreement – such as customs checks between Great Britain and Northern Ireland – in the event of “serious economic, societal or environmental difficulties”. But it could expose whoever acts to retaliatory tariffs. John Finucane, a Sinn Féin MP, said the British government should show “a degree of responsibility and realism” over the protocol, which allows Northern Ireland special access to the EU single market. He said the agreement provided “enormous economic benefit to this jurisdiction”. Truss supported remain during the 2016 referendum campaign, but is popular with Tory activists at a time when Johnson’s premiership is in crisis due to a string of revelations about lockdown-breaking gatherings at No 10. One hard-Brexit source on the party’s backbenches said they were supportive of Truss’s appointment, but wanted her to “focus on the detail and not just the showboating” – after she was pictured riding on a tank in Estonia last month, in a pose reminiscent of Margaret Thatcher. Truss will combine the role with her position as foreign secretary, the first time the jobs have been united since the UK voted to leave the EU in 2016. One former Downing Street insider said “both roles are so full-time” and wondered whether she can effectively focus on both. During the 2016 EU referendum campaign, Truss, speaking at a remain campaign event as environment secretary, said: “I don’t want my daughters to grow up in a world where they need a visa or permit to work in Europe, or where they are hampered from growing a business because of extortionate call costs and barriers to trade.” The minister co-authored a pamphlet with Labour’s Ed Miliband, Lib Dem leader Ed Davey and Green MP Caroline Lucas. They warned: “If Britain leaves Europe, our environment … will be starved of investment, bereft of protections and denied the leadership it needs.” Brexiters criticised it as scaremongering. Truss also agreed with Lord Frost, then president of the Scotch Whisky Association, in arguing that membership of the EU single market was critical to the successful exports of the spirit. “Europe has a taste for Scotch and the industry will do better if we remain in the EU,” she said. Allies of Truss said that the minister had made clear that she had changed her mind and would vote leave if she had the chance again. Her stint as international trade secretary, before becoming foreign secretary, had demonstrated her credentials as a free marketeer and free trader, they added.The government approach to transgender rights has caused real distress and exacerbated tensions, according to a group of crossbench MPs. The Conservative-led women’s and equalities committee has called for urgent reform to the way people can officially change gender, suggesting the government has been unwilling to engage in an area that has sometimes “become extremely toxic”. The select committee inquiry heard evidence from trans rights and women’s rights groups to consider the government’s response to a consultation on changing the Gender Recognition Act (GRA) to make it easier for trans people to legally change gender. Proposals developed under Theresa May’s government to allow people to “self-identify” by signing a statutory declaration without having to provide evidence of a medical diagnosis of gender dysphoria were scrapped two years after the consultation was launched. The committee said this “unacceptable” delay had exacerbated “tensions between an already polarised group of stakeholders” and “caused real distress to many within the transgender community”. The committee said the gender recognition process could be improved to include dropping the requirement to have a gender dysphoria diagnosis, having to gain consent from a spouse and to live in the acquired gender for two years, which risks entrenching “outdated gender stereotypes”. Gaining a certificate would still require a formal statutory declaration – a safeguard that ensures “genuine intent” – and “robust guidance” is needed on how this would work in practice. Caroline Nokes, who chairs the committee, said the government “spectacularly missed its opportunity” to modernise the 17-year-old law. She called for the government to enact “meaningful change” in lieu of the response to the 2018 consultation, which “amounted to little more than administrative changes”. “This is an area of reform which has attracted strong opinions and debate, but there are areas – such as the removal of a time period for living in an acquired gender – which many can agree on. The government’s failure to implement even these changes – made clear in its consultation – suggest its lack of willingness to engage.” The report criticised the women and equalities minister, Liz Truss, the equalities minister Kemi Badenoch and the Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) for evading “parliamentary scrutiny on this contentious subject” by refusing to give evidence to the committee. The MPs said both should urgently produce guidance, including practical examples, on how to apply single-sex exceptions under the Equality Act. The report also condemned the government for “abandoning its LGBT Action plan”, after its advisory panel suffered a series of resignations over several issues before being officially disbanded. Kim Johnson, Labour MP for Liverpool Riverside, who sits on the committee said she was pleased the cross-party group had been able to find “common sense consensus”. She said the report “utterly condemns the government’s role in polarising and toxifying the discourse around trans rights through its unnecessary delay in response to its own consultation”. Stonewall’s Robbie de Santos said the report “laid bare” the extent to which the UK, once a leader in trans equality, was failing communities, but welcomed recommendations to develop a healthcare strategy for trans and non-binary people within the next year. A Government Equality Hub spokesperson said the current law was effective. “We listened to those who responded to the GRA consultation and are taking steps to modernise the way that individuals can apply for a Gender Recognition Certificate as a result, including reducing the cost and moving the process online.” The EHRC said it will “publish guidance for service providers on single-sex spaces” in January and respond to the committee’s other points “in due course”.Just over a week after launch, the Guardian and Observer charity appeal has raised over £350,000 for good causes working for environmental justice in communities hit by extreme weather and climate crisis. Nearly 4,000 readers have donated to the appeal so far. Money raised will be shared between four charities: Practical Action, Global Greengrants Fund UK, Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, and Environmental Justice Foundation. “This year’s Guardian and Observer charity appeal brings together four organisations which in their separate ways all focus on the real victims of the climate crisis,” said one donor. “Your background notes inspired me to reach deeper into my pocket than I have ever done before.” Donations have held up so far despite the cancellation of Saturday’s annual fundraising telethon due to concerns about Omicron. The event, in which readers call up journalists with donations, normally gives a big boost to the appeal. The theme this year is climate justice, inspired by stories of people and communities uprooted by climate volatility, whether flooding, wildfire, ice melt or drought, and supporting charities working with those most affected by environmental loss. Introducing the appeal earlier this month the Guardian’s editor-in-chief, Katharine Viner, wrote: “The stark truth is that the world’s developing countries have seen the vast majority of the death and destruction caused by climate-induced disasters, and yet they are responsible for a tiny fraction of global emissions.” She added: “The richest countries pollute most but it is in the poorest where climate change is most harshly felt, through extreme poverty, food and water insecurity and the displacement of millions of people from their homes.” Thanking readers for their generosity, Rose Longhurst, the chair of Global Greengrants Fund UK, said: “I’m so incredibly grateful to the Guardian and Observer readers for their generosity; in such a difficult year for so many, there is a real sense of solidarity with those already hardest hit by the climate crisis. “Grassroots communities – from the Amazon to the Arctic - are protecting our shared planet. Your donations mean that together with the Clima Fund, Global Greengrants Fund UK will be able to support many more initiatives led by those at the frontlines of climate change.”Boris Johnson’s government is trying to chip away at your rights, but it wants you to believe that this is only a problem for other people. The police bill threatens the right to protest, but it is presented as a measure to deal with “extremist” political activists. The judicial review bill threatens to curtail the right to judicial review – a process that allows individuals to seek redress from public institutions that may have harmed them – but it is framed as an effort to reclaim power from “unelected” judges. The elections bill, which seeks to introduce voter ID, could effectively disenfranchise 2 million people, but the government claims it will address “fraud”. Each time the government wishes to push forward with measures such as these, it evokes a folk devil – a threatening outsider or internal enemy whose presence is used to justify the harsh new reform. These folk devils are more myth than reality, but they can cause great social damage if left unchallenged. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the government’s most recent initiative: its wide-ranging plans to overhaul the Human Rights Act, which were announced last week. Writing about the plans in the Times, the justice secretary, Dominic Raab, evoked the spectre of a “dangerous criminal” who was able “to frustrate deportation on human rights grounds”. The case certainly sounded serious. A convicted drug dealer, who had also been found guilty of battery against his partner and paid no maintenance to his child, appealed against a deportation order, claiming a right to family life under article 8 of the European convention on human rights. “This,” wrote Raab, “is the kind of case that gives human rights a bad name.” Yet if the example sounded strangely familiar, that’s because it’s not the first time it has been aired. Not only did Raab tell the same story during his speech to the Conservative party conference in October, but as several legal observers have pointed out, the case he was appearing to reference actually dates from 2009. It is so old, in fact, that Theresa May made a passing mention of it in her conference speech when she was home secretary, an entire decade ago. Why, then, would Raab turn to such a worn-out example to make his case for a major reform of the justice system in 2021? One reason, perhaps, is because there aren’t many such cases around. The government has already made it much more difficult to appeal against deportation, not least with the 2014 Immigration Act. In recent years, the media has been full of headlines about deportees being pulled off flights after last-minute legal appeals, but these tend to be on technical rather than human rights grounds. In February 2020, for instance, several people were removed from a scheduled deportation flight to Jamaica because they had not been given proper mobile phone access in detention, and were therefore unable to contact their lawyers in the days before departure. Another reason is that when it comes to folk devils such as these, the facts don’t really seem to matter. The stereotype of the foreign criminal has exerted a powerful hold over British politics for years. It is where popular fears about crime, immigration and race – almost always focused on people with roots in Africa, Asia or the Caribbean – merge together. Successive governments, both Labour and Conservative-led, have frequently promised to crack down on the issue by speeding up deportations and reducing people’s rights, yet the idea remains as politically potent as ever. To many people, it will seem like common sense that people from other countries who commit serious crimes in the UK should be expelled as a matter of public safety. What’s actually been happening over the past two decades is that governments have sought to widen the category of who counts as a “foreign criminal”, and who is therefore eligible to be expelled. The UK Borders Act of 2007 introduced automatic deportation for foreign national offenders who served prison sentences of 12 months or more. Under David Cameron, the coalition government introduced Operation Nexus, a data-sharing initiative between police forces and the Home Office, which saw people convicted of minor offences – or even merely suspected of being involved in crime – refused the right to stay in the UK. Immigration itself is increasingly criminalised, with a new offence of “illegal working” created in 2016, and a proposal in the nationality and borders bill currently making its way through parliament to impose prison sentences of up to four years on people who overstay their visas. This is a vicious cycle, because even as the law has become harsher, the idea that the UK is not deporting enough people persists. The result is not that the British public has been made safer necessarily, but that large parts of the public are having their right to belong thrown into question. The toughening of immigration laws has helped create a growing number of people who live in forms of legal limbo – around 215,000 children, for instance, half of whom were born in the UK, lack proper documentation. At the same time, the push for greater powers to deport and remove rights from people with roots in other parts of the world unsettles millions of people in a country as diverse as the UK. That’s why another recent government proposal – to extend the state’s powers to strip citizenship from dual nationals and people born overseas – struck a nerve. When there is public opposition to deportations – usually when a charter flight has been scheduled – the government will always try to keep the focus on the serious crimes committed by some of the deportees. It skates over the fact that many are convicted of lesser offences, and that in many cases the deportation will rip families apart. “The whole thing is messing with my head – he’s my dad,” said 17-year-old Nico McLean to the Independent this summer, on learning his father was being placed on a flight to Jamaica on the basis of an ABH offence committed in 2014. “It will affect me and my little brother. How do you explain to a seven-year-old that he’s not going to see your dad?” This is the sort of human reality that underlies the government’s rhetoric. At the moment Labour is choosing to oppose these moves on the grounds of competence alone. “A quarter fewer foreign criminals have been deported in the last year than in the previous year,” complained the shadow justice secretary Steve Reed while debating Raab’s proposals last week. “It is clearly not the Human Rights Act that is preventing foreign criminals from being deported; it is this incompetent Conservative government.” Seeking to out-compete the Tories on toughness may or may not be useful electoral positioning for Labour. But unless we directly challenge the stereotypes on which the government’s hardline new laws are based, the vicious cycle is likely to continue. Daniel Trilling is the author of Lights in the Distance: Exile and Refuge at the Borders of EuropeIn a warehouse in Ladywood, Birmingham, with a papier-mache spine down my back and breath like a dustpan, I walked up to a man and said, without any preamble: “You are the most handsome man at this party.” It was December 2004, the theme of the party was dinosaurs and, being a fan of puns, I had decided to go as a thesaurus. In my little room in Lupton Flats – the cheapest halls of residence at Leeds University at the time – I’d sat on the floor, beside my single bed, and patiently glued down layers of paper into a string of points. Reluctant to sacrifice my actual thesaurus, I had rooted around my reading list for another book, eventually choosing The French Lieutenant’s Woman. Listening to Stevie Wonder’s Innervisions and drinking PG Tips, it had taken me at least two hours to make the dinosaur spine, which would attach around my neck like a backwards pendant. Slipping it on and looking in the mirror, I wondered if anyone would even notice me. A few months earlier, I had broken up with my first boyfriend. The man to whom I had lost my virginity, learned about love with, and whose jumper I had wrapped around a pillow and slept beside for three months when he went away on a gap year. That man was also living in Lupton Flats. But he was now seeing a girl from my course. It was a special flavour of agony to walk out of my block, to the shop, into a lecture or through the student union and be confronted with the woman who was now sleeping with my boyfriend. I cried endlessly and sourly, and my self-esteem was something woodlice crawled over in the dark. The day of the dinosaur party, I togged up in a long-sleeved black vest, a black top, a pair of black tights, black leggings over those, thick black socks and high-heeled black boots. With the spine tied around my neck and tapping against my back, I looked more like a goth than a funny nod to a Jurassic-sounding book title. And so, like any good comedian flogging a patchy joke, I quickly whipped up a cardboard sign to hang around my neck: I Am A Thesaurus. That should do it. We drove from Leeds to Birmingham in my friend Catherine’s little car: me, my best friend Alice and Catherine at the wheel. On the way home from another party the year before, hungover and addled, we had got so hopelessly lost around the ring roads of Birmingham that we’d ended up driving all the way to Manchester, just to get our bearings and escape the Escher drawing that is the West Midlands road network. Pulling up outside the warehouse, the grit of mud and broken glass and litter beneath our wheels, I could hear the faint thunk of music rumbling through concrete. My heart began to flutter. Here, in an old industrial estate in a strange city, I was cut loose from my past, my ex, my heartbreak, my course, my attempts to make a good fresher impression. Here I was just an idiot in a papier-mache costume ready to dance like everybody was looking. We rang a buzzer and, eventually, the grey metal door was opened by a man with the word “Oomph” painted across his forehead and a buzz cut. Screaming with joy and excitement and the lash, we tumbled in, up the stairs and into a huge, cavernous space full of art students, locals, bands and folks from back home. There was a boxing ring, made out of lino, egg boxes and bungee ropes. There was a huge cardboard-box rollercoaster, disco lights and giant prehistoric creatures made of bubble wrap and poster paint. There were faux-fur sabre-tooth tigers with picnic-bench legs, volcanoes made from chicken wire and, above it all, the smell of perfume and cigarettes and sticky booze and industrial, Victorian damp. After an initial recce, Alice and I went to do our shift at the bar – selling cheese toasties for 50p from an old Breville machine and just a single choice of booze. Power Ball, for the uninitiated, is a sophisticated cocktail made from White Lightning and cherryade and it tastes precisely the same going down as it does being vomited back up. We sold it for 20p a glass. A man with a Power Pack – a premixed 2-litre bottle in a rucksack with a length of hose attached – was walking around the party offering gulps for 5p or a cuddle.About four hours in, I spotted Jamie. I remember his name because, at that stage, I was on a run of sleeping with men called James. There had been two already – a James and a Jimmy paving the way for this stranger. He was beautiful. His hair was a halo of dark brown curls, his eyes twinkled, his leather jacket creaked and, if you ignored the baked-bean-can velociraptor hanging above his shoulder, he looked like a lost member of the Strokes. I walked up to him and, with nothing to lose (since my dignity had been thrown down the stairwell of Lupton Flats), told him that he was the most gorgeous man in the room. “And you’re the most beautiful girl,” he replied. Shock, pleasure and hunger for the weight of a man against my skin shot through me. Could this person really find me beautiful? Was he kidding? And yet the steady, ravenous look in his eyes was not funny. I kissed him. Barely two sentences had passed between us and suddenly his taste was in my mouth, my hair in his hands, our knees pushing between each other’s thighs. “Does anyone have a condom?” I hissed, into the pack of women I’d known since puberty. Handbags were ransacked; the score of one of us a source of joy for us all. Someone produced the perforated square of glad tidings, comfort and joy. I grabbed Jamie and headed to the staircase. As the air hit my face, I realised quite how cold it was under that inky, sparkling, sodium-coloured sky. And how few trees there were. No grass to lie on. No river to slink beside. And yet I wanted this. I wanted it with my mind as well as my body. I wanted it because I had been so convinced that nobody wanted me. I wanted it because he was beautiful and he thought I was beautiful and he smelled hot. So, with mouths steaming like dragons and chests thumping against each other in the cold, we stumbled into a dark corner of a car park, beside another warehouse and became entwined. If there were rats and broken glass and abandoned polystyrene cups, I don’t remember them. If he whispered things in my ear and I moaned things to the sky, I don’t remember them either. I don’t even remember if we lay down on a folded coat or stood up against a fence. All I remember is that brilliant winter night. The cold, the heat, the thrill, the delight. And a man who probably doesn’t remember my name.Will we have a white Christmas? Thanks to Charles Dickens writing about it and Bing Crosby singing about it, snowy scenes have become synonymous with Christmas, but in the UK at least the chances of waking up to a thick blanket of snow are very slim. The Met Office defines a white Christmas to be at least one snowflake observed falling in the 24 hours of Christmas Day, somewhere in the UK. On average, just over half of all Christmas Days in the UK turn out to be a “white Christmas”, but a single flake in Edinburgh probably isn’t what most of us have in mind. The Dickensian scene of widespread snow lying on the ground on Christmas Day has occurred only four times in the UK since 1960 – in 1981, 1995, 2009 and 2010. Christmas in 2010 was particularly unusual, with snow on the ground at 83% of weather stations; the highest ever recorded. White Christmases were more common during the 18th and 19th centuries, with North Atlantic regions still in the grip of the little ice age. And prior to 1752, when Britain adopted the Gregorian calendar and lopped 11 days off the year, the chances of a white Christmas were even higher. But in recent decades global heating has lengthened the odds of a white Christmas.Dating No Filter: Under the Mistletoe 10pm, Sky Max The dating show that perfectly marries Gogglebox and First Dates for our entertainment returns. London Hughes, Jayde Adams, Joel Dommett, Emily Atack and Tom Allen are just some of the excellent comedians snuggling up on the sofa in pairs to watch videos of people going on festive first dates. The pantomime date is just one of the many moments that leaves them cringing behind their hands. Hollie Richardson Sarah Beeny’s New Life in the Country at Christmas 8pm, Channel 4 Having struggled to get their Somerset pad in shape, the Beeny family will hope for a festive payoff. But they wouldn’t be the Beenys if they didn’t make life more difficult for themselves for entertainment purposes. Accordingly, they’re building a treehouse and brewing some homemade mead. Phil Harrison Christmas University Challenge 8.30pm, BBC Two Nothing says “yuletide” like Jeremy Paxman hurrying along conferring quizzers. In tonight’s episode of the festive run, a face-off between alumni-based teams from Winchester and Bradford. Comedian Shaparak Khorsandi represents the former, and property expert Martin Roberts the latter. Alexi Duggins A Taste of Christmas With Andi Oliver 9pm, BBC Two The highly affable TV chef meets three very different families from Glasgow as they create celebratory feasts for their nearest and dearest, and tell the story of their city with food – its culture, spirit and history. HR Philip: Prince, Husband, Father 9pm, ITV This tribute to the long-serving royal consort, who died last April at the age of 99, makes much of his forthrightness, sense of duty and love of family. But while the tone is reverent it does not shy away from Philip’s contentious relationship with the media. Gyles Brandreth and Joanna Lumley are among those paying tributes. Graeme Virtue Landscapers 9pm, Sky Atlantic What started as a darkly comic retelling of a true crime story turns into a surprisingly emotional and sometimes uncomfortable deep dive into the troubled backstories of two convicted killers in love – Susan and Christopher Edwards (Olivia Colman and David Thewlis). Kate O’Flynn is particularly brilliant as the seemingly steely DC Emma Lancing. HR Film choice Being the Ricardos (Aaron Sorkin, 2017), Amazon Prime Video In the 1950s 60 million US viewers watched Lucille Ball’s TV sitcom I Love Lucy. Aaron Sorkin’s fascinating, sharply witty biopic is structured round the production of one weekly episode, when a press rumour that Ball (a sparky Nicole Kidman) is a communist gains traction. Also, her trust in the fidelity of her husband and co-star Desi Arnaz (Javier Bardem) starts to falter. The politics of state, Hollywood and gender come into play, as Ball and Arnaz fight her corner. Simon Wardell Live sport EFL Cup football: Arsenal v Sunderland 7.45pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Quarter-final action.The children of Paul Rusesabagina, the imprisoned Rwandan opposition figure, are only able to speak to their father for five minutes once a week. Even then the Rwandan authorities listen into the phone call. Tricked into boarding a private plane in Dubai and flown to Kigali, the 67-year-old Rusesabagina – who came to international attention after his life-saving acts were depicted in the Hollywood film Hotel Rwanda, set during the country’s genocide in 1994 – was given what his family says was a show trial and jailed over allegations that he had been a founder and leader of a terrorist group. During that trial, the phone of his daughter, Carine Kanimba, was targeted with the notorious Pegasus spyware, according to forensic analysis by Amnesty. Legal discussions and conversations were reportedly listened into, as well as meetings with senior foreign diplomats. The Rwandan government has previously said the country “does not use this software system … and does not possess this technical capability in any form”. In the midst of their international campaign to secure his release, Carine, and one of his other daughters, Anaise Kanimba, say that even now the regime of the Rwandan president, Paul Kagame, is still interested in their activities. The two women were Rusesabagina’s nieces, but were adopted as babies by Paul after their own family was murdered during the genocide and the girls were found by the family in a refugee camp. In London to lobby on behalf of her father, 29-year-old Anaise describes her father’s disappearance. “My sister and I were together in Washington during lockdown. Ten days before Dad left, he asked us to help him book his plane tickets,” she says. “I feel a lot of responsibility.” Knowing that the Rwandan authorities were seeking to arrest him, he was “extremely nervous” about travelling in Europe, she says. “I helped book his tickets to Dubai via Chicago.” But while transiting through Dubai, Paul Rusesabagina disappeared. Then his family heard that he was in detention in Kigali after being tricked into getting on a plane he thought was taking him to a meeting in Burundi. “It was 29 August. He disappeared on the 28th. Then I got a message from our younger brother saying: ‘They took Dad. He’s in Kigali.’ And I knew he wasn’t joking. “And you know, he had put himself almost under his own house arrest because he felt they were watching him.” In the seven-month trial that followed his arrest on arrival in Kigali, Rusesabagina was accused of being “the founder, leader, sponsor and member of violent, armed, extremist terror outfits … operating out of various places in the region and abroad”. And while prosecutors said he had recruited dozens of fighters for the National Liberation Front (FLN), a rebel group that has carried out a number of deadly attacks in Rwanda in recent years – charges that he denies – serious questions have emerged since his conviction over whether he received a “fair trial”, including whether he was coerced into making a confession. It is clear is that Rusesabagina was fiercely outspoken about the increasingly repressive rule in Kigali, was a member of an opposition group, and had even called for regime change. According to his family, his most serious crime was to be a high-profile critic of Kagame. It is an accusation that Kagame himself denied following Rusesabagina’s arrest – although framed in terms that referenced his high profile. “He is here being tried for [his actions]. Nothing to do with the film. Nothing to do with celebrity status,” Kagame said in television interview. Anaise believes there is an international infatuation with Kagame. “The world only wants to see [Kagame] as the guy on the white horse who ended the genocide,” she says. Many observers see the luring of Rusesabagina to Kigali, his detention and trial as of a piece with the treatment meted out by Kagame’s regime to those who oppose it, including former members of Kagame’s inner circle. At its most serious, this has allegedly included murders and attempted murders abroad – charges Rwanda denies. Most prominent of these was the murder of Patrick Karegeya, a former ally of Kagame turned opponent, in a South African hotel. Others have been warned about threats to their lives. And, like others who have fallen foul of Kagame over the years, Rusesabagina’s first and most serious sin, it appears, was the prominence he received because of the film Hotel Rwanda. “When father got a platform through the film, Kagame expected him to say just good things about Rwanda. But he wanted the truth to be known about what was happening in Rwanda,” says Anaise. “When Kagame and the regime would speak about him, they would smear him. This is completely personal. They accused him of being the leader of attacks – of being the mastermind! “We get to speak to him for about five minutes once a week. He’s been in solitary confinement for three months and can’t sleep because of the bed bugs. We worry about his health because he suffers from hypertension.” If Rusesabagina’s disappearance, in what Kagame has boasted “was a flawless operation”, was sinister enough in its own right, it has been underscored by the targeting of Carine – a Belgian citizen, unlike Anaise – with the Israeli-developed Pegasus spyware. “My understanding is that my phone was infected by an email address that was linked to Rwanda that was sent to me and then deleted. I never saw it,” explains Carine. Among meetings that may have been monitored by the spyware were those she had with European foreign ministries and officials at this time about her father’s case. The family also have reason to believe phone calls between Rusesabagina’s Rwandan lawyer and the family, as well as legal advisers in the west, about their legal strategy were targeted. That spying, Anaise suggests, allowed Rwandan officials to block legal documents being delivered to her father in prison to sign that might have helped with his defence. “The consequence of that surveillance,” says Kate Gibson, a UK-based lawyer who is advising the family, “is that Paul was blocked from seeing documents [and] his lawyer was not allowed to take out notes from their meetings. “We knew something was up but it was only later that we found communications with his lawyer had been compromised,” she adds. Gibson is scathing about the lack of due process at the trial, not least in a summary of the case drawn up for the campaign for his release. “Mr Rusesabagina’s trial and judgment followed his illegal kidnapping and return to Rwanda, his torture for four days while held incommunicado in an unknown location, and 248 days of solitary confinement,” the summary reads. “Throughout this process, his legal and human rights were violated by the Rwandan government at every turn. The judgment in this case continues this trend, with factual, legal and procedural errors throughout. “Mr Rusesabagina’s judgment had very little to do with the law, and everything to do with continuing the illegal and arbitrary detention of a critic of the Rwandan regime.” And with the Rwandan prosecutor appealing against his 25-year prison sentence (they had sought life imprisonment) – and little hope of a meaningful appeal to shorten it in Kigali – Rusesabagina’s family is now pinning its hopes on international pressure. In June, the US-based Lantos Foundation for Human Rights &amp; Justice filed a formal petition to the US state department and treasury calling for Magnitsky sanctions against the Rwandan justice minister, Johnston Busingye, and head of the Rwanda Investigation Bureau, Col Jeannot Ruhunga, “for their role in human rights violations committed against Paul Rusesabagina”. In October, the European parliament passed a non-binding resolution by 660 votes to two, with 18 abstentions, strongly condemning Rusesabagina’s conviction, which it said was “exemplary of the human rights violations in Rwanda”. “Our strategy,” says Anaise, who has briefed the House of Lords on her father’s case, “is to put as much pressure on Rwanda until Kagame is sick of hearing about my father’s case and the cost of it is too high.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Top story: ‘Stand up if you hate Boris’ Hello, this is Warren Murray presenting your final Guardian morning briefing of 2021. Whether on email, the app or our website, sincere thanks for reading this year. Season’s greetings and here’s hoping for a better 2022. A Cabinet Office inquiry into alleged government parties in breach of Covid rules could be expanded after the Guardian published an image showing the prime minister alongside his wife and up to 17 staff in the Downing Street garden in May 2020. Bereaved families have accused Boris Johnson of showing “flagrant disregard” for the public as ministers struggled to explain the justification for a wine and cheese event in Downing Street at the height of lockdown. Amid growing fury over the photograph, Johnson said on Monday: “Those were meetings of people at work, talking about work.” Labour dismissed Downing Street’s explanation and said it amounted to evidence of law-breaking. Johnson found himself the target of some rather different negative publicity last night when chants of “Stand up if you hate Boris” rang out as spectators packed Alexandra Palace in London for the 2022 PDC World Darts Championship. * * * Status quo as Omicron spreads – New Covid restrictions are unlikely to be imposed before Christmas but Boris Johnson has warned further measures remain on the table. Parliament is preparing for a possible recall on Tuesday 28 December for a vote on any new measures. The prime minister has been accused of leaving millions of people in limbo, as well as businesses, after a two-hour cabinet meeting ended with no decision. Scientists have also reacted with dismay, emphasising that waiting until the new year would “almost certainly be too late to have a material impact on the epidemic”. There has been a steep rise in hospitalisations in London, with the UK’s highest number of Omicron cases, while 91,743 people tested positive for Covid on Monday across the UK. The London mayor, Sadiq Khan, announced the cancellation of the New Year’s Eve celebration in Trafalgar Square “in the interests of public safety”. The number of UK vaccines administered within 24 hours broke 1m for the first time on the weekend, it has been confirmed. * * * Truss takes up NI protocol talks – The UK’s newly appointed Brexit negotiator, Liz Truss, is due to speak today to her EU counterpart, Maroš Šefčovič. No EU-UK talks had been scheduled in the last days before Christmas, until the surprise weekend resignation of Lord Frost, who had been Boris Johnson’s chief Brexit negotiator. There are renewed calls to rip up the Northern Ireland protocol, with ministers under pressure from Conservative hard Brexiters and the Democratic Unionists to resolve an issue they argue has put a border down the Irish Sea and damaged the integrity of the United Kingdom. Truss supported remain at the 2016 referendum but is popular with Tory activists at a time when Johnson’s premiership is in crisis. Allies say the minister has made clear that she would vote leave if she had the chance again, and that her stint as international trade secretary demonstrates her credentials as a free marketeer and free trader. * * * ‘Extremely toxic’ – The government approach to transgender rights has caused real distress and exacerbated tensions, according to a group of cross-bench MPs. The Conservative-led women’s and equalities committee has called for urgent reform to the way people can officially change gender, suggesting the government has been unwilling to engage in an area that has sometimes “become extremely toxic”. A Government Equality Hub spokesperson said it was taking steps to modernise applications for Gender Recognition Certificates, including reducing the cost and moving the process online. The equality commission has said it will publish guidance for service providers on single-sex spaces in January and respond to the committee’s other points in due course. * * * Guilty verdicts over machete killing – A mother and her teenage son have been found guilty of killing a 17-year-old boy in a machete attack in south London. Nichola Leighton, 36, was found guilty of murder and having an offensive weapon. Her son Tyreese Ulysses, 19, admitted having a weapon, and was cleared of murder but convicted of manslaughter. They had been on trial along with three teenagers over the death of Levi Ernest-Morrison. On the evening of 10 April, Leighton drove Ulysses to the scene of the attack after becoming “furious” with the victim for repeatedly knocking on her door looking for her son, jurors at the Old Bailey were told. Two teenagers, aged 16 and 17, were also convicted of murder after admitting to having weapons. The jury failed to reach a verdict on a murder charge for a 15-year-old. The defendants were remanded into custody to be sentenced on 28 January 2022. * * * Reign in splendid isolation – Barrow borough council has begun one of the UK’s most unusual local government recruitment processes while seeking someone to both run the Ship Inn pub and reign as monarch on Piel Island, off the coast near Barrow-in-Furness. The successful applicant must be willing to mark their appointment as “king” or “queen” of the island by sitting on a throne and having beer poured over their head. Piel Island is half a mile off the Furness peninsula, reachable on a ferry which runs April to September or on a guided walk across the sands. Many people go to the island for birthday parties or for a few drinks before camping overnight. As well as running the pub the successful applicant will need to manage and maintain the island itself. Today in Focus podcast: Another Covid Christmas? The government hasn’t cancelled Christmas – yet – but the rate of the Omicron variant’s spread should make us all reconsider our plans, science correspondent Nicola Davis reports. Lunchtime read: Hotel Rwanda hero’s terrorist ‘show trial’ Tricked into boarding a private plane in Dubai and flown to Kigali, 67-year-old Paul Rusesabagina – who came to international attention after his life-saving acts were depicted in the Hollywood film Hotel Rwanda, set during the country’s genocide in 1994 – was given what his family says was a show trial and jailed over allegations that he had been a founder and leader of a terrorist group. The European parliament has described Rusesabagina’s conviction as “exemplary of the human rights violations in Rwanda”, and his family are working to bring more international pressure to bear against the regime of the Rwandan president, Paul Kagame. Sport The 100 best male footballers in the world 2021: Nos 100-71. From Jude Bellingham to Patrik Schick and Gavi, we present the first 30 names of our countdown to the very best player of 2021. Premier League clubs have discussed driving up vaccination rates in their squads by creating separate rules for players yet to get a Covid-19 jab. On a day when it emerged that 16% of top-flight players are unvaccinated and a record 90 positive tests had been recorded among players and staff in the week up to last Sunday, a two-tier system was raised at an emergency meeting. In the Women’s Champions League quarter-finals Arsenal face a difficult task to overcome Wolfsburg while Lyon and Barcelona are expected to challenge for European success – read our complete tie-by-tie analysis and verdicts. The PGA Tour has announced it has given permission for players to compete in the Saudi International, which is due to take place from 3-6 February 2022. All sporting events in Wales will be held behind closed doors from Boxing Day due to the surge in coronavirus cases, the Welsh government has announced. Raymond van Barneveld made a winning return to Alexandra Palace, beating Lourence Ilagan 3-0 to set up an intriguing second-round meeting with Rob Cross. Business Asian shares have mostly been higher today with Tokyo gaining nearly 2% early on. Investors snapped up stocks that had been dragged lower in previous sessions by concerns about the Omicron variant. The FTSE should be swinging back into the green with a roughly 1% lift at the opening, while the pound is worth $1.321 and €1.171 at time of writing. The papers The Guardian’s splash today is “Covid surges, but cabinet split means no extra curbs – for now”. “Rejoice!” – the Daily Mail does, saying “Xmas is looking safe”. It relates on its front page, as do others, that the Queen has cancelled her Christmas festivities at Sandringham and will be staying at Windsor where family are expected to visit. “Queen’s quiet Xmas” says the Mirror. “Tough call, PM, but you can’t cancel Christmas” – oh so stoic is the Daily Express characterisation of Boris Johnson deciding not to do anything yet. The paper says its polling shows people would ignore any new rules anyway. “Christmas hopes grow as Johnson delays action” – that’s the Times, while the Telegraph is less charitable in its view: “Confusion at Christmas”. The Sun vulgarises the message into: “Hold on to your baubles”. The i says “Christmas lockdown blocked by Johnson and cabinet”. The Financial Times says “Johnson faces cabinet deadlock on Covid curbs before Christmas. The i stays on the No 10 garden drinks story: “Raab’s tailor made excuse … Boris and his staff ‘weren’t breaking lockdown rules as they were in suits’”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendAmong all the TV specials and stage productions at this time of year, one story is always guaranteed to be retold – A Christmas Carol, by Charles Dickens. Fans might be jollied to know about a new holiday cottage near the seafront in Broadstairs, Kent, which recreates a setting in another favourite Dickens novel – Oliver Twist. Fagin’s Den – which its owners claim is the first Dickens-themed escape in the UK – has been styled as a Victorian thieves’ hideout, like that of the book’s shifty pickpocketing character. Great expectations? Mine were more on the medium side. I wasn’t totally convinced that the hovel of a dubious literary character was the sort of place I wanted to spend a weekend. But we were there for the kids, who are not huge fans of Dickens, but definite enthusiasts for make-believe. Set on a narrow backstreet a few steps from the sea, the flint-walled terraced cottage certainly looked the part. And as our eyes adjusted to the dark interior, we felt excited by the theatricality of it all, with Victorian-style furniture, clocks, candles and a rocking chair. A string of pocket handkerchiefs was strung like bunting above the stairs; framed portraits of Dickens characters and shelves of his novels decorated the walls. Upstairs, costumes for Oliver Twist characters hung in the bedrooms, should we wish to indulge in some Nancy and Bill role play or dress up as the Artful Dodger. Bathroom walls were papered with prints of the illustrations that accompanied the original Oliver Twist instalments, published monthly between 1837 and 1839. The overall effect was perhaps more am dram stage set for Oliver! than authentic Victorian home, but it’s fun for families, and for Dickens fans, who are also sure to appreciate the cottage’s location. Two minutes’ walk away is Bleak House, once Fort House, but renamed in honour of the author, who frequently stayed there when holidaying in the town between 1837 and 1859. He wrote David Copperfield in this striking perch above the harbour. (For those coming in warmer months, there’s a choice of beaches too – the town’s own curl of sand at Viking Bay in one direction, and East Cliff and Stone Bay’s kilometre-long stretch of golden sand in the other.) The Dickens connection has been wholeheartedly embraced by Broadstairs: strolling through the town we pass Artfuls Bed and Breakfast, the Charles Dickens pub and Please Sir!, a lurid fast food joint. There are also the more gracious Dickens House Museum – former home of the woman who inspired the character Betsey Trotwood – and the Dickens festival, held annually in June since the 1930s. Things have changed much since Dickens’s day, when the main street was “stopped up with donkey chaises”, there were “first-rate bathing machines” on the beach, and fishing boats and mariners galore, according to descriptions in his essay of devotion to the resort, Our English Watering-Place. They’ve changed a fair bit since my last visit, too, with cool new spots such as The Table, serving dishes such as Kent clams with dashi against a monochrome backdrop of metro tiles and exposed brick; new bistro The Jetty Broadstairs on the main Viking Bay beach, and posh fish and chips place Flotsam and Jetsam, which alongside the standards offers treats such as crispy crab dumplings and monkfish scampi in black, squid ink batter. It’s not as if all we ever get is gruel, but the enthusiasm with which we devoured those unctuous bites was matched only by that of the seagulls, who dive-bombed and pecked us as we wandered along the sand with our paper cones. Beaten back by these airborne thieves, we retreated to our own robbers’ den to finish the meal, and then complete the Fagin’s Den scavenger hunt left for guests. Following clues around the house, finding answers in pictures and recipe books, the children eventually unearthed “Fagin’s stash” – a treasure chest of bubble wands, pencils and chocolate coins. And then of course, they asked for more, which I suppose was only appropriate. • Accommodation was provided by Fishermen’s Cottages Broadstairs. Fagin’s Den sleeps four from £90 a night, two-night minimum More accommodation for fantasy fun with kids The Wizard Chambers, Pimlico, London In the basement bar of the seemingly ordinary Georgian House hotel near Victoria station, magic commences at teatime. Those who book an “enchanted afternoon tea” are treated to cakes and savoury bites presented in a blackbird cage, scones topped with cream and popping candy, and a teapot that pours smoke into a cauldron. Wizard hats are provided. Potion making is available too: test tubes of colourful liquids arrive with a recipe explaining how to warm “troll fat” and add thunderhead dragon blood and phoenix teardrops to baby werewolf fur to concoct a delicious drink. Afterwards, young sages can retire to one of the wizard’s enchanted chambers, accessed through a bookcase and down a candlelit staircase, with gothic decor that would make Harry Potter feel at home – four-posters with red velvet curtains, cauldrons, tapestries and trunks. • Potion experience £12, or £15 for alcoholic version, wizard afternoon tea £45 adult, £29 child. “Wizard” chambers for four from £290 B&amp;B, georgianhousehotel.co.uk Wizards and hobbits, North Yorkshire Newest among the accommodation options inspired by fantasy stories and fairytales at North Shire is the Dorm Room Cottage, based on the Gryffindor dormitory in the Harry Potter films, and sleeping six in single four-poster beds. Groundkeepers Cottage, also sleeping six, is reminiscent of Hagrid’s hut and has a huge copper bath for scrubbing off forest mud (or boarhound fur), while Shire House is a Hobbity cottage for four with a round green door and grass roof. • All from £250 a night, northshire.co.uk Looking Glass Cottage, Brighton More comfortable than a rabbit hole, this colourfully decorated 16th-century cottage near Brighton’s seafront and Lanes has an Alice in Wonderland theme. Flamingo-patterned wallpaper is hung upside down in one bedroom, the wall of another is peppered with looking-glasses, the lounge is papered in a playing card print, and teapots bear “drink me” labels, for tea parties best enjoyed on the south-facing sun terrace. • Sleeps eight from £203 a night or £890 a week, Coolstays.com Ice-cream-themed hotel, Bournemouth A £2m refurbishment of the ibis Styles Bournemouth hotel has given it a retro ice-cream theme, with a choice of pastel-coloured rooms in “mint choc chip”, “tutti frutti” or “very berry”. Carpets look like sundae swirls, walls feature hundreds-and-thousands patterns and once the Pavlovian response kicks in there’s a 1950s-style ice-cream station downstairs to sate the cravings. • Family rooms sleeping four from £120 a night B&amp;B, doubles from £81, all.accor.com UFO pod, near Narberth, Pembrokeshire Wales has had its fair share of UFO sightings over the decades, but this may be the first you can sleep in. Called an “intergalactic glamping pod”, Spodnic has a classic flying saucer shape, bendy legs and a space-agey interior with a metal ladder up to a bubble-dome cockpit in the roof. Guests can don space helmets, play a retro game of Space Invaders, soak in the hot tub and use a bathroom hidden inside a Tardis. • From £430 for two nights sleeping four (two adults, two children), melinmabes.com Fire truck cabin, Cumbria Little ones who are thrilled by fire engines and firefighters will love the Red Rescue Retreat in the southern fells of Blencathra mountain in the northern Lake District. Inside the bright-red converted fire truck, a ladder leads to a fireman’s pole, the children’s beds are shaped like fire engines, with wheels. Firefighter costumes are provided, and there’s a real hose to play with. • Sleeps four from £476 a week, holidaycottages.co.uk The Officer’s Hideaway, Herefordshire With a bathroom in an air raid shelter, a real army safari tent to sleep in, and a military trunk packed with camo gear and games, warlike families have everything they need for play hostilities at this secluded forest camp near the Wye Valley. It’s the only glamping site on a huge 3,000-acre estate, so invasion is unlikely, but a large wooden shelter for outdoor dining is disguised with camo netting, and almost every detail, from the pots and pans to the furniture, is real ex-military. (Not the hot tub though.) Nearby are castles and cider orchards to visit, but you might prefer to sod that for a game of soldiers and bring water pistols for firing practice at targets hidden in the woods. • From £184 for four, qualityunearthed.co.ukIn 2021 workers appear to have had enough. Amid constant claims from some industries of labor shortages as the economy recovers from Covid-19 shutdowns, workers have been pushing employers and elected officials to raise wages, improve working conditions and benefits such as paid sick leave through walkouts, protests, rallies and strikes. The last few months of 2021 saw workers quit at record or near record rates, while an uptick of strikes occurred around the US in October and November 2021. “I’ve been traveling a lot to picket lines all over the country in the last couple of months, been in so many different states and across all industries. But the one thing that’s been really consistent is the sentiment of the working people who are out there taking the risks is that they are absolutely fed up,” said Liz Shuler, president of the AFL-CIO, the main union federation in the US. Thousands of workers went on strike in 2021 at Frito-Lay, Nabisco, Kellogg’s, John Deere, Volvo, Frontier Communications, New York University, Columbia University, Harvard, carpenters in the Pacific north-west, hospitals, airports and at coalmines in Alabama, while workers at several fast-food and retail chains including McDonald’s, Walmart, Wendy’s, Burger King, Bojangles, Jack in the Box and Family Dollar, held walkouts or short-term strikes. Shuler believes that the hardships of the pandemic – when so much focus was put on the sacrifices of workers in often manual jobs that were deemed essential – has sparked a reawakening of labor politics in America, especially as some companies have tried to go back to business as usual. Shuler added: “When I was walking the line with those Nabisco workers, and Kellogg’s workers, I kept thinking about all of them in the plant, making Oreos and the Ritz crackers, while the rest of us were inside consuming those. Those are the folks that really made the sacrifices and the whole time, they were told that they were essential. Then they go to the bargaining table, and they’re basically disposable because the companies continued to profit through the pandemic and then say, ‘Thanks, but we’re not going to compensate you, we’re not going to protect you, we’re not going to value and reward you for making those sacrifices.’” One of the year’s most important strikes is playing out in the deep south where about 1,100 coalminers at Warrior Met Coal in Alabama have been on strike since 1 April, as workers fight for better wages after accepting concessions in their previous union contract. “The past eight months have been some of the hardest times of our lives. I don’t think any of us imagined the strike would be going into its ninth month with no end in sight, but I’m proud of our resolve,” said James Traweek, a miner who has worked for four years at Warrior Met Coal in Brookwood, Alabama. Other strikes have broken records. At the Tenet Healthcare-owned St Vincent hospital in Worcester, Massachusetts, about 700 nurses have been on strike since 8 March over understaffing and cuts at the hospital before and during the pandemic, the longest strike in Massachusetts’ history. Tenet Healthcare has sought to permanently replace nurses on strike as the hospital faces fines from the state for closing down inpatient behavioral health beds due to the strike. An agreement fell through in August over Tenet Healthcare’s return to work agreement that would have prevented some nurses from returning to their previous positions. “Saint Vincent hospital nurses’ fight has now become all of labor’s fight,” said Marlena. “It’s a big red flag for all of labor and all of humanity that if you stand up for what you believe in on principle and stand up for patients and you stand up for one another as workers, Tenet Healthcare’s strategy is that you can be replaced and will be punished for that. That’s very dangerous, this strategy trying to diminish our union rights instead of coming to a settlement, trying to intimidate nurses to cross a picket line.” On 18 December, a tentative agreement was reached after the US secretary of labor, Marty Walsh, served as mediator in the final negotiating session, which will end the strike if approved by the nurses. The Labor Action tracker at Cornell University Institute of Labor Relations documented 346 strike locations in 2021 as of 10 December. Johnnie Kallas, the project director , attributed an uptick in strikes in October and November to increased leverage of workers in a labor market where workers are in high demand and burnout of workers who have continued working through the pandemic. “Labor market conditions can provide workers with more leverage, but strikes don’t just automatically happen. They often require deep organizing and always require incredible sacrifice,” said Kallas. Unionization rates in the US have declined over the past few decades, but several union organizing efforts were launched in 2021 in response to pandemic working conditions, while labor leaders and unions continue pushing for labor law reforms to rein in anti-union employers and facilitate US workers’ ability to organize unions and engage in collective bargaining. According to unionelections.org, 890 union elections in the private sector were held in the US in 2021 as of 11 December, with 573 resulting in a new union certification. Union election rates and union density in the US have been in a downward decline over the past several decades, though approval of labor unions in the US is at 68% according to a September Gallup poll. “If we see any changes, it will be next year. Between the tight labor market and the high profile coverage of the strikes and recent elections, Starbucks for example, I’d expect to see some increase,” said Kevin Reuning, assistant professor of Political Science at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio, who manages the unionelections.org website. Amazon workers in Bessemer, Alabama, attempted to form the first union at the retail giant in the spring and though the union lost the election, the National Labor Relations Board has ordered a new election to be held due to Amazon’s anti-union misconduct. At the same time New York’s attorney general is pressuring Amazon to reinstate a fired employee and improve safety protections amid a union organizing drive led by the terminated employee, Chris Smalls, in Staten Island. Starbucks workers in Buffalo, New York, also won a historic union election on 9 December, forming the first union at a Starbucks corporate store in the US. A second branch is likely to have won their union election after challenged ballots are resolved and three more stores are set to hold union elections in Buffalo, New York, and another in Arizona. With the union victory spurring optimism, it could lead to more stores requesting to unionize. “It was a major victory,” said Brian Murray, a Starbucks barista in the Buffalo area and one of the organizers with Starbucks Workers United. “I think our real fight will be now getting a first contract and hopefully having them recognize the right to organize, but with these wins I’m sure we’ll see more workers organizing nationwide in the near future.”The British government has been accused by NGOs and trade unions of “chasing colonial post-Brexit fantasies” at the expense of the world’s poorest as they urge Liz Truss to keep aid focused on poverty reduction rather than geopolitical manoeuvring. In a joint letter to the foreign secretary, the group criticises the rebranding of the UK’s development investment arm, which will see the Commonwealth Development Corporation (CDC) become British International Investment (BII) next year. “This new strategy and name change appears to repurpose BII as an institution that focuses solely on private-sector investment and profit-making, rather than development goals and poverty reduction,” write the 12 organisations, including Global Justice Now, the Trades Union Congress (TUC), the Catholic Agency for Overseas Development (Cafod) and Unison. “Rather than investing in general job creation and projects with only the most tenuous relation to poverty reduction, in the hope that the economic benefits will trickle down to the world’s most marginalised communities, UK aid must retain a strong poverty reduction mandate … and support decent job creation to retain its international credibility,” they said. When Truss announced the overhaul of the CDC last month, she billed it as part of the “network of liberty” strategy of the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO), outlining plans for BII to leverage private capital to invest in countries across Asia, Africa and the Caribbean. Observers said the implicit message was that the government sees BII as offering an alternative to loans from China, which is estimated to have lent about $1.5tn (£1.1tn) in direct loans and trade credits to more than 150 countries around the globe. The shift, said Truss, would help “grow economies across Asia, Africa and the Caribbean while drawing them closer towards free-market democracies and building a network of liberty across the world”. But NGOs, already furious at the government’s slashing of the aid budget from 0.7% to 0.5% of gross national income, have condemned not only the rhetoric but also the practical changes to the way in which British aid is spent. In the letter, also sent this week to Diana Layfield, the new chair of the CDC, the NGOs and unions warn that increased funding for BII will “almost certainly lead to catastrophic cuts to other, grant-based areas of aid spending”. “Ultimately, this means that more UK aid will be directed to projects, countries and sectors that provide an economic benefit to the UK, rather than to the world’s most marginalised communities,” they add. “Especially in such a time of global health crisis and climate breakdown, what is left of the reduced UK aid budget should be prioritised for agencies with a proven track record of delivering on development goals.” It is “highly concerning”, the letter says, that the changes appear to have been made without consulting civil society or unions. Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, said: “After being left in the dark on plans for British International Investment, it’s time for ministers to consult with unions and other civil society groups so that we can ensure decent jobs and poverty reduction are at the heart of the institution’s work.” Daniel Willis, development finance campaigner at Global Justice Now, said: “There is a clear role for UK aid to play in supporting the ‘global south’ during the pandemic and against climate change, but instead the government is chasing colonial post-Brexit fantasies. “After already cutting the aid budget by £4bn this year, the government’s expansion and rebrand of BII’s role will see grant aid squeezed further and more funds going to for-profit, ineffective, private-sector projects instead.” The CDC has said it will invest £3bn specifically to help emerging economies in Africa and Asia meet their Paris agreement goals. But Graham Gordon, head of public policy at Cafod, said that at the Cop26 summit in Glasgow last month, developing countries had “made a clarion call” for more climate finance in the form of grants rather than loans, and that the new proposals for BII could result in those countries being saddled with yet more debt. “As secretary of state with direct oversight of BII, Liz Truss should commit all future UK climate finance as grants not loans, and stop any future disbursements to BII unless they can show how they will provide grant-based finance,” he said. Unison’s international officer, Mark Beacon, said: “Ministers shouldn’t be channelling the diminishing aid budget into the private sector. They must instead fund quality public services to reduce global challenges such as poverty and inequality.” An FCDO spokesperson said: “No country in the world has ever escaped poverty without reliable, long-term investment. Reliable and honest sources of finance are needed in low and middle-income countries to prevent them from taking on unsustainable debt, and make them freer, wealthier and more secure. “British International Investment will act as a key delivery vehicle to drive investment and economic opportunities across Asia, Africa and the Caribbean, including in some of the world’s poorest countries.”Mummy, when Grampy’s burnt will there be fireworks?” my six-year-old demanded. My heart sank as I realised I’d made a terrible job of explaining cremation. We were racing down the motorway so that Abbey and her older brother could see their grandad – my father – one final time. But it was only a few weeks after Bonfire Night. Abbey’s one frame of reference for setting people alight was the guy that had so enthralled her on the school playing field, going up in a blaze of sparks and cinders. As soon as we arrived – on an icy Christmas Eve in 2017 – the children stampeded into the dining room where Dad lay on a hospital bed being drip-fed morphine, yellow with jaundice and skeletal. I’d worried that the sight of him might frighten them. But no. “Grampy!” they squealed as they raced to his bedside. Abbey instinctively leant downwards to kiss his forehead, while Finn took the bare bones of Dad’s hand in the plumpness of his, and gently, tenderly, squeezed them. Tinsel and fairy lights twinkled around them. He was too weak to speak, but Dad’s eyes danced with pleasure. My heart cracked as I watched his face – so very gaunt, stripped bare by cancer – glow with an unmistakable smile. Christmas Eve was my father’s 75th birthday. From the moment he had been diagnosed 15 months ago, he’d known in merciless detail all that would come his way. A retired GP, he had watched cancer claim too many patients to count. Determined not to be tucked away upstairs like a secret, he’d wanted the hospital bed he knew he would never leave to be cocooned in the warmth of his family. We gathered round – his three children, three grandchildren and wife of 47 years – and sang our hearts out to a dying man. And somehow, the children’s belted Happy Birthday made genuine joy rise from the grief. Dad’s eyes responded with silent delight as he managed to murmur “Thank you, all.” You might think that mistletoe and morphine wouldn’t mix. But the truth was, Dad’s being at home was a miracle of sorts – and what could be more festive than that? For the NHS wasn’t merely administering opiates. The district nurses, community palliative care team, GPs and occupational therapists had rallied round my father with nothing less than love – smiling, listening, embracing, consoling – ensuring he felt safe and secure enough to die, as he longed to, at home. He was rushing towards the end of his life borne on a thousand tiny acts of kindness, bestowed with grace and effusiveness by NHS staff. In the early hours of Boxing Day morning, with Mum sleeping on a camp bed at her husband’s side, enclosing his palm in hers, he took his final breath. The undertakers arrived, sombre and stiff, with frost on the doorstep. All that remained of the man I had spent a lifetime adoring was an imprint of limbs in cooling, crumpled cotton. The absence was impossible to grasp. Curled up under a duvet in the vastness of grief, I thought back to my own childhood Christmases when, in between unwrapping presents and devouring turkey, we’d drive to the local cottage hospital. There, the frailest of Dad’s patients would lie marooned, facing the festivities alone. Their faces would light up as we trooped from bedside to bedside, Quality Street at the ready, as Dad, in a Santa hat, fussed and made them feel special. Now, I clung with gratitude to the knowledge that what he had given of himself to his patients so freely for four decades had been returned so abundantly, at no cost, by others who cared. I posted an impromptu tweet of thanks to the NHS: “Last night, cancer finally claimed my dearest Dad. One major surgery, countless chemotherapies, &amp; a small army of community &amp; palliative care nurses so he could be at home with us. The bill? £zero. Grief, pain, emptiness – but not bankruptcy. Thank you, thank you NHS.” Improbably, the message set off around the world, being retweeted about 40,000 times and reaching nine million people. Thousands of people I had never met shared their own experiences of the NHS stepping up when their loved one was dying. “I lost my wife to cancer in October,” wrote one man. “The care and dignity with which she was treated will stay with me for ever.” Then there were the haunting responses from the US: “My dad died too soon because he couldn’t afford chemotherapy.” “My family has been destroyed and bankrupted by mum’s cancer bills.” No one in the UK, mercifully, has yet been forced to do a Walter White and build a crystal meth lab to fund their cancer chemotherapy. As a society, we still choose to provide through our taxes for universal healthcare according to need, not ability to pay. The NHS may be tattered, threadbare and at risk of collapse. Nevertheless – despite all our political and economic divisions – we continue to provide this radical act of collective kindness. As I learned the hard way, on this most painful of Christmases, the NHS is surely the greatest social miracle of all. Breathtaking by Rachel Clarke (Little, Brown) is out in paperback nowMy insurer, the AA, appears to have lost my crashed car and can’t, or won’t, pay my claim as a result. In October, a truck emerging from a yard drove into the side of my car and, as I was shaken, a witness drove me home. The vehicle was seemingly collected by the insurer but is now lost. When I inquired as to why the claim had not been paid, I was told my car was with English Ford in Poole for repair. However, English Ford told me it had no record of the car. The AA then said it would ring me the next day. When it failed to do so, I raised an official complaint. I cannot afford to purchase another car until the claim is settled. So far, as I am not able to determine that the AA has lost my car, my claim remains unsettled. MP, Bournemouth The AA told me that, despite appearances to the contrary, your car was never lost. It is at the salvage depot of the policy underwriter (Covéa) and has been deemed a total loss. Therefore payment is on its way. “We had not made its whereabouts clear to the policyholder, nor who would be processing the claim,” the AA says. “We have apologised, and informed the policyholder of the next steps. We have also provided £75 as a gesture of goodwill due to the stress and inconvenience.” And finally … JS, from London, writes in praise of O2. “When a dear friend, suffering from a critical health condition, found her O2 connection, sim card and Yahoo email account wasn’t working, I contacted the chief executive of O2 on her behalf. A member of the executive office helped and a new sim – with the much-needed original number – was sent to a local store. A positive experience that should not go unrecorded.” We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsState premiers will urge Scott Morrison to speed up the schedule for booster shots after the emergence of the Omicron variant of the Covid-19 virus which has seen cases surge to record numbers in New South Wales. Before the hastily scheduled national cabinet meeting on Wednesday, the NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, and his Victorian counterpart, Martin Foley, wrote to Greg Hunt calling for the commonwealth to shorten the booster eligibility period. While most Australians are eligible for a booster shot five months after their second Covid-19 vaccine dose, the letter calls for Australia’s top immunisation advice panel to fast-track the program. Citing what they described as “a very challenging holiday and summer period” ahead, the two ministers want the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation to make “specific determinations” for the two states. As of Friday, just over 1.51 million Australians had received a booster dose out of an eligible group of 3.16 million. There are currently 3.2m doses of mRNA vaccines at primary care and state vaccination settings, with 4.8m expected to be in clinic fridges across Australia by Christmas. Wednesday’s national cabinet meeting is scheduled to begin at midday with leaders to first receive an update from health experts about the Omicron variant before discussing the booster program interval period. They’ll also receive updated Doherty Institute modelling. On Tuesday, the acting Victorian premier, James Merlino, said the state was calling for a “shorter interval” between the doses, saying the booster should be considered as a “third dose” and that the timing should be “as short as possible”. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, said he was hoping for a “constructive discussion” at national cabinet about shortening the Covid vaccine booster interval from five months to four, and said his government would do “whatever we can” to provide supports for a sped-up program. “Because the faster we get booster shots into arms, the safer the community will be as we continue to open up here in NSW.” Guardian Australia understands the Queensland government is also supportive of a shorter booster timeframe, although the situation is less urgent in that state because of lower case numbers. The South Australian premier, Steven Marshall, also added his name to the list of premiers pushing for booster shots to be brought forward to four months after that state recorded 154 new cases on Tuesday. Marshall said he was keen to hear what Atagi had to say about the proposal. “We were strongly supportive of reducing the gap between the second dose and the booster from six months down to five months. It’s our belief here in SA that we should consider reducing that down again,” he said. “We would like to have a decision... we are very keen to provide the opportunity for people to get boosters sooner because we know it will increase their protection.” Masks are still required in a range of SA settings, including public transport and shared indoor spaces. SA is set to further ease restrictions on 28 December, and is still considering allowing the general public to use rapid antigen tests. Speaking from Queensland on Tuesday, Morrison said he would leave it up to Atagi to make a decision on booster intervals. “They are the experts when it comes to immunisation,” the prime minister said, adding: “We continue to listen to them on these issues, as I have said on many occasions. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “What I will not do is I will not front-run their advice on that issue. They will consider these issues carefully and they will advise the government. Just as they will carefully consider, as they have been for some time, the interval period for booster shots.” The national cabinet meeting comes at another key inflection point during the Covid-19 pandemic in Australia. On Tuesday NSW reported a record 3,057 new cases of the virus, with the state government facing an increasing push for the reintroduction of indoor mask mandates. Advice from the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee, signed by the chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, shows the nation’s top health official supports mandates. “Masks should be mandated in all indoor settings including retail, hospitality when not eating or drinking, and entertainment facilities,” read the advice first reported by the Sydney Morning Herald. “Implementation of mask-wearing measures should occur prior to Omicron case escalation to have maximum benefit.” On Tuesday, the Royal Australian College of Physicians added its voice to calls for indoor mask-wearing, as well as mandatory QR code check-ins at public venues and events and indoor venue capacity restrictions. But speaking from Queensland on Tuesday, Morrison said decisions about the use of mask mandates were up to individual states, and he wanted to encourage a “culture of responsibility”. “We just need to live with this virus sensibly and practically,” he said. “From mandates to responsibility and as governments around the country, because the states have the total authority when it comes to public health orders. “The commonwealth does not have the power to direct those state and territory governments. What I will be saying to them, and I know a number of premiers agree with this, is we have got to move to the next phase of how we live with this virus. The time for that heavy hand is behind us.” Additional reporting by Elias VisontayChina is considering strengthening its laws on women’s rights to provide more robust protection against gender-based discrimination and sexual harassment in the workplace. The draft regulations come amid the rise of a nascent #MeToo movement in China, which activists say has been hampered by the country’s strict regime of censorship and oppression against all signs of dissent. The major draft revision was presented to China’s top lawmaking body for deliberation on Monday. The amendment marks a significant development in the country’s women’s rights legislation since it was implemented almost three decades ago. Under the proposal, any comments with sexual connotations, inappropriate bodily behaviour, sexually explicit images, or suggestions of benefits in exchange for sex towards a woman without her consent constitutes sexual harassment, according to Reuters. The definition is the clearest to be provided since the law protecting women’s rights was introduced almost three decades ago. Previous provisions stated merely that sexual harassment against women was prohibited. An employer would also breach the proposed laws if they fire or reduce a woman’s salary for getting married, becoming pregnant, taking maternity leave, or breastfeeding in the workplace. All schools and employers are also encouraged to implement systems to prevent sexual harassment. The new regulations also extend to the home, granting women who bear the responsibility of taking care of the household the right to demand compensation from her husband in a divorce. The amendment comes after a court in Beijing granted a housewife a 50,000 yuan payout from her former husband as labour compensation in February, in a case that sparked nationwide attention and debate. The standing committee of the National People’s Congress is expected to debate the amendments to the Law on the Protection of Women’s Rights and Interests on Friday at the earliest. The implementation timeline remains unclear. The proposal comes amid a whirlwind of international attention on gender and power inequality in China, after the tennis star Peng Shuai made apparent allegations of sexual assault against a former vice-premier in early November. The Women’s Tennis Association has continued to voice concerns over Peng’s welfare after the player on Sunday denied having accused anyone of sexual assault in what appeared to be an informal interview with a Singaporean Chinese-language outlet. Peng had earlier posted a social media post describing a non-consensual sexual encounter with the former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli, which was removed by censors within 30 minutes. Peng disappeared from public life for three weeks after the post, sparking concerns among the international sporting community about her welfare. The WTA has announced it will suspend all tournaments in China after several failed attempts to reach the player directly. China’s patriarchal society is reflected in its ruling and business elite, which is dominated by men. The country’s fledging #MeToo movement hit a major setback in September, when Zhou Xiaoxuan, a 28-year-old woman, lost a high-profile sexual harassment court case she had brought against a well-known broadcasting host with strong political ties. Zhou is widely seen as the face of the country’s #MeToo awakening. Earlier this month, a former Alibaba employee accused the company of firing her after she made sexual harassment allegations against a colleague.For a nation so obsessed with the Christmas No 1 – as much part of the festive season as overboiled sprouts and Lynx Africa – Britons are awfully sanguine about what they put at the top of the charts each year. Since the chart began in 1952, only 12 Christmas No 1s have had some clear and unambiguous connection to the season: two of them have been versions of Mary’s Boy Child and three have been Do They Know It’s Christmas? While we have our platonic ideals of what a Christmas No 1 should sound like – somewhere between Mariah Carey and Slade and slathered in sleigh bells – the history of UK Christmas No 1s tells a different story. The Britain reflected in our seasonal chart toppers is one that is nostalgic, silly and generous. And it is inconstant: at Christmas, Britain wants only something to make it feel good, and is happy to cast its December favourites aside the minute it’s New Year’s Eve. There was nothing terribly remarkable about the first 16 years of Christmas singles in Britain. Although Dickie Valentine (Christmas Alphabet, 1955) and Harry Belafonte (Mary’s Boy Child, 1957) took actual Christmas songs to No 1, the top spot usually looked as it might have at any other time of the year. Between 1962 and 1967, Elvis, the Beatles and Tom Jones kept the No 1 position to themselves: no one thinks of Return to Sender, I Want to Hold Your Hand, I Feel Fine, Day Tripper, Green, Green Grass of Home or Hello, Goodbye as Christmas records. The first inkling that the role of the Christmas charts would change came in 1968, when another member of the McCartney family took Paul’s place at the top of the charts. Mike McCartney’s group the Scaffold may have had unimpeachable artistic credentials – the poet Roger McGough was a member – but Lily the Pink was clearly and indisputably a novelty song, and it set a trend for novelty songs to overperform at Christmas. The next year, Two Little Boys by Rolf Harris was No 1; in 1971 it was Benny Hill’s Ernie (The Fastest Milkman in the West); in 1972, the nine-year-old Jimmy Osmond reached No 1, and any record by a child is, de facto, a novelty record. There was a novelty revival again in the early 80s, with St Winifred’s School Choir; Renée and Renato – not a novelty song, so much as a turgid ballad, but watch the video and you’ll see why how in the heyday of Duran Duran this has to be called a novelty record – and the Flying Pickets (again, a cappella covers have to be counted as novelties). Only two novelty acts have taken No 1 since then – Mr Blobby, in 1993, was the first – but the most recent, LadBaby, has colonised Christmas, topping the charts for the past three years and looking set to do so again this year. LadBaby – singing cover versions of old hits, retooled to be about sausage rolls – is not some complete underdog championed by an indulgent public. It is a finely honed machine, with the specific purpose of reaching No 1 at Christmas. The LadBaby singles have been released through a company called Instrumental, which scrapes social media and streaming information to analyse and predict musical success. Each year really is a campaign: fans are encouraged to download, not stream (each download is equivalent to 100 streams on a premium account, or 600 on a free account); there are team-ups with other artists and their fanbases (last year it was Ronan Keating) to promote the songs; and there is an unrelenting focus on timing. If all you want is to be the Christmas No 1, only Christmas week matters, so LadBaby’s single is released one week before Christmas, hammered to death and then forgotten. Last year, Don’t Stop Me Eatin’ (Journey’s Don’t Stop Believin’, rewritten to be about baked savouries) was straight in at No 1 for Christmas Day, then fell to No 78 the week after, then disappeared entirely. But in the meantime, it will have raised money for the Trussell Trust, to help alleviate hunger. The true heyday of the Christmas No 1 lasted from 1973 to 1990. It is not that every No 1 over that period was brilliant, because many of them really weren’t. It is more that this was the era of the tinsel arms race, when the bauble-industrial complex really went to work: eight of the 12 Christmas-themed festive No 1s come from this span of year, beginning with the song that, more than any other, embodies the British Christmas – Slade’s Merry Xmas Everybody – and ending with Cliff Richard’s Saviour’s Day, a song that no one bar his fanbase wanted to hear a second time. The 90s were an inchoate decade for Christmas hits – the Spice Girls had three seasonal chart-toppers in a row, and the nearest we got to a Christmas-themed No 1 was East 17’s Stay Another Day, which was Christmassy only because it had bells on it, and the group dressed in snowy white for the video. But a new order was imposed in 2002, when reality TV first tightened its fingers round the Christmas charts, and the winners of the show Popstars: The Rivals had their first No 1. Girls Aloud’s Sound of the Underground suggested a manufactured future might not be too bad, but the stream of X Factor winners who followed rarely looked designed for careers that would last beyond the tree coming down; we remember Alexandra Burke and Leona Lewis, but who mourns the disappearance of Shayne Ward, Leon Jackson, Matt Cardle, Sam Bailey and Ben Haenow? All of them have had a Christmas No 1 thanks to the efficiency of Simon Cowell’s Syco machine. The effect of the Syco hegemony was to provoke another change. People evidently wanted Christmas to be about something more than Simon Cowell being able to buy another supercar or house. The first stirrings came in 2009, when an organised campaign sent Rage Against the Machine’s Killing in the Name to No 1, but that was just rage. It took others to harness the rage and turn it into something benevolent, and so came the rise of the Christmas charity single. Of the last 10 Christmas No 1s, six have raised money for charity. You might never wish to listen to the Lewisham and Greenwich NHS Choir or Military Wives With Gareth Malone ever again. You might crave Mull of Kintyre (Christmas 1977) by comparison, but at least no one need feel nauseous about where the money goes to from so many of the last decade’s Christmas No 1s. Like Christmas itself, the Christmas No 1 is almost always a disappointment. But that’s perhaps as it should be: a Christmas hit is a last-minute stocking filler, something to be played with and dispensed with. It is not a work of art. It’s just that sometimes, somehow, it strikes a nerve (even if that’s songs that didn’t reach No 1 – by Mariah Carey or the Pogues or Wizzard – that seem more Christmassy). If Christmas No 1s seemed better in the past, that’s just a function of ageing, and it was ever thus. “Does your granny always tell you that the old songs are the best?” sang Noddy Holder on Merry Xmas Everybody. And, really, is I Love Sausage Rolls actually any worse than Mr Blobby or There’s No One Quite Like Grandma? Of course it’s not. Christmas is as Christmas was and Christmas will ever be.Two cases. In the beginning that was all it took. First Mikel Arteta at Arsenal. Then Callum Hudson-Odoi at Chelsea. And, although a few other clubs had seen some cough-like symptoms and were beginning to fear the worst, it feels vaguely surreal now to recall that back in March 2020, the entire professional footballing apparatus in England and Scotland was brought to a halt on the basis of two positive tests. Over time, just like the rest of us, football moved on. It hardened and desensitised. Our concept of suffering and loss began to fracture and diffuse; it stopped being something happening to us in the compound and became something that happened to us as individuals. The days when we all fixated on national mortality rates and watched severe news reports from intensive care units are gone. Big numbers stopped meaning anything to us. Death became noise. Disease became politics. The line on the graph became a daily game. Coronavirus did not go away. But we did. And so we arrive in late 2021. Premier League clubs are being hit by new cases, new outbreaks, new illnesses, and yet the presumption remains that the show must go on at almost any cost. Any team with 14 fit players including one goalkeeper is expected to play or face disciplinary action. Postponements are left until the very last minute, with a bare minimum of regard for the paying public. Stadiums are still pretty much full. We are told that the safety of players and supporters is paramount and that the sporting integrity of the competition remains intact, both of which are demonstrably untrue. On Sunday Thomas Tuchel revealed that his Chelsea side had been ordered to play against Wolves despite having seven players in isolation and a squad that had just shared a three-hour bus journey with a confirmed positive case. Norwich played against Aston Villa last Tuesday despite having players who were symptomatic, according to their manager, Dean Smith. Brentford’s Thomas Frank has called for a temporary suspension in order to allow clubs to catch their breath. On Monday the 20 Premier League clubs met to discuss its approach to the latest crisis. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the message was business as usual. The fixture calendar must be sacrosanct, even if by the end of the festive period some clubs could be four or five games behind some of their rivals. And for clubs, torn between a duty of care to their players and staff and the financial incentive to push on regardless, the emergence of the Omicron variant and the recent wave of positive cases has placed them in an invidious position. Consider the dizzying maze of competing interests and concerns they are being required to weigh up. When and how often to test players. How to arrange training and travel to minimise the risk of contact. How soon to reintegrate recovered players into the team. How to deal with players who are unwilling or reluctant to vaccinate. How to keep their facilities and stadium safe amid an ever-shifting canvas of rules and regulations. When an outbreak occurs, the stakes are higher still. How many players need to isolate? Who were they with? Who’s still available? Are they fit? Are they any good? Are any of them left-footed? Do you request a postponement now, in the knowledge that it will probably be turned down, or bank on a fresh wave of positive tests in the morning, by which time a fair number of fans will already be in their cars? These are hard decisions, important decisions, in many cases ridiculous decisions, and yet by and large they remain entirely in the remit of clubs themselves rather than governing bodies or the actual government. We can quibble about the extent to which clubs and the Premier League have followed protocols, or been driven by self-interest. But surely we can all agree on the absurdity of these decisions – in many cases, pressing matters of public health – being delegated to football clubs. And if it occasionally feels as if the Premier League is operating in a vacuum, publicly sensitive to public health concerns while doing the bare minimum to address them, then it is only really taking its cue from central government, whose time-honoured absence of leadership stopped being funny some time ago. Even now, as Omicron becomes this country’s dominant strain, Boris Johnson’s administration has refused to impose limits on public gatherings, refused to restrict the privileges of the unvaccinated, refused to offer anything beyond a wink-wink and a series of vague noises that can mean whatever you want them to mean. We know why this is, of course. The government is still reeling from the scale of the Conservative backbench rebellion last week, still deeply embarrassed by the revelations about parties in Downing Street last Christmas, and has thus tried to nudge people into being careful without moving a single legislative muscle in that direction. And really, how did we think football would proceed in this scenario? Unilaterally shut itself down? Restrict its own stadium capacity? Of course not. We end up, instead, with a weekend where some matches are being postponed at a few hours’ notice while others take place in front of capacity crowds. Where different clubs have wildly differing rates of vaccination and nobody really knows what to do about it. Where everyone insists that player welfare is the top priority while insisting that the fixture calendar must be played in its entirety, in the allotted time, no exceptions. After all, this is Covid Britain, and here anything goes.At the start of 2021, I was diagnosed with long Covid. It was a huge relief to finally know why I had been struggling so much with my health – extreme fatigue, continuous coughing and, most distressing of all, brain fog and panic attacks. The diagnosis was also the beginning of a journey that would take me – of all places – to a life-changing decision about what I eat. After further tests, I was told it was very likely that I had caught Covid a while ago, possibly at the start of the pandemic, before tests were available. I’m very fortunate to have a brilliant and caring GP who listens to me and provides me with support. He signed me off work for two months and helped me understand that I needed real rest to assist my recovery. Once I received my diagnosis I spoke to two friends who had also been instrumental in helping me with my recovery and health. One of them had become a vegan a few years ago in order to manage her own health issues. She gently suggested I should think about trying a plant-based diet to help reduce the inflammation in my body, which was causing me pain, contributing to the deep fatigue, and harming my mental health. And that’s how I became a vegan. I’ve always been curious about veganism but never really thought it was something I would embrace. I also don’t know any women of colour or Muslims who are vegan. This was part of the reason why I had never really explored it . You cannot be what you cannot see. In the west, veganism is seen as an indulgence for the white middle classes; and in this country at least, it’s expensive and difficult to envisage for anyone who doesn’t fit into these categories. There’s a kind of elitism linked to veganism, which I think puts people off from exploring it. Part of this is based in economic reality: it’s often more expensive to buy fresh vegetables and fruit – and spend time cooking them – than it is to rely on fast food or processed food, especially for people and families on budgets or struggling with the cost of living. There’s so much judgment heaped on people over the food they consume in the UK; it’s inherently linked to class – as most things are here. I’m understanding and seeing this more clearly. This is just one of the reasons why vegans are also frequently portrayed as people without humour or joy; whose entire personalities are reducible to what they eat. We’re portrayed as smug people who spend time making our own yoghurt, trying out new ways to make a Sunday roast from mung beans. Oh and, of course, winding up the likes of Piers Morgan. The latter accusation I have no problem with. Forget the stereotypes. Changing my mind about veganism has radically changed my life and vastly improved my health. The inflammation has eased off hugely, I have far more energy generally, I’m sleeping better, I feel less exhausted and stressed, and the panic attacks have receded. I’ve resumed counselling too, which is also really helping my recovery. To be clear, I do not believe that anyone can wish away long Covid or any other illness through veganism alone or a change in lifestyle. But I do believe that we create healthier and more equal societies when everyone has the same opportunity to consciously be aware of how we eat and live. There’s a big rise in the numbers of people in the UK exploring veganism. Research by BBC Good Food shows more than 20% of children in the UK are either already vegan or would like to become so in the near future. According to a recent report from the University of Illinois, food production contributes around 37% of global greenhouse gas emissions; animal-based foods are estimated to produce twice the emissions of plant-based ones. The arguments in favour of changing our diets – whether for less meat or no animal-based products – are overwhelming. I’m very much at the beginning of my vegan journey. However, I’ve learned that being vegan doesn’t require having to spend lots of money or shopping in fancy places. It does require being organised and planning meals and shopping visits. I’ve been reading up on new recipes and learning how to eat well on a budget. I’m of Pakistani heritage: a lot of the food I’ve grown up eating is vegan or can easily be adapted to be so. Changing my mind about veganism has also introduced me to a community of people, including people and women of colour, who are on the same journey as me. It’s simply one of the best decisions I’ve ever made. • Shaista Aziz is a journalist, comedian, writer and Labour councillor for Oxford city councilLee Johnson has identified Alex Pritchard as the playmaker capable of “unlocking doors” for Sunderland as they strive not only to escape League One but to indulge in the sort of cup giant-killing run rarely seen in these parts since 1973. “Alex can do things most people at this level aren’t capable of,” says his manager as Pritchard prepares to remind a wider audience of what might have been on Tuesday night at Arsenal. “He can pull the strings for us.” The 28-year-old former Tottenham and England Under-21 attacking midfielder experienced a slow burn start to his career on Wearside after signing from Huddersfield in the summer. Yet having overcome first Covid and then a neck injury, he is establishing himself as an essential component of a side seven games unbeaten and third in League One, only two points short of an automatic promotion place. There is also this Carabao Cup quarter-final in north London to look forward to. “To go to the Emirates having been a Spurs player back in the day, it’s obviously a big one,” says Pritchard, who grew up in Essex. “My family and friends will be there in numbers.” He is talking over Zoom from Sunderland’s training ground, a Premier League-calibre facility studded with memorabilia of a more glorious past, most notably relating to that 1973 FA Cup triumph against Leeds United. “Everyone’s seen shocks in every cup competition over the years and hopefully we can create another one,” Pritchard says. “Arsenal are playing really well at the moment but we look at this tie as a game we can compete in; we believe we can get to the next round.” The conversation turns to the past, his nine England Under-21 caps and the encouragement he was given by Peter Taylor, his manager at the 2013 Under-20 World Cup in Turkey. “Alex is a terrific player with a terrific touch and football brain,” said Taylor at the time. “He’s an intelligent footballer who is not afraid to take the ball in tight areas and not frightened to take a tackle.” Pritchard sighs. “That was a long time ago,” he says. “I played there, at that level, but now I’m here, in League One … for whatever reason. So … yeah for sure I’d like to remind people what I can do at Arsenal but it’s not about me; it’s about us as a collective. We’re facing a great side and, to get any sort of decent result, we need to play as a team.” For quite a while he was regarded as a star in the making at White Hart Lane but, after loans at Peterborough, Swindon, Brentford and West Brom, Pritchard joined Norwich for £8m in 2016 after only two senior appearances for Spurs. Given the talk that Mauricio Pochettino’s pressing style of that era simply did not suit his game he was possibly in the wrong place at the wrong time. A nasty ankle injury sustained in 2015 hardly helped his cause either but he eventually ended up in the Premier League, albeit fairly briefly, after an £11m move to Huddersfield and did not move north-east to tread water in the third tier. “We’re in League One now but Sunderland was in the Premier League not so long ago and you never know what you can do,” says a player who has previously conceded he lost both “confidence” and “mojo” towards the end of his stint at Huddersfield. “Playing at Arsenal is a good opportunity for people in this team to see where you can get to in the game. There are so many pathways to the top and this tie against high-level opposition is a great platform. There’s a lot of potential in our team, young players who can get to that level.” Pritchard has been studying recordings of Arsenal’s 4-1 win at Leeds on Saturday evening but seems more excited than daunted. “It was great to watch,” he enthuses. “You see how they pass and press all over the pitch and you know Mikel Arteta’s squad is immense. I played with Emile Smith Rowe at Huddersfield for a good while and you could see the great ability he had. But he’s a top player now.” Sunderland are aiming for a similar metamorphosis under the stewardship of their 25-year-old billionaire owner, Kyril Louis-Dreyfus, and the thoroughly modern Johnson. The latter has widened his managerial remit to include offering players tutorials from a sleep specialist in addition to encouraging them to read novels and holding frank group discussions on the perils of gambling and sex addiction. Johnson’s holistic approach, not to mention his enthusiasm for a passing game, explains why Pritchard turned down overtures from Championship clubs last summer. “I had other offers,” he says. “But it was important to be with a head coach who understands me as a player and as a person and who has a playing style that suits me.” He would like nothing better than to repay the Sunderland manager’s faith on Tuesday night. “We’re going to the Emirates with confidence,” says the Spurs old boy. “We’re going there thinking we can get to the semi-final. There are always cup shocks.”My partner and I are in our late 30s and met a few months before the pandemic. We are in the process of buying a house and planning to have kids next year. I have a relationship history with some abuse, and have also been sexually assaulted more than once. This means that sex is sometimes difficult for me, and I go through patches where it shuts down completely. Lately I have also been feeling quite low because of various changes that happened in my life due to Covid, and one consequence of that has been a drop in libido. My partner obviously finds it difficult when sex disappears, and he feels frustrated that this means sex is “always on my terms”. He never pressures me, but he can be moody. Sometimes, I think he should have more patience and should engage with me to find solutions, but at other times I understand that he feels sad, frustrated and worried about a future with me if it means hardly having sex. I have tried counselling in the past, but nothing has ever worked. Do you think I can get better, or do we need to find partners with sex drives that are better suited to us? I would have liked a more active sex life, but that feels hopeless now. It sounds as though you still need to seek healing to overcome the aftermath of abuse and victimisation. Survivors are often left with feelings of shame, fear, worthlessness and a sense of being undeserving of love and happiness. There can also be a tendency to repeat negative patterns from the past, so it is important that you really look carefully at this relationship – preferably with some good therapeutic help – before embarking on a future together. At the moment, your body is shutting down sexually as a self-protective measure, and as a natural accompaniment to depression. Don’t allow the legacy of abusers to sabotage your future. Take charge of your life now. Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.And that is it for the blog today. Before we go, let’s recap what made the big news stories today: The Doherty Institute flagged that the booster shot interval period “may well change in coming days”. Thousands are still without power in Sydney after a storm on Saturday. Northern Perth councillor Linda Aitken announced she will stand for the Liberal party in Christian Porter’s old Perth seat of Pearce. NSW police called for help to discover the whereabouts of silver bars that vanished from a truck. NSW reported 3,057 new cases, Victoria 1,245, Tasmania four, the ACT 16, SA 154, and the NT had 14. The co-chairs of the First Peoples’ Assembly of Victoria called for the government to raise the age of criminal responsibility. RACP called on state and territory governments to reintroduce restrictions. Scott Morrison stressed that Australia was “not going back to lockdowns” amid fears there are not enough restrictions in place to stem the tide of rising Covid cases over the Christmas period. Interstate test mandates were scrapped in South Australia amid long waits for testing. Quarantine was halved in Queensland for vaccinated close contacts. The AMA called for mask mandates and density limits for Christmas. ACT introduced a mask mandate for all inside areas. And New Zealand delayed its border reopening in a bid to strengthen defences against Omicron. And that’s it! We’ll be back tomorrow – until then, stay safe. When Dan Johnson first heard the commotion coming from the Proserpine riverbank in north Queensland, he thought he had just snagged a really good fish. It wasn’t until he took a closer look that he realised he had hooked a shark, and local celebrity “Boofhead” – a four-metre crocodile – was coming for his catch. Around 1400 health workers in New South Wales have now been furloughed because they’ve contracted or been exposed to coronavirus. Health authorities say that number is expected to rise in the coming weeks. Greenpeace Australia has put out a statement after the Morrison Government’s decision to release a report on the status of the Great Barrier Reef just days before Christmas. Yesterday the Australian government published its updated Reef 2050 plan as it lobbies to keep the global icon off the World Heritage Committee “in danger” list. “The Morrison government has long been derelict in its duty to protect the Great Barrier Reef from the threat of climate change caused by burning fossil fuels and it’s telling that they have sought to bury this report by releasing it just a few days before Christmas,” Greenpeace Australia Pacific CEO David Ritter said. “They’ve sabotaged international negotiations, tried to silence the scientists and now they are trying to sneak this out like vandals in the night. “The outlook for the reef is not good and this so-called plan won’t make much difference because it relies on the government’s fanciful and comprehensively discredited plan to get to net zero emissions by 2050. “Instead of playing political games to keep the reef off the World Heritage Committee’s in danger list, the Morrison government should live up to its obligations and tackle the root cause of the destruction of the reef – climate change caused by the mining and burning of coal, oil and gas.” More Australians are quitting their jobs for better-paid ones as they make the career moves they put on hold earlier in the pandemic, the RBA says. Reserve Bank of Australia board members noted workers were encouraged by the strong labour market conditions after coronavirus lockdowns ended, the minutes of the central bank’s 7 December policy meeting show. From AAP: Nine new ministers have been sworn in to their roles at NSW Government House, as Dominic Perrottet’s revamped cabinet team becomes official. Governor Margaret Beazley swore in the ministers in a ceremony on Tuesday afternoon. The new faces include Liberals Natasha Maclaren-Jones, Eleni Petinos and Wendy Tuckerman and Nationals MP Steph Cooke. “I know that every one of these new ministers who will be appointed tomorrow has the experience, but more importantly, the passion and the energy to take NSW to the next level,” Perrottet told reporters on Monday. Other changes include David Elliott handing over the police portfolio to deputy premier Paul Toole and taking on transport. Matt Kean - who was treasurer as well as environment and energy minister - keeps control of the purse strings and the energy portfolio, but gives the environment portfolio to first-timer James Griffin. Veteran Health Minister Brad Hazzard will stay in the job as NSW continues to battle the Covid-19 pandemic. Labor on Monday called it an “L-plate cabinet from an L-plate premier”. More info on the 154 SA cases here: This from Queensland: One million dollars’ worth of silver bullion has mysteriously disappeared somewhere on the road between Sydney and Melbourne and police are investigating whether somebody with inside knowledge is behind the heist. NSW police say 192 individual 5kg silver bars were stolen from a truck which left NSW on a Friday afternoon last month and arrived in Melbourne at 8am the following Monday. And here is Prof Adrian Esterman from the University of South Australia on why Australia needs an organisation like the Center for Disease Control and Prevention - which is the national public health agency of the United States. “One way of protecting others at Christmas is to give yourself a rapid antigen test before family gatherings. Unfortunately, they are not available in shops or pharmacies in South Australia – I have no idea why! “Which really speaks to the desperate need for an Australian CDC where we can have national regulations about testing, close contact rules, etc. New Year’s resolution for Scott Morrison?” And Prof Jaya Dantas from Curtin University on rapid antigen testing. “We need as a priority to roll out antigen testing at very low costs across states that are seeing a spike in cases. The large numbers of people needing to be tested waiting over five hours for a swab is unsustainable and creates a huge strain on testing laboratories, reagents, and staff. “Whilst pandemic fatigue has set in we cannot let our guard down, relaxing public health measures or refusing vaccinations or boosters.” Here is Prof Tony Blakely from the University of Melbourne on if Omicron is actually milder than Delta. “The estimates are still vague. South Africa puts it at 10% as virulent as Delta, and recent Imperial College London estimates at 70% as virulent (but I suspect this is over-estimating the risk due to Omicron being more likely to be asymptomatic, and the UK analyses were (necessarily) just on those notified cases). The evidence will firm up in the next one to two weeks. “Perhaps the most important evidence will be on hospitalisation rates in countries with similar vaccination infection profiles to Australia. So far, hospitalisations are not taking off to a great extent in those countries experiencing Omicron.” Some of the country’s top health experts have commented on booster timing, including Dr Andy Flies from the University of Tasmania. Take note fellow AZers: “The ATAGI recommendation of five months before receiving a booster shot (third shot overall) is based on the best available evidence. However, as many clinical trials are ongoing, the best current vaccination regimens cannot be considered optimised due to the limited availability of direct comparisons between vaccines, timelines, and new variants of concern. “Shortening the time between booster shots could be helpful, particularly for people who received the AstraZeneca vaccine initially. A limitation of the AstraZeneca vaccine is that the immune system makes antibodies that neutralise the AstraZeneca vaccine before it can produce the coronavirus spike protein.’” From AAP: Coronavirus cases at an Adelaide nursing home have climbed to six as South Australia reports a record 154 new infections and grapples with a blow-out in wait times at testing centres. SA Health says five of the infected residents are receiving specialist care at the facility with one admitted to hospital. “When a residential aged care facility resident tests positive to Covid-19, a response coordination team is activated and a health rapid response team can be deployed to assess the situation and provide support,” it said in a statement on Tuesday. “SA Health works with the aged care provider to ensure the resident receives the best possible care and that other residents are protected against the risk of Covid-19 transmission.” Tuesday’s case numbers included 134 that were locally acquired and left SA with record daily totals on five consecutive days and 556 active infections. It followed 105 cases on Monday, which prompted a surge in the number of people flocking to testing sites, pushing wait times out to eight hours in some cases. To help reduce testing lines the premier, Steven Marshall, said people travelling to SA from NSW, Victoria and the ACT would no longer be required to have a swab on arrival unless they have symptoms. The Morrison government has released an update to Australia’s cornerstone policy to protect the Great Barrier Reef as it tries to stop the ocean icon being placed on a list of world heritage sites in danger. Environment groups said the updated Reef 2050 plan, released without fanfare late on Monday, fell short because it was linked to the government’s “inadequate” plan to cut greenhouse gas emissions. A foreword to the plan, co-signed by the federal environment minister, Sussan Ley, and Queensland’s minister for the Great Barrier Reef, Meaghan Scanlon, said the reef is under threat from marine heatwaves that caused three mass bleaching events in 2016, 2017 and 2020. The ministers wrote: “These events, combined with other major impacts to the reef, have affected the communities and industries that depend on it for their livelihoods and way of life.” Scientists are concerned about forecasts showing large parts of the central and northern sections of the reef could bleach again by the end of January. Read more: New South Wales health minister, Brad Hazzard, has warned local health workers “are in a state of exhaustion”, as “tourism testing” of people needing a negative Covid-19 status to travel interstate are behind “huge pressure” being placed on testing capacity. Hazzard noted testing requirements to enter South Australia and Tasmania, and said he had conducted “some outreach” to Queensland authorities, where there is a similar rule, “asking them what they might be able to do to help us”. Regarding those requirements for incoming travellers to those states to get a negative PCR test, Hazzard said “I think there is some value in those discussions about having rapid antigen testing instead of PCR testing but again we have to be respectful of other state governments and understand that they are trying to keep the community safe as well”. Hazzard has warned residents “to be very patient” when waiting for Covid-19 test results. Hazzard said: We don’t have the answer but we know ... we need to get the cooperation, assistance, collaboration with other states and territories about how we handle it. Until we get there we have got to recognise we’re going be under that pressure, all the teams are under that pressure and I would counsel people to be very patient. I know it’s tough, but at least we have capacity to move between our state and other states.” New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, is hoping for a “constructive discussion” at national cabinet on Wednesday about shortening the Covid-19 vaccine booster interval from five months to four. Perrottet noted the Victorian government also supported “looking at opportunities to bring forward a booster shot from five months to four months”. Perrottet said: We want to do whatever we can to provide whatever support we can to the federal government so we can get that into place because the faster we get booster shots into arms the safer the community will be as we continue to open up here in NSW. We want that to be a constructive discussion tomorrow, there will be challenges as we see many GPs go on leave during this period. I say to everyone, booster shots are key to keeping people safe.” A New South Wales man who triggered a 72-hour lockdown in southern Tasmania after flying into the state illegally and escaping from hotel quarantine has been sentenced to five months in jail — with two of those suspended. In what feels like a devastating sense of deja vu for the music industry, Faith No More, Jimmy Barnes and the Hoodoo Gurus have cancelled Australian shows in the lead-up to Christmas, among many other acts that have been spooked by the December spike in Covid-19 cases and the emergence of the Omicron variant. China has accused the Australian government of “violently interfering” in its internal affairs after Australia joined with its Five Eyes allies to voice grave concerns about the “erosion of democratic elements” in Hong Kong. Pro-Beijing candidates have been confirmed to occupy nearly every seat in Hong Kong’s new legislature after an overhaul of the electoral system that authorities said would ensure “patriots run Hong Kong”. I’ve got some weather updates here for you and I am still not over how hot it is expected to be in Perth on Christmas Day! We’ve got more info here from AAP about the mask mandate in the ACT: Masks will again be mandatory indoors in the ACT as it tightens Covid restrictions due to an increase in Omicron infections. From Wednesday, masks will be required across indoor retail and hospitality venues as well as aged care, workplaces and on public transport. Aged care restrictions will also be reintroduced, with a limit of five visitors each day. The mask mandate will continue over Christmas and the new year period before it is reviewed in January. “Wearing a mask indoors is a small price to pay to keep your family and friends safe,” acting chief minister Yvette Berry told reporters on Tuesday. It came as the national capital recorded 16 new infections and residents faced lengthy queues for testing. Some testing clinics were forced to close early after reaching capacity. Nearly 6,000 results were processed on Monday as demand for tests reached levels not seen since August. Half of the ACT’s 124 active Covid-19 cases have been identified as the Omicron strain. Three virus patients are in hospital, but none have that variant. But the chief health officer, Kerryn Coleman, expected Omicron to become the dominant strain in the ACT. “We anticipate we will see an escalation in cases similar to that in NSW,” she said. The Bondi icebergs club has said it will close today after “a large number of staff” were exposed to a positive case while attending an event external to work. “This is a precautionary measure for the safety of all members, visitors and staff,” the club management said in a statement. “All exposed staff are vaccinated and will have a Covid PCR test before returning to work. “We will keep you informed of reopening via email and Facebook. The safety of our members, visitors and staff remains our priority.” The heroic actions of bystanders who tried to save the Falkholt family after a horrific Boxing Day car crash have been praised at the inquest into their deaths. Home and Away actor Jessica Falkholt, her sister and her parents died after another car driven by a drug-affected driver failed to negotiate a bend on a highway as the family returned to Sydney from a Christmas event on the NSW South Coast in 2017. While we’re talking about the Vic CHO - here are some good tips he has on ventilation. Not sure anyone needs to see this but here we are... New Zealand has announced a suite of measures to strengthen its defence against the Omicron variant, including pushing back the start of its quarantine-free border reopening to the end of February. The Covid-19 response minister Chris Hipkins said the reopening delay will be disappointing for those who had made travel plans over summer, but added that waiting until the end of February would increase New Zealand’s overall protection and slow Omicron’s spread. From AAP: Surf life saving Australia are begging people to swim between the flags and learn how to identify a rip - the most deadly hazard on Australian beaches - ahead of another busy summer. More than 3.7 million people have been caught in rip currents, new research from Surf Life Saving Australia has found, with more than a quarter needing to be rescued. On average, 26 people each year die after being caught in a rip. That’s why SLSA’s Shane Daw is urging beachgoers to swim between the red and yellow flags. “Already this summer there has been eight coastal drowning deaths, with four of those reported to be attributed to rip currents,” he said on Tuesday. “While this is below last year’s start to summer, one drowning death is one too many.” Almost two thirds of rip-related deaths occurred further than one kilometre away from a surf life saving service, with half at unpatrolled locations during patrol season. Research also shows that two out of three people who thought they knew how to spot a rip, in fact were unable to identify one correctly. “Alarmingly, we continue to see people who choose to swim at unpatrolled locations, away from surf lifesavers and lifeguards and they don’t know how to correctly spot a rip, which is a combination that can have deadly circumstances,” Mr Daw said. That message should particularly be heeded by men, who make up 86% of rip-related deaths. In 2016 surf life saving put together this useful video on spotting a rip: Traditional owners have made their next move in an attempt to quash the federal government’s decision to build a nuclear waste dump in South Australia. The Barngarla Determination Aboriginal Corporation today filed an application to overturn the decision to build the dump at Napandee, near Kimba. Corporation chair Jason Bilney said his people had “never been respected or engaged by this government at all in this process”. He said: “After successfully winning native title after 21 years of fighting for our country, we were then excluded from the community ballot, and the government has continued to treat us unfairly, including not undertaking heritage assessments with us and abandoning the commitment to ‘broad community support’ at the last minute. We will continue to fight to protect and preserve our country, like we have always done, and make sure that the government’s failures are brought to light in the court.” You can read the background to the story here: The Australian Electoral Commission has launched legal action against Liberal MP Andrew Laming for allegedly failing to disclose his political links on a Facebook page which appeared to be operating under the guise of a grassroots community group. The federal court proceedings come after Guardian Australia revealed in April that the Queensland MP was operating 35 Facebook groups – with at least one for each suburb in his electorate. The ACT is introducing an inside mask mandate to slow the spread of Omicron. The mask mandate will be in place from 11.59pm. Masks will be needed in all indoor settings. And that’s it for Khorshid. To recap: the AMA wants masks mandated for indoors and high-risk settings. They want density restrictions. Khorshid says bringing boosters forward will not help at the moment, because we don’t have enough testing centres. He slammed NSW for risking people’s lives with its “let it rip” strategy. AND he said all our previous national modelling was kinda useless because of Omi. Nat-Cab needs a plan, he said. Right. Khorshid says Omicron means the modelling is now all out of date and Australia is now flying blind. “The difference with the Omicron means all the modelling is out of date. We just do not have the data around Omicron to do new modelling as yet. “We know it is spreading very quickly through previously immune population either through infection or vaccination.” Cool cool cool... Khorshid calls for Nat-Cab to deliver an Omicron plan and take it seriously. I hope the change in national cabinet suggests that they’re taking this seriously. They need to come up with a national plan. It would be so much better if we could do things as a nation rather than each state taking its course. I am hoping it is a good sign but of course, time will tell. Khorshid says don’t worry about brands, just get it! People have the right to determine what vaccine is put into their arm and they can choose one versus the other by determining where they get the vaccine. But the medical advice is that these vaccines are pretty much identical, the same technology ... at a very similar dose, so it really makes no difference which one you get – but get one as quickly as you can. Khorshid says in terms of brands there is not much difference between Moderna and Pfizer for booster shots. Do not worry about which brand of vaccine you are getting, just go and get your booster because the quicker you get it the better protection you have against Omicron and the quicker we can get to a more normal life. The lack of state-run vaccination clinics means it can’t go any faster even if the timeframe changes, Khorshid said. Millions of more Australians are eligible for the booster today, how do we get those millions of doses into arms within a very short period? It is a huge challenge and that is why it is absolutely critical to keep working on other measures, public health measures [such as] masks because that is how we buy ourselves a little bit of time. Khorshid says the AMA supports reducing the time between boosters, but there are logistical issues with getting them out fast. I know everyone is desperate to get their booster but changing eligibility does not magically mean the rollout is going go faster. We need to look at the ... state-run centres and lack of capacity in primary care to actually get these done in a very short period of time. Khorshid says access to rapid tests is not good enough. PCR tests are the gold standard. But certainly, if you are symptomatic and ... you’re going to an event and really need to know right now, ‘am I infectious and putting my grandmother at risk on Christmas Day’, it would be great to have access to rapid antigen tests, but unfortunately the access is not what it should be. Khorshid says it seems the NSW premier is making decisions on popularity. From an outside view it seems to me that having given people hope, they do not want to take it away just before Christmas. And I understand that it is a difficult thing to say to people. We know we said this is the end of restrictions and the end of the pandemic but it absolutely is not. And to be honest, the best way to avoid lockdowns and going down those pathways nobody wants to go down is to take Omicron seriously, to bring in some simple measures. Khorshid says we need to remember we are living in a pandemic. We understand that our leaders do not want to limit the freedoms of Australians, but we have to remember, we are in the middle of a global pandemic that has taken an extraordinary number of lives around the world, so having the courage, having the will to say to people, look, we just need to do this. Khorshid says the AMA supports bringing the booster dose forward, but that it will not help over Christmas. He says NSW is risking peoples’ lives. The approach so far by the NSW government in particular is risking lives, is risking an extraordinary impact on the health system into next year and it just does not make sense. Khorshid says we need “sensible” measures to handle Omicron over Christmas. Measures that do not have significant impacts on peoples lives, like wearing masks, like some simple social distancing requirements, density limits in indoor venues, are all measures that are absolutely essential to manage Omicron. Khorshid says we need a national plan for Omicron. This risk is real and spreading around the globe like wildfire and causing disruption ... to economies in Europe and other countries overseas in ways we just do not want to see how. The idea that Omicron is mild, it may be mild but we just don’t know ... It is a risk we do not want to take. Dr Omar Khorshid is speaking in Perth now... The president of the Australian Medical Association (AMA) Dr Omar Khorshid will hold a press conference shortly, where he will call on the national cabinet to institute a national plan to tackle Omicron. Khorshid said Omicron is quickly overtaking the Delta variant around the world and is increasingly driving infection rates in Australia. “Tightening public health restrictions should not be seen as a policy failure,” Khorshid said. “There is a growing consensus among key medical experts [that] we need to do more to slow the spread of Omicron, including those involved in the Doherty Institute modelling, which has helped guide the national plan to open up Australia.” Khorshid described Perrottet’s approach as “reckless”. “DIY contact tracing, watered-down check in requirements, the abandonment of mask wearing mandates, and the removal of density limits altogether [are] a recipe for disaster and by the time hospital admissions and ICU cases grow beyond whatever benchmark he is working to – it will be too late,” he said. “A much more cautious approach is required, at least until we know more about Omicron and its severity of illness. We are not going to be able to eliminate Omicron, but we can do a lot to slow its spread, reduce pressure on the health system, save lives and keep businesses open. Indoor mask mandates, mandatory check ins, density limits for venues and major sporting events, all need to be part of a stronger national response to Omicron.” The Royal Australiasian College of Physicians president Prof John Wilson made a similar call for restrictions earlier on Tuesday. I have been speaking to health workers and clinicians who have expressed concern about NSW premier Dominic Perrottet’s comments in recent days that intensive care numbers are the key metric on which public health decisions are being made. Perrottet has also rejected mandating further public health measures, saying “it is a time of personal responsibility”. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, echoed Perrottet’s comments, saying on Tuesday that “we have to move from a culture of mandates to a culture of responsibility”. “That’s how we live with this virus into the future,” he said. The comments have alarmed some health workers in NSW, who say the entire system is stretched, and that politicians need to consider Covid’s impact beyond intensive care. A clinician at one NSW hospital told Guardian Australia that the public health unit where she works is dealing with many more Covid-19 cases in people from vulnerable settings than at the Covid-19 Delta peak earlier in the year. “Aged care and disability care predominate, both residential and community settings,” she said. “There are cases of Covid in staff, carers and clients. Not many seem really sick yet and most are vaccinated, but it is early days. Getting staff to provide ongoing personal care to cases and close contacts is becoming very difficult. They need training in PPE and often key staff are required to isolate as close contacts of the client or staff cases.” The public health and disability workforces are also losing staff, she said. “It’s a casualised workforce with often no entitlements so there is not much loyalty to employers,” she said. “I would think most who work through an outbreak do so for the clients, to whom many of these low-paid carers are incredibly loyal. But transfer to hospital for elderly or disabled cases with high care needs is becoming more difficult. “Hospital transfer and health hotels have been our safety net to stop transmission and provide care to vulnerable people. I can see these options being exhausted in the lead up to Christmas.” Managing outbreaks is labour intensive, she said, requiring coordination between public health, clinicians, hospital executives, the private provider and the department of health. “Everyone is stretched,” she said. “Everyone is faced with the dilemma of how we can safely and compassionately do less. People, particularly those in aged and disability care, have borne a disproportionate burden of loss of quality of life during Covid. “It’s particularly galling to me that they stand to lose out yet again, for the sake of ‘freedoms’ for the general population that surely could have been bestowed more slowly and mindfully.” A health worker in a rural referral hospital in regional NSW told Guardian Australia it was not just Sydney being affected. She said her hospital is experiencing “severe staffing issues all across the hospital from the emergency department to ICU to maternity”. “We are not coping with day-to-day operations, let alone a Covid outbreak,” she said. “In January, we are expecting an extra 15,000 people to travel to our area for a county music festival from all over the country. Has there been planning, funding or just anything from the state government? There hasn’t.” Staff are tired from filling multiple roles for the last two years during the pandemic, she said. “I can now truly say to you that now [Covid] is coming we have less resources than we did before. My comment to the premier is that we do not have the resources to deal with this, or the planning and leadership we need to steer this ship. “Is there a national leader out there who understands what is going on, who can pull this nation together and have us all moving in one direction together instead of individual states?” And just quickly to Tasmania where all passengers on a Sydney to Launceston flight have been told to isolate and get tested immediately. Virgin Australia flight 1086 landed in Tasmania on Wednesday. Fyles said vaccination rates have been strong but they need more people to come forward. We need to see people being vaccinated, particularly in the Barkly region as we have to make decisions over the coming days between lockdowns and lockouts and mask mandates. If we see the vaccination rate coming up as we did in Katherine, it gives us confidence there is protection in the community. Fyles said the testing rates are strong. I have been informed that it has been a strong rate of testing and particularly in Katherine and Tennant Creek. There were 280 tests done in Tennant Creek and that is one of our biggest days there. Well done to everybody in Tennant Creek for coming forward and getting tested. There were more than 200 tests done in Katherine. Thank you to the residents there, even though they are out of the lockout and mask mandate, it is important to come forward if you are feeling any signs of illness in the Katherine region. Fyles said both of the Yulara cases that came from Brisbane are Omicron. Fyles said the NT government would be able to handle the outbreak. Absolutely. We’ve kept her safe to date and we will continue to do so. We have managed this response very well right across the Northern Territory dealing with a particularly vulnerable population. We’ve got some of the highest vaccination rates in Australia in some areas, we certainly acknowledge others we’re working on and we need people to come forward. There’s plenty of vaccines available. Fyles said three cases are not from the current outbreak. One of the new cases is a close contact of the two Yulara cases next last week. The person is in quarantine at Howard Springs and authorities think it may be Omicron. The other two cases include an international aircrew member and a woman from Adelaide who flew to the NT recently – she was unvaccinated and is also in quarantine at Howard Springs. NT Health Minister Natasha Fyles is providing a COVID-19 update. She is asked how likely the Tennant Creek lockdown will lift when planned. We really need that vaccination rate to come up, and we have seen dozens of people come forward, but not the hundreds that we would expect. So we’ll just be looking at the cases over the last 24 hours and make sure that all those close contacts have been identified, do we have all of their test results, those are the types of pieces of information that will help us make that decision tomorrow. The total number of cases linked to the Katherine outbreak is now 123. A barrister will on Tuesday appeal for bail for an 11-year-old Indigenous child facing a Christmas spent in the Northern Territory’s infamous Don Dale detention centre. The child, who is on remand, has not yet had his matter heard in court. He is one of 35 Indigenous children now held in Don Dale, which is located in the former adult prison, Berrimah. Major Sydney production Come From Away has suspended two performances – Tuesday night and Wednesday’s matinee – after a member of the company tested positive to Covid-19. The entire company and production crew will be tested before Wednesday night’s performance. At time of publish, the production was unable to confirm which strain of Covid-19 was involved, whether the company was taking PCR or rapid antigen tests, or whether audience members of recent past shows would be pinged by NSW Health. Ticketholders for tonight and tomorrow’s matinee will be issued a refund from Ticketmaster, and offered to rebook an alternative performance at the Capitol theatre. Producer Rodney Rigby said in a statement: “This is part of the new Covid-normal and nothing is more important than the health and safety of all that visit our theatres. We are taking a short break in our season to ensure that we are doing everything we can to keep everyone protected and return this brilliant show back on stage.” QLD bringing forward new quarantine rules for close and casual contacts – they will come into effect from 1am 22 December. More below... OK back to Esterman – his final point is that we still don’t know a lot about Omicron, and we have to be cautious. We know it is much more transmissible than Delta. At least twice as transmissible ... We know a little bit about its ability to affect our system. Being fully vaccinated, by the current definition, provides little protection against the infection of Omicron but still provides protection against serious illness and death. Just jumping away from Esterman for a second. A Come from Away company member has tested positive. I will have more for you on this in a minute. He says it’s likely three doses will become “standard” for base protection against Omicron. I think we’re beginning to see that two doses is simply not enough against Omicron and future variants. We will probably end up with three doses being standard. The issue is, do we have three doses of the same or do we ... mix-and-match? Esterman says it looks like mixing and matching offers better protection. Esterman says there are plenty of public health measures we could take that won’t impact on business/Christmas. There are public health measures we can take which don’t impact on business. New South Wales has been taking, relaxing public health measures because they don’t want to have a huge impact on business. That has always been one of their priorities. The fact is, wearing a mask in retail settings isn’t going to impact businesses. So there are potential public health measures we can take. Professor Adrian Esterman is an epidemiologist and biostatistician at the University of South Australia – he’s on ABC now talking about boosters. He wants ATAGI to reduce the time between boosters. The big issue is that, with Omicron, having double dose of the standard vaccination can spread protection against infection. There are large numbers of elderly people at high risk who cannot get that booster shot until February or late January at the earliest. They are a huge risk in getting Omicron. This is why I want them to reduce that time. Good afternoon team GA. This is Cait, I’ve had too much coffee and I am keen to get started. With that, I will hand over to Cait Kelly whose capable hands will guide you through the rest of the afternoon. Perhaps instead of mandating mask restrictions we can just roll out a novelty, lovable Covid mascot who teaches us how to wear masks, social distance and wash our hands. Meanwhile, bad news for people trying to get to New Zealand. New Zealand has ruled out the prospect of non-quarantine arrivals until the end of February. The Covid response minister will front the media this afternoon to address the impact the Omicron variant will have on the government’s plan to reopen to international travellers. Of Queensland’s new cases, 79 were locally acquired and six were acquired interstate. Announcements are coming in thick and fast today. Quarantine arrangements are changing in Queensland. They have been brought forward to 1am tomorrow “based on advice from the chief health officer”. So double vaccinated close contacts of positive cases will have their isolation time reduced to seven days. It comes after 86 new cases were recorded in the state. South Australia has reported 154 new Covid cases, the majority locally detected. The day one and day six Covid testing has been removed partially because of this rise in local transmission of the virus. This will mean there will be an “absolute” focus on symptomatic people in the state. Close contacts need to continue getting tested but “as things evolve” over the coming weeks changes may be made to this requirements. There are five people hospitalised with the virus. There is also lots of positive wastewater testing across metropolitan Adelaide. Bordertown has had “a couple of very strong positive results” despite no new current cases. Go and get tested if you have symptoms. AMA president Dr Omar Khorshid will be speaking this afternoon on responding to the Omicron variant. Presumably we will be hearing about boosters and mask mandates. Speaking of testing lines: Marshall says capacity has ramped up from 2,000 tests to 20,000 tests, after waiting times of up to nine hours were reported. I can indeed see how this would be a disincentive. Marshall says results are still coming back in short timeframes, but lengthy lineups may discourage people from doing the right thing: We’d much rather keep that capacity for South Australians with symptoms ... we do have an ability to book in at 12 sites right across the state and this is definitely the way to go. We’re not encouraging people to sit in their cars for hours and hours ... virtually every single person coming from interstate now has to have that test in their own state within 72 hours of departure ... our focus now is making sure South Australians have access to a rapid PCR test ... we have a 100% screen of all those people coming from interstate. Bit of a turnaround in South Australia. You don’t have to get a Covid test without symptoms if you’re arriving from interstate after a mass surge at testing clinics. “We know the lines have been very frustrating for people, and that’s why we say, you do not need to be in that line”, premier Steven Marshall says. From now on if you develop symptoms, isolate, go onto the SA Health website and book into one of 12 testing sites. Marshall says rapid antigen tests will be made available soon, and authorities are doing everything they can to free up capacity for people with symptoms. Marshall says he also “strongly” supports reducing the interval to get a booster shot. Over in South Australia, premier Steven Marshall will be up soon alongside the chief public health officer and police commissioner. There have been 16 new Covid cases in the ACT. Slightly up on yesterday’s numbers but still relatively stable. There are three people in hospital and none in intensive care. Melbourne friends: Morrison finishes by reinforcing it’s up to the public, not the government to be responsible for their health: There has been a need for all sorts of things over the last two years but we’re going into a new phase and that new phase is one of a culture of responsibility rather than a culture of control and a culture of mandates and letting Australians live with this virus responsibly. Thanks very much, everyone. Ta. Personally, I will keep wearing my mask not only for my health but also as a stylish fashion accessory. Morrison circles around the “we don’t mandate sunscreen” argument. As we know, sunburn isn’t contagious, but anyway. Maybe don’t have that “big night out” if you’re seeing grandma at Christmas, but again, it’s up to you: Here is another tip, Omicron is moving substantially amongst the younger population. They are at parties, night clubs, hospitality venues. I would encourage them, particularly if they’re going to spend time at Christmas with older family members, you want to give that big night out a miss, particularly if you’re going to see one of your elderly relatives over Christmas, or exercise greater precautions around them. Australians don’t have to be told by governments how to live. Australians are responsible people who care about their own health, whether it’s sun smart behaviour or Covid, or any other element of their health and they really care about those they love and they care about their communities. One of the biggest lessons that were reinforced during the Covid pandemic is you want to put a bet on the best way to deal with a crisis, you bet on Australians and that’s what we have done. Go and sit in the outdoor areas ... that’s a commonsense thing ... that’s immediately going to be a more practical way to avoid the variant and the virus. If you’re inside, you know, a bit of distancing. You don’t need to crush into a mosh pit. That’s probably not a good idea if you’re going to see your grandmother on the weekend. But that’s common sense. Morrison is asked for an update on booster shots. Atagi have currently set a five-month interval between receiving a second and third vaccination. There have been increasing calls for that period to be reduced, particularly in light of the Omicron strain. The advice from our immunisation experts – and let me be very clear about this – Atagi is not a new institution ... they have been around for a long time and they have been responsible over many years for steering Australia’s immunisation programs which have achieved world record levels. Not just more recently on Covid, but on other childhood immunisations and other immunisation programs. They are the experts when it comes to immunisation. Everyone else has opinions, they have responsibility and the expert responsibility for advising the government about what the vaccination programs are. We continue to listen to them on these issues, as I have said on many occasions. What I will not do is I will not front run their advice on that issue. They will consider these issues carefully and they will advise the government. Just as they will carefully consider, as they have been for some time, the interval period for booster shots. Morrison continues, encouraging vaccination uptake and “commonsense behaviours” like hand washing. He reinforces that states, not the commonwealth, have authority over health orders. The commonwealth is just in charge of things like vaccination supply: People should get vaccinated. If you don’t get vaccinated, you’re more likely to get the virus, get very serious illness from the virus and to die from the virus. That is three very good reasons why you should get vaccinated. Equally, it’s important that you practice other commonsense behaviours, like washing your hands, keeping appropriate distances, but you don’t need to get the ruler out and you don’t need to get people to come around hitting you with fines. We just need to live with this virus sensibly and practically. From mandates to responsibility and as governments around the country, because the states have the total authority when it comes to public health orders. The commonwealth does not have the power to direct those state and territory governments. What I will be saying to them, and I know a number of premiers agree with this, is we have got to move to the next phase of how we live with this virus. The time for that heavy hand is behind us. The prime minister Scott Morrison is speaking now. He says he has written to the premiers and set out “the advice that they’re providing” including strong recommendation of mask use inside “and things like that and that is very sensible”. One of the key messages is, yes, we’re going to need to continue to calibrate how we manage this virus and how we live with this virus in the face of Omicron. Of course that is necessary. But we’re not going back to lockdowns. We’re not going back to shutting down peoples’ lives. We’re going forward to live with this virus with common sense and responsibility. There will be other variants beyond Omicron and we have to ensure, as a country, and as leaders around the country, we are putting in place measures that Australians can live with. What that means is we have to move from a culture of mandates to a culture of responsibility. That’s how we live with this virus into the future. In my home state in New South Wales, people are already wearing masks. They’re not being fined if they don’t because Australians know what is a commonsense responsible action to look after their own health and to look after the health of those around them. As a country, we have got to get past the heavy hand of government and we have got to treat Australians like adults and we all have our own responsibility in our communities and for our own health. Wait times have eased somewhat in the ACT. Meanwhile, Scott Morrison is making the most of his Tour de Queensland. How good are little nippers? Back in Victoria again, Merlino confirms there will be no changes to crowd capacity at the Boxing Day Ashes test in Melbourne. Speaking of which: The Royal Australian College of Physicians (RACP) has called on state and territory governments to reintroduce or maintain certain Covid-19 restrictions in light of the spread of the Omicron variant. The RACP wants governments to: Reintroduce (or maintain) mandatory mask wearing, particularly indoors and when people are unable to physically distance Reintroduce (or maintain) mandatory QR code check-ins across all public venues and events Restrict numbers of people at indoor public venues and events for a few weeks until the risks of the Omicron variant are better understood. RACP president and respiratory physician Prof John Wilson: While we don’t want to see families separated and communities impacted in the festive season, we are also wary of the increasing Covid-19 case numbers in states like NSW. If not checked, a surge in cases will further burden our already exhausted health systems due to an overwhelming rise in hospitalisations. The relaxation of restrictions in some jurisdictions, especially those associated with mask-wearing, QR code check-ins and large gatherings, can have dire consequences. Our advice to governments remains to listen to their respective public health officers and maintain the restrictions necessary to control the spread of the Omicron variant. The RACP also urged the broader Australian and Aotearoa New Zealand communities not to let their guard down. “If anyone is eligible for a booster shot after having waited for five months or more after their second shot, there is no better time than now to book,” Wilson said. This is an interesting point. We know the efficacy of AstraZeneca and Pfizer wanes within six months. There has been little messaging, too, on whether/how our vaccination passports will be updated in light of boosters. We’ve been in a pandemic for quite some time now and it’s almost as if this was something that could have been predicted. Back in Victoria, acting premier James Merlino has no further updates on restrictions. He cites the National Cabinet meeting to come. But he does want a shorter interval between boosters, as does NSW. Tasmania’s premier Peter Gutwein is providing a Covid update. There are four new cases in the state, as mask wearing becomes mandatory indoors. In Victoria the state government has announced more than $100m towards a specialist women’s mental health service in Melbourne and Shepparton as a recommendation of the royal commission. Some 30 beds will be established at the Albert Road clinic in Melbourne and five in Shepparton. It comes as women have been three times as likely as men to call Lifeline during the pandemic. Good news! Guardian Australia’s 2021 year in review is here, featuring, among other things, fabulous fashion from Amy Remeikis: The year started with hope and optimism, with a small step towards recognising Australia’s Indigenous history in our national anthem. But a few months in, 2021 took a sharp turn. The nation faced a reckoning on the treatment of women after Brittany Higgins came forward to allege she had been raped in Parliament House. The Delta variant of Covid-19 caused deadly havoc across the globe and soon reached Australia’s shores. Covid conspiracy theories raged online – and on the floor of parliament. The state premiers’ daily press conferences became part of our daily lives, as did lockdown upon lockdown and state border closures. There were glimmers of hope and joy, however, as Australia became one of the most vaccinated countries in the world. Somehow we made it through, fumbling towards a federal election in 2022. An Indigenous body elected to negotiate a treaty in Victoria has called for the state government to raise the age of criminal responsibility and “stop locking up our children”, AAP’s Callum Godde reports. The co-chairs of the First Peoples’ Assembly of Victoria have written to state attorney general Jaclyn Symes to stress the need for immediate change, saying treaty must not be used as an excuse to stall reform. Aunty Geraldine Atkinson and Marcus Stewart write: This does not need to, nor should it, wait for treaty. It is a much-needed, sensible, compassionate, evidence-based and simple reform that community overwhelmingly supports. We want the government to stop locking up our children. Children as young as 10 across Australia can be arrested by police, remanded in custody, convicted by the courts and jailed. Australia’s attorneys general last month agreed to support a proposal to raise the minimum age from 10 to 12 after the federal government faced pressure from more than 30 UN countries. But the independent Indigenous group has urged Symes to listen to the experts and legislate a change to 14 years, as recommended by Victoria’s Commission for Children and Young People in June. There were nearly 600 children aged between 10 and 13 in custody in 2018-19, according to data from the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. More than 60% were Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander. The ACT is the only state or territory committed to changing the age of criminal responsibility to 14, while the WA government passed a similar motion in October. Both Victorian Labor and the Liberal/Nationals in March rejected a Greens bill to raise the state’s age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 14, and the minor party is urging the government to reconsider supporting its stance. A Victorian government spokesperson confirmed it was “working to develop and consider a proposal” to up the minimum age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 12. Apparently there is now a lost load of fish on the Sydney Harbour Bridge. Wait times for testing in the ACT are best at Garran and Nicholls this morning. It looks as though the traffic flow has improved at Melbourne’s Albert Park testing site. If we look at the reproduction rate, that is also up in NSW, where the positive test rate is 2.23%. In Victoria, it is 1.86%. If we turn now to hospitalisation rates, Victoria’s are down slightly on yesterday, from 406 to 392. In New South Wales, there are 284 people being treated in hospital and 39 in intensive care. That’s up from 261 yesterday. Victoria’s numbers have remained relatively stable, with 1,245 Covid cases today. But there have been six lives lost overnight. New South Wales has recorded 3,057 new Covid cases – another record number. Sadly, there have also been two deaths. Thanks as ever to the indomitable Matilda Boseley. We are waiting for Covid numbers to come in, which should be shortly. With that, I shall hand you over to the fantastic Caitlin Cassidy who is taking over for the rest of the morning. Sydney train commuters have been warned to expect delays to the network after an overnight strike, reports AAP. The Sydney Trains-operated network was disrupted from 8pm last night to 4am this morning as Rail, Tram, and Bus Union members took industrial action. Buses replaced train services on all lines between 8pm and 4am but Sydney commuters have been encouraged to avoid travelling this morning. The union is at loggerheads with Transport for NSW as they negotiate a new enterprise agreement covering more than 10,000 staff. The strike comes after industrial action last Tuesday when RTBU members refused to drive foreign-built trains used on about 75% of services. Transport for NSW said workers had been offered new enterprise agreements, including a 2.5% pay rise in the first year. The union wants a 3.5% wage rise. Seems that Victoria isn’t the only state struggling with long Covid-19 testing lines today: Health experts are nervous about rising Covid hospitalisations, particularly in New South Wales, as political leaders continue to call for calm over skyrocketing case numbers. Across Australia, attention is turning from the Covid case numbers to how many people end up in hospital and the ICU. Given Australia’s high vaccination rates, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said on Monday the focus should be on the impact on the health system rather than the record case numbers. Australasian College for Emergency Medicine president Dr Clare Skinner told the Guardian there is a nervousness among health experts as numbers continue to rise. You can read the full report from Mostafa Rachwani and Josh Nicholas below: NSW police are seeking help to discover the whereabouts of silver bars that vanished from a truck. Silver bullion worth $1m has been stolen from a truck travelling between Sydney and Melbourne, reports AAP. NSW police are appealing for help in solving the theft that was discovered when the truck arrived in Melbourne on 29 November after leaving NSW three days earlier. The consignment – 192 individual 5kg silver bars – was being transported by a Kenworth truck and a silver Krueger trailer, police say. The bullion is estimated to be worth $1,015,000. Surging demand at Covid testing clinics across Australia has led to waiting times of up to five days for results, with travellers now worried they won’t get a negative result in time to travel across state borders for Christmas. Waiting times in Victoria have averaged between 40 minutes and an hour during the past week, while a busy ACT site reached capacity by 9.30am on Monday. A negative Covid test is mandatory to enter Queensland, Tasmania and South Australia if arriving from an area with community transmission, while travellers to the Northern Territory are required to have a PCR test within 72 hours of arrival. You can read the full report below: Northern Perth councillor Linda Aitken will stand for the Liberal party in Christian Porter’s old Perth seat of Pearce. Western Australian party faithful gathered at the Whale and Ale pub on the northern outskirts of Perth on Monday night where Aitken edged out former navy officer Miquela Riley in preselection, reports AAP’s Dominic Giannini. Aitken will take on her council colleague and Labor’s pick of City of Wanneroo mayor Tracey Roberts at next year’s election. But her nomination will first need to be rubber-stamped by the party’s state executive when it comes before them on Thursday. The plebiscite was the first time the Liberals let rank-and-file members vote for their preferred candidate in a Liberal-held seat. WA Liberal party state president Richard Wilson said Aitkin was the best person to represent Pearce: Linda will work hard in the months ahead to meet with as many locals as possible, to listen to the issues that are important to them and their family, and share her positive ideas for Pearce ... As a strong local voice, Linda has been helping to deliver better services for her community. She understands the issues which are important to the people of Pearce because her family experiences them every day. Porter announced he wouldn’t recontest his seat at the next election after a scandal-ridden 2021 when he was demoted within the federal cabinet before being forced to resign altogether. The former attorney general held Pearce since 2013 and it has been in Liberal hands since its inception in 1990. Porter retained it at the 2019 election on a 7.5% margin but it’s now considered a much tighter contest after a boundary redistribution. The election is due to be held by May. According to Seven News Scott Morrison is supportive of an indoor mask mandate in light of the Omicron variant spreading throughout Australia, but not further lockdowns. Thousands of customers are still without power on Sydney’s northern beaches after the brief but cyclonic weekend storm that felled power lines, leaving a trail of destruction, reports AAP. Ausgrid has restored power to almost 17,500 customers after Sunday’s storm that ripped through beachside suburbs Narrabeen, Collaroy and Dee Why, leaving more than 500 hazards including trees on powerlines. The ferocious storm, which lasted only a few minutes, ripped roofs off apartment buildings and blacked out 35,000 homes. Susan Cobham, 68, who was heading home from a party near Narrabeen surf life saving club, died after she and two other women were struck by a massive Norfolk Island pine. The two injured women remain in Royal North Shore hospital. Ausgrid expects the majority of customers will have power restored in the next few days, but due to extensive damage at Dee Why, Collaroy, Naraweena and Wheeler Heights “power outages could extend well into the week”. Additional crews from neighbouring network Endeavour Energy and contractors, have been brought in to support Ausgrid’s repair efforts to restore the 17,500 customers who are still blacked out. Ausgrid said: It’s a very difficult time of year to be without power, and we apologise for the delays. We are doing everything we can to turn the lights back on as soon as possible. Where we can, we are progressively turning power back on, and as always the safety of our customers and staff remains our number one priority. Given the extensive damage from the storm, some parts of the network need to be rebuilt. Voter approval of Scott Morrison has dived 19 points in a year as voters marked down the prime minister for vaccine bungles, sustained controversy over the allocation of taxpayer funded grants and the extended furore over parliament’s #MeToo reckoning. A year of Guardian Essential data reveals the high-water mark of Morrison’s voter approval was in February, when 65% of survey respondents said they approved of his performance, and 28% said they disapproved. But in the final poll of 2021, only 46% of respondents say they approve of the prime minister’s performance, while 44% disapprove. The last survey of the year has 1,095 respondents. You can read the full report below: Back to Sharon Lewin from the Doherty Institue for a second and she’s indicated she supports the reintroduction of a mask mandate for indoor settings in Australia: Look, in an ideal world, of course we can trust that people will do the right thing. However, rules are changing constantly. People are confused. And they want to know what they can and can’t do. All along in this pandemic we have had most of our policies informed by the best science and very clear instructions about what you can and can’t do. We’re in a position at the moment where days really matter. Having the right policy, right now, making it really clear to people what you can and can’t do, is something I strongly support. That includes a simple intervention like mask wearing, we’ve become very used to [it]. I know it’s not the way we like to live but we have become used to it. We need leaders to tell us where and where we can’t wear those masks. My decision to not wear a mask doesn’t just affect me, it affects everyone around me. While we have borders open internally, it affects everyone across Australia. We need some cohesion and simple advice to stop any confusion for people. Hmmmm, anyone got a strange craving for gravy this morning? Can’t think of why that might be. Testing locations in Melbourne appear to have filled up before they have even opened, as thousands rush to get a PRC test before their Christmas travel. Doherty Institute director Sharon Lewin says Atagi is looking closely at data from overseas to try to decide if Covid-19 booster doses should be brought forward to four or even three months. She noted the current five-month interval “may well change” in the days to come: To make that decision, the authorities, or the advisory group, Atagi, are weighing up a number of factors. How quickly your antibodies drop ... how much safety data we have at giving the booster earlier and ability to deliver it. We’re weighing all of these things up. We are learning from overseas the booster dose gives you that additional protection against Omicron that we want. These are difficult decisions being weighed up by all the best evidence available and availability of vaccines and that may well change the current recommendation of five months, it may well change in coming days. I mentioned before that Atagi is now reviewing whether three doses will be required to be considered fully immunised. The director of the Doherty Institute, Sharon Lewin, has been a bit coy on her views on the matter while speaking to ABC News Breakfast: Look, these are difficult decisions. Australia has done incredibly well getting so many people their first two doses. At the moment there’s a gap of five months to get the third dose. We have to make that really easy for people to access. Certainly you get much better immunity after your third dose. You need that third dose for better protection against Omicron. And deciding whether that makes you fully vaccinated or not will be a decision for national cabinet. Good morning, everyone! There are only four days until Christmas and I’ve just remembered I haven’t bought my sister anything. How’s your morning going? It’s Matilda Boseley here on the blog and why don’t we jump right into the day. Now, the big thing coming up is the prime minister and state and territory leaders gathering for an “informal” national cabinet meeting tomorrow to discuss the threat of the new Omicron variant. It looks as though the main message Scott Morrison will be sending is “stay calm, and for god’s sake don’t close the borders”. The time frame of booster shots is due to be discussed, with South Australia pushing for a shortened interval amid Omicron concerns. Nine newspapers reports that Australia’s vaccine advisory body, Atagi, is reviewing whether three doses will be required to be considered fully immunised. Chief medical officer Dr Paul Kelly has also reportedly recommended a mask mandate in all indoor settings in an effort to curb an escalation in Omicron cases. When speaking to reporters on Monday, Morrison said the government would follow health advice on mask mandates, with there being some circumstances where mask wearing was “commonsense”. Given that the NSW premier Dominic Perrottet has been fairly steadfast in his refusal to reinstate a mask mandate, it will be interesting to see how all the premiers react to this prospect today. OK, why don’t we get cracking then!Australian high school students are sending bacteria into space in an experiment to make their own yoghurt. In collaboration with the Swinburne University of Technology, 40 students across Victoria are participating in a program that will deliver yoghurt cultures to the International Space Station (ISS) on Tuesday, via a SpaceX rocket. The rocket, a Falcon 9, is set to launch at 5.06am US eastern time on Tuesday – just after 9pm Australian eastern time – from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. A team of six students at Haileybury, an independent high school in Melbourne, are working with Swinburne researchers to study the effects of microgravity on bacteria. They hope to perfect the conditions under which astronauts could make their own yoghurt. A total of 36 vials will be sent into space, containing frozen milk and strains of yoghurt-producing “good” bacteria, which will be defrosted by astronauts on the ISS. Aysel Sapukotana, who has just completed year 10 at Haileybury, said it was “exhilarating” to be sending an experiment to space. “Something that we’ve put really hard work into going to the International Space Station – this was previously something that … we could only really imagine,” she said. The Haileybury team is sending 20 vials to study what yoghurt will be produced depending on the milk type used – either full cream cow’s milk or soy milk – and how long it ferments for – either 24, 48 or 72 hours. Samples will return to Australia about 1.5 months after they were first sent off. The students plan to analyse the viscosity, nutrient profile and lactic acid content of the resulting yoghurts, Sapukotana said. A fellow Haileybury student, 16-year-old Chiara Sgroi, said a goal of the experiment was to determine “which yoghurt ended up being more nutritious, and also how that compared to the control that we did on Earth.” “We even might get to taste it, which is pretty exciting,” Sgroi said. She noted the temperature inside the ISS, around 23C, is significantly cooler than the 37C or warmer that yoghurt is usually cultured at. Sapukotana added: “If astronauts were to eat this and they didn’t have enough proteins and nutrients, that would be causing a bit of an issue.” Separately, students across Victoria participating in Swinburne’s Space Youth Innovation Challenge will send another 16 other vials to the ISS, containing different combinations of milk and one or multiple bacterial strains. The coordinator of the Swinburne Youth Space Innovation Challenge, Dr Sara Webb, said previous ISS experiments showed the behaviour of bacteria was altered by microgravity. Webb said the students hoped to find that the yoghurt produced in space was equally nutritious as dairy products cultured on Earth. “We might see that the actual strains of bacteria fared better than on Earth,” she said, citing fewer mutations in their DNA or faster replication as examples. “We’re hoping to be able to say: yes, not only is yoghurt viable in space – so technically you could send Joe Blow to Mars with some frozen bacteria and a pint of milk and he could make his own yoghurt – but it would be healthy.”Filming sex scenes has left the actor Claire Foy feeling exposed and exploited, she has said, ahead of the airing of the latest adaptation of A Very British Scandal, in which she stars as a duchess whose private life became the subject of salacious gossip during her divorce proceedings. Foy plays Margaret Campbell, the Duchess of Argyll, who was famed for her charisma, beauty and style and who suffered the publication of explicit photographs after her husband sought a divorce on the grounds of adultery. The 1963 hearing focused heavily on the duchess’s sex life, with her husband Ian Campbell publicly estimating the number of men with whom he believed she had had sex, as well as providing explicit pictures purporting to show her in the act. Nearly 60 years later, Foy said she struggled with filming the sex scenes in the onscreen adaptation. She said: “It’s a really hard line because basically you do feel exploited when you are a woman and you are having to perform fake sex on screen. You can’t help but feel exploited. “It’s grim – it’s the grimmest thing you can do. You feel exposed. Everyone can make you try to not feel that way but it’s unfortunately the reality. “But my thing was that I felt very strongly that it had to be in it, but I wanted it to be female. I did not want it be that sort of awful climactic sexual experience you often see on the cinema screen,” she told BBC Radio 4’s Woman’s Hour. The real-life divorce proceedings brought to light accusations of forgery, theft, violence, drug-taking, secret recording and bribery. The duchess was criticised by the judge, who denounced her in his judgment as a “highly sexed woman” who was not “satisfied with normal relations and had started to indulge in disgusting sexual activities to gratify a debased sexual appetite”. The fact that the couple had an open marriage her husband had also exploited and that he had stolen her private property and reportedly sought the divorce only when she stopped paying his bills was deemed largely irrelevant. Responding to the suggestion that the duchess was the first woman to be publicly “slut-shamed” by the media, Foy dismissed the term. She said: “I hate the phrase slut-shaming, I absolutely hate it. But I think that women have basically been slut-shamed forever. I think Eve was probably slut-shamed.” She added: “There is something about it that I just hate, the rephrasing of the ownership of that title, and it being used in a way that justifies it even more. Just the word ‘slut’, I think, probably shouldn’t exist.” The three-part series will air on BBC One over three consecutive nights starting on Boxing Day. It was made by Sarah Phelps, who previously wrote The Pale Horse, And Then There Were None and Dublin Murders, and directed by the Norwegian film-maker Anne Sewitsky. The programme comes from the team behind the BBC’s A Very English Scandal, which starred Hugh Grant and Ben Whishaw as the Liberal politician Jeremy Thorpe and his lover Norman Scott.Pep Guardiola has warned his Manchester City players that they must behave on and off the pitch in order to be picked for games. Phil Foden and Jack Grealish were pictured on a night out after the 7-0 win against Leeds United and were subsequently dropped for the win over Newcastle on Sunday. City won 4-0 but Guardiola told the BBC after the game: “I pay a lot of attention to behaviour on and off the pitch. And when off the pitch is not proper they are not going to play. So they have to be focused all the time because the distractions in the Christmas time and everything that happens – you have to still be focused.” Guardiola, who did not mention Grealish or Foden by name, had a Covid scare himself on Thursday when he returned an inconclusive test before the game at St James’ Park. He postponed his pre-game press conference but was later given the green light to lead the team against Newcastle. Foden and Grealish did not breach any Covid rules on the night out but have in the past been reprimanded for doing so. Last year, Foden and Mason Greenwood were sent home from England duty in Iceland after breaking breaking coronavirus isolation rules. Foden said at the time: “On this occasion I made a poor decision and my behaviour didn’t meet the standards expected of me. I breached Covid‑19 protocols put in place to protect myself and my England colleagues. I will learn a valuable lesson from this error in judgment and I wish Gareth and the team good luck this week.” Grealish was warned by Aston Villa in March 2020 after being pictured at the scene of a road accident on a Sunday morning. Without giving any details about the incident in Solihull when a Range Rover crashed into two parked cars, the player admitted he was at the scene after defying the ban against non-essential travel by going to visit a friend. Less than 24 hours before the incident, Grealish had issued a public appeal to his social media followers to “Stay home. Protect the NHS. Save Lives.”When Roberto David Castillo graduated from the US Military Academy at West Point, the Honduran cadet was confident he’d leave behind a legacy. “He will be remembered by all as being a fearless leader committed to God, his family and serving others,” read the caption under his yearbook portrait. Castillo is certain to be remembered: earlier this year, the Honduran high court found him guilty as the joint perpetrator in the 2016 assassination of the indigenous activist Berta Cáceres, then one of Latin America’s most prominent environmental defenders. Cáceres was killed by a team of hitmen after years of death threats linked to her opposition of the 22-megawatt Agua Zarca dam, approved by the government without permission from the local indigenous people. Castillo was the president of the company building the dam and the court concluded that he had used his military training to stalk her for years, while secretly helping coordinate the assassination. Some of that training came from West Point, where Castillo studied from 2000-2004. A Guardian investigation reveals how Castillo’s time at the prestigious military academy helped shape his career – and raises questions about the training provided by the institution to generations of Central American soldiers, some of whom later became involved with human rights abuses. Xiomara Castro’s recent victory in presidential elections has raised hopes for ending a culture of impunity in Honduras. But Castillo has yet to be sentenced for his crime, and West Point has yet to publicly acknowledge the conviction of its alumnus. Castillo was one of a handful of international students in his class at West Point. Travis Dent, a former roommate, remembers Castillo as a jovial and helpful friend. “I joke with him still that I failed English and he passed, because he was a very, very smart student when it came to the books,” Dent said. “We knew him just as another cadet.” At West Point, Castillo studied the fundamentals of war, tactics and weaponry, later concentrating on electrical and computer engineering. But when international cadets return to serve in their home nations’ military, they benefit from more than just the academy’s training. “It gives them institutional and social bragging rights,” said Martin Andersen, a former professor at the US National Defense University. And it can help them make powerful friends. After graduating from the academy, Castillo returned to Honduras in 2006 to join the armed forces as a second lieutenant. His career illustrates what soldiers with connections can do in nations like Honduras, which has become notorious for its murder rate, state-sponsored violence and political impunity. Castillo quickly became involved with the government-owned power company, first when the armed forces militarized it in 2007, then working with the company in 2008 once it had been taken over by the army. While there, he joined the commission that negotiated contracts for Honduran hydroelectric projects with a subsidiary of Odebrecht S.A. The Brazilian conglomerate was later found guilty in the largest foreign bribery case in history after it paid hundreds of millions of dollars in bribes to government officials around the world. By then, Castillo started a business that was caught selling equipment to the army at inflated prices. (He was later ordered to pay the government back.) And when Castillo founded the energy company, Desa, in 2009, he again broke the rules, Honduran anti-corruption prosecutors argued in a separate case. Associates allegedly started it on his behalf while he continued to work for the government entity that approved the contract to purchase electricity from the future Agua Zarca hydroelectric dam. “He got swept up into a power structure – and that’s the military in Honduras.” said Jackie McVicar, a human rights consultant who helped draw up a 2019 report on corruption in the Honduran energy industry. When Desa began working on the dam, Castillo crossed paths with Cáceres. As she rallied protestors and lobbied international groups to withdraw their backing for the project, Cáceres was spied on, tracked and threatened. According to her daughter Bertita Zúñiga Cáceres, Castillo played a central role in the harassment, constantly sending her text messages to remind Cáceres that he knew exactly where she was. By 2016, the mother of four was dead. “He used his military skills to order her murder – and not just to kill her, but to persecute her,” said Brigitte Gynther, a human rights advocate who worked with Cáceres. But after Castillo was arrested two years later, his former West Point roommate rallied the class in his defense. Dent lobbied the US ambassador to Honduras and contacted colleagues working for lawmakers and federal agencies. “The vast majority of the entire class and everyone we talked to was up to help,” Dent said. That Castillo had support from an influential US network was not an accident. West Point’s International Cadet Program “was established as a foreign policy tool to provide a means for the United States government to improve relations and to foster stability with friendly nations”, said a 1997 report in the academy archives. And Central American cadets have been outsized fixtures of the program since it began in 1889. Since then, almost a fifth of the more than 500 international graduates have come from the seven small Central American countries. US taxpayers have covered some or all of international students’ costs – an expense that should be viewed as an investment – the author of the 1997 report argued. After being exposed to US democratic ideals, he posited, they would spread those principles at home. Similar arguments were made in support of the “School of the Americas”, a US Army program founded in 1946 to train Latin American soldiers – more than a hundred of whom have been accused of human rights abuse at home. Among them were two of the other seven men convicted in 2019 of participating in Cáceres’s murder. “US-trained military figures have caused immeasurable destruction and death in Central America over the past several decades and continue to do so today,” said Gynther, now a coordinator at School of the Americas Watch. Castillo is not the first example of a West Point graduate who failed to live up to the international program’s lofty ideals. After graduating from the academy in 1946, Anastasio Somoza Jr returned to Nicaragua where he became head of the national guard, then president and was accused of repeated human rights violations and the deaths of thousands. His son, Julio, was accepted by the academy in 1977, at the height of the regime’s war against Sandinista rebels. In a recent presentation, West Point’s admissions team included Somoza in a list of “prominent international graduates” – with no mention of his career as a despot. More Central Americans may have lived up to the ideals the program envisioned. But since the US army redacted the names of most previous international graduates on a list released to the Guardian and declined say how many former cadets have been accused of crimes, its effectiveness is difficult to measure. West Point declined a request for an interview, referring the Guardian to the state department, which the academy said is involved in choosing which countries may send cadets to the academy. The state department referred a request for an interview to the Department of Defense, which referred the reporter back to the state department. “This is a public institution that should be publicly accountable for what it does,” said Beth Stephens, a professor of international law and foreign relations at Rutgers Law School, adding that the onus should be on West point to demonstrate the program doesn’t lead to human rights abuses abroad. As the US government protects West Point’s international program from scrutiny, Honduran leaders continue to be linked to undemocratic actions and illicit activity. Juan Orlando Hernández became the country’s president five years after a Honduran graduate of the School of the Americas led a military coup in 2009. This year, the president – under whose rule hundreds of thousands of citizens have emigrated to escape poverty, violence and corruption – was identified by US federal prosecutors as allegedly taking bribes from drug traffickers and using the country’s armed forces to protect a cocaine laboratory. Hernández has repeatedly denied any ties to drug cartels. Though shielded until now by a US policy of not charging sitting presidents, Hernández could be indicted as soon as Castro replaces him in January. But Honduran cadets have kept training at West Point. One entered the academy in 2016, the year of Cáceres’s murder.March 2020 changed many lives. Lockdown measures brought in as a response to the Covid pandemic upended day-to-day patterns and changed perspectives. For some, family homes and shared flats became congested working and schooling spaces; and those living alone found themselves isolated from social contact. But for many of the one in six working households estimated by the Institute for Public Policy Research to be struggling to stay afloat financially, the situation became desperate. “In April, after the pandemic and lockdown kicked in, we saw an 89% increase in the number of people coming to food banks,” says Emma Revie, chief executive of the Trussell Trust. “What that showed us was the fragility of those people who were just about making ends meet.” Families on the brink of destitution are particularly susceptible to the slightest change in circumstances beyond their control, whether that’s the increase in home heating costs, a cut in their working hours, or petrol and diesel hikes. “People who may be borderline using the food bank, they’re often working unsociable hours, so they can’t rely on buses or cycling to get to work,” says Margaret Saner, CEO of Cambridge City Food Bank. “They need the car, but the cost of the fuel is just going up.” For parents looking to rejoin the workforce, the UK’s hefty childcare costs represent a further problem – because how many non-working parents are sitting on enough savings to shell out for upfront childcare costs long before the first paycheck lands, well before any support from universal credit can be claimed back? “If you have to pay upfront before you’ve earned the money – it’s impossible,” says Revie. The sudden rise in the use of Trussell Trust food banks in April 2020, severe though it was, belies the true extent of the problem. “We know that many more independent emergency food aid providers saw a similar rise, and different organisations started providing food as part of their core services during the pandemic,” says Revie. “Our figure is just the tip of the iceberg.” Then there’s the fact that pride prevents many from seeking much-needed help. “We had a chap come in who told us he hadn’t eaten for three days so that his son could have something to eat. I mean, we get quite a few of those cases,” says Saner. In parents, especially mothers, she adds, this is a common pattern. “They’ll say: ‘I’ll eat later, I’ve just got a few more things to finish off in the kitchen.’ And then, of course, they don’t eat.” Revie recalls sitting with a man who clearly felt a sense of shame to be relying on a food bank. “He said: ‘I’m not here for food for me. It’s for my children.’ He still felt that he shouldn’t have come, that it was just a failure on his part. And that’s awful.” The core of this problem goes back to the global financial crisis and the government’s subsequent austerity measures, introduced in 2010. Between 2012 and 2014, as the cumulative effects of those policies were beginning to be felt, the number of parcels being distributed by the Trussell Trust was rapidly increasing, says Revie, and new food banks were at one point being opened at a rate of four a week. The charity now supports a network of more than 1,300 centres – up from fewer than 100 in early 2011 – through which nearly 2m food parcels were distributed during 2020. “There’s something about the financial resilience of a huge number of people who had been managing through sheer graft to just about make ends meet,” says Revie. “Then you become unwell, or get laid off from a job instantaneously, and suddenly you’re falling right the way through to food banks, being unable to feed your family.” According to Saner, people who are referred to Trussell Trust food banks tend to come through a network of local support agencies. “That can be anything from Citizens Advice or local councils, to family centres, homeless shelters, right through to doctors and school secretaries,” she says. “When they initially come to us, our first question is always: ‘Would you like a cup of tea or coffee?’ Then we ask why they’re here.” Most people coming to a food bank for the first time are in a similar state of mind, she says: “A few are angry, but most are just sort of really sad and worried. And we have people breaking down in tears when they see the amount of food that they’re given.” For Christmas, they’re hoping to provide something more than the basic essentials. “We’ve been working with one of the local bookstores doing an appeal for books, so parents have something to give their families at Christmas.” In a city like Cambridge, where Saner says “very well-off people live alongside people who are really struggling”, donations, at least, seem to come thick and fast. “We’ve had several people give us whole trolley loads of food – they just take a small bag out for themselves and say: ‘The rest is for you.’” But in the long-term, the Trussell Trust wants a society where everyone can afford the essentials, without needing to turn to emergency food to get by. Whether that happens depends on the decisions the government and all of us make.The story of Kathy Bergen’s decorated track and field career began in the pages of AARP magazine, which is another way of saying it didn’t start until after she turned 50. In the years since, Bergen has cemented her status as a legend in the world of masters athletics, which is open to competitors aged 35 and older. She was inducted into the USA Track &amp; Field Masters Hall of Fame in 2008, and was named the top female masters athlete in 2015. Earlier this month at a ceremony in Orlando, Florida, Bergen received her highest honor, as she was named the top masters athlete of the year by USATF. The accolades are deserved for someone who has broken so many world records that she loses count. “Off the top of my head, I’m thinking 24, 28. I’m not really sure,” Bergen said in a phone interview. (It’s 28, but who’s counting?) “In the last 12 years, I’ve broken so many records, it’s crazy,” she added. Bergen, who will turn 82 on Christmas Eve, notched five more world records last year. She set three indoor records at an event in Houston, posting times of 10.02 in the 60m and 35.66 in the 200m to go along with a record-setting mark of 1.2m in the high jump. Months later at an event in Marble Falls, Texas, Bergen was at it again, setting a pair of outdoor world records in the 100m with a time of 16.62 seconds and the high jump with a leap of 1.15 meters. She broke two more outdoor world records this year at an event in Santa Ana, California, in June, improving her time in the 100m to 16.26 and setting a new mark in the 200m with a time of 35.34. Bergen has watched many of her previous world records fall, but she still claims the top indoor times in the 60m (9.21) and 200m (31.86) for the 70-74 age group, which she set in 2010 and 2012, respectively. Her indoor high jump world record for the 75-79 age category, 1.25 meters, has stood for more than five years. That Bergen was able to compete at all in the pandemic-marred 2020 was something of its own feat. She credits her husband Bert, with whom she has five children and 13 grandchildren, for finding the two events amid all of the disruptions. It was Bert who played a similar role nearly 30 years ago, when he helped guide Kathy to her first meet. She was 54 and Bert was 56 – or, as Kathy puts it, “that ripe old age when you start getting AARP magazine.” Bert, who was a high jumper in high school, came across an article promoting the California senior games, which were to be held at nearby Occidental College. “He said, ‘Why don’t we give it a try? Anybody can run,’” Kathy recalled. Up to that point, Kathy’s athletic experience was limited. She dabbled in intramural basketball and volleyball while growing up in Brooklyn, but her sporting endeavors stopped after high school. And although Bergen said she was always fast as a kid, and that she became a good tennis player after she and Bert relocated to California in 1972, her background did not exactly portend a hall of fame future. Nor did it necessarily give her reason to expect immediate success when she first stepped on the track at Occidental. Bergen won both the 50m and 100m races that day – from a standing start and in a pair of sneakers, no less – and from there, she was off. “It was like, oh boy, I found a new love,” Bergen said. She learned how to use starting blocks and bought a pair of sprinting spikes, as she and Bert searched for other meets in California. Kathy eventually showcased her dominance in other events, adding the 200m, high jump and javelin to her repertoire. There are late bloomers in sports – Ian Wright playing Sunday League football until he was 21, Hakeem Olajuwon taking up basketball at 15 – and then there are athletes like Bergen, who began collecting gold medals when most of their peers were counting gray hairs. “When I turned 70, I was kind of spinning my wheels,” she said. “I was OK. I’d win a fair amount, but I wasn’t that great.” Not content with merely placing first, Bergen sought the assistance of a track and field coach named Eric Dixon. “I must admit I thought she was crazy at first because when we first met, she told me she wanted to set world records,” Dixon said. “But I’m always up for a challenge. Plus, I saw that she had the right attitude.” He developed a training program for Bergen, who said that the new regimen helped make her world class. Dixon coaches other masters record holders and some standout collegiate athletes, but he said few rival Bergen. “Kathy is among the top of my list,” he said. There are other masters athletes who have unlocked their elite abilities deep into adulthood. Brian Hankerson learned of his hidden athletic prowess when he was trying to help his kids discover their own. Driven by the fatherly impulse to lead by example, Hankerson, 45 at the time, began to train with his son and daughter while they competed in track and field. “I would run with them and encourage them. ‘Hey, if I can do it, so can you,’” Hankerson said. Attending a regional meet in the Miami area around that time, Hankerson took note of some contemporaries who weren’t there as spectators. “They were called ‘masters’. I had never heard of it, but as I listened to the age groupings, I thought, ‘Wow, these guys are my age,’” he said. “I was out there running with my kids and I thought, ‘I bet I could do what they’re doing.’” He gave it a go the following year, competing in high jump and sprints. At a meet in Clermont, Florida, a fellow competitor recognized that Hankerson was a diamond in the rough. “He asked me if I had ever tried long jump,” Hankerson said. “I told him no, and he said that with my leaping ability and speed, I could be great at long jump.” Hankerson, now 62, has gone on to establish himself as one of the preeminent long and high jumpers on the senior circuit. He will compete at the masters world championships in Finland next summer, and has designs on setting his first world records in the coming year. Hankerson is currently just on the cusp of shattering the marks for long jump (6.07 meters) and high jump (1.78 meters) for the 60-64 age group. “Those records are definitely doable,” he said. Hankerson has posted a number of record-setting marks at the National Senior Games, billed as “the largest multi-sport event in the world for seniors”. The 2022 games, postponed a year late due to the pandemic, will be held in Hankerson’s hometown of Fort Lauderdale, Florida, where he and Bergen will be joined by thousands of other athletes over the age of 50 competing in 20 different sports. Philipp Djang will be there. He’s only missed one edition of the senior games since 2005, racking up more than 20 event records in swimming races across four age groups. Djang, 67, swam as a kid growing up in New Mexico, where he still lives, and had what he described as a “mediocre” collegiate career in the pool at a small university in Oregon. He stayed fit throughout his 35-year career as a scientist in the US Army, playing racquetball and competing in triathlons and marathons, but he had largely given up swimming until 1999, when he turned 45 and a friend persuaded him to participate in a meet held in Long Beach, California. “I got into the pool, swam a race and I accidentally broke a world record,” Djang said, modestly referring to his 1:03.39 time in the 100m backstroke. “I had no expectations at all of doing anything like that.” That performance was the springboard for a swimming career highlighted by 10 individual world records and 15 US masters records. The success has given Djang a rosy view of the natural aging process. Every five years offers a new age group to conquer – and new records to target. “I look forward to getting older,” he said. It’s why Djang was especially gutted to miss out on a year of competitions in 2020, with his 65th birthday falling shortly before the pandemic. “I would have done really well, but everything got shut down,” Djang said. “You only turn 65 once.” Bergen concedes that her record-setting days are likely finished in the 80-84 age group, but that doesn’t mean she is done making history. Just last month, 105-year-old Julia Hawkins set a world record in the 100m with a time of 1:02.95, perhaps offering a glimpse of what lies ahead for Bergen, who vows that she will “keep doing this forever”. But Bergen’s career invites an obvious question: does she ever wonder what might have been had she realized her abilities earlier in life? After all, a high jump coach once told her that if she had started in high school, she may well have been an Olympian. “I’m very flattered by his estimate,” she said. “But if I had, I wouldn’t be doing it now.”Once again we have seen a new variant of the Covid virus emerge, and health officials are warily eyeing the data from around the world. With Omicron, a key question is whether infections are as severe as those caused by previous variants. Many are speculating that it could be inherently milder, especially after several preliminary reports from South Africa seemed to suggest fewer hospitalisations and less severe symptoms. In my opinion this judgment is premature. Especially in such a rapidly changing situation. Accurately estimating the severity of a new infection is a nightmare. Especially at such an early stage. However, there are some things we should keep in mind when evaluating the numbers coming in. Looking at the severity of infections in South Africa, it is important to remember differences in populations. South Africa has a younger population overall, and Covid in younger age groups has been consistently milder than in older ones. There is also the issue of time, and how long it takes for people to fall ill and get sick enough to require care, and for those numbers to be reported. We are still only a few weeks into this newest wave. Similarly, we do expect infections in a highly vaccinated population such as that of the UK to be milder overall, because vaccination is expected to protect against severe illness. However, that is little comfort to those who have been unvaccinated for various reasons, or otherwise unable to mount a robust immune response after vaccination. The surge of Omicron makes it more likely such people will be exposed. Indeed, because Omicron appears to spread even more quickly than previous variants, we need to be cautious even if breakthrough infections are only occasionally severe, because there are going to be so many breakthrough infections. The ultimate number of severe outcomes is determined by the number of opportunities the virus gets to cause them, which is the result of infectiousness. This is one reason why the Alpha variant wreaked such havoc last winter. You cannot simply compare Omicron with Delta by adding up the numbers of cases and hospitalisations for each over a short timeframe. The numbers of Omicron cases have been growing faster – much faster – than those of Delta, and it takes time for people to become seriously ill. To accurately gauge the severity, we will need to compare the numbers of cases that end up in hospitalisation or death. Mortality is often assessed as death within 28 days of diagnosis, and Omicron was reported to the WHO less than 28 days ago. We cannot afford to wait to find out exactly how dangerous it is. There is a widespread belief that infectious diseases evolve to become less virulent, leaving many hopeful that Omicron will be less severe for everyone, regardless of age or vaccination status. This is false. Viruses do not necessarily get selected to be milder or more severe. If virulence (the severity of the disease) is not connected to transmission (the factor that makes a virus successful or not) there’s no real link between the two in most real situations. The great majority of Covid transmission occurs before people become seriously ill, and so the virus has already moved on. We should remember that Delta was actually more virulent than Alpha, which itself was more virulent than the original virus. Remember the issue with Covid has never been its virulence. It’s the number of people infected. Everyone wants to believe Omicron is milder. I would like it to be milder myself, but I am very careful to not allow what I want to colour the way I interpret the data. The growth rate of Omicron is such that even if it is milder in most cases, cases can still rapidly add up and threaten the NHS. The UK has a healthcare system already struggling with decades of underinvestment and which was teetering on the brink after months of Delta. People seem to forget that nearly 20,000 people have already died from Covid in the UK since “freedom day” in July. The virus has been much more manageable, but that attrition has not been without consequence. The most definitive estimate of severity that we can expect will come in a few weeks when the UK Health Security Agency (which has done a phenomenal job in terms of analysis in a dizzying turnaround time) reports on the comparison of the outcomes of infections with Delta and Omicron over the same time period. Before then, the South African data should start to become informative on longer-term outcomes. Very early data suggest hospitalisations in Guateng have peaked at a lower level than previous waves. But this is the first wave to have taken place in the presence of immunity of previous infection, which makes things more complicated to interpret. Epidemics of rapidly transmitting viruses are not kind to overstretched healthcare systems, especially ones that have been fighting a pandemic bear for nearly two years already. Boosters will help, but Omicron will be infecting a lot of people receiving boosters now before the doses have had time to act to prepare the immune system. This is why Jeremy Farrar of the Wellcome Trust was right, even before Omicron, to propose “vaccines plus” rather than relying solely on the jabs to preserve healthcare. Even if, and it is an exceedingly big if, Omicron is milder than Delta, that is no reason to relax. The transmission properties alone make this serious. The difference between a caress and a slap is largely in the pace with which it is given. Dr William Hanage is a professor of the evolution and epidemiology of infectious disease at Harvard and the co-director of the Center for Communicable Disease DynamicsChristmas when I was a child was always about Event Books. Not paperback novels; those would be bought after Christmas with the book tokens I always received both on the big day and for my January birthday, feasting on the gems in the January sale at Smiths in Wigan – not WH, but an independent, family-owned bookshop. But under the tree would be big rectangular packages – the requisite comic book annuals, of course, and occasionally the Guinness Book of Records, but also a big old hardback book, often obtained cheap from remaindered shops, obscure volumes of science fiction or fantasy art with a nominal narrative thread loosely connecting the images, or Reader’s Digest explorations of uncanny phenomena. And one of my most treasured Event Books, which I must have got sometime in the late 1970s or very early 80s, was Usborne’s The World of the Unknown: Ghosts. It was meant to be a child-friendly introduction to the world of the paranormal — and it fascinated and terrified me in equal measure. The big, airy graphic pages and breezy text belied the utterly blood-freezing content. As for many people of my generation, the book branded the words “Borley Rectory” into my brain – which, as everyone knows, is the most haunted house in England. Even the cover was terrifying … a line of ghostly monks, or perhaps the same ghostly monk, caught in repeated freeze frame, with the ruins of an abbey behind him as the main image, topped with a panel of graphic blurbs promising haunted houses, famous fakes, a grinning skull and a candle guttering in a mysterious, spirit wind. I devoured the book, first published in 1977, in the long days of the Christmas week. It was fine when there were jolly movies on all afternoon and the lights of the fake tree were glittering, but once under the bed covers with the midwinter moon shining through the curtains, the tales of ghostly dogs, vengeful pirates and the tips on how to hunt ghosts were brought into sharp focus. Every creaking floorboard in our mid-terraced house, every distant dog bark, every shadow crossing the sodium orange glow cast on the ceiling by the streetlight outside, was surely evidence for the existence of ghosts. It was the matter-of-fact way in which the book presented its information – as straightforward as if it were writing about trains or garden birds or mountains. There was never any suggestion that ghosts weren’t as real as those things. For many years I knew that ghosts existed because I had read about them in this book. And I was not alone … two years ago, Usborne re-published the book after years out of print, and I fervently hope it will be terrifying a new generation of children this Christmas.Teeming with stimuli in highly-populated scenes reminiscent of a Where’s Wally? spread, a Lemi Ghariokwu painting is instantly recognisable. Raised in Lagos, the 66-year-old has painted over 2,000 album covers for artists both major and independent in Nigeria and beyond, but his most famous were for Afrobeat pioneer Fela Kuti – visible in a new box set out this month – whose warrior spirit railed against the country’s military regime and aligned with Ghariokwu in an eventful four-year partnership. At five years old, Ghariokwu would draw luxury cars that sometimes drove by, using a broomstick on Lagos’s unpaved sand streets. He would not pursue art professionally until 17, when he came across a record designed by Roger Dean, the British artist famous for his work with prog band Yes. “Seeing him have magazine interviews because of his work, the inspiration was foundational,” he says. His prolific output began via his friendship with musician Sonny Okosun, who was invited for a TV interview. “I went along and made a sketch of the presenter, and [the studio] started to invite me to draw on live TV. I always made sure I was finished by the time the show ended so the public could see [the finished product].” His opportunity to meet Kuti came at 18, when local journalist Babatunde Harrison was impressed by a Bruce Lee tribute painting he made for his local bar. “I found out that Babatunde wanted to buy it for 120 naira [close to £800 today]. I knew that was my golden ticket into Fela’s world,” Ghariokwu says, positively gleaming with the memory. Harrison challenged him to draw a portrait of Kuti to see if he was worthy of meeting the man himself. The next day, Lemi waited outside the bar with a framed and completed portrait, to Harrison’s amazement. He ordered a taxi to Kuti’s communal compound, known as the Kalakuta Republic, immediately. Declared by Kuti as an independent state, to the contempt of the Nigerian military, the Republic accommodated Kuti’s family and an in-house band among a carnival of other residents. “When it came to Kalakuta, Fela was a very good human resources manager,” Ghariokwu explains. “He gave jobs for everyone there: some of the girls were dancers, some were singers; there were chefs and DJs. He always had one or two ‘rollers’, who were responsible for rolling up joints. Fela even had his own court in the house – if there was a fight between two members of the Republic, he would hold the court session himself.” Ghariokwu describes the place as “surreal, like a rockstar lifestyle. DJs played music 24/7 in Kalakuta – you would wake up and James Brown’s Sex Machine would be playing on massive speakers.” Bonding over teachings of spiritualism from British-born Tibetan lama Tuesday Lobsang Rampa and black empowerment from Malcolm X, Ghariokwu notes the immediate connection the two had. “The synergy between us was there right away,” he says. “The relationship only grew from there.” Travelling to Kalakuta every day for four years, Ghariokwu observed Kuti as he wrote and perfected new music. Kuti trusted him like a best friend, and this vantage point allowed Ghariokwu to offer spontaneous visual responses to Kuti’s ideas. In his words: “I am embellishing his point of view and adding my perspective. I am visualising the soul of the music.” This was most evident when Kuti was brutalised by the police in 1974 and urgently wanted to write about it. “I met him at the hospital, and he had a broken skull that needed 17 stitches,” he winces. “But he said he wanted to write a song directly attacking the police. That was the moment he chose that role of fighting the establishment directly.” That song would become Alagbon Close, the title track of a Kuti album that first used Ghariokwu’s artwork. Tensions between Kalakuta and the Nigerian military would ultimately pollute Lemi and Fela’s friendship. After Kuti released the scolding political album Zombie in 1976, the Republic was burned down by a thousand soldiers in retaliation. Ghariokwu was disturbed: “I was 22. It was scary shit.” Relations between him and Kuti worsened after an argument over the cover art for 1977’s Sorrow Tears and Blood. “I showed him the artwork, and he [glanced] and complained that I didn’t include his burning Republic. Why should I draw the burning house when it was a year ago? He poked my chest: ‘check your mind, your mind is weak.’ I drove away crying, I was so heartbroken,” he recalls. Despite their split, Ghariokwu’s work refracted into many different areas of black culture in the decades after. For 11 years each, he created artwork for Polygram and Kennis Music, the latter a Nigerian label that preceded the Afrobeats explosion of today. Meanwhile, his influence shaped socially-conscious US hip-hop, from the Pan-African paintings that cover A Tribe Called Quest’s albums to the handwritten titles of De La Soul’s classics. Though Ghariokwu’s time with Kuti ended at just 22, his art has lasted. He posits a simple explanation as to why: “I reflected my generation.” Fela Kuti Boxset 5, curated by Chris Martin and Femi Kuti, is out nowIt is three days until Christmas Day. According to government rules, if people in the UK test positive for Covid-19 they will have to self-isolate over Christmas. Have you tested positive and had to change your Christmas plans? Or are you minimising the contact you have with others from now on so that you can be Covid-free to see people on Christmas Day? How do you feel about restrictions at the moment and the way the government is handling the rise in Covid cases? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.People hopping over the border to Belgium and Germany to avoid the Dutch lockdown are filling the neighbouring countries’ restaurants and shops despite calls for them to “stay away”. Since Mark Rutte, the Dutch prime minister, announced the closure of hospitality and non-essential shops from Sunday, border regions have experienced a rush of visitors. While the hospitality industry in the Netherlands is shuttered, Belgium has resisted scientists’ calls for stricter measures, with restaurants open until 11pm to customers who can prove full vaccination. The German Länder, or states, have been given the power to close restaurants but such measures are generally yet to be enforced. At a meeting on Monday with the governor of the Belgian province of Antwerp, Cathy Berx, local mayors expressed their concern about the potential spread of the Omicron variant due to border-hopping. Berx said: “Letting this happen is the shortest route to a closure of the catering industry, and nobody wants that. And so the friendly but firm appeal is: don’t come to cafes or restaurants in the province of Antwerp now.” Marc Van Aperen, the mayor of Hoogstraten, a town in Antwerp, said hundreds of people had had to be turned away from local restaurants since the weekend. He said: “I understand very well that many Dutch people now come here for their dinner. That’s human. But it is not wise. “The question we now need to ask ourselves is how can we contain the pandemic? Not where can I go for a good meal. Healthcare is under pressure both in the Netherlands and here. “Then we are not going to import infections, are we? I have a lot of Dutch friends, but it’s best for them to stay in their own country for a while.” Kai Zwicker, a district administrator in Westmünsterland, a German region bordering the Netherlands, said people should stay on their side of the borders. He said: “At the moment, don’t make unnecessary visits to your neighbouring country. The Germans should stay in their country, the Dutch in the Netherlands.” The German and Belgian governments are considering tighter Covid rules but both countries have a higher proportion of the population who have received a booster vaccine and a greater availability of intensive care beds than the Netherlands. The European Commission has urged the 27 EU member states to keep their borders open to residents within the bloc, with Italy being the exception in asking travellers from within the EU for a negative PCR test. Following an EU leaders’ summit last Thursday, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, tweeted: “We must continue to act like Europeans. People who have been vaccinated will not have to take any tests to travel between member countries of the European Union.”The Treasury is set to respond on Tuesday to concerns of businesses suffering financially from the latest Covid wave, a minister has said, while a leading scientist has added that the country is facing the most uncertain period of the pandemic since March 2020. The Cabinet Office minister, Steve Barclay, said that, even though at cabinet on Monday ministers held back from a decision to press ahead with further restrictions, the plan B measures already implemented were having an impact. “We’re acutely aware that, as a consequence of plan B, we have seen significant behaviour change,” Barclay told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “You see that for example, in restaurant bookings. That is why the chancellor [Rishi Sunak] has been engaging with industry leaders.” Barclay said Sunak was talking to industry figures about their financial predicament and the government would be saying more about this issue later on Tuesday. Barclay also said, in a separate interview, that the government was “keen to keep businesses open” and that hospitality firms “should continue to plan for the bookings they have”. Barclay and Sunak were among the cabinet ministers pressing for more data at a meeting on Monday afternoon before they could agree to calls from Prof Chris Whitty, the government’s chief medical adviser, and Sir Patrick Vallance, its chief scientific adviser, for new restrictions going beyond plan B. But, in an interview after the cabinet meeting, Boris Johnson also stressed that further action had not been ruled out, and some in the government expect new restrictions on socialising in England to be introduced after Christmas, with parliament being recalled next week for MPs to pass the measures. Asked about the Labour party claim that the cabinet delayed taking a decision because Johnson was too weak to push through new restrictions in the face of opposition from lockdown-sceptic Tories, Barclay said he did not accept that. “The key issue is that there is a time lag [in the data],” he said. In a separate interview with the Today programme, Sir Jeremy Farrar, a former member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) and head of the health research foundation the Wellcome Trust said he thought it was reasonable for ministers to wait for more data before ordering new restrictions. He said the country was in “the most difficult, most uncertain” period of the pandemic since March last year and that, although Omicron was spreading “unbelievably fast’”, there was great uncertainty about what impact this would have on hospitalisations, the death rate and the health service generally. He continued: “I think it is reasonable that, if there is going to be more data, if we can watch what is happening, particularly in London, the epicentre, for another 24 hours, 48 hours – but if transmission continues to rise … we will see hospitalisations rising after that, and then I believe the government will have to act. “But amid the current uncertainty about severity, about transmission and about the broader impact on society, I think it is reasonable to pause for 24 hours, maybe 36 hours until we see other data.”Australia could have 200,000 new Covid cases a day by late January or early February under a “worst-case scenario” included in Doherty Institute modelling to be discussed at national cabinet. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, will discuss the spike in Omicron cases and the vaccine booster program with state and territory leaders on Wednesday. The Doherty modelling suggests that without low-to-medium restrictions, Australia could reach 200,000 cases a day in just over a month’s time, Nine newspapers reported on Tuesday evening. A senior source who has seen the complete modelling told Guardian Australia that figure would only be reached “if we do nothing”. That scenario was based on people not altering their behaviour, no change to the booster schedule and only basic public health restrictions being in place. Nine newspapers reported the Doherty modelling suggested the high case numbers could lift hospitalisation rates to 4,000 a day and see between 8,000 and 10,000 patients admitted to intensive care units. Models provide information on a wide range of scenarios, and governments and health officials rely on dozens of models, never just one. No model predicts the future with certainty and Covid models that look at worst-case scenarios are usually wrong. But they are useful as they allow authorities to see what might happen if nothing was done to control an outbreak. Stricter mask mandates are on the agenda as state and territory leaders scramble to limit hospital pressure in the face of the spiking transmission of Omicron ahead of Christmas. At national cabinet on Wednesday, they will be presented with expert advice recommending mask requirements be in place over the festive period in jurisdictions that have not yet tightened Covid restrictions. Face masks will again be mandatory indoors in the ACT from Wednesday due to an increase in Omicron infections. They are also mandated in Queensland and Tasmania. Victoria has not ruled out tightening indoor mask mandates but will not make wholesale changes to restrictions for Christmas gatherings and major events to limit Omicron cases. Australia’s chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, has urged all state and territory chief health officers to mandate masks in all indoor settings, citing rising case numbers for the new Covid variant. Victoria’s acting premier, James Merlino, says Victoria will take Kelly’s advice on board before making a decision on reintroducing compulsory masks in hospitality and entertainment venues. “Mask wearing is a prudent commonsense measure. It can be inconvenient but it’s a small inconvenience for a significant public health benefit,” Merlino told reporters on Tuesday. “There are no restrictions on getting together with loved ones, with family and friends to celebrate Christmas, to celebrate New Year, to enjoy the summer. None of those things are changing.” No change will be made to the unlimited crowd cap for the Boxing Day Test at the MCG, despite fears it could become an Omicron super-spreader event. “The contract with people of Victoria [was] get vaccinated and that means an end to lockdown, it means enjoying events,” Merlino said. In the ACT, masks will be required across indoor retail and hospitality venues as well as aged care, workplaces and on public transport. Aged care restrictions will also be reintroduced, with a limit of five visitors each day. The mask mandate will continue over Christmas and the new year period before it is reviewed in January. “Wearing a mask indoors is a small price to pay to keep your family and friends safe,” the ACT’s acting chief minister, Yvette Berry, told reporters. The national capital recorded 16 new infections on Tuesday and residents faced lengthy queues for testing. Some testing clinics were forced to close early after reaching capacity. Nearly 6,000 results were processed on Monday as demand for tests reached levels not seen since August. Half of the ACT’s 124 active Covid-19 cases have been identified as the Omicron strain. Three virus patients are in hospital but none have that variant. The chief health officer, Dr Kerryn Coleman, expected Omicron to become the dominant strain in the ACT. “We anticipate we will see an escalation in cases similar to that in NSW,” she said. “The unexpected emergency at this time of Omicron is posing an increasing risk to our community, and it’s why we have made the decision to reintroduce mask wearing.” Meanwhile, in NSW – where the premier, Dominic Perrottet has resisted calls to reintroduce stricter mask mandates and other restrictions as cases spike – symptomless residents have been urged to reconsider going to Covid testing clinics as a pre-Christmas surge caused delays. Clinics at Stanmore and the international airport in Sydney turned people away on Tuesday morning despite some waiting three hours. “It’s just frustrating,” Mitchell Jones, who went to both clinics before giving up, said. “I wanted to be safe as I’m needing to see elderly family in Newcastle over Christmas. I had run out of RATs [rapid antigen tests], and figured they were like gold now.” Extreme demand at Northern Beaches hospital’s drive-in testing clinic stopped hospital staff getting to work and led the management to stop testing asymptomatic people unless they were close contacts or needed to be swabbed for work. “Please be kind to our staff – they’re doing their very best in this time of high activity, as well as having some colleagues absent from work due to being community close contacts,” the hospital chief executive, Andrew Newton, said on Monday. NSW pathology labs have processed more than 700,000 tests since Wednesday evening with more than 12,800 coming back positive. The state reported 3,057 new local cases on Tuesday along with two deaths, with 284 people in hospital and 39 in intensive care. Perrottet on Tuesday said his government would tailor its settings to the current circumstances. “But we’ll make those changes based on facts not fear,” he told reporters, adding NSW would look at the new Doherty modelling to be presented to national cabinet. “This [Omicron] is just another challenge … I understand different people have different opinions from time to time but we are standing firm here in NSW and we remain strong.” Victoria reported 1,245 cases on Tuesday with six deaths. There were 392 people in hospital and 73 in ICU. The head of the AMA, Dr Omar Khorshid, said Omicron was spreading around the world like wildfire and the “threat is real”. “Our message to the states is focus on what you can do,” he told reporters. “You can require masks to be worn in indoor venues. You can keep some sensible limits on people getting together in indoor venues to try and minimise the impact of Omicron while we wait for extra data … it is a no-brainer in the view of the AMA.”It was while fleeing the civil war in South Sudan that Lual Mayen’s mother gave birth to him 28 years ago. She had four children in tow and was near to the border with Uganda, in a town called Aswa. The journey was difficult; Mayen’s two sisters died on the way and he became sick. No one thought he would survive. “I can’t imagine what she had to go through. There was no food, no water, nothing,” says Mayen. “I remember she said she was not the only woman who gave birth on the way. Other women abandoned their children because they didn’t want them to suffer. But my mother thought: “He is a gift for me, I have to keep him.”’ Mayen’s mother made it to northern Uganda with her newborn son and reunited with her husband in a refugee camp that remained their home for the next 22 years. Mayen grew up there, and although life was a struggle, he was happy and grateful for what he had. There wasn’t much to do but Mayen says he found creative ways to keep himself entertained. Then, one day he had the chance to play the video game Grand Theft Auto, which mostly revolves around driving and shooting. “While I was playing, this thought came into my mind,” he remembers. “In South Sudan, most of the population is under 30. They were born in war, raised in war. I saw conflict every day in the refugee camp. I realised that if more kids in the camp play Grand Theft Auto, they might think that’s how things are done.” Mayen, up until this point, had never seen a video game and didn’t know how they were created. “I thought [they] fell from heaven,” he says. But, in that moment he decided he wanted to make a game that would encourage empathy and compassion, and promote peace and conflict resolution. He had a laptop which his mother had saved up for three years to buy. He went to an internet cafe, downloaded online tutorials on to a USB stick and learned to code. Once he had created his game about a refugee’s journey, he used Bluetooth to share it with others in the camp. He saw people enjoying it and had “an insane idea”. He decided to upload the game to his Facebook page with a message saying that he had created it in a refugee camp. The post attracted attention from people in the games industry who started contacting him, saying they loved the idea. Mayen got in contact through Facebook with Thorsten Wiedemann, artistic director of the international games festival A Maze. “I was impressed by his journey and also his mission,” remembers Wiedemann. “He had this idea of bringing peace through games, which is just amazing, as games are seen more as products of entertainment.” After finding out more about Mayen and his ideas, Wiedemann invited him to the 2016 festival in Johannesburg. “That’s how everything changed,” says Mayen. “[After that] a game developer’s conference invited me to the US, and from there I started working on my business.” In 2017, Mayen was granted a visa for the US, moved to Washington DC and founded his own company, Junub Games. Mayen has helped his family, who previously applied for resettlement 10 times without success, to move to Canada. In 2018, he won a Global Gaming Citizen award, created by Facebook Gaming and the Game Awards to recognise people using the power of games to create positive change in their communities. Leo Olebe, who now works at Google but was Facebook’s former global director of games and remains a mentor to Mayen, says: “Lual received the award because he and his vision for games is pure and authentic. I don’t think you can find anyone more committed to making the world a better place because, in the worst ways, he has seen its evils first-hand. At every turn, Lual is a positive force for good.” Next year, Mayen will launch his video game, called Salaam (peace in Arabic), which follows a family as they flee a war-torn country. It is based on his own family’s story. The player is responsible for seeing that the refugee gets to their final destination. Along the way they must avoid bombs, evade kidnap and find food and water. “My focus is to make people understand what that journey takes, what it looks like,” he says. “There are people, policymakers, who do not understand the journey of a refugee and how it traumatises people.” Mayen hopes that a 16-year-old might play the game now, then in 10 or 20 years may be in a position of power and have an understanding of what refugees go through. “We have [tens of millions of refugees] around the world and each of them flees their country for different reasons,” he says. “I decided to make games because they are a powerful tool to communicate an idea.” The game will initially launch as a phone app, with a PC version coming later, and will be free to download. Players will need to make in-app purchases to buy their character essentials such as food, water and medicine to enable them to continue their journey. The funds will benefit real-life refugees through Junub Games’s partnerships with various NGOs. Mayen also wants to introduce a dashboard for players where they can donate more, and see photos and thank you letters from the people they have helped. “It’s bridging the virtual world and reality on the ground so players understand that it’s more than just playing a game – they’re helping other people,” says Mayen. His work on developing Salaam led, in part, to him being recognised at this year’s Young Activists Summit, run in partnership by the UN and dev.tv, an organisation of media professionals dedicated to promoting coverage of social and environmental issues. Marina Wutholen, founder of the summit, says: “His video game is a smart idea. It’s modern, new, and a cool way to help others and foster peace and empathy.” Salaam has not been the only thing keeping Mayen busy. He is also developing a virtual reality game about conflict resolution, and there is a board game in the works. During lockdown in 2020, he was at home with wifi and a computer, and imagined what life would be like if he were still in the refugee camp. He saw everybody working from home, and wanted to replicate that for people in camps by ensuring they had access to the internet so that they could learn skills and work. With that in mind, Mayen started his own foundation to teach 3D and animation skills to refugees. He is partnered with Origin PC, a computer manufacturing company, to provide computers to refugee camps. In December, the foundation is sending three refugees to Singapore to participate in the Global Esports Games. He also has plans to build data stores in refugee camps so that people can upload their pictures and store them permanently. Mayen says: “Talent is evenly distributed, but opportunity is not. We need to invest in education for refugees. It’s the most powerful tool that can change their life.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:The ruler of Dubai has been ordered to pay his ex-wife Princess Haya and their two children a divorce settlement which could reach over half a billion pounds – the highest ever awarded by a UK court – to protect them from the threat he poses to them. In a written judgment, Mr Justice Moor said that “uniquely” the “main threat” to Haya and the children came from Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, who is also prime minister of the United Arab Emirate, a close Gulf ally of Britain. Haya fled to Britain in April 2019 with her two children. Since then, in a series of hearings concerned with custody, access and financial support, which have so far cost over £70m in legal fees, high court judges have found on the balance of probabilities that: Sheikh Mohammed orchestrated the abductions of two of his other children, Princess Latifa and Princess Shamsa – in the latter case from the streets of Cambridge – and subjected Haya to a campaign of “intimidation”. Using NSO Group’s Pegasus spyware, he hacked the phones of Haya and five of her associates, including two of her lawyers, while the couple were locked in court proceedings. His agents attempted to buy a £30m estate next door to Haya’s Berkshire home in a “very significant threat to her security”. Referring to the previous rulings, Moor, who ordered that the sheikh pay over £250m upfront to Haya and provide a bank guarantee of £290m for annual payments, said: “I am entirely satisfied that this means that, although HRH (her royal highness Haya) and the children would require security provision in any event, given their status and the general threats of terrorism and kidnap faced in such circumstances, they are particularly vulnerable and need water-tight security to ensure their continued safety and security in this country. “Most importantly in this regard, and absolutely uniquely, the main threat they face is from HH (his highness the sheikh) himself not from outside sources. This is compounded by the full weight of the state that he has available to him as seen by his ability to make use of the Pegasus software, which is only available to governments.” The high court judge ordered the costs of security for Haya’s lifetime to be paid upfront rather than annually as it would otherwise create a situation whereby it was in her ex-husband’s interests to reduce the payments so that it “weakened the defences of HRH against him”. Haya, who in Dubai was given £83m a year for her household spending plus an allowance of £9m per annum and ad hoc gifts, did not ask for any money for herself in the proceedings, other than to compensate for items including jewellery and clothes that she lost as a result of the marital breakdown. Details of her spending provided for the proceedings included £6.7m paid to four security staff during her marriage to Sheikh Mohammed after they had allegedly blackmailed her over an affair she had had with one of them. The court had previously heard of the affair and of a phone call the sheikh made to her about it that left her “terrified”. Her ex-husband criticised her use of some funds from the children’s accounts to pay the alleged blackmailers. Moor did not hear from any of the alleged blackmailers, but said, while it would have been “preferable” if Haya had used her own cash, “she was in a very difficult position indeed. She would have been desperate for HH not to find out”. He said he found her a believable witness, while the sheikh did not give evidence. The settlement includes £210m, which must be paid within three months, to cover the security costs of Haya, for her expected lifetime, and her children until they finish tertiary education. The sheikh must also pay £41.5m up front to his ex-wife for chattels cash for education and maintenance arrears and £5.6m a year for each child for maintenance until they finish their tertiary education, when he must instead pay them directly the same amount but for their security. If the bank guarantee were used in full, the settlement would reach £554m, although that could vary depending on how long the yearly payments last. Moor said there could be a reconsideration of the payments if the children’s security situation changes when they are adults as a result of reconciliation with their father of his death, but it was not a given. For now, he said the risk to them was “clear and ever present”. A spokesperson on behalf of Sheikh Mohammed said: “He has always ensured that his children are provided for. The court has now made its ruling on finances and he does not intend to comment further. “He asks that the media respect the privacy of his children and do not intrude into their lives in the UK.”The potentially record-breaking settlement in the divorce between the ruler of Dubai and his ex-wife Princess Haya provided an insight into what the judge called the “truly opulent and unprecedented standard of living enjoyed by these parties” during their marriage. The court heard that before their separation in 2019, Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum had provided Haya with £83m a year for her household spending plus an allowance of £9m per annum for herself and various ad hoc payments. Their children, Jalila, now 14, and Zayed, now nine, had annual allowances of approximately £10m each, as well as access to a fleet of aeroplanes owned by the sheikh, including a custom-fit Boeing 747 upon which he insisted the children should travel, helicopters, a $400m (£303m) superyacht and luxurious properties worth hundreds of millions of pounds. The children and their mother also had support from about 80 staff . In one summer while they were married, Haya and Sheikh Mohammed spent £2m on strawberries, the court heard. Among the items Haya unsuccessfully asked to be returned to her were haute couture clothing worth €74m (£63m) and jewellery worth £20m. After a video of the walk-in safe at the beach palace was shown in court, Haya said most valuable items had been removed, leaving mainly costume jewellery worth about £20,000. Asked by the judge whether there was “any point” it being sent to her, she replied “no”. In the event, Mr Justice Moor ordered Haya’s ex-husband to pay her £13.7m for jewellery and £1m for haute couture clothing (she claimed £32m rather than €74m). She was also awarded £5m to “buy a few reasonable horses and run them for several years”. Holidays formed a significant portion of the yearly maintenance payments for the children, with £5.1m awarded for nine weeks of foreign holidays a year, two weeks in the UK, plus three long weekends in Jordan and three weekends away in the UK. Also forming part of the maintenance payments are £1m a year on “leisure” and £277,050 annually on animals, including two ponies and a horse, which the children ride. While the court heard that they had incurred tutoring costs of £250,000 a year, the amount awarded was set at £100,000 per annum. The court heard that while the sheikh would be able to afford any amount he was directed to pay within reason, Haya’s resources amounted to £100m but were largely tied up in two properties and she had been forced to sell assets worth £15.6m since coming to Britain. Her desire, expressed in court, for the children to live a “normal life” in the UK, was questioned by the sheikh’s lawyer in light of some of the sums claimed. For his part, Moor said he would “do my best to come to a conclusion as to what is reasonable while remembering that the exceptional wealth and remarkable standard of living enjoyed by these children during the marriage takes this case entirely out of the ordinary”. He largely refrained from comment on the amounts involved although he said it was a “legitimate criticism” to question the purchase of three cars for Zayed. Declining to make any award with respect to the children’s cars, he said: “I do consider it an artificial edifice to talk of children of the ages of these children owning motor vehicles. Moreover, Zayed’s precious motor vehicle has now finally been returned to him.”Good morning. Omicron is the dominant version of Covid in the US, federal health officials have announced, racing ahead of Delta and other variants and accounting for 73% of new infections last week. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data showed an almost sixfold increase in Omicron’s share of infections in only one week. In much of the country, its prevalence is even higher. It is responsible for an estimated 90% of new infections in the New York area, the south-east, the industrial mid-west and the Pacific north-west. Meanwhile, the World Health Organization has also declared 2022 to be the year “we end the pandemic”, while sounding a new warning about Omicron and calling for some events over the festive period to be postponed. Should we be sticking to our holiday plans? Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the head of the WHO, has warned that festivities could lead to increased cases, overwhelmed health systems and more deaths, adding: “An event cancelled is better than a life cancelled.” What is Joe Biden doing about Omicron? Half a billion at-home coronavirus tests will be sent free to the American public in an effort to fight the surging variant, the president will announce today. US Capitol attack panel seeks interview with Scott Perry The House panel investigating the US Capitol insurrection on 6 January has requested an interview and documents from Scott Perry, the Republican representative of Pennsylvania – the first time the committee has publicly sought to interview a sitting member of Congress. Perry and other congressional Republicans met Trump before the attack and strategized about how they could block the results at the 6 January electoral count. In a letter to Perry, the Mississippi representative Bennie Thompson, the Democratic chair of the panel, said the panel had received evidence from multiple witnesses that Perry had “an important role” in efforts to install the justice department official Jeffrey Clark as acting attorney general. The letter sent on Monday night is the first time the panel has publicly released a request to a fellow member of Congress as it investigates Donald Trump’s communications with his Republican allies. But the panel notably did not subpoena Perry. The panel has interviewed about 300 people as it seeks to create a comprehensive record of the attack and the events leading up to it. Ghislaine Maxwell’s sex-trafficking trial: jury begins deliberations The jury began deliberating late yesterday afternoon in Ghislaine Maxwell’s sex-trafficking trial in New York. Closing arguments had wrapped up in federal court in Manhattan earlier on Monday with a simple, chilling message. “She was a grown woman who preyed on vulnerable kids,” Alison Moe, prosecuting, told jurors. “She targeted a girl whose father had just died. She targeted a girl whose mother was an alcoholic. She targeted a girl with a single mom who was struggling to raise her daughters. “Maxwell was a sophisticated predator who knew exactly what she was doing. She ran the same playbook again and again and again.” What did the defense say in their closing arguments? Laura Menninger insisted the allegations against Maxwell were the “product of erroneous memories, manipulation, and money”. In other news … Democrats will keep working on Biden’s Build Back Better spending plan “until we get something done”, the Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, told colleagues yesterday – a day after a stunning move by Joe Manchin of West Virginia drew accusations of betrayal from the White House Gun purchases accelerated in the US during 2020-21 compared with 2019, with more than 5 million adults becoming first-time owners between January 2020 and April 2021, compared with 2.4 million adults in 2019, a study on reveals. Trump revealed he received a Covid booster shot, drawing boos from a crowd of his supporters in Dallas. The former president made the disclosure on Sunday night during the final stop of The History Tour, a live interview show he has been doing with Bill O’Reilly. The tornadoes and storms that hit US were the result of a derecho, the National Weather Service said. The derecho, often described as an inland hurricane, hit the north-central US on 15 December, separately from Kentucky tornadoes. A derecho storm has no “eye” and its powerful winds cause damage in a relatively straight line. Don’t miss this: Have we witnessed the death of the Hollywood remake? Remakes were once central to the cinematic landscape – hardly more remarkable or disreputable than a new theatrical production of an old play. Still, it’s easy to see why remakes got such a bad reputation, especially if we jump forward to the early 2000s, AKA the Time Just Before Every Mainstream Movie Was a Superhero Blockbuster. This was a period when studios seemed to be greenlighting a remake every week. Freaky Friday, The Italian Job, Ocean’s Eleven ... these are all titles that evoke previous decades. Anyone grumbling about Hollywood’s lack of ideas did not have to look far for examples. Climate check: Walmart illegally dumps 1m toxic items in landfills every year, lawsuit claims Walmart illegally dumps more than 1m batteries, aerosol cans of insect killer and other products, toxic cleaning supplies, electronic waste, latex paints and other hazardous waste into California landfills each year, state prosecutors have alleged. In a lawsuit announced on Monday, the California attorney general, Rob Bonta, accused the retail giant of failing to properly dispose of discarded or returned goods. Last Thing: White House pet shakeup after biting incidents Biden has introduced the newest member of his family, a purebred German shepherd puppy named Commander, while the first lady’s office said the cat she promised more than a year ago to bring to the White House would finally join them in January. But the news was not so good for another member of the Biden animal clan. The family decided it was best for their other German shepherd, Major, to live in a quieter environment with friends after some biting incidents.’Twas the week before Christmas and all through the house, not a creature was stirring, not even the latest Omicron variant. And with infection rates on the rise in many parts of the continent, who would currently opt to be a cross-border tournament organiser? European rugby union’s bleak Covid midwinter is already showing signs of being a depressingly long one. Last weekend just eight of a possible 18 pool games across the Champions and Challenge Cups were able to proceed because of Covid-related issues, leaving officials with any number of logistical headaches. Essentially if the French government do not announce an easing of their current border restrictions inside the next three weeks there will be little chance of fully completing round three of European competitions next month. That, in turn, would drastically undermine the scheduled final pool round just a week later. Even then, how fair have some of the recent adjudicated points decisions been? Leinster remain hugely aggrieved at being adjudged 28-0 losers against Montpellier even though they could still have fielded a team for the fixture. And after Scarlets were effectively punished for having to quarantine following their ill-fated trip to South Africa, is there not a good argument for treating them similarly to those French teams currently barred from travelling whose fixtures may be rescheduled? It is a deepening hole at a time of year when players and supporters are supposed to be building towards the start of the Six Nations in early February. Vaccines or no vaccines, will it be possible to stage the tournament in front of capacity crowds? Will mass cross-border travel be permitted or sensible? Nor have we even mentioned the possibility of inclement wintry weather, not exactly unknown when Scotland host England, as they will do in February’s opening round. Remember Storm Ciara in 2020? The capacity for disruption is never too far away. So, what next? As anyone with the slightest knowledge of rugby’s jam-packed calendar will know, it is not a matter of simply waiting for a free weekend. Even tinned sardines would wince at the congested nature of the northern hemisphere fixture list, with not a solitary spare Saturday available until deep into the summer. Midweek games are also a non-starter on player welfare grounds, which leaves just the round of 16 home and away weekends pencilled in for April. Could you ditch those, move any postponed December and January fixtures to the now vacant dates and then send only the top four from each pool through to the quarters? Fine in theory, less so if you happen to be one of the clubs forced to field an under-strength side in the early games. There is a more radical alternative. You could call a reluctant halt to the pool stages now, invite the eight fastest starters (including at least two sides from each of the three major European domestic leagues) from this season’s fledgling Challenge Cup to make up the numbers to 32 and play a straight knockout tournament over five weekends commencing in April. Not ideal and slightly breathless, but more inclusive and, with a fair wind, potentially workable. Last season was arguably even more of an oddity, with Sale managing to qualify for the last 16 (and subsequently the last eight) despite losing both the pool games in which they played. And yet, by the end of the season, with Toulouse beating La Rochelle in a highly-competitive final at Twickenham, many of the whys and wherefores had melted away. As the Scarlets chairman, Simon Muderack, rightly put it the other day: “We love sport because at the end of the game we know who has won, lost or drawn. If you remove that factor then you lose the sport.” It is not just EPCR, though, whose fingers are tightly crossed. In the Ultimate Rugby Championship, the fixtures involving South African teams in Ireland and Italy on the weekend of 7-8 January have now been rescheduled to the final weekend of February. Sure, but if January turns out to be badly disrupted from a Covid point of view, will that leave some, if not all, Six Nations teams with players seriously short of match practice? On and on it goes. At least – and how thankful we should be – there has been one discernible silver lining so far. Several of the European matches that have been played, particularly, those involving Cardiff, have been genuinely uplifting, with players who might otherwise not have enjoyed the spotlight making the most of their opportunities. Cardiff’s Cameron Winnett and Theo Cabango showed much youthful promise at Harlequins, while James Botham and Dan Fish, in an uphill cause, both burnished their reputations significantly. Elsewhere, how good does James Hume look in the centre for Ulster and does Duane Vermeulen ever have a bad game? How many sides on the UK mainland would love to have Michael Lowry at full-back? When the dust settled at the Stoop, though, the excellent statistician Russ Petty observed that winless Cardiff’s -58 points difference after two games against Toulouse and Quins was a worse scenario than it would have been had they forfeited both fixtures and been adjudged 28-0 losers on both occasions. Harsh indeed, and slightly ironic as the spirit shown in adversity has bathed the club in as much deservedly good publicity as it has enjoyed for years. Which maybe is the lesson the whole game should now absorb. Focus not on what may not happen but on what might still be possible. Accentuate the positive, keep smiling and try not to let the virus, or other gloomy winter tidings, entirely dominate the way you feel. On which upbeat note it is time to leave you with a socially-distanced chorus of The Breakdown’s bespoke festive carol. “Four lateral flows, three French tests, two booster jabs and a test tube in a pear tree!” Happy Christmas all. • This is an extract from our rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe and receive the full email, just visit this page and follow the instructions.If you didn’t know beforehand, it would not be long before you realised that Girls5Eva (Sky, Now) came from the school of Tina Fey and Robert Carlock, who gave us those perennial delights, 30 Rock and Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt. The new show, about a manufactured 1990s girlband of the same name (“We’ve been best friends ever since we auditioned for a man in a New Jersey hotel room!”), is the brainchild of Kimmy writer and producer Meredith Scardino, in collaboration with Fey and Carlock. It provides a similar cocktail of laughs. There are parodies (this time mostly of music videos rather than TV shows or characters), “proper” jokes so densely packed you’re still unearthing more on third and fourth viewings, call backs, and throwaway gags so good they would be revered treasures anywhere else. The chemistry among its leads recalls – even if it doesn’t quite get there, because nothing can or will – the chemistry between Ellie Kemper and Titus Burgess in Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt. In short, it is a joy. Under the aegis of their sleazy manager Larry, Girls5Eva had one hit (Famous 5Eva) three decades ago but fell into obscurity after their follow-up tanked. It was called Quit Flying Planes at My Heart and was released on 10 September 2001. Since then, one of the girls has died (Ashley – “The one who got us all through our breakups with Moby”) and the remaining four members have drifted apart. We first meet Dawn (Sara Bareilles) as she is listening to the radio while having a mammogram. She has the perfect breasts for it, her doctor says – “Already so smooshed!” The Fey spirit, unable to know of a physical female indignity without leaping to embrace it for comic effect, remains strong throughout. Dawn herself is the mother-figure of the group. Always the responsible one then, she is now married with one child, constantly stressed (“Fireworks or terrorism?” she shouts when woken by a strange noise at night), and works long hours at her idiot brother’s restaurant (Dean Winters, essentially reprising his 30 Rock Dennis Duffy role). Hearing Famous 5Eva sampled as part of hit rapper Li’l Stinker’s latest moneymaker, she goes to pick up her royalty cheque from Larry and is coaxed into delivering the rest to her former bandmates, too. Summer (Busy Philipps) is still blond, chaotic, goodhearted and now married to former boybander Kev (Andrew Rannells), though he does now live and work in Tampa and appear to be gay. Gloria (Paula Pell) is a successful dentist (“with a kind of rosacea you get from other people’s breath” – 30 Rock’s fondness for light evocations of foul skin conditions lives on, too). Wickie (Renée Elise Goldsberry) was the only one with proper talent (she was also the winner of the Wettest Mouth in a girl group award) and left the band to go solo. She is famous on social media as the head of her own glamorous “fempire”, but we all know that Instagram – and generally anyone who uses the word “fempire” – lies. When the Li’l Stinker attention brings the possibility of the girls staging a comeback, they are all in. “We should celebrate!” says Dawn’s husband (Daniel Breaker) when he hears the plan. “Wanna start The Americans?” The eight-episode season is full of beautifully honed jokes, absurdities, acute commentary (as well as some more similar to the decidedly unacute, defensive moments about “woke” criticism and contemporary issues the previous Fey/Carlock collaborations contained), sight gags and song and dance numbers (lyrics largely by Scardino, scores, of course, by Jeff Richmond – Mr Tina Fey – who did such wonders with the musical side of Kimmy Schmidt). But as is also the pair’s hallmark, it has heart too. The women – so different from when they first met – must reform their bonds as well as the group, and find different ways to flourish. The authenticity of their friendship and the supportive dynamic gradually woven among them (Gloria gently encouraging Summer to see that all is not well with her marriage, Summer encouraging Dawn to create a stage persona that will liberate her, Dawn taking the broke Wickie – and her transparent grand piano – into her home) makes you wonder if everyone involved in And Just Like That shouldn’t be forced to a screening immediately. Anyway. It is, as I say, a joy. Fey, Carlock, Scardino and Richmond 5Eva.Near the summit of a peak west of Missoula, Montana, the hiking trail forks as it clears the forest of pine and fir trees. A wooden sign indicates the way to a steep climb over tumbled rocks to reach the peak, Ch-paa-qn. This is a Salish word that means “shining mountain,” or “gray, treeless mountain top”. Except that some rube has used a knife to all but scratch the Indigenous word out and replace it with “Squaw” in crude letters. I was raised from boyhood in the shadow of this mountain. I have stood atop the summit many times and growing up, I knew it as Squaw Peak too. Last November, the interior secretary, Deb Haaland announced that her agency will initiate a plan to review and replace racially derogatory place names all over the United States. She identified “squaw” as a particularly offensive word, one which currently appears in the names of more than 650 federal land units. Some say the word merely means “Indian woman”, but no Native language claims the word, just ones similar to it. It is generally accepted to have sexual connotations, particularly as it relates to a woman’s genitalia. In 1999, Montana renamed the peak, as well as 76 other landmarks which carried the same slur. It is also reviewing the name of 17 locations around the state that use “half-breed” or “breed”. For me, this is personal. I am Chippewa-Cree Métis enrolled with the Little Shell Tribe of Chippewa Indians and identify as Métis, and the terms were often used disparagingly to refer to my ancestors. They were called “dirty half-breeds” or “drunken breeds”. Signs were posted in businesses across central Montana that read “no breeds allowed.” Lost in the discussion about renaming places is the genocide that saw those places named so in the first place. Not just a genocide of burned settlements and body counts, but the genocide of forced assimilation, of the stamping out of ceremonies and traditions, of the elimination of languages. Especially languages. My people were multilingual. I say “were” because hardly anyone speaks any of our Native tongues anymore. One of my great-great grandfather Mose’s many jobs back in the day was as an interpreter for the US army in central Montana, translating the mix of languages predominant on the plains at that time; French, English, Cree, Chippewa, Dakota, and Crow. That wasn’t an uncommon gig for Métis men. Of the languages grandpa Mose spoke – at least half a dozen – the only language that remains in my family is English. Today, the language my tribe teaches as part of our language program – an effort to restore a critical part of our lost culture – is Chippewa (Ojibwe). Our last fluent speaker in Montana died last year. As for our Métis language, Michif – a tongue born as a trade language mixing French, a little Gaelic, and whichever Native community was in the vicinity (generally Chippewa, Cree, or both) – is also little-spoken. Métis elders tell me there are maybe 1,000 fluent speakers of the language in the world, and about 800 of them are in Canada. When I hear Indigenous tongues spoken my heart swells, both for joy and sorrow. I know my great grandparents spoke their Native tongue, but I never heard them. Does that mean my grandparents spoke it too? Probably. I never heard them and they had good reason not to: as a friend reminds me, “It wasn’t always cool to be an Indian.” There was a time Indian children were viciously beaten for speaking their tongues. There was a time my people were rounded up by American troops and deported to Canada. In that context, speaking a Native language was dangerous. So my ancestors buried their words. What about the names of the landmarks important to my ancestors? What of Hill 57 in Great Falls, named after a dubious marketing effort by a pickle-selling entrepreneur in the 1920s? Or Cree Crossing, a ford on the Milk River near the Canadian border used by Indigenous people for millennia? There must be old, beautiful names for them, but no one speaks them anymore. I want to hear them. Their loss evokes a longing inside all of us who still want to share that intimate connection to the land – one which our ancestors once had. East of Ch-paa-qn are two mountains. They loom over Missoula, but I don’t know so much as their Salish names. However, the pass that cleaves them – where the Red River carts of my people left traces the interstate was built over; where other Indians from territories to the west passed back and forth to hunt buffalo for millennia until the buffalo were all gone – bears the English version of what my Métis ancestors called it: Hellgate Canyon. My Michif-speaking ancestors used French in naming it Porte d’Enfer, the Gates of Hell, so-called because the Blackfeet Indians who also camped here were so vicious in their depredations on any travelers they encountered that the ground was said to be littered with the bones of the unwary. Settlers may not like to see Indigenous names returned to the landscape around us. But we were here first, and no amount of failed effort at removing us, or defacing signs, will change that. The land awaits our re-emergence, and we are here.As the now very likely collapse of the Build Back Better Act underlines, what’s exceptional about the United States is its extraordinary ability to dole out harm. Besides its ever-ballooning military budget and foreign wars, America also makes the world unsafe thanks to the prodigious amount of fossil fuel it continues to send around the world. Oil Change International, Earthworks and the Center for International Environmental Law have found that burning the oil and gas expected to be drilled in the US alone over the next decade could gobble up 10% of the entire world’s remaining carbon budget, the amount of carbon dioxide that can be released before the planet warms above 1.5C. The Build Back Better Act wouldn’t have made a dent in that drilling, of course: constraining US fossil fuel production or exports has been a political third rail on both sides of the aisle, despite John Kerry having spent months hectoring other smaller and less wealthy nations about their own fossil fuel use in the lead-up to Cop26. Just last week, energy secretary Jennifer Granholm went out of her way to assure oil executives that the administration wouldn’t reinstate the longstanding crude oil export ban, assuring them: “I don’t want to fight with any of you.” West Virginia Senator Joe Manchin – whose promised no vote on Build Back Better seems to have hammered the nail into Biden’s legislative agenda – made half a million dollars last year off his family’s coal business, and was reportedly speaking weekly with ExxonMobil lobbyists this spring. But he’s hardly the only Democrat furthering the fossil fuel industry’s interests. What the Build Back Better bill represented was a bare minimum, at best: the roughly $55bn a year the bill would spend on incentives for renewables deployment, building upgrades and electric vehicles over the next decade is roughly half of what Americans spent on caring for their pets in 2020, and pales in comparison to the $768bn one-year Pentagon budget that breezed through both chambers last week. Even the White House’s topline goal of reaching net-zero emissions by 2050 is dangerously behind the times: that’s when the entire world should be carbon neutral. With its vast resources and outsized historical responsibility for the climate crisis, the US should get there much, much sooner. But what the United States should do to reduce emissions and what its staid, corporate-captured democratic institutions are capable of at this moment are two different things. That’s not to say the fight is over. Congressional leadership could finally call Manchin’s bluff and force a vote on Build Back Better. Biden has a slew of emissions-cutting executive actions at his disposal should he choose to use them, including the EPA’s ability to regulate carbon dioxide. And there are exciting victories at the state and local level to build on. But the road ahead is a rocky one. With a deadly Omicron surge encroaching, the child tax credit about to lapse and student loans payments starting up again in February, Democrats will struggle to point voters to success stories during next year’s midterm elections without Build Back Better in hand. They face a potential blowout in the House, where a Republican majority may well refuse to recognize that any Democrat could win the 2024 presidential election. It’s very likely that the United States, the world’s largest economy and second biggest greenhouse gas emitter, will not pass its first-ever comprehensive climate legislation for at least a decade. Should they take back control in Washington, Republicans will expand drilling as quickly as possible, rest of the world be damned. Countries committed to seeing temperatures not rise above 1.5 or 2C should start treating the US for what it is: an exceptionally dangerous country that needs to be reined in. Kate Aronoff is a staff writer at The New Republic and the author of Overheated: How Capitalism Broke the Planet – And How We Fight BackWhat if there was a pill you could take as soon as you test positive for Covid, that stopped the virus in its tracks? A pill that reduced the viral number of copies in your upper airway (known as viral load) by more than tenfold, markedly reducing contagiousness to others? And that reduced the chance of hospitalization by nearly 90%? There is such a pill, called Paxlovid, which was developed specifically for the Sars-CoV-2 virus, derived from a molecule that was effective in the lab against the original SARS virus, and is a potent inhibitor of the main protease of the virus, called Mpro. It’s the chokepoint for preventing the virus from replicating. It has been tested in two randomized clinical trials compared with a placebo, and not only was its potency established, but it proved to be as safe as the placebo. Until now, our main approach to dealing with the virus has relied upon immunity. Vaccines and boosters induce our immune response, and monoclonal antibodies used early inactivate the virus. That along with mitigation measures such as masking and distancing, and the immune protection derived from prior infection, worked reasonably well to contain the virus’s spread in many parts of the world, along with preventing an enormous toll of hospitalizations and deaths. While our hospitals and staffs were overrun at many times and places, that would have been far worse without the more than 8.7bn vaccine doses that have been given throughout the world. But now we are confronting Omicron, which has achieved extensive immune escape from our vaccines, lowering the effectiveness, even with a booster, to 75% instead of 95%, with the Pfizer shot, against symptomatic infection. That will result in five times as many breakthrough infections compared with prior variants, which is the pattern we are now seeing. Further evidence of Omicron’s immune evading feature is that most of the monoclonal antibodies are no longer effective, since the hypermutated variant does not look enough like the earlier versions of the virus to the antibody response that we mount. That also explains the high rate of reinfections among people with prior Covid, ranging three- to eightfold in South Africa and United Kingdom reports. These were unusual before Omicron and tell us that infection-induced immunity alone is not adequately protective. But it’s not just the immune escape property of Omicron that is the problem. It is the profound rapid growth of cases, doubling in two to three days, in many countries throughout Europe, southern Africa, North America and soon enough throughout the world. There is a definite sense that the cases are less severe than prior variants, but the extent of this and a full explanation for it is unknown. It could be the immunity walls that have been built from prior vaccination and infections, and possibly less virulence of the virus per se. No matter, the transmission onslaught will, at the very least, induce tens of millions of new infections around the world. Already the Netherlands and other countries are starting to lock down, universities in the United States have abruptly closed. This is just the beginning of what can happen when there’s much further spread, particularly in countries like the United States where Delta is still on the rise. With more than 130,000 new confirmed infections a day, health systems will get overrun from inadequate staffing of healthcare workers, many of whom are absent with Omicron infections. The good news about Paxlovid is that it is expected to work well against Omicron because it is the first potent treatment that is not dependent on our immune response. There is only one mutation in the variant in its main protease, indicating this is not a region of the virus that has been prone to undergo mutations. Paxlovid has been highly effective against Omicron in lab studies. That gets us to the vital need for the Paxlovid five-day pill pack (two pills a day, and one other pill, a low dose ritonavir to help raise Paxlovid’s blood level) to be available everywhere. But there is a grossly insufficient supply of only 200,000 treatment courses now, and only 80 million expected by the end of next year. If we had an unlimited supply of these pills, it could have an extraordinary impact on preventing illness, preserving our healthcare workforce, staving off spread, eliminating the need for lockdowns and school closings. Paxlovid intervention might also reduce the toll of long Covid, a disabling symptom complex that can occur with even mild cases. In the days ahead, Paxlovid will gain emergency authorization use by the US Food and Drug Administration. That’s good, but it doesn’t get us where we need to be. We must find a way to rapidly scale pill pack production for wide accessibility and use throughout the world, whether that involves enacting the Defense Production Act in the United States or other bold measures. It is not appropriate at this juncture to rely on a single company to mass produce a small molecule which companies throughout the world are fully capable of making with the highest manufacturing standards. This anti-Covid pill has all the features of a breakthrough intervention at the time when we absolutely need it. It’s a sign of light in a very long tunnel. But its extraordinary promise will not get realized unless we pull out all the stops to quickly get it made and distributed at mass scale. Eric Topol is the founder and director of the Scripps Research Translational Institute, professor of molecular medicine, and executive vice-president of Scripps ResearchAndy Serkis has starred in some of the biggest film trilogies – as Gollum in The Lord of the Rings, Caesar in Rise of the Planet of the Apes and Supreme Leader Snoke in the latest Star Wars – without actually physically appearing in them at all. Serkis is responsible for the voice and motion capture of the computer-generated characters we see instead. Motion capture means acting on set, covered in Lycra and special motion capturing ping-pong balls, so that the Hollywood super-computers can turn his human form into a gold ring-loving monster, super-intelligent ape or Force-sensitive genetic strandcast male humanoid created during the reign of the Galactic Empire to lure the unwary to the Dark Side. Born in 1964 in Middlesex to two half-Iraqi parents, Serkis studied theatre and the arts at Lancaster University. After an early career in touring theatre, he had parts in – like all great actors – The Bill, as well as an ITV adaptation of Oliver Twist and several low-budget British films you’re very unlikely to have heard of. But when Serkis was cast as Gollum in Peter Jackson’s 2001 adaptation of The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring, he quickly became the man to call if you want a giant gorilla (Kong in 2005’s King Kong), marine captain (Captain Haddock in 2011’s The Adventures of Tintin) or bear (Baloo in 2018’s Mowgli: Legend of the Jungle) magically brought to life. Even when we do see his face – as with Ulysses Klaue in Avengers: Age of Ultron, with a huge scar – it’s often far from flattering. Although Serkis does pass for a jolly convincing Ian Dury in 2010’s Sex &amp; Drugs &amp; Rock &amp; Roll. So, what would you like to ask the king of motion capture? What happens if he’s fully motion-capture-suited up and needs the toilet? What’s his favourite Ian Dury and the Blockheads song? How does he get in character to play an ape and/or what’s the best way to peel a banana? Serkis would – since it is the premise of this interview – be especially pleased to be asked about joining the panel to select the shortlist for the EE Rising Star award for the 2022 EE British Academy film awards, the only category voted for by the public. Or if he has any advice on breaking into the business. But unfortunately he can’t answer any questions about his forthcoming role as Alfred in The Batman because – kerpow! – he’s contractually obliged to keep stumm on all things Batman for now. Tsk. Small print, eh? So get your thinking caps on, whack your questions in the comments below by midday on Friday and we’ll publish the answers on 11 February. • Public voting opens for the 2022 EE Rising Star award at this year’s Baftas on 1 February.Christmas is coming and, in a burst of uncharacteristic domesticity, you have decided to make your own mince pies. It’s a sensible impulse because the act of eating most shop-bought mince pies is roughly equivalent to force-feeding yourself dry pastry. However, you have mucked up the quantities and now you have buckets and buckets of leftover mincemeat. Whatever should you do with it all? Glad you asked. Here are 10 very good uses. Mincemeat samosas Obviously, your first instinct when presented with too much mincemeat is to simply make more mince pies. But this would be a tremendous error, partly because nobody likes mince pies as much as they say they do and partly because that mincemeat would be much better dolloped into a samosa. BBC Good Food’s recipe for mincemeat samosas is an active improvement on the traditional mince pie. The mincemeat is dolloped into thin filo, rather than smeared inside thick shortcrust, which seems like a much more sensible delivery system. Make these for guests this year and you’ll never go back. Tangzhong mincemeat Chelsea buns If you break down mincemeat to its constituent parts – sugar, peel, suet – then you have something that quite closely resembles Chelsea bun filling. So the idea of a mincemeat Chelsea bun seems like something of a no-brainer. Patisserie Made Perfect’s recipe is absolutely wonderful, the softness of the bun perfectly complementing the festive filling. Mincemeat and apple crumble Nobody in their right mind would ever think to make a mincemeat crumble, because that would be far too punishing for even the most diehard Christmas-heads. But Easy Peasy Foodie has found a brilliant compromise: spooning the mincemeat into the filling of an apple crumble. Honestly, it’s genius. You don’t need much in the way of mincemeat – four spoonfuls should be enough – but its flavour blasts through the rest of the dish without completely overpowering the other elements. Mincemeat sauce What might overpower it, though, is the Epicurious recipe for mincemeat sauce. Heat a pile of mincemeat in a pan with sugar, orange and lemon juice, orange peel, half a cinnamon stick and brandy, wait for it to thicken and then stir in some whipping cream. It sounds heavy-going, and it is, so you definitely shouldn’t use it for a dish that already contains mincemeat. But over a bowl of frozen yoghurt? Delightful. Mince pie blondies Let’s pause and imagine a world in which you make too many mince pies and need to repurpose the whole thing. In this instance, I have two recipes that call for mincemeat and pastry. The first is for Claire Ptak’s mince pie blondies; not only is the blondie itself lightly mince pie-ish, requiring dried fruit, orange zest and brandy, but the finishing touch involves smashing up a load of mince pies and sprinkling the results over the top, like a crumble crust. Mince pie rocky road My second suggestion for repurposing whole mince pies is mince pie rocky road from My Fussy Eater, which is ultimately a regular rocky road that – along with shortbread, Maltesers, glacé cherries and marshmallows – features bashed-up mince pies. Mince pies are a hard sell in my house, so the thought of hiding them away in something chocolatey, as one might hide vegetables in a spaghetti bolognese, is tremendously appealing. Banana and mincemeat buns But back to mincemeat proper. Spend any time online and you will be overwhelmed with recipes for mincemeat cakes. There are loaf tin cakes, bundts, muffins and sponges. But for the sake of simplicity, I am going to highlight Tin and Thyme’s recipe for leftover mincemeat buns with optional banana. Now, the thought of eating banana cake in 2021 might bring about horrible lockdown flashbacks, but the (overripe) bananas are hardly noticeable here. They work to keep the cake moist, while staying in the background to let the mincemeat hog the limelight. Lovely. Mincemeat flapjack Similarly, Food on the Table’s recipe for mincemeat flapjack is an enduringly sensible place for leftovers. There isn’t much to say about them other than that they are flapjacks, taste like mincemeat and are the closest you will ever come to eating a mince pie for breakfast. Mincemeat ice-cream We’ll end with a couple of blockbusters. Gluten Free Alchemist’s recipe for mincemeat ice-cream has two huge things going for it: first, it’s a no-churn ice-cream, so you don’t need to burden yourself with expensive specialist equipment. Second, it looks even more beautiful than it tastes. We have a coeliac in our family and, given the dismal range of gluten-free mince pies on offer, this is just screaming to be made for her this year. Mincemeat sorbet Claude Bosi’s variation on the blockbuster theme is his mincemeat sorbet. Bosi blends leftover mincemeat, then mixes it with mulled wine and freezes it, stirring every half-hour. It is, if there can ever be such a thing, a light and refreshing way to enjoy mincemeat. Merry Christmas, everyone.The Greek government has come under growing pressure to introduce femicide as an offence in the country’s penal code amid outrage over the growing and unprecedented number of women being brutally murdered by their partners. Two women were murdered by their husbands within five days last week, bringing the death toll to 17 since January, according to state-run television. Both men allegedly told police that they had killed their wives out of fear that they would leave them. On Saturday police narrowly prevented an 18th woman being killed by her husband when officers broke down the door of the couple’s house as he held a knife to her throat. With the Mediterranean country shaken by the sheer savagery of the killings, calls have mounted for tougher legislative action to confront what are seen by many as hate crimes. Highlighting the issue, Alexis Tsipras, the country’s former prime minister and main opposition leader, emphasised that time was running out. “Disgust and fury is not enough. It’s the time for action. “We’re already late,” he said, deploring the Greek parliament’s refusal to discuss the issue. “Recognition of femicides by the state ought to be only the beginning.” A dramatic rise in domestic violence – attributed increasingly to the pandemic and months of confinement – has been accompanied by a string of brutal murders, putting renewed focus on abuse in Greece. From the start of the year, Greek media has reported victims being shot, strangled, suffocated, stabbed, beaten and drowned, with many of their arrested partners reportedly confessing to the murders. The femicides come amid unparalleled allegations about sexual abuse of women in the arts and sports worlds. The revelations have been widely seen as a turning point for a society that remains one of Europe’s most socially conservative. In November the centre-right government responded by initiating a public campaign urging victims of domestic and gender-based violence to speak out. It also established a 24-hour helpline and is set to expand a network of counselling centres. Changes to the penal code more recently have ensured that the severest penalties will be meted out to those found guilty of murdering women, with perpetrators no longer able to cite extenuating circumstances in the hope of receiving a lighter sentence if the act is deemed a “crime of passion”. The justice ministry is also poised to overhaul domestic violence legislation drafted more than a decade ago. The country’s gender equality minister, Maria Syrengela, described the measures as unprecedented. “There’ll be no ability for men to claim they acted in the heat of the moment, that it was a crime of passion,” she told the Guardian. “And when the domestic violence law is redrafted in line with the Istanbul convention, we will of course advise that femicide is included,” she said. “It’s about time.” It was appalling, she added, that in cases of homicide, men in Greece had been able to claim “provocation”, or claim that it was a crime of passion, when the murders amounted to the ultimate exercise of power over women. “We will be one of the first countries in Europe to have a law that refers to femicide and that is what is important,” she added, noting that no EU member state had so far incorporated the intentional killing of women and girls as a separate criminal offence. Classes on sex education and promoting greater awareness of diversity have also been introduced in schools. But the opposition say the policies still fall short of what is needed. With passions running high and graffiti condemning the hate crimes appearing more often around Athens, the left-wing opposition has vowed to keep up the pressure until femicide as a motive is introduced into the country’s criminal code. “It has to be recognised as a term and as a crime,” said Eirini Agathopoulou, Syriza’s spokesperson for human rights and gender equality. “We have tabled proposals twice in parliament but the government simply refuses to discuss it.” • In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 and the domestic abuse helpline is 0808 2000 247. In the US, the suicide prevention lifeline is 1-800-273-8255 and the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14 and the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. Other international helplines can be found via www.befrienders.orgI was disappointed to read Naga Kandiah’s comments on the removal of British citizenship (Like Shamima Begum, I could soon be stripped of British citizenship without notice, 15 December). Removing British citizenship on grounds of being “conducive to the public good” is used against the most dangerous of people, such as terrorists, extremists and serious organised criminals. It’s been possible for over a century. It comes with a right of appeal and is only used in exceptional circumstances in a small number of cases each year. The nationality and borders bill doesn’t change any of that – it’s only about how someone is notified. We would always try to notify someone, but this may not be possible in exceptional circumstances – such as if they’re in a war zone, their location is unknown, or it would reveal sensitive intelligence sources. Maintaining our national security and keeping the public safe are the government’s top priorities, and it’s a duty I take incredibly seriously. Damian Hinds Minister for security and bordersThere is no greater gift than never again having to walk into an overheated, Wham-blasting shopping centre full of animatronic reindeer and the smell of damp hair, to spend £20 on a pot plant that nobody has asked for nor, in all probability, wants. To never again hear Noddy Holder shouting across the shop floor as you dither between shaving soap and another brown leather wallet. To never again try to bring four rolls of non-recyclable wrapping paper home on the packed bus. Which is why, in my immediate family, we do not swap presents at Christmas. My mother, my sister, my father, my partner and my child: none of us get each other Christmas presents. It’s been an agreement for the last few years and, all being well, one that will hold water again this festive season. But it would be unfair to say we don’t actually give each other things. We may not buy things, wrap things, put things under a tree or push anything but a hairy toe into a stocking on Christmas Eve but that’s not to say we don’t give gifts. Instead we bestow upon each other the treats of time, saving money, the weekends in the run-up to Christmas at home, sanity, and evenings not clogged with sticky tape and phone calls and online checkouts. You may think these are rambling attempts at optimism from a Scrooge but I really believe that, by taking presents out of the equation, I have given my family back almost the whole of December to spend as they wish. The tradition of giving gifts in the dark days of winter is far older than the Christian story supposedly being celebrated on 25 December. According to Andrew Hann, the properties historian for English Heritage: “Druids gave out sprigs of their sacred plant, mistletoe, to wish their people good fortune for the year ahead. Romans gave gifts known as strenae, named in honour of Strenia, goddess of health and physical wellbeing, from whose sacred grove the original luck-bringing laurel twigs were sourced. Initially the gifts were twigs and branches from sacred trees, but later gilded nuts were exchanged, or even coins.” The Roman poet Martial describes exchanging mostly inexpensive gifts such as writing tablets, dice cups, lamps, combs and toothpicks. I actually love the idea of a child’s bedroom on Christmas morning being transformed into a sort of Greek-restaurant-come-bird-nest, covered in twigs, nuts, toothpicks and cups. Later, the practice became associated with St Nicholas – a wealthy bishop born in what is now Turkey – who used his money to help the poor. But the idea that you would have to spend weeks and months saving your wages to collect up armfuls of clothing, serious bits of homeware, electronics or – worse – that miscellaneous tat sold beside the checkouts of most high street shops in December, to pass on to other people in your exact economic circumstances, is pure yuletide bollocks. When I was young, presents abounded. My sister and I used my grandmother’s support tights, in natty colours like “bamboo” and “mink”, as our Christmas stockings. Great, lumpy amputated limbs stuffed full of gift-wrapped pyjamas, games, books and food would arrive at the end of our beds on Christmas Eve until well into our teens. In return, I lost track of the number of earrings, bracelets, brooches and candles I picked out for my relatives, usually from those shops that smell vaguely of nag champa incense and have tinkling bells above the door. These items weren’t popular, were of very little sentimental or monetary value and – I hope – quickly made their way to charity shops by early January. After my grandparents died and we started having smaller, less traditional Christmases, my family started to wean ourselves off presents. Like addicts choosing gum or vapes to replace our old habits, we introduced an under-a-fiver rule. This lasted just one year, to be superseded by a handmade-presents-only rule. We quickly realised that, in fact, this was almost more work than buying things (I think I knitted my mother a jumper) and so, after a few years, we went cold turkey: no presents. We might spend the day together, might eat nice food together, might watch telly and go for a walk and argue over the gravy together. But none of us needed to give or receive a token of our affection. After all, we were privileged adults; we rented our own homes, bought clothes as we needed themand ate nice food all year round. So why did we need to furnish each other with more unnecessary treats? What exactly were we being rewarded for? Once my generation started reproducing and I started seeing more of my extended family over Christmas, a new rule was introduced: you can (if you want) buy a present but only for someone younger than you. This means that, should they have the urge and means, my younger sisters can make or give my son something, I can gather presents for my cousins’ children, I might get my younger sisters something they’ve actually asked for. But the bloodless transaction of swapping socks, scented candles, book vouchers and picture frames with other grownups has, mercifully, fallen by the wayside. I’m not John Lennon (I have neither the talent nor the nasal geometry) but I would encourage everyone to imagine a Christmas with no presents. A December where, instead of swapping shopping vouchers and unappreciated booze between salaried adults, we all are just left to enjoy the first few months of winter in our own way. To go outside, to talk to our children, to fix the things that are broken in our homes and to plan for the year ahead. With the time and money we’d save, great things could be done and Jeff Bezos would see none of the profit. Now, if you’ll excuse me, I’m off to root around in the bushes by our local park, gathering up mistletoe, toothpicks, and combs for Christmas morning. My son is going to be so thrilled. Nell Frizzell is the author of The Panic YearsTrifle is that rare and sparkling unicorn: an easy, make-ahead dessert that looks fabulous and tastes even better. You can keep it as simple as you like, with bought cake and custard, plus a layer of jarred fruit, or go all out with this festively spiced version using seasonal citrus and ginger cake, all on a layer of fruity, mulled wine jelly. Prep 25 min Infuse 30 min Cook 30 min Cool 3 hr+ Serves 8-10 For the jelly 750ml fruity red wine 6 cloves 1 cinnamon stick 5 cardamom pods, bruised 200g caster sugar 8 gelatine leaves (or agar agar, prepared according to packet instructions, if you want to the trifle to be vegetarian) 1 ginger loaf cake (see step 3) 2 tbsp Cointreau (or other citrussy alcohol; optional – see step 7) 5-6 clementines, or tangerines or similar 500ml whipping or double cream, to top Halved marrons glacés (candied chestnuts) and long strips of candied citrus peel, to decorate (optional – see step 9) For the custard (or use 1 litre ready-made or Bird’s) 1 litre whole milk 2 whole eggs 6 egg yolks 150g caster sugar 80g cornflour ½ tsp almond essence (or 1 vanilla pod or other flavouring) 1 Mull the wine Put the wine and spices in a large saucepan (if you’d like to keep the trifle alcohol-free, replace the wine with grape juice, in which case you’ll probably want to reduce the sugar content later, too). Bring to a simmer, turn down the heat and leave to infuse for about 30 minutes. 2 Make the jelly Strain out the spices by passing the wine through a sieve, then return it to the pan with 100ml water and bring back to a simmer. Stir in the sugar until dissolved, and take off the heat. Soak the gelatine in cold water until pliable, then wring out and whisk into the wine. Pour through the sieve into a 20cm or so glass serving bowl and leave in a cool place or in the fridge for three or four hours, until set firm. 3 Top with the cake and add booze Slice and arrange the cake on top of the jelly, cutting it as necessary to cover – you could use trifle sponges, boudoir biscuits, panettone, stollen or plain madeira or sponge cake here, if you prefer. Sprinkle with the triple sec (other citrussy liqueurs would be excellent alternatives, as would amaretto, or the traditional sherry, or a fruit juice or syrup). 4 Lay the sliced citrus on top Peel five clementines and cut them into horizontal slices. Arrange these standing up on one edge all around the inside of the bowl, pressing them against the glass so they stick. Fill the middle of the bowl with more clementine slices, peeling and slicing more fruit as necessary, until the cake layer is completely covered. 5 Start on the custard This custard is a thick creme patissiere, so if you’d prefer it runnier, halve the amount of flour. Equally, if you have a sweet tooth, add 25g more sugar. Put the milk in a large saucepan and bring to a bare simmer (add a split vanilla pod if you want to make vanilla custard). Meanwhile, whisk the whole eggs, egg yolks and sugar in a large heatproof bowl, then whisk in the flour. 6 Finish the custard Pour about a third of the milk into the egg bowl, whisking vigorously as you go, then pour this mixture back into the milk pan, whisking as you do so. Put on a low heat and cook, whisking constantly, until the custard comes to the simmer – any lumps should disappear as you continue to beat it. 7 Leave the custard to cool Simmer, still whisking, until thick; add the almond essence, if using (vanilla extract or orange blossom water would also be nice here, as would a grating of nutmeg), and taste and adjust for sweetness. Once the custard is school-dinners consistency, take off the heat and leave to cool slightly, stirring regularly to prevent a skin forming. 8 Top with cream Pour the tepid custard over the layer of sliced fruit, level it out and leave it to cool and set a little. Put the cream in a large, clean bowl, and whisk until it forms soft, floppy peaks. Spoon in billowing clouds on top of the custard layer, cover and chill (if the trifle is hard to fit in the fridge with the cream on top, whip and top with the cream only just before serving). 9 Finishing touches When you’re ready to serve, arrange the marrons glacés, if using, in an evenly spaced circle around the edge of the trifle, then stack the candied peel in a nest in the centre (if you do this any earlier, you risk them bleeding into the cream and discolouring it). Other good toppings include crumbled amaretti, toasted flaked almonds or the classic angelica and silver balls. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoChristmas belonged to my grandmother. It was as if she invented it. On Christmas Eve, my mother would drive my sister and me from Hackney in east London to Hertfordshire. We’d arrive to an electric fire-heated house that smelled of toasted bread and radiated electric blankets. Grandma greeting us at the door, the Christmas lights blinking on the tree, Coco, her long-haired sausage dog wagging her tail at our shins. Barbara Antrobus was the quintessential English grandmother. The motherly widowed wife of a minister, still active in her community and well loved locally. Wearing floral cardigans, Coco on a short leash. At bedtime we were tucked into our sheets with Christmas stockings at the foot of our beds. Every year those stockings got thicker, until we approached our teenage years and instead of stockings she had large white plastic bags with a snowman printed on them. Christmas grew with us in Grandma’s house; it took our measurements and was always prepared to fit whatever renewed expectations came with maturity. I was always a child inside my grandmother’s Christmases: a tad too excited to settle. Sleep would be the blinking of the Christmas lights and then I’d snap awake, and the Christmas stockings would be bulging. Breakfast was cornflakes with full-fat milk, plain yoghurt sprinkled with white sugar. The TV on in the living room, the radio on in the kitchen where the turkey was stuffed, vegetables chopped, gravy stirred, pigs-in-blankets lying in their tray waiting for the oven. This meal took four hours of preparation. We’d eat by 2pm. Thin paper Christmas crowns on our heads, red Christmas crackers, cranberry sauce, silver cutlery, everything was on the table except our elbows. Grandma sat at the head of the table and said a prayer: “We give thanks for what we are about to receive …” Food eaten and crackers pulled, we’d move to the living room to watch the Queen’s speech. Grandma sat in the armchair, close to the picture of her lost husband, who glared out of the frame on the mantelpiece next to her. He had a lean body and white hair, soft features and a trimmed moustache; holding a black Bible in his hand, his lips slightly parted, he looked prepared to speak. Grandma rested her hands on her lap, silently facing forward as if she was back in the pews of her husband’s hushed church. Afterwards, we opened presents. Most years I played Santa, sliding the gifts under the feet of the recipients. My older sister snuggled on the couch, my mother nursing her cup of tea, grandma in her armchair, clasping her hands, Coco asleep at her feet. There was pleasure in this giving. Even if I wasn’t the one who bought the gift, I enjoyed this small service. Every year I’d be surprised by how much it made me glow inside. My last Christmas with my grandmother was in 2014. She was 99 years old. Every Christmas since losing her has taken place under a different roof, with friends in Cape Town or in-laws in New Orleans, at my cousin’s London flat or back at my mother’s house, where little pieces of my grandmother’s rituals loosely wove themselves into the tapestry of Christmas Day. Only half-listening to the Queen’s speech, or only improvising Christmas meals with dry nut roast instead of stuffing, or attending a Christmas service only half-hearing the sermon and the nativity plays. I grieve my grandmother’s Christmases, as they seem to have died alongside her. There was something about those Christmases that supplied a strong comforting (and non-material) experience that felt unique, spiritual even, something very different from every other area of my upbringing. I grew up living between my father’s council flat and my mother’s house. My father’s flat always smelled of cigarettes and kitchen grease, my mother’s of markets and mothballs. I wouldn’t describe either space as particularly homely. Both environments lacked the necessary predictability and routine (dullness, even) that goes into stable home-making. My mother actively fought against this kind of commodity and middle-class conformity, while my father (a temperamental gambler and alcoholic) didn’t have the financial or emotional stability that it required. I’m not complaining – overall, I was privileged; my mother took me on her work trips around Europe, Africa and the Caribbean, where she bought materials for her custom-made jewellery, which she sold at festivals and at Camden Market. Most of my peers growing up hadn’t left their borough, let alone their country. I was worldly for a child. Even if it came at an expense, overall the perspective it gave me was worth it. It’s just that with Grandma, in the quiet English suburbs, everything flattened and simplified into a comfort that still feels foundational. This year I became a father. I hope to restore some of this homely Christmas tradition for my son. Perhaps have him stretched out in some thick red pyjamas and a jingly Christmas hat, perhaps I’ll cradle him on the sofa next to the radiator, his own grandmother pinching his cheeks and counting his toes. I want it to be a soulful, festive family congregation like the Christmases my grandmother made for me. A time and place to land in a life that is so easily uprooted. His mother’s family are from New Orleans; it’ll probably be easier for him to land there, having both his southern grandparents. However, that land has its own upheavals, unpredictability and insecurities; as I write this they are repairing the roof on their house, months after Hurricane Ida tore it off. My son’s English Christmases may become a requirement, and his small remaining British family may need to revive my grandmother’s traditions, listening back to her cues of grace and prayer. Raymond Antrobus’s All the Names Given (Picador) is shortlisted for the TS Eliot prize for poetryIt’s the classic gift given by do-gooding family members at Christmas but Jane Goodall and other scientists have warned that people should think twice before giving a donation of a goat or heifer to a developing country. Charity gifts, where the recipient is informed their present is an animal to help feed a family in an impoverished area, have been popular for decades. However, the famed scientist Jane Goodall has warned these presents can do more harm than good, as the large volume of animals given can place a great strain on local water supplies. She said: “In the lead-up to Christmas, many people are feeling generous and want to help those less fortunate than themselves. There are a number of organisations that have launched campaigns, suggesting that one way to help those suffering poverty and hunger is to gift them an animal, such as a heifer. “As a result, farm animals are bought in great numbers by generous donors. Unfortunately, this can result in unintended consequences. The animals must be fed and they need a lot of water, and in so many places water is getting more and more scarce thanks to climate change. Veterinary care is often limited or totally lacking.” Instead, she recommends people fund community seed hubs and water irrigation systems, as well as investing in soil regeneration. Goodall said: “It will be ever so much better to help by supporting plant-based projects and sustainable irrigation methods, regenerative agriculture to improve the soil. Well this means charities must develop plans to create a gift package that will appeal to the generosity of those who want to help those less fortunate than themselves. Thank you.” Oxfam is one of the most popular charities to use the animal present initiative; it costs £12.50 to buy a goat. Another £12.50 gift card offers the buyer the chance to support Oxfam in digging wells and installing water pumps, taps and innovative water meters for families facing drought, or living in areas far from the nearest water supply. The charity says its project has changed the lives of thousands of families. “The Oxfam-funded goat distribution programme in Malawi started in 2005. Since then over 3,000 families have received a goat and their lives have begun to change for the better,” it says. “It is a simple initiative that aims to ensure that people have enough food all year round, particularly during the dry season or hungry months – when personal maize harvests have run out and the earth is dry so nothing can grow without irrigation. “A goat is a valuable asset to a vulnerable household; it breeds easily and can produce up to six kids a year. Offspring can be sold to help families cope or kept to produce manure, which will improve subsequent harvests. Ideally, within a year, each family will be able to choose to do both: selling goats to improve their homes or pay for school fees; and using manure to increase their maize and vegetable harvests so that they can produce a surplus to sell.”Welcome to Pushing Buttons, the Guardian’s brand new gaming newsletter. If you’d like to receive it in your inbox every week, just pop your email in below – and check your inbox (and spam) for the confirmation email. This week we’re taking a critical look at one of the most popular games in the world – one you’ve probably never played. If you’ve got any children in your life, you’re going to have heard of Roblox, a virtual world where you can dress a crude Lego-like character up and play random games like cops and robbers with other people. It is absurdly popular, with more than 200m players a month, and the developer behind it hit the headlines last year when it floated on the stock market and generated a $47bn frenzy. It is also pretty baffling for adults. A co-worker told me the other week that her daughter once presented her with a laptop and asked, “Mum, can you just spend an hour serving these pizzas for me? I need the Robux.” I’m going to be honest: I have never liked Roblox. I have kept my kids away from it, because I find it boring and ugly and I would rather they play Mario Kart with me. But I am a grown-ass woman, and Roblox is not for me. It is not a good game, at least not by any definition that makes sense to me, but its young players really love it, as evidenced by the literal billions of hours that they spend in it (not to mention the millions of YouTube videos that they make and watch). It is, essentially, a social space where kids hang out with each other, as many parents discovered over the course of the pandemic. Kids and teens form and find communities there, in the same way I did on game forums in the early 00s. They explore their identities, or learn about making games. I do not begrudge the kids their fun, and I’m not going to sit here and belittle the joy and meaning that they find in Roblox. It’s a strange venue for it, but it’s real. It turns out, however, that Roblox has a more troubling way than usual of making money from its players. Players earn Robux, the in-game currency, by making and playing games – and that currency has real-world value. Roblox shares some of the money that it makes off its players’ creations, but only a small percentage. And the thing is, kids’ creations are the ENTIRETY of Roblox; the company relies on kids to create stuff for other kids. Essentially, the company is profiting off the labour of children. Earlier this year, YouTube games journalism channel People Make Games released a video outlining how Roblox Corporation could be seen to be exploiting young games developers, going into huge detail on the sketchy economy that drives it and revealing just how difficult it is for any player to make money from Roblox. The video caused quite a stir, garnering nearly 1m views, and unsurprisingly elicited a furious response from Roblox itself. A follow-up video dropped last week, going further into the platform’s problems with child safety, the dodgy nature of its in-game economy, and the black market that’s sprung up around it. I talked to Quintin Smith, the reporter behind People Make Games’ investigations, about what he found when he started to dig deeper into a game that, despite being one of the biggest in the world, is poorly understood. “It was Roblox going public on the stock market in March of 2021 that first made me start paying attention,” he says. “Like a lot of people, I had this notion that Roblox was a silly, janky platform that kids sometimes liked to play on, and then overnight it was valued at almost $40bn.” Smith was shocked to discover the stock market-like collectibles system that drives Roblox’s economy: basically, kids can buy and sell items with fluctuating prices in the in-game marketplace, potentially making and losing thousands of Robux. “Broadly speaking, Roblox is getting away with stuff that other games publishers have been ruined for. And that’s the opposite of how it should be – Roblox should be under more scrutiny than other games publishers because of how extraordinarily young their users are. Nobody is taking children’s video games seriously … What this showed me is just how little time parents and market analysts have spent looking at Roblox. Apparently in today’s society you can be a tech company that’s floated on the stock market without anyone having even a semi-serious grasp on your business. That’s a terrifying thing to find out about our society!” Video games are absolutely plagued with vaguely immoral monetisation – whether that’s the free-to-play model, which relies on maximising profits from a small percentage of players who are willing to pay; or randomised loot boxes, a hopefully soon-to-be-banned way for games to extract money from players based on paying for the chance of acquiring some desirable virtual whatsit. (Let’s not even get into NFTs in gaming, a topic for another day.) Roblox is hardly extraordinary in this respect. But let’s remember: 50% of its users are under 12 years old. With all this in mind: should you ban your kids from Roblox? Like banning your kids from social media, that might prove both futile and detrimental to their social life. But that doesn’t mean you can’t educate yourself and your kids about what they’re playing. “It’s not necessarily the wrong move, but you’re pruning back something that their peers use to socialise,” says Smith. “What I would say is that parents should ALL know more about how Roblox works. You should know where the platform’s goals with regards to the safety of their audience don’t match up to reality. You should warn kids about scammers, abusers and the collectibles market, and they should know that if they decide they want to make games or cosmetics for Roblox themselves, that they should not expect anything resembling financial success.” It troubles me that Roblox’s model of play and monetisation – where games are increasingly dependent on their users spending more and more time and money on the platform – is seen as aspirational in the games business. It might make billions, but it’s ethically troubling – and it never seems to result in good art. What to play OK, look, this isn’t a game, but if you have a PlayStation 5 or Xbox Series X/S then you really must download The Matrix Awakens: An Unreal Engine 5 Experience, a free technical demo featuring Keanu Reeves, Carrie-Anne Moss, thousands of cars that you can drive around a New York-esque city, and the most jaw-droppingly realistic and detailed video game graphics I have ever seen in my life. I am not a game developer and instantly fall asleep as soon as anyone starts delving deeply into the technical side of gaming, but if you’re into that, there are all kinds of settings to tinker with to explore what this new-generation gaming technology can do. I’m happy to just sit there and gawp at it, idly changing day to night like an omnipotent god, and wish that I could show the 11-year-old version of myself who first watched The Matrix how incredible our virtual worlds and characters would look 20 years on. Available on: PlayStation 5, Xbox Series X. Approximate playtime: 1 hour What to read CNET’s Mark Serrels goes into how the Australian mining industry – which, for years, funded a lump-of-coal mascot to teach children about crossing the road and brushing their teeth – is now using video games such as Minecraft to ingratiate itself to young Aussies. Though we are thankfully no longer in the dark days of the 00s, when basically every single game character was either a gruff white dude or a cartoon animal, video games still have a diversity problem. Non-white protagonists are still quite rare, and so Kotaku’s Isaiah Colbert was disappointed to discover that the star of Square-Enix’s forthcoming fantasy game Forspoken appears to be “an amalgamation of Black stereotypes”. This is an important lesson on why it’s important to have a diverse workforce working on your games’ characters. Question Block We’re about to head into some fun/fraught festive weeks in the company of our families. So I asked comedian, Twitch streamer and longtime games journalist Ellie Gibson: what are the best games to play at Christmas? Picking family games to play at Christmas really depends on the kind of family you have. If you all get along marvellously and cruise through the festive season in a joyous bubble of harmony and camaraderie, try a game that requires teamwork like It Takes Two, Overcooked or Moving Out. If, however, you have a normal family, release pent up aggression and resolve decade-old grudges with classic racer Mario Kart or a modern fighter like ARMS. If you want something to suit all the generations, Just Dance requires zero gaming skills (and very little dancing ability, to be honest) so it’s great for getting everyone on their feet, even if Uncle Nigel’s had one too many sherries. But perhaps the most important game of all is the one you play when you need to escape from your family. I’d recommend Animal Crossing or Everdale for transporting yourself to a beautifully calm, ordered world where you’re in control, and nobody is arguing about whose turn it is to be the Top Hat.” What to click Strange, horny game ads are flooding social media. I accidentally became obsessed Ten board games that your teens might actually play with you this Christmas Analogue Pocket review – a heaven-sent gift for Game Boy fansMore than 160 people drowned in two separate shipwrecks off the coast of Libya in the past week, a UN migration official has said. The fatalities were the latest disasters in the Mediterranean Sea involving refugees seeking a better life in Europe. Safa Msehli, a spokesperson for the International Organization for Migration (IOM), said at least 102 were reported dead after their wooden boat capsized on Friday and at least eight others were rescued and returned to shore. The second shipwreck took place on Saturday. The Libyan coastguard retrieved at least 62 bodies, Msehli said. The same day, the coastguard intercepted a third wooden boat with at least 210 refugees on board, she added. The deaths bring the total number of people drowned this year on the central Mediterranean route to about 1,500, Msehli said. In recent months, crossings and attempted crossings from Libya surged as authorities accelerated their deadly crackdown on refugees in the capital, Tripoli. About 31,500 people were intercepted and returned to Libya in 2021, compared with nearly 11,900 the previous year, according to the IOM. About 980 refugees were dead or presumed dead in 2020, the UN agency said. Libya has emerged as the dominant transit point for people fleeing war and poverty in Africa and the Middle East. The oil-rich country was plunged into chaos after a Nato-backed uprising that toppled and killed its longtime autocrat, Muammar Gaddafi, in 2011. Human traffickers have benefited from the chaos in the oil-rich nation and smuggled refugees through the country’s lengthy border with six other nations. They pack desperate people into ill-equipped rubber boats, then embark on risky voyages across the perilous Mediterranean Sea. Those returned have been taken to detention centres rife with abuses including forced labour, beatings, rape and torture. The abuse often accompanies efforts to extort money from families before they are allowed to leave Libya on traffickers’ boats. UN-commissioned investigators said in October that abuse and ill treatment of refugees in Libya could amount to crimes against humanity.Kamala Harris has refused to be drawn into a war of words with Joe Manchin over the West Virginia senator’s attempt to sink the Build Back Better spending plan, saying: “The stakes are too high for this to be in any way about any specific individual.” The vice-president, whose vote in the 50-50 Senate would have passed Build Back Better had Manchin (and the other 49 Democrats and independents) stayed onboard, was speaking to CBS News. But Manchin issued a dramatic “no” in an interview with Fox News Sunday, enraging the progressive wing of the Democratic party as well as the White House, which issued a stinging rebuke. “I don’t have any personal feelings about this,” Harris insisted. “This is about let’s get the job done. Let’s get it done. “I refuse to get caught up in the what might be personal politics. The people who are waking up at three o’clock in the morning worried about how they’re going to get by, they could care less about the politics of DC.” Build Back Better, valued at around $1.75tn, aims to boost social and health care as well as target spending at the climate crisis and other Democratic priorities. Harris said: “Let’s talk with families who say I can’t afford to do the basic things that I need to do as a responsible adult, like care for my children, care for my older parents, or afford to get life saving medication like insulin.” Asked how the Democrats could do that without Manchin – as many in the party have said they will try to do, if they are not able to turn him round – Harris said: “You don’t give up? That’s how we do it.” Manchin does appear to have personal feelings on the issue, having told a West Virginia radio station on Monday he reached “wit’s end” before deciding to drop his bombshell on Fox. “This is not the president, this is staff … they drove some things that are absolutely inexcusable,” he said. “I just got to the wit’s end of what happened.” Manchin also said he had been “far apart, philosophically” with Democratic leaders for months. “We’re in a 50-50 Senate, you all are approaching legislation [as if] there is 55 or 60 Democrats,” he said. Some fear Manchin could switch allegiance from Democratic to independent or even Republican – as every other official in major office in his state has done. Such a move would jeopardise or end Democratic control of the Senate. On Monday, Manchin said he “would like to hope there was still Democrats that feel like I do”, but said that could change. The Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, said he would “certainly welcome” Manchin into Republican ranks. “He doesn’t fit well over there,” McConnell said, “but that is a decision ultimately that he has to make. We certainly welcome him to join us if he was so inclined.” McConnell also told the Guy Benson Show podcast he was “shocked at the vitriol” in the White House rebuke of Manchin. “And basically it seemed to me that they were calling Senator Manchin a liar. I think that was not smart. This is a 50-50 Senate. It’s going to be 50-50 for another year, and believe me, this is not how I would handle a disappointing vote like that.” Joe Biden’s press secretary, Jen Psaki, told reporters in Washington she would not “relitigate” Manchin’s announcement on Sunday and the White House rebuke, which was issued in her name. West Virginia is a major coalmining state. Also on Monday, a prominent coal union urged Manchin to reconsider his opposition to Build Back Better, not least because it would extend benefits, due to expire at the end of the year, to miners suffering from black lung disease, and encourage investment in jobs for former miners. “For those and other reasons, we are disappointed that the bill will not pass,” said Cecil Roberts, president of the United Mine Workers of America. “We urge Senator Manchin to revisit his opposition to this legislation and work with his colleagues to pass something that will help keep coal miners working, and have a meaningful impact on our members, their families and their communities.”10. Sarah Haras - Mirage Bahraini experimental producer Sarah Haras meanders between ambience and aggression on Mirage, warping the distinctive oud melodies of Khaliji folk music within thick waves of distortion and shimmering, abstracted vocal patterns. The result encloses the listener in a trance-like sound bath that almost crosses into dancefloor catharsis. 9. Mdou Moctar – Afrique Victime The self-taught Tuareg guitarist Mdou Moctar has been compared to Jimi Hendrix thanks to his aptitude for thundering distortion. Yet Afrique Victime sets him and his band squarely in their own lane, building colossal jams to replicate the force of their live shows and imbuing their lyrics with a narrative of protest against the postcolonial exploitation of the continent. Read the full review. 8. Balimaya Project – Wolo So This 16-piece London-based percussive ensemble is a force to be reckoned with. Merging the syncopated rhythms of the west African Mandé peoples with an improvisational jazz mentality, their debut album is a joyous celebration of drumming’s intrinsic power to move us – and to make us move. 7. Native Soul – Teenage Dreams On their debut album, the South African duo channel amapiano, the country’s latest subgenre of house music. Combining minimal percussion with dubby momentum, the 18 and 19-year-old pair embody the claustrophobic urban setting of their music’s making in its combination of melodic darkness and clattering rhythms. Read the full review. 6. Arooj Aftab – Vulture Prince On Vulture Prince, dedicated to her late brother, vocalist and composer Arooj Aftab uses the existential yearning of Urdu ghazals to explore the painful, isolating experience of loss, eschewing traditional instrumentation for harps, strings and keys. But Aftab’s delicate voice is the star here, stretching syllables to contain ineffable emotion. 5. Jaubi – Nafs at Peace The Pakistani improvisational quartet followed 2020’s collaborative Ragas From Lahore LP with this remarkably self-assured debut group album. Meant to evoke a Qur’anic journeying of the self, it incorporates guitar and synths along with tabla and sarangi into an intuitive fusion. It reaches its apex on the title track as band members solo through spiritual jazz and Indian classical references. Read the full review. 4. Arushi Jain - Under the Lilac Sky Reframing Indian classical ragas in the context of modernist modular synth composition, the Indian American composer set herself a potentially insurmountable task for her debut album. Yet the result is an intricate and engaging tessellation of drones, vocals and synth patterns, with its sequencing meant to evoke the calm passage of day to night. Read the full review. 3. Mabe Fratti - Será que ahora podremos entendernos? The Guatemalan cellist recorded her latest album in the collaborative haven of La Orduña, an artistic compound outside Mexico City. Joining forces with composer Claire Rousay, experimental band Tajak and multi-instrumentalist Pedro Tirado, the resulting nine tracks centre Fratti’s nonchalant vocals amid ambient field recordings, whispered harmonies and rumbling synths. An enveloping, introspective journey. Read the full review. 2. Malcolm Jiyane - Umdali Tapping into South Africa’s unique jazz lineage, this multi-instrumentalist’s debut is a work of subtle depth. In 45 minutes, it packs in references to fellow countryman Abdullah Ibrahim’s melodic economy (the swaggering Ntate Gwangwa’s Stroll), as well as Herbie Hancock’s jazz funk (Umkhumbi kaMa). Switching from piano to trombone and voice, Jiyane plays freely, channelling the improvisatory force of this music. Read the full review. 1. Toumani Diabaté and the London Symphony Orchestra – Kôrôlén A 2008 live recording from the Barbican, this unearthed gem explores the centuries-old tradition of Malian kora music in dialogue with western classical orchestration. Kora master Diabaté provides swells of emotion through his tumbling melodies, while the LSO takes a back seat, adding swirling strings and woodwind to provide cinematic grandeur. Final track Mamadou Kanda Keita is the masterpiece, crescendoing over the late Kasse Mady Diabaté’s rich vocals. Read the full review.For El País in Spain, his “magic has vanished”. For Libération in France he is “the only actor in the Boris Johnson show – which is, increasingly, a flop”. In Germany, Der Spiegel asked how long Britain could last being governed “almost exclusively by defiant optimism”. As the scandals mount, the approval ratings plunge, the electoral defeats accumulate, the rebellions multiply, his trusted Brexit lieutenant jumps ship and the Omicron variant runs rampant, continental media seem – to coin a phrase – in no mood to donner un break to Britain’s beleaguered prime minister. “Johnson says he accepts responsibility,” wrote Libération. “But for what? The spectacular defeat of his party in North Shropshire, which he himself triggered by supporting the local MP, accused of corruption? The multiple parties under his roof when the country was in lockdown?” Does he also accept responsibility for “the total absence, for months, of any social distancing measures or masks” in the face of a rampaging virus that has killed nearly 150,000 people, the paper asked. And for “the ailing economy; the plunging foreign investments; Brexit, which still has not delivered the slightest positive result?” Johnson, the paper’s former London correspondent, Sonia Delesalle-Stolper, said, “makes nobody laugh any more. What legitimacy does he have, today, to ask the least effort of the British people? He has repeatedly shown his moral compass is either wholly inexistent or wildly askew.” With few friends, no real clan, surrounded by “mediocre politicians drunk on the unexpected power conferred on them by the referendum”, he is a one-man band – and his future looks far from assured, she said. Der Spiegel said bluntly that barely two years after “the apparently glorious election victory of the political entertainer”, Johnson today resembles “a fire-eater who’s run out of fuel: no more sparks, no flickering flames, only cold smoke rising over Downing Street.” The paper’s London correspondent, Jörg Schindler, however, concluded it was not yet certain the prime minister with “a Pinocchio-like relationship with the truth” was about to leave the stage. Despite partygate, wallpapergate and countless other scandals, Johnson had “never made a secret of the fact that he only knows one moral code: his”. He has always been, the magazine said, “the naked emperor who cried: ‘Look, I have no clothes.’ That has made him unassailable.” Even with his polling at record lows, he will not resign. And for him to be kicked out by his party, “it would first have to recover the decency it largely lost when it surrendered to its election winner”. But the truth of the last two years, Der Spiegel said, is that “Johnson has shaped the Tories in his own image”, shifting the party sharply to the right to accomplish “his life’s work, Brexit”, removing older, moderate heavyweights and replacing them with “young loyalists who owe their election solely to Johnson”. Forecasting “the beginning of the end”, however, Die Welt suggested growing discontent in his parliamentary party was precisely Johnson’s biggest threat: “So far, their motto has been that Johnson’s careless handling of the truth was the price to be paid for electoral victory. But Tory MPs are increasingly finding themselves caught up in an endless loop of new Johnson scandals.” El País said it was clear that Johnson’s “electoral magic has run out”. After a damaging parliamentary rebellion in which nearly 100 Tory MPs rejected his Covid measures, voters in North Shropshire, “tired of his jokes and fed up with a succession of recent scandals, simply turned their backs on him”, it said. Downing Street may be confident the Christmas break “will reduce the tensions”, said the paper’s London correspondent, Rafa de Miguel, but the threat of the highly transmissible Omicron variant “points to a tough winter, and is combining with public outrage to weigh on the credibility of a prime minister that is currently in tatters”. In an editorial, the Spanish daily said the sudden departure of the government’s Brexit negotiator, David Frost, further weakened Johnson – but would perhaps give the EU a chance to reset relations with London and a prime minister who until now had “always used Brexit as the wild card to get him out of domestic difficulty”. Facing an “onslaught from Omicron just before Christmas, and supply chain problems exacerbated by Brexit that have left the country without truckers and with half-empty supermarket shelves”, the last thing Johnson needed, the paper said, “is a bloody conflict with the European Union”. Spain’s ABC daily, meanwhile, said “Johnson is living through hard times”, facing several open fronts and “what could be his toughest week” since coming to power in the summer of 2019. “In just a few days, the premier has witnessed for himself how his approval rating has plummeted to its lowest point in the polls – proof of his disconnection from normal people, and even his lifelong supporters,” it said. The Dutch newspaper De Volkskrant warned Frost’s departure was “a new blow for the prime minister after a rebellion by his parliamentary party and a defeat in a byelection”, adding that the problem had now become about “Johnson’s personality. His great strength was winning elections. If that doesn’t work any more, there is really not much left.” Additional reporting by Sam Jones in MadridJoe Biden had hoped to end his first year in office by signing his signature bill, the Build Back Better Act, a $1.75tn spending package that includes massive investments in healthcare, childcare and climate initiatives. Instead, the president is ending the year with a member of his own party dealing a devastating blow to his legislative agenda and potentially Democrats’ prospects in next year’s midterm elections. The announcement by centrist West Virginia senator Joe Manchin that he will not support the Build Back Better Act has kicked off a round of fiery recriminations among Democrats, as party leaders rushed to determine whether the bill can still somehow be saved. But Manchin’s comments did not seem to leave much wiggle room for future negotiations. After announcing his opposition on Fox News Sunday, Manchin released a fuller statement saying the cost of the legislation, which had already been slashed in half to appease him, was too high to justify. “I have always said, ‘If I can’t go back home and explain it, I can’t vote for it,’” Manchin said. “Despite my best efforts, I cannot explain the sweeping Build Back Better Act in West Virginia and I cannot vote to move forward on this mammoth piece of legislation.” The White House was clearly blindsided by Manchin’s announcement, accusing the senator of reneging on commitments that he had reiterated to Biden just days earlier. “On Tuesday of this week, Senator Manchin came to the White House and submitted – to the president, in person, directly – a written outline for a Build Back Better bill that was the same size and scope as the president’s framework, and covered many of the same priorities,” press secretary Jen Psaki said on Sunday. “If his comments on Fox and written statement indicate an end to that effort, they represent a sudden and inexplicable reversal in his position, and a breach of his commitments to the president and the senator’s colleagues in the House and Senate.” Despite the significant setback, the White House pledged to keep advocating for the bill’s passage. “The fight for Build Back Better is too important to give up. We will find a way to move forward next year,” Psaki said. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer has already said he will hold a vote on the Build Back Better Act once the chamber reconvenes in January. In a “Dear colleague” letter that singled out Manchin, Schumer said: “Senators should be aware that the Senate will, in fact, consider the Build Back Better Act, very early in the new year so that every member of this body has the opportunity to make their position known on the Senate floor, not just on television.” But the bill will likely have to undergo significant revisions to win the support of Manchin, and Democrats cannot move forward without him because of the 50-50 split in the Senate. For the left of the Democratic party, the dilemma represents a bitter case of “I told you so”. The Congressional Progressive Caucus had insisted that the bipartisan infrastructure bill should not pass until the Build Back Better Act could move forward as well. Instead, the House passed the infrastructure bill last month after Biden convinced progressives that he could also secure 50 Senate votes for the spending package. Despite Biden’s assurances, six progressives still voted against the infrastructure bill to protest the decoupling of the two proposals, and those lawmakers have expressed outrage over Manchin’s announcement, which has proven their predictions correct. “We have been saying this for weeks that this would happen, and we took the hits,” congresswoman Cori Bush told MSNBC on Sunday. “Having those coupled together was the only leverage we had. And what did the caucus do? We tossed it.” However, it is not just the left wing of the Democratic party expressing criticism of Manchin. Congresswoman Suzan DelBene, the chair of the centrist New Democrat Coalition, warned that the party would suffer severe consequences if the Build Back Better Act is not passed. “The challenges our country faces are too big and the cost of inaction is too high to throw in the towel on Build Back Better negotiations now,” DelBene said Sunday. “Failure is not an option.” In an effort to bring Manchin back to the negotiating table, DelBene suggested that the bill should be altered to focus on funding a smaller number of programs for a longer period of time. Manchin’s most recent gripe about the legislation is that it calls for some programs to be phased out after a year or a few years. The senator has complained that those programs will inevitably be renewed and result in even more government spending, although the White House has said any future renewals would be paid for through additional revenue-raising provisions. “At the start of these negotiations many months ago, we called for prioritizing doing a few things well for longer, and we believe that adopting such an approach could open a potential path forward for this legislation,” DelBene said. But the progressives who are outraged at Biden and Democratic leaders for their handling of the negotiations have endorsed a different tactic, calling on the president to use the power of the executive pen to enact immediate change. “Biden needs to lean on his executive authority now. He has been delaying and under-utilizing it so far,” New York congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez said in a Monday tweet. “There is an enormous amount he can do on climate, student debt, immigration, cannabis, healthcare, and more. Time is running out. We need to move and use alternative paths.” Biden’s strategy in the coming weeks will likely have significant repercussions on the midterm elections. If Democrats cannot deliver on their promises to address the climate crisis and make childcare and healthcare more affordable, despite having full control of Congress and the White House, they will face many angry voters as they seek reelection next year. After months of drawn-out negotiations and no results to show for them, those voters may decide they are ready for a change in Washington.Vladimir Putin has said he will consider a military response if Russia feels threatened by Nato, in a sign that he is not ready to de-escalate tensions over a potential invasion of Ukraine. In a combative speech on Tuesday, Putin – who has demanded “security guarantees” from Nato – told his top military commanders that the west was to blame for the rising tensions. It came against a backdrop of a Russian buildup of tanks and artillery for what could constitute an invasion force within weeks. The Russian president has railed against Nato enlargement since the fall of the Soviet Union and accused the west of turning Ukraine against Russia. After a revolution installed a pro-western government in 2014, Moscow annexed Crimea and sparked a conflict in east Ukraine that has left more than 14,000 dead. It has bristled at growing military cooperation between Ukraine and Nato countries. “What the United States is doing in Ukraine is at our doorstep,” he said of Washington’s support for Kyiv. “And they should understand that we have nowhere further to retreat to. Under [US] protection, they are arming and urging on extremists from a neighbouring country at Russia. Against Crimea, for instance. Do they think we’ll just watch idly?” Putin did not specifically refer to the possibility of an offensive operation in Ukraine and Russian diplomats have previously suggested a response could employ other measures, such as moving intermediate-range missiles within striking distance of European targets. That would be a punishment, Moscow claims, for the US’s unilateral withdrawal from a missile treaty in 2018. By massing troops at Ukraine’s borders, however, Russia has made it clear that an attack is on the table. “If our western counterparts continue a clearly aggressive line, we will undertake proportionate military-technical countermeasures and will respond firmly to unfriendly steps,” Putin said in televised remarks. “I’d like to stress that we are fully entitled to do that.” Parts of his speech on Tuesday appeared tailored to give Russia a justification to launch a new military campaign in Ukraine, something it could be ready for as soon as next month. Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, said an unnamed private US military company had acquired chemical weapons and was planning to launch a “provocation” in the east Ukrainian cities of Avdiivka and Krasny Liman. Russia’s military previously made similar claims in Syria, although the predicted attacks often did not take place. Putin repeated demands that the west make legal guarantees to ensure Russia’s security, but said he would have difficulty trusting the US to abide by a treaty. “We need long-term legally binding guarantees,” he told military commanders. “You and I know well that even they, legal guarantees, cannot be trusted because the United States easily withdraws from all international agreements it loses interest in for one reason or another … giving no explanations whatsoever.” He pointed specifically to missile defence treaties and the Treaty on Open Skies, which the US left in November 2020. Putin railed at Nato’s expansion and accused western powers of supporting terrorists and separatists in Chechnya, where Moscow fought a brutal series of wars in the 1990s and 2000s. The speech points to a broad reassessment of Russia’s post-Soviet history, in which Putin views Washington and its allies as taking advantage of the country’s weakness. Russia put forward a highly contentious list of security guarantees last week that it says it wants the west to agree to in order to lower tensions in Europe and defuse the crisis over Ukraine, including many elements that have already been ruled out. The demands include a ban on Ukraine entering Nato and a limit to the deployment of troops and weapons to Nato’s eastern flank, in effect returning Nato forces to where they were stationed in 1997, before an eastward expansion. Putin did offer some hope of talks but said Russia needed an immediate answer to its proposals. “There are some signals that our partners are ready to work on this,” he said. “But there’s a danger that they will attempt to stall, dumping our proposals into a swamp, and use this pause to do what they want.” Both Russian and western analysts have said the Kremlin is unlikely to receive the concessions it desires, making a conflict more likely. In that case, Moscow may use the dismissal of its draft treaty as an excuse for launching a military operation in Ukraine. “What’s happening now, this tension in Europe, is their fault,” Putin said. “At every step Russia has been forced to respond, the situation has got worse and worse and worse … And now we’re in a situation where we must make a decision. We can’t allow the situation I’ve described to develop any further.”The United Nations is scrambling to manage the postponement of Libyan presidential elections set for 24 December as fears grow that a looming political vacuum will lead to renewed violence and economic chaos. There has been no formal announcement on a postponement, but all sides acknowledge the vote cannot proceed, not least because a list of authorised candidates has yet to be published. Libya has seen a year of relative calm since a landmark October 2020 ceasefire following almost a decade of conflict and the UN has been pushing for elections as part of a multi-pronged effort to cement the peace. Tensions are building over whether the interim government of national unity can remain in office after its formal term expires on the 24th. Roadblocks and armed vehicles have also begun to appear in parts of the capital, Tripoli, and four major oilfields have been shut due to their occupation by militia. The UN mission to Libya warned that developments in Tripoli did not bode well for maintaining stability and establishing the conditions for free and fair elections. “The current mobilisation of forces affiliated with different groups creates tensions and increases the risk of clashes that could spiral into conflict,” it said in a statement. “Any disagreements on emerging political or military matters should be resolved through dialogue, particularly at this stage when the country is navigating through a difficult and complex electoral process that should usher in a peaceful transition.” Fadel Lamen, a leading presidential candidate, said the position was very fluid and dangerous. “Some of us are trying to crystallise a new roadmap,” Lamen said. “There are different scenarios: a very short postponement, just a shift in the date to clarify the outstanding legal issues, such as a candidate’s qualifications, or a longer six-month delay, but once you go for such a long delay anything can happen.” Stephanie Williams, the UN’s special adviser on Libya, has been conducting urgent consultations in the country in an attempt to craft an agreement on how it can maintain a semblance of momentum towards democracy. A dispute between two Libyan bodies over responsibility for the delay has meant the announcement of the delay has itself been postponed. The High National Elections Commission (HNEC), the technical body overseeing the elections, says it is the responsibility of the Libyan parliament, the House of Representatives, to make the announcement, but the house is refusing to meet at least until after election day, when it will announce its plans on how to proceed. Some members of the house have called for a new government to be installed, claiming the mandate of the interim government, formed in February to take the country through to elections, has expired. Although Europe and the US have been fixated on the 24 December date for presidential and parliamentary elections for more than a year, no Libyan consensus on the legal framework for the elections, including the qualification criteria for candidates, was ever reached. The HNEC has handed to the House of Representatives its still unpublished report on the eligibility of some of the candidates seeking to stand. Question marks have existed over three of the most prominent candidates: the renegade general Khalifa Haftar, leader of the self-styled Libyan National Army, which controls the country’s east and parts of the south; Muammar Gaddafi’s son Saif al-Islam Gaddafi; and Abdul Hamid Dbeibah, the interim prime minister, who pledged on taking the role that he would not stand in the presidential election. The US ambassador to Libya, Richard Norland, has acknowledged there are political and legal obstacles to the elections going ahead and that new proposals, none of them ideal, are being discussed. He also pointedly told Dbeibah he should not use the interim premiership as a base to campaign for the presidency. Rival presidential candidates from the west and east met in Benghazi on Tuesday, issuing a joint statement that underlined the extent to which they are allied against Dbeibah, who they believe has abused his office to gain popular support. Lamen said: “There is consensus that this corrupt government has to go.” But it is not clear who is empowered to form a new caretaker government. Williams was the UN special envoy to Libya from March 2020 until January 2021 and then handed a roadmap to elections to her successor Ján Kubiš, but he quit in November after his disastrous hands-off approach gave the existing Libyan political class an opening to slow the progress to elections. None of the substantive issues over necessary conditions for running an election were fully resolved, including an agreed legal framework, the constitutional checks and balances on a ruling president, and the eligibility criteria for vetting candidates. As a result, it became increasingly likely that the elections, without any consensus on their basis, would lead to a disputed outcome. This could be disastrous, given the tinderbox conditions in a country controlled by dozens of armed groups including thousands of foreign fighters. Williams returned to the job on 12 December, since when she has been privately urging various parties to revive the route to elections with a new timetable. Her task will be to find new ways to reapply pressure on existing political bodies in Libya that have traditionally acted as spoilers, and persuade them to agree a new timetable and basis for elections. She previously tried to go round the roadblock of the existing political class by appointing a 75-strong Libya political dialogue forum, but the credibility of that body fell apart soon after her departure.No visitor to Linlithgow can miss the prominent lettering across the gable end of the 17th-century tavern at the top of the high street: Black Bitch. “There will be people who are offended and they have a right to their opinion,” said Alistair Old. He is leading an energetic campaign to retain the pub’s name after its owner, Greene King, announced last month it would be rebranded as the Black Hound in line with its diversity policy. “But the people of Linlithgow wouldn’t have tolerated it if the name had racist connotations,” Old added. Local people are by no means oblivious to the force of these words, and most tell of incidents with visitors to the birthplace of Mary, Queen of Scots where some hasty explanation has been required. Legend has it that a black female greyhound would swim across Linlithgow loch to bring food to her master, who was sentenced to starve to death on an island. The town and its residents are steeped in the tale, which dates back to the 13th century. Children learn about loyalty at primary school, the faithful dog is on Linlithgow’s coat of arms and those who were born there are proud to use the moniker. Into this local context comes Greene King, the UK’s biggest pub owner, a company that has publicly apologised for its founder’s links to transatlantic slavery and has already changed the names of two pubs called the Black Boy, as well as another called the Black’s Head. It also runs an award-winning diversity strategy titled Calling Time on Racism. Greene King insists it made its announcement after a lengthy consultation, including a visit to Linlithgow by its chief executive, Nick Mackenzie. Local residents, who complain that they were not sufficiently canvassed, have reacted furiously, holding a rally outside the pub and collecting nearly 10,000 signatures for a petition. The town’s SNP representatives have pledged their support, and later this week campaigners will meet Greene King in the hope of thrashing out a compromise. Mackenzie says that since the announcement he has had letters of both criticism and support from residents. “This is something that we feel strongly is the right thing to do,” he said. “We appreciate and respect the importance of Linlithgow’s history, which is why the new name continues to recognise this, but at the same time we cannot just brush aside the fact that we have spoken to people from a range of backgrounds who find it offensive and upsetting to see the name displayed on the pub as it is currently.” “Those two words mean different things to different people, depending on their experience or background,” said Abel Aboh, the chair of the West Lothian Community Race Forum, one of the groups to which Greene King spoke, “but if you want to run a public space where everyone is welcome then you have to signal that. Words have power.” He emphasised that he was not a lone critic, adding: “People say it quietly that it’s high time the name changed. I’m not dismissing history but Linlithgow as a place has evolved.” But those opposed to the name change are undoubtedly more vocal. Nidhin Chand has lived in Linlithgow for six years. She said: “I thought ‘what?!’ when I first saw the name, but then I heard the story, that it is all about loyalty and bravery. It’s nothing to do with racism. “If people want to address that they need to tackle real racism, not a female dog.” While local people emphasise that Linlithgow is a welcoming place, they accept that the town is not immune to racism. For example, during the Black Lives Matter protests in the summer of 2020, locals wanting to show support were subjected to online abuse and accused of ignoring Covid rules. Mukami McCrum, the former chief executive of Central Scotland Racial Equality Council, who has lived in Linlithgow for over 30 years, believes that the pub row may have – albeit unintended – negative repercussions for some of the residents of Linlithgow. “Most of the minority ethnic people in the town were not involved in any consultation, or asked, ‘Do you think the name is racist?’ Now visible minorities are getting blamed for a decision that is not ours.” Her daughter Laura McCrum, who grew up in the town, recalls that she found the pub name “startling” when she first saw it, but when she learned it was a story of loyalty and perseverance “it resonated with me”. Meanwhile, Old says, irrespective of the decision on the name, the row has made some people think more deeply about their town: “As white men we don’t see the racism. I was shocked to hear some of the comments made [to members of Linlithgow’s BAME community]. They are our community and we should be supporting them. We should be ostracising the racists.”China has deleted social media accounts of an influencer known as the country’s “livestreaming queen” and stripped her of a title that promotes honesty on the internet, a day after she was ordered to pay a record $200m (£150m) fine for tax evasion. Huang Wei, known by her popular username Viya, is one of China’s most high-profile livestreamers in an e-commerce sector that has grown rapidly since the coronavirus pandemic took hold last year. With over 110 million followers on social media, Viya reportedly sold products worth a total of 8.5bn yuan (£1bn) in just one evening during China’s recent Singles’ Day shopping festival on 11 November. But on Monday, tax authorities in the eastern province of Zhejiang said that Viya “evaded 643m yuan of taxes” between 2019 and 2020 by “concealing personal income and [making] false declarations of income.”. They announced the 1.3bn yuan penalty – the biggest of its kind in Beijing’s sweeping crackdown on celebrities. The decision was reported all over China’s media. It also became one of the most-searched topics on Weibo on Monday. Viya responded by saying that she would accept the decision from the tax authorities. “I am very remorseful and apologise to the public,” she wrote. But on Tuesday, Viya’s social media accounts vanished from major online platforms, with her livestreaming page on the Alibaba-owned Taobao shopping site rendered inaccessible. Searches for her account on the Twitter-like Weibo and Douyin – China’s version of TikTok – returned no results. In the meantime, authorities said that they have also cancelled a title that promotes good behaviour on the internet following the scandal. The title, internet honesty and credibility ambassador, was given to Viya in July in the Chinese province of Hunan. Crackdowns on tax evasion and perceived immoral behaviour in the entertainment industry have been ongoing for a number of years. In 2018, actor Fan Bingbing was given a $129m tax bill. And more recently, Chinese actor Zheng Shuang was hit with a $46m fine for tax evasion, in a drive by the regulators to crack down on entertainers’ “sky-high pay”. In recent months, the authorities have extended their scrutiny to include online influencers. Last month, the government fined two other live streamers $14m. It is not the first time the “livestreaming queen” hit the headlines. In June, Viya was fined 530,000 yuan for breaching advertising laws, after some fans accused her of selling counterfeit products. Her massive penalty this week came amidst the launch of President Xi Jinping’s “common prosperity” drive. Chinese analysts say the campaign aims to reduce economic inequality, partly by reining in excessive incomes in the entertainment and technology sectors. Additional reporting by Agence France-PresseThe emergence and rapid spread of the Omicron variant represents the biggest threat to the NHS since last December’s rise of the Alpha variant. The NHS only managed then by reducing much non-Covid work and by putting a brake on the rise of cases with the second lockdown in January 2021. A year later, the lack of urgency in the government response is a danger to us all. NHS staff are exhausted. They have been working flat out for almost two years. For some of that time they had to struggle with rising numbers of seriously ill patients with Covid-19. When each wave subsided, they turned to the backlog of cases that had built up in the meantime – this enormous backlog started before the pandemic and numbers almost 6 million people. Meanwhile, Covid patients still make up about a quarter of occupied critical care beds. The risks to the NHS come from three sides. First, Omicron has grown faster than any variant seen to date – including the original spread of Covid-19 in March 2020. The UK Health Security Agency reports that cases of Omicron have been doubling every two days in most regions of the UK. A certain percentage of newly infected people will need hospital treatment – even if Omicron causes less severe disease than Delta. Let’s say that the risk of hospitalisation with Omicron is half that of Delta, although the analysis from Imperial College London suggests this may be optimistic. With a variant that is doubling every two days that gives us only a two-day advantage. Whatever the eventual percentage of people with Omicron who will need NHS care, the absolute number seeking care will also double every two days. Because it takes seven to 14 days from infection to needing hospital, this rapid increase in demand for NHS services will not be seen immediately – probably not until after Christmas – but it will happen. Modelling by the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, Operational sub-group – which reports to the Sage committee – suggests that by the time we see this impact, four doublings may have passed. This means much higher levels of pressure on the NHS which we can’t do anything about if we wait for hospitalisations to rise before we act. Last Thursday, Sage estimated that without reducing transmission further (over and above plan B), there will be at least 3,000 daily admissions to hospital in England (equivalent to the first wave in 2020), and it could be much worse even than last January. So the question is not whether it will be bad for the NHS, but whether it will be just dreadful or catastrophic. The second risk comes from only focusing on the numbers of patients alone and not staff capacity. It is very likely that staff absences due to infection will also have a severe impact. Fortunately, almost all will have had boosters so they are at little risk of serious illness or death, unlike in the early days of the pandemic. But we know that those who have been boosted are being infected and must isolate. And when a neurosurgeon is isolating, their entire team may be unviable. It also exacerbates the strains placed on those who can still work. The NHS in London is already struggling with major staff shortages due to Omicron: Guy’s and St Thomas’ trust has already had to cancel services and the London ambulance service currently has hundreds of staff off sick. The speed with which Omicron is rising makes it inevitable that we will lose many critical staff just as demand surges. The number of NHS hospital beds in England has more than halved over the past 30 years, with the UK being among the countries with the lowest ICU capacity per population across western Europe. And we already have far fewer doctors than other parts of Europe. The third risk comes from the way we have taken the efforts of NHS staff for granted. Throughout the pandemic, NHS staff have adapted remarkably to unbelievably difficult situations. They have learned new skills. They have created new ways of working, such as remote consultations (with much maligned GPs seeing many more patients than before). They have repurposed facilities, turning conventional wards into intensive care units. They have provided support for one another when things seemed to be getting too much. But at some point they can do no more. Many staff have left and many more are burned out and cannot face the trauma of another winter desperately helping people to breathe. Many have developed long Covid with more than 3% of health and social care staff reporting persistent symptoms from Covid-19 for 28 days or more, the highest across all occupations. After nearly two years of dealing with crisis after crisis, the NHS just does not have the resilience it had at the beginning of the pandemic. This means that pressures are now higher at lower levels of Covid-19 hospitalisations than in previous waves. As a society, we have a duty of care to the NHS, as well as care-home staff, who have looked after us through incredibly difficult circumstances. We are failing them. We need to urgently protect our health and social-care staff with adequate personal protective equipment. We need to provide all staff with high-quality PPE (including FFP2/3 masks), so they can protect themselves and their families, and reduce in-hospital transmission which can cost lives. We need measures that can reverse the rise in cases rapidly. Vaccine boosters are crucial, but they take effect over weeks rather than days. We have lost the opportunity for less severe early action. The only thing that could work in time is a short circuit breaker to limit indoor social interaction (and return the rule of six when outside, while keeping outdoor hospitality, shops and schools open), as proposed by Independent Sage and Sage. New data on severity and spread is arriving by the day and if good news, the circuit breaker can be lifted rapidly. But we need to act now. Christina Pagel is director of UCL’s Clinical Operational Research Unit, which applies advanced analytical methods to problems in healthcare. This article was coauthored by Deepti Gurdasani and Martin McKeeTown halls in England are calling for billions of pounds a year earmarked for the NHS to be diverted to social care amid warnings of severe care worker shortages and hundreds of thousands of people not getting the help they need. The cross-party Local Government Association wants a rethink of the government policy announced in October, which is to reserve 85% of receipts from the new 1.25% health and social care tax for the health service. It warned the measures, announced to deliver Boris Johnson’s promise to “fix social care”, fail to deal with “immediate, frontline pressures facing care services right now”. The demand “to immediately redirect a significantly greater share of the levy to frontline adult social care” comes amid concern the social care crisis is preventing hospital discharges amid rising Omicron admissions. A four-star hotel in Bristol has become the latest makeshift care home to be pressed into action, after NHS England’s chief executive, Amanda Pritchard, told hospital bosses to use hotel beds to prevent discharge blockages when conventional community care is unavailable. Across the UK, almost half of homecare providers also now say they can no longer take on new work, with worker shortages a key problem. A total of 38% said they were handing back contracts to councils and the NHS because they could no longer deliver, a survey by the Homecare Association found. Meanwhile, 95% of the largest private care home chains are struggling to find care staff, according to a poll published on Tuesday by the industry group Care England. Ministers have said the new national insurance levy starting in April 2022 would deliver £12bn a year for the NHS and social care, but only £1.7bn would go to social care. The LGA has calculated that councils need up to £9.5bn a year more by 2025 to cover unmet care packages, increase pay and finance care homes fairly. “We recognise the NHS faces a significant backlog which needs to be tackled, but so does social care, which faces huge challenges in addressing unmet and under-met need, workforce shortages and care worker pay,” said David Fothergill, the Conservative leader of Somerset county council and chairman of the LGA’s community wellbeing board. “Otherwise we are building towards a future based on inadequate foundations.” He added: “This means some people cannot access any or as much of the care as they need, impacting upon their quality of life, and also has a direct knock-on effect on getting people out of hospital and into their homes and communities, which is both bad for the individual and for the health service.” The latest hotel to be used as a care facility is the city-centre Bristol hotel, which is due to start taking patients from hospitals in Bristol, north Somerset and south Gloucestershire from Wednesday. Up to 30 patients will be discharged into rooms on one floor, supported by live-in staff on another. Local health chiefs describe it as “a temporary care facility” to “release much-needed hospital beds” with “rising Omicron cases likely to add to further strain in the coming weeks”. At least three other hotels have been pressed into use in the south of England, including in Plymouth, despite concerns they do not match care home conditions. The operator, Abicare, said it has been recruiting live-in workers from Spain, Greece and African countries who already have rights to work in the UK. The Health Foundation thinktank has calculated that funding for social care needs to increase by £4.8bn a year to stabilise the system and £9.3bn a year to enable it to recover. Under the government’s plan, most of the additional £1.7bn a year will cover the cost of the new £86,000 cap on lifetime care bills, aimed at ensuring people who pay for their own care are not forced to sell their homes. “What the government is proposing to inject into social care is nowhere near enough to address the issues,” said Mike Padgham, the chair of the Independent Care Group, which represents care operators in Yorkshire. “Some £8bn has been cut from social care budgets since 2010 … Financial cutback after financial cutback has left the provision of care in tatters.” Last week, ministers announced an additional £300m to fund retention bonuses for care staff amid an exodus of workers, but with payments so far only allowing for bonuses ranging from £60 to £150 a worker, and operators fear the additional funds may have limited impact. The Department of Health and Social Care has been contacted for comment.Sarah Palin, the former Alaska governor and vice-presidential candidate, used the same week that the US passed 800,000 Covid-19 deaths to tell a rightwing gathering she would add to that toll herself before she would agree to be given a vaccine. “It’ll be over my dead body that I’ll have to get a shot,” Palin told a cheering crowd. “I will not do that. I won’t do it, and they better not touch my kids either.” Palin, who tested positive for Covid in March, was speaking at AmericaFest 2021 in Phoenix, Arizona, an event hosted by the conservative student organization Turning Point USA which attracted other staunch vaccine opponents including Tucker Carlson of Fox News and extremist Republicans Lauren Boebert and Marjorie Taylor Greene. Experts say vaccinations against Covid-19 almost entirely eliminate the threat of death or serious infection. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has said unvaccinated people are 14 times more likely to die than those who get the shot. Palin also falsely claimed that those who would refuse a vaccine outnumbered those taking them. “I think if enough of us rise up and say, ‘No, enough is enough,’ there are more of us than there are of them,” Palin said in response to a question about vaccine mandates, Mediate reported. “There is an empowerment in a group like this where we can kind of feed off each other and really be strong.” According to the CDC, 72.9% of the eligible US population has taken at least one shot and 61.5% are considered “fully vaccinated” with two. One in three of those has also taken a booster shot – including former president Donald Trump, who was booed at a rally in Dallas when he revealed he had done so. Writing for the Washington Post, the columnist Dana Milbank said: “Palin’s talk of dead bodies is on point. By discouraging vaccination, she and Tucker Carlson and the rest of the anti-science right are quite literally getting people killed.” He also pointed to studies that have shown a widening Covid death toll between counties that voted for or against Trump. Other analysts have likened a Republican party dedicated to an anti-vaccine and anti-mask stance to a “death cult”. “Though free Covid vaccines are readily available to every American, untold numbers of people have needlessly died in 2021, heavily clustered in Republican-dominated states, often because they refused the vaccine,” Sidney Blumenthal, a former Clinton adviser and now a biographer and Guardian contributor, wrote in Prospect magazine. Republican governors, Blumenthal said, had “wantonly” undermined public health measures by banning mask and vaccine mandates. “Never before has a US political party sought to gain partisan advantage through tactics that would result in the widespread deaths of its followers,” he wrote.Victory is sweet. The hundreds of thousands of Chileans who took to the streets to celebrate the victory of the leftwing former student leader, Gabriel Boric, in Chile’s presidential runoff elections certainly thought so. Boric won with a 12-point margin and a historic number of votes, imposing a convincing defeat on the rightwing candidate José Antonio Kast that few would have predicted only a month ago. Yet Boric’s victory speech was anything but gloating. Nodding towards the years of polarisation and protest leading up to the election, he stressed the need for “social cohesion, refinding ourselves, and sharing common ground”. Earlier in his campaign he vowed to “bury neoliberalism”, sounding like the same revolutionary politician who led the social protests of 2011 and frustrated many parliamentary colleagues from traditional political parties during his eight years as a congressional deputy. But his campaign in the runoff was characterised by the measured tones of a budding statesman. Boric demonstrated an extraordinary degree of pragmatism and a genuine ability to reach out to moderate voters and bring Chileans together during the most polarised election the country had experienced since the plebiscite that permitted the country to transition to democracy in 1988. Many pundits were quick to highlight that the result of the election (Boric: 55.9%; Kast: 44.1%) mirrors that of the plebiscite (55.99% for a transition to democracy and 44.01% against). This was also clearly a highly polarised election. A 35-year-old, leftwing former student leader partially supported by a revolutionary student movement and the Communist party, up against an older politician associated with the dictatorship of General Pinochet, who clearly represented economic and political elites as well as extremely conservative social values. It seemed Chile again faced a choice between a bold and risky move into an unknown but democratic future, or a return to an authoritarian anti-democratic past. Kast’s first round campaign slogan “Atrévete” (roughly translated as “I dare you”) gave the extreme right licence to voice its views without shame. Trumpian tones threaded through his campaign, with threats that Chile would turn into a communist failure like Venezuela if the left won. A video by rightwing YouTuber Sebastián Izquierdo calling on Kast’s supporters to interfere fraudulently with the election went viral and is now being prosecuted by Chile’s election authority. Ultimately, Kast unleashed the anti-democratic and authoritarian instincts of a rightwing political elite that feels profoundly threatened by the social protests and violence that have stunned Chileans in recent years. But extending this licence to his followers made it extremely difficult for Kast to persuade independent voters from the political centre of his democratic credentials, and his ability to – as his campaign slogan went – “make everything OK” (“Todo va a estar bien”). By contrast, the second-round campaign of Boric successfully reached out to independents: his efforts, for example, to bring about a reconciliation between the political programmes of the primary candidates from the centre-left, coordinated by a widely respected and experienced Christian Democrat economist, Guillermo Larraín, signalled his willingness and ability to engage a broad sector of the political spectrum. It was this effort – as well as the contrast with the authoritarian past of his opponent – that won him the support of prominent national and international economists, including Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz and Thomas Piketty. In addition, the impressive efforts by his campaign coordinator, Izkia Siches, and student leaders from his generation, such as Camila Vallejos and Giorgio Jackson, coherently communicated a message of a better future (“Para vivir mejor”) to the Chilean electorate. Their campaign demonstrated the pragmatic and generational – not ideological – coherence of this new band of politicians in Chile. Their positivity mirrored the democratic message of the 1988 plebiscite, and their margin of victory suggests that many independent voters were won over. The president-elect captured this energy in his victory speech, which echoed the style of transition president Patricio Aylwin before him. His tone was profoundly conciliatory and aimed to bring Chile back from polarisation and return to the democratic centre. Aware that he will have to govern with a Congress that is equally split between political factions, Boric emphasised his willingness to engage with all actors across the political spectrum, including his recent opponent, Kast. Knowing that he will have to collaborate with a constitutional assembly that is working hard to deepen democracy in Chile, he hit all the right notes: democracy, institutions, social inclusion, women’s rights, environmental sustainability, justice, truth, human rights and dialogue. Knowing that he has no majority in the Senate, however, led him to combine these themes with promises of fiscal responsibility and economic stability. Gabriel Boric is promising Chile a lot. But the views of the young student leader have moved on, and he is no longer promising a social revolution. Instead, his actions and words indicate he is promising a rebirth of Chile’s economic, political and social structures. Sceptics (and financial markets) should take heart from the fact that Chile’s first transition from an authoritarian dictatorship to democracy in 1990 provided no guarantees either, but led to one of the most successful periods of development in Latin American history. Now, Chile is embarking on a second transition, reinventing itself as a social market economy. Its political leaders will be able to build on the institutions, experience and capabilities that the country established during the past 31 years. Boric captured the historic moment perfectly in his victory speech. Now he will have to work out the practicalities of how to deliver. Kirsten Sehnbruch is a British Academy global professor at the International Inequalities Institute at the London School of Economics and Political Science, and co-editor of Democratic Chile: The Politics and Policies of a Historic CoalitionAny easy, last-minute tips for zhooshing up my Christmas dinner? Sue, Reading Christmas dinner is stressful enough without busting out recipes you’ve never made before. That said, if Sue is after a little zhoosh, she might want to consider how she dresses her veg. “A good way to add theatre with relatively little effort is by salt-baking root vegetables,” says Mark Birchall, chef/patron of Moor Hall in Lancashire. “Everyone has the ingredients in their cupboard – salt, egg whites, herbs – especially at Christmas.” Combine these to make a crust, then use to coat celeriac, beetroot, parsnips or even carrots. “It makes them extremely moist and perfectly seasoned.” Alternatively, says Selin Kiazim of Oklava in London, embrace “crunchy fairy dust”, AKA breadcrumbs cooked in a little dripping or duck fat. “Add to that crispy bacon and lots of chopped herbs, and sprinkle over any vegetables.” Roasting sprouts will also bring the magic: Rose Ashby, head chef at Spring in London, tosses hers in olive oil, tamari, maple syrup, dried chilli and salt. “They become umami-like and caramelised.” Finish with a bright sprinkling of chopped parsley and a squeeze of lemon. Oven space is, of course, at a premium on Christmas Day, so you could also do away with cooking altogether. “Sprouts are delicious raw, and have a gorgeously nutty, peppery flavour,” says Ashby, who shreds them, then tosses with good-quality olive oil and salt; for extra Christmassy vibes, add slices of blood orange, chopped mint and hazelnuts. Or steam your greens instead: Jack Stein, executive chef at Rick Stein Restaurants, pops kale or cavolo nero and a splash of water in a pan with a tight-fitting lid and turns on the heat. “Slice a few cloves of garlic, put in a add olive oil to cover and microwave for a minute. Lift the lid, let the last of the liquid steam away, then add the garlic oil, saute for another minute, and you’re ready to season and serve.” Birchall rules the roast turkey by brining it before cooking. “It keeps the meat tender, and also adds flavour and texture. I use a 10% brine solution [one part salt to nine parts water], to which you can add bay leaves, peppercorns and orange zest.” Even a short brine for a few hours will make a huge difference, Birchall says: “When the turkey is ready to be cooked, put a simple breadcrumb and herb stuffing under the skin, to stop the breast meat from drying out.” And don’t forget that all-important gravy, Kiazim says: “Add sherry [oloroso or fino] and a little sherry vinegar for an acidic kick to cut through the rich Christmas meal.” For Monica Galetti, however, Christmas wouldn’t be Christmas without a pineapple-glazed ham. “I like to make food reminiscent of childhood and family gatherings,” says the MasterChef judge and chef/patron of Mere in London. “Blitz tinned pineapple [yes, really] to a puree, stir it into a dry caramel to make a nice, thick glaze, then brush all over the ham. It doesn’t run off, either.” Slice any leftovers and stuff them inside a cheese toastie. You’re welcome. • Got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.comWith Omicron spreading in the UK the potential for disruptions to Christmas plans are high, whether you’re limiting your contacts or have been forced to isolate. But the fact you can’t meet in person doesn’t mean all the festivities have to stop. It will not be quite the same but you can still join your family and friends and have a good time virtually. Here are some ideas to help keep you connected over the festive period – whether it’s checking in for a chat or sharing entertainment. Easy video calling Video calls are most people’s first port of call. You can use almost any device with a camera, but tablets or laptops are the easiest to set up for longer chats if you have them. Zoom is one of the easiest cross-platform services available with an app available for most devices. It can be used for free for up to 40 minutes at a time. For those in the Apple ecosystem, FaceTime is built into every iPhone, iPad or Mac, is very easy to use and now you can send invites to those on Android or Windows for calls in their browser. Google users can use Meet on Android, in Chrome on a computer or iPhone and iPad apps. Those sitting on their own should use headphones to avoid feedback and help keep conversations more natural, and shorter video chats are usually better to avoid fatigue. Place a tablet or laptop at the end of the table if someone can’t make a gathering. Party games over video call Chats can get old quickly, so why not try party games over video calls. Some things are easier to do than others. Charades is a natural fit: just prop up your video calling device and make your shapes to the camera. Pictionary is also fairly easy to do over a video call using pen and paper, or you can use a shared drawing service such as the free Microsoft Whiteboard to see what other people are drawing on their screens or tablets. Quizzes are a video chat favourite, too. You can try using Google Docs or similar services, but the old(er) fashioned way of pen, paper and a bit of screen sharing if any pictures are involved often works better. Share films, TV shows and music over video calls The latest addition to the growing list of video call activities is watching videos or listening to music at the same time. Apple’s new SharePlay offering makes this easy – it’s built into FaceTime as of the latest software updates. While you’re on a FaceTime call you can start watching a TV, movie or playing music in an app that supports SharePlay, such as Apple’s Music and TV, Disney+, Pluto TV and TikTok, and it will sync up with the others on your call when you tap on “play for everyone”. It works on every Apple device, including the Mac or an Apple TV streaming box so you can watch the movie on the big screen. Watch movies together without needing to call If you’d rather not see the faces of others when watching a film, or you don’t use Apple devices, you can still watch on-demand services together remotely. Disney+ has a feature called GroupWatch built in, which is easy to use and works on most devices. It lets you invite other people with a Disney+ subscription to join you to watch the content at the same time. Amazon’s Prime Video Watch Party can do similar via Android devices, computers in the browser or Fire TV devices. Group watching on Netflix is more limited at the moment, requiring the free Teleparty Chrome or Edge browser extension on your PC, Mac or Chromebook, so it won’t work on your smart TV, phone or iPad, but you can text chat with other viewers in a bar to the side. The BBC launched a pilot service called Together last year that allows you to group iPlayer, Sounds, Bitsize, News and Sport on a computer. But don’t forget, if you pause it your end for a quick pit-stop it’ll pause it mid-action for everyone else too, which they might not thank you for. For a low-tech alternative you could just tune into a live broadcast on TV or stream and chat with WhatsApp. Play video games remotely Multiplayer and co-operative video games are big business and they can be exceptionally rewarding when you can’t physically be together. All the big consoles support online multiplayer with voice chat, and there are many games to choose from. Typically you need to pay for the online service, but many can be bought monthly including £3.49 for Nintendo’s service, £6.99 for Microsoft’s Xbox Live Gold and Sony’s £6.99 PlayStation Plus. Some games such as the hugely popular Fortnite can be played for free online on most platforms, including consoles, PCs, phones and tablets. There are lots of great shooting, racing and adventure games to play together, while a crop of excellent party games such as Among Us, which is the modern reinvention of wink murder offer something a bit different. Shared Christmas playlists or a roaring (digital) fire If it is simply some of the communal Christmas atmosphere you are looking for, and live radio doesn’t quite cut it, then a shared music playlist might be the answer. Spotify is the best known for collaborative playlists allowing everyone to add tracks using either free or paid accounts. But you can at least share a basic playlist you’ve made by sending friends a link from the various apps for Apple Music, Amazon Music and most others services if they also subscribe. For a bit of ambience, you can put a recreation of a roaring fire on your TV too, so you’re all watching the same mesmerising dancing flames. The easiest way is to play one of the surprisingly large libraries of fire videos on your streaming service of choice, be that Netflix, Amazon, YouTube or others. There are smart TV apps available too for most platforms. Just search for “fireplace”.Iran has implied that its regional foe, Saudi Arabia, may have blocked efforts to save the life of its ambassador to Yemen, who contracted coronavirus there but was unable to be repatriated immediately for urgent medical treatment. The ambassador, Hasan Irlu, “was evacuated in poor condition due to delayed cooperation from certain countries”, the Iranian foreign ministry spokesperson, Saeed Khatibzadeh, told state media. The spokesperson appeared to be referring to Saudi Arabia. Riyadh controls the airspace around the Yemeni capital, Sana’a , and the ambassador was flown out on an Iraqi military aircraft after negotiations by the Oman government with Saudi Arabia. There had been claims, picked up by the US state department spokesperson, Ned Price, that the ambassador’s departure signalled a row between Iran and the leadership of the Houthis. But the announcement of the ambassador’s death from Covid complications appears to dispel the rumours of serious political tensions between Iran and the Houthis, whom they have backed during Yemen’s long conflict. Asked on Monday to comment on media reports of a rift between the ambassador and the Houthis, Price said: “We do hope that the departure of the Iranian ambassador from Yemen … is a sign that Yemenis understand the profoundly destabilising role that Iran has been playing in their country for some time now.” The Wall Street Journal had reported that Riyadh said there were no signs the ambassador was seriously ill and that in return for allowing Irlu to leave Yemen, Riyadh had asked the Houthis to release a number of Saudis held by the militant group. If the Saudi objections to his evacuation were genuinely material to his death, the episode is unlikely to ease relations between the two countries that had been on a upward path. Saudi Arabia resents what it regards as Iranian interference in support of the Houthis, a group that Saudi Arabia has been fighting to contain for six years. His death also highlights the diplomatic impasse in Yemen, marked by Saudi air attacks on Sana’a on Monday. The Norwegian Refugee Council’s country director for Yemen, Erin Hutchinson, said the attack on the city’s airport “would not change much for the millions of impoverished Yemenis who were already cut off from the rest of the world. Thousands of them die anonymously, waiting for life-saving medical flights promised years ago and never followed through. But it should serve to open the world’s eyes to the madness that is punishing millions of civilians who have no say in this conflict.” The Arab Coalition spokesperson, Brig Gen Turki al-Maliki, said the coalition had mounted limited and legitimate attacks as a response to repeated Houthi drone strikes inside Saudi Arabia. He added that the airport was being used by the Houthis as a workshop to build drones and ballistic missiles with which to hit Saudi Arabia.A group of thousands collectively held our breath I was a big fan of Pavel Kolesnikov’s recording of the Goldberg Variations, and it was a pleasure to be once again part of a reasonably big, focused Proms audience to hear him play the work, the same yet different, in the Royal Albert Hall. I had missed the feeling of being part of a group of thousands collectively holding our breath. Yet what’s been more striking than seeing big events return is the way in which some smaller ones have seized their chance: events such as the Oxford Lieder festival, which kept going with a huge programme including some exciting new commissions, efficiently delivered to online audiences and those in the hall. Facing the double whammy of Covid and Brexit, the resilience of the music business even in the face of the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport’s cancelled meetings, cack-handed press releases and general indifference has been quite something. Erica Jeal Operatic comedies felt like balm for the soul Italian operatic comedies, understandably perhaps, felt like balm for the soul as we emerged from lockdown. Rossini was prominent, with Glyndebourne offering a dazzling new production of Il Turco in Italia by Mariame Clément, while Garsington gave us Cal McCrystal’s deliriously camp take on the wonderfully ribald Le Comte Ory. A beautiful staging by Julia Burbach of L’Amico Fritz, Mascagni’s sweet, gentle romcom was Opera Holland Park’s choice, a perfect summer night’s entertainment from a company that found a well-nigh ideal solution to social distancing, with their open-sided auditorium and movable seating. Once full audiences returned, however, the absence of clear Covid guidelines resulted in confusion, with venues operating different policies with regard to issuing paper tickets or e-tickets, printed or downloadable programmes, and – until recently – whether the wearing of masks should be mandatory or optional. We really could do with greater consistency. Tim Ashley Nicola Benedetti made a dynamic advocate for music education In a year that has seen both misery and exhilaration on a sometimes epic scale, it would be too easy to overlook the heroes of classical music’s day-to-day running. Alongside the administrators who’ve made performances possible in a world of ever-changing legislation and you-be-the-judge guidelines, we should celebrate the teachers who continued to enthuse musicians of all ages through masks and isolation, across dodgy wifi connections and multiple time zones. Few high-profile artists have shown more practical commitment to the cause than Scottish violinist Nicola Benedetti: during lockdown her Benedetti Foundation “virtual sessions” involved more than 7,000 participants and she remains a dynamic advocate for the vital importance of music education. Is it a coincidence that in July the Scottish government announced free musical instrument tuition for all school pupils in 2021-22? Perhaps. But Westminster could certainly learn urgently needed lessons about cultural recovery from such leadership. Flora Willson Smaller local venues came into their own With transport and big halls causing health worries, smaller local venues came into their own. Local amateur musicians deserve medals for what they have managed amid the uncertainty. Who needs London when I could walk 15 minutes from home to hear Steven Osborne in Crumb, Debussy and Beethoven? Just as special was Paul Lewis playing Scriabin and Mussorgsky in Amersham with an abandon I had never heard from him before. Guy Johnston’s all too short autumn Chamber Music festival in Hatfield House ran both close: a joyous Brahms piano quartet and a fine Joseph Phibbs premiere. My chief bugbear this year was the same as in 2020: failing to master how our expensive “smart” TV can pick up livestreamed performances, though I did catch Roger Norrington’s inimitable Gateshead farewell in time. My unsurpassed 2021 highlight, though, was the Takács Quartet playing Janáček’s second string quartet in Wigmore Hall so intense it eclipsed even their late Beethoven after the interval. Martin Kettle Turnage’s deliriously exuberant Arsenal tribute It’s hard to imagine two concert locations less alike than Snape Maltings at midsummer, with the sun setting over the marshes, and London’s Barbican Centre in November, thronged with football fans wearing their tribal colours, yet both provided utterly memorable musical experiences. Juliet Fraser’s performance of Morton Feldman’s Three Voices, her voice hypnotically twining around two recorded versions, created a magical twilight experience at Snape, while at the Barbican, Arsenal fans relived the excitement of winning the league on the last day of the 1989 season as the BBC Symphony Orchestra premiered Mark-Anthony Turnage’s Up for Grabs, a score by turns dramatic, elegiac and deliriously exuberant. At least since concert life started up again in May, the BBCSO has maintained its commitment to new and rediscovered works; too many programmes elsewhere have erred on the side of caution. Why wary concertgoers should be more tempted to return to live concerts to hear routine performances of all too familiar symphonies and concertos, rather than music that might be new to them, escapes me. Andrew Clements Tabita Berglund’s Beethoven blew cobwebs away Back in the concert hall after what felt like forever, Tabita Berglund’s blistering Beethoven 7 with the Hallé Orchestra was enough to blow any cobwebs away. Outside it, praise must go to the organisations that proved their essential community function as others fell strangely quiet – Manchester Camerata and Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra, take a bow. Green programmes really took off this year, as the immediacy of the climate crisis slowly dawned on ensembles. A couple ungraciously shoehorned environmental themes into existing works (Repackaging Vivaldi’s Four Seasons to confront the climate emergency? Come on) Others commissioned fresh responses from living composers, which, more often than not, disappeared from sight post-premiere. As the need for sustainability becomes ever more apparent, is the best response we can muster really a stream of resource-sapping, single-use works? Hugh Morris Intimate and compelling demi-semi-staged Wagner English National Opera’s recent Valkyrie grabbed attention, some of it reporting Wagner Society members’ chagrin that conductor Anthony Negus was being denied his single Coliseum date. He was reinstated, but their initial indignation was understandable. Negus, presiding genius at the Longborough festival opera’s Die Walküre, conjured an unforgettable evening, intimate and compelling, despite being demi-semi-staged with singers socially distanced. As Siegmund, Peter Wedd was a vocally and physically commanding presence, rare that heldentenors are so graceful. My other standout experience was just days ago: John Woolrich’s Viola Concerto played by Timothy Ridout with the BBC National Orchestra of Wales, stunningly beautiful and moving. At 26, Ridout is an amazing talent. But we should spare a thought for the young up-and-comings whose work has simply disappeared thanks to the pandemic. Faced with perhaps never quite getting on to the career ladder, theirs are plaints that desperately need to be heard. Rian Evans • What have you enjoyed most this year? Tell us in the comments below.Two monkeys that allegedly killed hundreds of puppies in the Indian state of Maharashtra have been captured. Villagers in Lavool village, in the Beed district of Maharashtra, reported the langur monkeys after they witnessed them engaging in what seemed to be targeted killings of the neighbourhood puppies by snatching them and taking them up to deadly heights. The villagers claimed the monkeys were carrying out “revenge killings” after dogs had killed an infant monkey. “In the last two to three months, there have been incidents where the langurs roaming in the area would catch puppies and take them to a place with considerable height to throw them from there. At least 250 dogs have been killed so far,” a villager told the Indian news agency ANI. The monkeys were reported to have left puppies on roofs and in trees where they would die from lack of food and water, and in other incidents they would be thrown down and killed. The locals said the monkeys had been so thorough that there were no puppies left in Lavool village. An official from the district office said there was no proof the monkeys’ actions were being driven by revenge. “This [the killing of an infant monkey by dogs] is said to have enraged the monkeys who in retaliation are killing the puppies of dogs as per local residents. But we do not have any proof to back up this theory. It’s animal behaviour and we cannot ascertain why they are behaving like this,” he said. The villagers reported the animals to the forest department after the monkeys allegedly began harassing local children. The local forest department confirmed they had captured the two alleged culprits, who would be released into a nearby forest. “Two monkeys involved in the killing of dogs have been captured by a Nagpur forest department team in Beed,” forest officer Sachin Kand told local media. The incident went viral across social media in India, prompting “Monkey vs Dogs gang war” to begin trending.The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, has announced a £1bn package of emergency financial support for businesses in response to the economic damage caused by the Omicron variant. What is the Treasury offering? Grants worth up to £6,000 will be available for hospitality and leisure firms. A further £100m of discretionary funding will be given to local authorities for firms outside the sector but still affected by Omicron. The latter tops up £250m of unspent funding. The statutory sick pay rebate scheme will be reopened for all types of business. Launched in May 2020 to compensate small and medium-sized employers for payments made to their staff,, it had been wound down at the end of September. The £2bn culture recovery fund will be topped up by £30m to support theatres, museums, galleries and cinemas. Funding worth £150m will be allocated through the Barnett formula for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The Treasury points out that other measures are still in place, including business rates relief and a 12.5% reduced VAT rate for hospitality until the end of March, flexibility with government-backed loan repayments and extra time to pay taxes. Why do businesses need help? Hospitality operators told Sunak that 10,000 venues were at risk of closure as a result of a severe drop in trade since news of Omicron broke. The chancellor had been reluctant to take action but changed tack after being forced to cut short a trip to California to hold meetings with furious industry bosses on Friday. The sector usually makes a quarter of its annual profits during the festive season, and the trade body UKHospitality has said more than half of venues suffered a 40% drop in revenue last weekend. Business confidence has also taken a heavy knock more broadly. Retailers have suffered reduced footfall and private sector growth expectations have dropped to their lowest ebb since before the start of the vaccine rollout. Economists say tighter restrictions could push the economy back into recession early next year, but much depends on how the Omicron wave develops and how the government, households and businesses respond. The Treasury is keen to point to a stronger starting point than earlier phases of the pandemic. Many companies have more cash in the bank than before the pandemic. Deposits for all hospitality firms have risen by £7bn and company insolvencies in the sector are 25% below pre-Covid levels. Staff vacancies are 50% higher. Is it enough? The plan does not include the relaunch of furlough, which some firms and trade unions regard as vital to support jobs and the economy. Business leaders reacted angrily, saying it failed to meet the scale of the challenge posed by Omicron and was “like a dud cracker at Christmas”. Several of Britain’s biggest business lobby groups praised the chancellor for coming forward with the scheme but said a sustained hit to the economy or the imposition of tighter restrictions would mean additional help was required. The relaunch of the sick pay rebate will help firms, but does little to help their staff. Employers and unions are also concerned that statutory sick pay is too low, which hits workers financially and discourages self-isolation. The TUC estimates that 238,000 hospitality workers, or about one in six, do not even qualify for statutory sick pay, pushing them to try to work through illness to protect their earnings.Switched on Pop When Switched on Pop began back in 2014, it helped to cement and spread the “poptimism” movement within music criticism, arguing for chart-toppers to be afforded the same attention as rock or classical. Co-hosts musicologist Nate Sloan and songwriter Charlie Harding break down popular songs such as Call Me Maybe to their component parts to explain what makes them so compulsively listenable. In the years since, genre lines have blurred, hierarchies have been broken down and such song-explainers have become mainstream, but Switched on Pop continues to set the bar (as its recent acquisition by Vox media attests). Harding and Sloan know their stuff but wear it lightly, helping the most tone deaf of music fans to understand theory, and drawing parallels that will send you down a Spotify rabbit hole. No other podcast would make a link between Paramore’s 2007 pop-punk smash Misery Business and a Rossini aria sound so plausible. More recently, Switched on Pop has broadened its remit from song breakdowns to regular series centring on listeners and guests, including Modern Classics, where writers share a song that they would place in the modern pop pantheon (Mark Ronson’s pick? Ginuwine’s Pony), or drilling down in to the hits of the summer. Hit Parade The writer and critic Chris Molanphy has long cast a critical eye on the pop charts as a regular commentator for NPR, Rolling Stone and Pitchfork, and also in his own column for the online magazine Slate, Why Is This Song No 1?. On Hit Parade, Molanphy brings together music history, trivia and song snippets to shed light on a particular moment in music history. His point of difference is his fine-grained knowledge at the intersection of the business and artistry of pop music, contextualising how the two come together in the charts. But if Hit Parade sounds anorak-y, the stats, facts and numbers are always in service of a story to interest the less passionate listener. Recent episodes have included a two-part deep-dive into the lasting impact of early-00s emo, and exploring the case for 1971 as the greatest year for popular music ever. Bandsplain Music writers seek to explain the appeal of a cult band to an ambivalent or unaware audience – and included among their ranks is host Yasi Salek, whose deadpan delivery encapsulates the challenge of making the case for “boomer-ass rock bands” in 2021. But Salek’s conversational and somewhat sceptical style provokes the passion of her interviewees, making Bandsplain the equivalent of hearing your friend make the case for why you should listen to Joni Mitchell or Jawbreaker. As it’s made using Spotify’s Music + Talk format, it isn’t available on other platforms, but it does have the advantage of being able to play songs in full during episodes. Fun fact: Best Coast’s Bethany Cosentino sings the self-ironising theme song. Song Exploder Singer-songwriters from Willow Smith to Sparks break down one of their best-known tracks, from the initial idea to production and public reception. The isolation of individual parts, down to the bassline or backing vocals, helps you to hear new elements in even your favourite songs, while the musicians share often revealing, sometimes emotional insights. The interview is all the more intimate for the omission of host Hrishikesh Hirway’s questions, giving the impression of the artist confiding directly in you about their process (somewhat lost from the recent Netflix spin-off series). Song Exploder attains remarkable depth in a very short period, with all episodes under 30 minutes and some under 20. Hirway’s recent deconstruction of John Lennon’s God – the only posthumous episode so far, and featuring the original demo and archival interviews with Lennon – is a masterclass in editing and remarkably moving. For a greater focus on the craft of songwriting, there’s And the Writer Is … – a podcast hosted by Ross Golan (who has worked with artists from Michael Bublé to Nicki Minaj) interviewing professional songwriters about their process. Popcast Although this is a New York Times production, Popcast feels like it has an identity all its own, testament to the chemistry between host Jon Caramanica, NYT writers Caryn Ganz, Jon Pareles and Joe Coscarelli, and regular recurring guests. Every week or so, Caramanica leads a spirited roundtable discussion about an artist or significant trend, whether that’s a major release from the likes of Taylor Swift, Drake or Adele; new technology such as TikTok changing how music is consumed; or mainstream moves in country, jazz, Spanish-language pop or K-pop. (Popcast was across the #FreeBritney movement long before the swathe of documentaries.) No matter the subject, Popcast has that easy authority that can stretch from irreverence to sincerity, whether it be making a tongue-in-cheek case for the brilliance of Ashlee Simpson or a moving two-part special on the musicians lost to coronavirus. What makes Popcast essential listening is its inclusivity, with the audience as much a part of the product as the guests, as evidenced by the many running in-jokes. Who can relate?The man accused of stabbing to death the Conservative MP Sir David Amess has pleaded not guilty to his murder and planning a terrorist attack for more than two years. Ali Harbi Ali, 25, appeared before the Old Bailey in central London on Tuesday for a pre-trial hearing. Amess, 69, was stabbed on 15 October while holding a constituency surgery at Belfairs Methodist church in Leigh-on-Sea, Essex. He was pronounced dead at the scene after an incident that sent shock waves through Westminster and led to a tightening of security for MPs. Ali also pleaded not guilty to preparing terrorist acts, according to an indictment, which alleges he carried out reconnaissance of addresses linked to MPs, the Houses of Parliament, and researched the internet for attack targets over the period from May 2019. The charge of “engaging in conduct in preparation of terrorist acts” alleges that: “Ali Harbi Ali between the first day of May 2019 and the 28th day of September 2021, with the intention of committing acts of terrorism, engaged in conduct in preparation for giving effect to that intention, the said conduct included: “a) Engaging in reconnaissance of locations of targets to attack, including addresses associated with members of parliament and the Houses of Parliament, and … “b) Engaging in internet research relating to targets to attack.” Ali from Kentish Town, north London, spoke only to confirm his identity and to say “not guilty” to both charges, when they were formally put to him by a court official. The trial judge, Mr Justice Sweeney, agreed that the trial date could be put back a fortnight, and it was set for 21 March 2022. Ali was remanded in custody. Amess was the MP for Southend West and had been a parliamentarian for 38 years. He died barely an hour after the stabbing shortly after midday, as he held an advice surgery for those from his Southend West constituency. Amess was stabbed 17 times and died in the church. He was so badly injured paramedics could not even get him to hospital. After his death, Amess’s family paid tribute and said: “We are enormously proud of him. Our hearts are shattered. However, there was still so much David wanted to do – this we know from the events of the last few days.” They also called for less rancour and more unity in society as they praised the veteran Conservative backbencher. They said: “Strong and courageous is an appropriate way to describe David. He was a patriot and a man of peace. So, we ask people to set aside their differences and show kindness and love to all. This is the only way forward. Set aside hatred and work towards togetherness. “Whatever one’s race, religious or political beliefs, be tolerant and try to understand. As a family, we are trying to understand why this awful thing has occurred. Nobody should die in that way. Nobody. “Please let some good come from this tragedy. We are absolutely broken, but we will survive and carry on for the sake of a wonderful and inspiring man.”One of the most powerful leaders in UK policing has been suspended after being placed under criminal investigation over two allegations of sexual touching. PC John Apter was on Tuesday suspended as chair of the Police Federation of England and Wales (PFEW), which represents 130,000 rank and file officers. He faces a disciplinary investigation into four allegations of gross misconduct. Of those four allegations, two have been deemed as warranting a criminal investigation. Apter is an officer with the Hampshire force, which also suspended him from duty as a PC on Monday. Two of the incidents for which he is under criminal investigation are alleged to have occurred in October this year, and on 9 December, at the Police Bravery awards in central London. The complaints were made first to the Hampshire force. They referred it to the Independent Office for Police Conduct, which is carrying out an independent investigation. Apter was elected as chair of the national federation in April 2018 and was due to stand down next year. Prior to that, Apter was chair of the Hampshire Police Federation, and has served as an officer for 29 years, joining in 1992. In a statement the IOPC said: “We can confirm that, on Friday 17 December, we received a referral relating [to] a police constable from Hampshire constabulary and we have started an independent investigation. “On Monday 20 December, the officer was served with a notice of investigation for potential breaches of police professional standards relating to four separate alleged incidents. “They were also advised they are subject to criminal investigation, for sexual touching contrary to section 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003, in relation to two of those alleged incidents.” The criminal offence occurs if touching occurs without consent and is intentional. In a statement, the Police Federation said Apter would be suspended as chair because of the allegations and his suspension as a Hampshire officer. Vice-chair Ché Donald, a former firearms officer, will be the interim chair. In a statement the Federation said: “We have been informed that the National Chair of the Police Federation has been suspended from duty by Hampshire police whilst an investigation is undertaken. “As a result he is also currently suspended from his current PFEW role. PFEW has acted as swiftly as possible in conjunction with the force.” Apter’s home force of Hampshire said: “Following the statement from the IOPC, we can confirm that the officer has been suspended. We assess each case based on the information provided to us.” The news comes after women’s confidence in policing was damaged after the conviction of Metropolitan police PC Wayne Couzens for the murder of Sarah Everard, who was kidnapped as she walked home in March 2021 in south London. It triggered a debate on policing and misogyny, with Apter saying police had to improve. A fortnight ago, Apter said: “I love policing and the people within it. I’m proud to carry a warrant card and privileged to do the role I do on behalf of those fantastic men and women in blue who I represent.” Since 2010 relations between the Conservative government and the Federation had been strained as officer numbers and budgets were been cut. Relations improved just after Apter became chair as the cuts began to be reversed. But the Federation and Apter declared no confidence in the home secretary, Priti Patel, after officers were this year refused a pay increase. The Federation felt its hard work during the pandemic merited recognition. Apter said in July: “You cannot pat our members on the back for their heroic efforts with one hand, while effectively taking their pay with the other. Warm words are no longer enough.”China has accused the Australian government of “violently interfering” in its internal affairs after Australia joined with its Five Eyes allies to voice grave concerns about the “erosion of democratic elements” in Hong Kong. Pro-Beijing candidates have been confirmed to occupy nearly every seat in Hong Kong’s new legislature after an overhaul of the electoral system that authorities said would ensure “patriots run Hong Kong”. Elections on Sunday were marred by record low voter turnout and held 18 months after authorities began a crackdown on political dissent in the name of national security. The Australian foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, joined with her counterparts from the US, the UK, Canada and New Zealand to say Sunday’s vote and said that it had reversed the trend of candidates with diverse political views having contested elections in Hong Kong. They said the overhaul of Hong Kong’s electoral system had reduced the number of directly elected seats and established a new vetting process to severely restrict the choice of candidates on the ballot paper – which “eliminated any meaningful political opposition”. The Five Eyes ministers said many of the city’s opposition politicians remained in prison pending trial, with others in exile overseas, while last year’s national security law was having a wider “chilling effect”. The statement said media freedoms were “being curtailed at pace”. “Actions that undermine Hong Kong’s rights, freedoms and high degree of autonomy are threatening our shared wish to see Hong Kong succeed,” said the joint statement, which was issued late on Monday. “Protecting space for peaceful alternative views is the most effective way to ensure the stability and prosperity of Hong Kong. “We urge the People’s Republic of China to act in accordance with its international obligations to respect protected rights and fundamental freedoms in Hong Kong, including those guaranteed under the Sino-British Joint Declaration.” The PRC responded by saying it “firmly opposed and strongly condemned” the joint statement, which it argued “recklessly disregarded the facts and reversed the truth”. The Chinese embassy in Canberra said the new members of Hong Kong’s legislative council had been “elected smoothly” and it was a “crucial” moment in “the transition period of Hong Kong from chaos to stability and prosperity”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “In recent years, the Australia side has gone all out to hype up its opposition to so-called ‘foreign interference’, while in the meantime, constantly finding various excuses to violently interfere in China’s internal affairs which fully reveals its hypocritical nature of ‘double standards’,” an embassy spokesperson said. “China strongly urges the Australia side to reflect on itself and stop undermining the stability and development of other countries under any pretext.” The embassy spokesperson added that “all attempts by certain countries to meddle” in China’s internal affairs were “futile and doomed to fail”. Similar statements have been issued by other Chinese overseas missions, as well as Beijing’s commissioner office in Hong Kong in the last 48 hours. In the UK, the Chinese embassy urged “a handful of countries, including the UK, to take off their mask of hypocrisy”. The Chinese foreign ministry’s commissioner officer in Hong Kong called the west’s expression of concern “external defamation”. It added, “long gone are the days when external forces could willfully interfere in Hong Kong affairs by supporting political agents”. Australia has been caught in the midst of deteriorating relations between China and Five Eyes countries – China is Australia’s top trading partner. The bilateral relationship has worsened as a result of a range of differences over the past five years. In the now infamous “list of grievances” against Australia last year, China’s embassy accused Australia of “incessant wanton interference in China’s Xinjiang, Hong Kong and Taiwan affairs” and “spearheading the crusade against China in certain multilateral forums”. China also objected to the Turnbull government’s ban on the Chinese telco Huawei from Australia’s 5G network and introduction of foreign interference laws seen as targeting China, and the increasingly tight approach to screening foreign investment proposals. The Australian government’s calls for an independent international investigation into the origins and handling of Covid-19 emerged as another flashpoint last year, with Beijing introducing a freeze on ministerial talks. The government has also accused Beijing of a campaign of “economic coercion” after it rolled out tariffs and other trade actions against Australian export sectors including barley, wine, beef, seafood and coal over the past year and a half. There is no imminent offramp from the tensions, with the prime minister, Scott Morrison, vowing not to “trade away” Australia’s values or sovereignty, and the Labor opposition offering largely bipartisan support on the big strategic questions. On Monday Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Penny Wong, said the party was “deeply disappointed and concerned by” the Hong Kong elections, saying they were “yet another illustration of the continuing erosion of Hong Kong’s autonomy and democratic freedoms”. “This further undermining of Hong Kong’s democracy and the One Country, Two Systems arrangement is not the behaviour of a responsible global power,” Wong said. Tensions with Beijing are likely to further increase after Australia joined the US and the UK last week in announcing a diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics in protest at human rights abuses in China’s Xinjiang region. China has also strongly criticised the Aukus deal – in which the US and the UK have promised to help Australia acquire at least eight nuclear-propelled submarines – as a sabre-rattling “Anglo-Saxon clique”. The Australian government is expected to make a decision in coming months about the future of a Chinese company’s existing long-term lease over the strategically important Port of Darwin. The Australian defence minister, Peter Dutton, has previously accused the Chinese government of resorting to “outbursts” and “irrational” threats against a range of countries that have stood up to Beijing – behaviour that the conservative figure said was “unsettling and unnecessary”. Dutton attracted controversy last month when he said it would be “inconceivable” that Australia would not come to Taiwan’s aid if the US defended the democratically governed island against an invasion by China. Brushing off claims he was ramping up national security rhetoric for political purposes as a federal election looms, Dutton said it was important to “be realistic” about how China’s outlook had “changed quite dramatically” under Xi Jinping’s leadership.The birthrate is declining across the west. It has been doing so for some time, but the recent drop appears to have been exacerbated by the pandemic. I’ve been following the discussion for years now, amused at the discrepancy between statistics and experience (at one point in 2020, almost everyone I knew seemed to be pregnant or caring for a newborn, my peers having reached the “shit or get off the pot” stage of in their reproductive biology), but also irritated by the tone of the coverage. Whenever I read about the falling birthrate, it is reported alongside a (usually male) economist or politician talking about the catastrophic economic effects of what is being called a “baby shortage”. As though babies are a resource, which of course to some they are. I have come to dislike these men intensely. They make me feel like a brood mare who must reproduce for the good of the nation. The latest report on declining birthrates comes from Italy, where it has fallen to the lowest level since 1861. An article on the study in the Times quotes two men, one talking about labour shortages and house prices, no women mentioned or spoken to at all, except passively. Ironically, it is Mussolini’s “battle for births” that comes to mind when I read these articles, which all seem steeped in that same notion of duty, even if they aren’t explicit about it. In fascist Italy, women were told they had a duty to reproduce. “Unproductive” or infertile women were sacked from their jobs and men with more than six children were exempt from paying tax. The most prolific mothers were given awards in an annual ceremony and abortion was banned, while contraception was limited. Bachelors and gay men were also penalised and demonised. As a policy, it was an epic failure. I say this merely because it is important to know one’s history when coming to these discussions. When you are a woman, these reminiscent rumblings and mumblings – subtle though they are – can trigger alarm bells. And for good reason: though Donald Trump’s reign has ended, women are unlikely to forget the mad dash for IUDs in the wake of his election. American women’s right to a safe and legal abortion is being challenged at the highest level; Polish women have already lost theirs. As economic panic about the birthrate continues, it is only natural to fear that women’s reproductive autonomy will come under threat. The men are already talking about us as though we were not there. Demonisation of “birth strikers” will inevitably follow. As Sophie McBain has argued, declining fertility is already being blamed as a sort of “youth attitude problem” among those who are anxious about the climate crisis: “If only over-anxious young people would stop fixating on rising global temperatures and instead focus on producing future taxpayers.” She references a Spectator cover story from October that blamed “baby doomers” for “putting the planet ahead of parenthood”. While the climate emergency is undoubtedly a factor in some people’s decision about whether to have a child, it does tend to preclude discussion of other relevant barriers: a dire lack of affordable childcare and affordable housing, the motherhood penalty paid in your career, the pathetic – embarrassingly pathetic – amount of paternity leave offered in many western countries, a transactional dating economy and the continued imbalance of domestic labour. If you were going to make the decision purely based on logic, without considering the more profound, visceral longing that many women experience, you simply wouldn’t do it. That’s the problem, really. That, and the fact that the contemplation of motherhood is never, with the exception of a few notable works (including Sheila Heti’s novel Motherhood), framed as a philosophical question. A profound philosophical question, perhaps one of the most fundamental of a woman’s life. No, it’s all about women’s unruly bodies, and their failure to just shut up and do what’s best for the economy. Which is why I fear for the women examining these questions. Will they become increasingly demonised by the right? Already, they are mocked and trivialised. Silly little privileged western women in their silly pink hats, fretting about forest fires, worrying about their wombs. No doubt some will call me paranoid. I certainly hope that I’m wrong. I’ve been writing a book that is partly about the motherhood question, and reading the work of Silvia Federici, whose analysis of the witch-hunts of medieval Europe places them within the context of demographic collapse. They were, she writes, “an attempt to criminalise birth control and place the female body, the uterus, at the service of population increase and the production and accumulation of labour-power”. This sounds familiar. Maybe it’s just me. But either way, I dislike the parameters of this debate. It is time for those men opining on the birthrate in purely economic terms to step to one side and stop drowning out the voices of those who matter most in this debate: women of reproductive age, and the girls who will become them (it might also be worth talking to a few men about why it is they are dragging their feet). “Why, oh why aren’t these women doing their duty?” the politicians and economists lament. Maybe ask them. They’ll have a lot to say. Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett is a Guardian columnistThis year will go down in history as the year I went bald. Well, actually, 2018 went down as the year I went bald. But still, 2021 will go down as the year that I stopped fastidiously brushing three long wisps of cobweb over my scalp in the berserk belief that it somehow made me look less bald. I am bald now. Hello. Obviously, being bald is rubbish. A bad roll of the genetic dice means I am now conclusively unattractive in the eyes of most of the world. Of course I am – I’m 85% forehead now. I can never go out and commit a crime, because a witness would only have to draw a face on their thumb and show it to the Photofit guy and I’d be in handcuffs by teatime. In the end, I embraced baldness out of practicality. In the middle of 2020, bound by lockdown, I bought a £10 electric razor from Argos and started cutting my own hair. I was terrible at it. The sides I could do, because it was just like mowing a lawn. But I could never figure out what to do with the strands on top. So this spring, I gave up and shaved everything the same length. When I finished, I looked in the mirror and was greeted by the sight of scalp. Nothing but scalp. Where did the scalp stop? There was no longer any identifiable demarcation. Did my face count as scalp now? You expect a big moment like this to have some impact in the world. Double takes in the street. Awkward conversations with friends. Screams of horror from people who wrongly assumed that they were being stalked by Phil Mitchell. However, to my almighty surprise, nothing happened. I went bald and nobody batted an eyelid. In retrospect, this was because everyone in the world had accepted that I was bald long before I did, and they were relieved that they no longer had to suspend their disbelief about the ratty candyfloss cloud I was trying to pass off as a haircut. What I’ve learned from baldness is this: choose your role models carefully. For a while, mine was Stanley Tucci, but in reality Tucci does the bald a disservice. He is too charming, too handsome, too well dressed. We might think that we can harness our inner Tucci, but it’s impossible. He is a movie star, with a movie star’s presence. The rest of us could hire a stylist and train for a month and we would still look like someone who would beat you up in a Wetherspoon’s. Instead, I found myself glomming on to Larry David, who has this year become my uncontested bald oracle. Nobody on Earth seems to understand the bald experience like David. It was he who, upon winning an Emmy in 1993, strolled up to the podium and sighed: “This is all very well and good, but I’m still bald.” And it was he who, in March 2000, wrote a New York Times column headlined: “Kiss my head.” In the piece, which I have read and reread so often of late that I almost know it off by heart, David lays out the proper way in which a man should embrace baldness. Don’t hide it underneath a cap, he says. “Have you ever seen the looks on people’s faces when the bald man takes the cap off? They’re dumbfounded.” A cap-wearing bald man, according to David, is ultimately delusional. “You’ve tried to come off as a hair guy,” he chides. “You’ve lied, bald man.” David’s big lesson is that the bald man has to compensate somehow. “We have to have a little more going for us than the hair man,” he writes. “And we do. Have a conversation with a bald man sometime. Go ahead. Do yourself a favour. Tell me you don’t walk away impressed.” You just have to look at Larry David to see how true this is. As the seasons of Curb Your Enthusiasm have progressed, he has taken more and more pride in his appearance. His unconstructed blazers have grown sharper, his layering more complimentary. His ring of hair has grown out, too. And for all his apparent misanthropy, the Larry David smile is something to behold. When Larry David smiles, you’re blinded by charm. It’s a Julia Roberts smile. Only bald, so worse. This, I now realise, is the path I have to follow. Despite repeated attempts, Larry David did not respond to requests to be interviewed about this subject. Which makes sense. Nobody wants to round out their year by discussing their most visible physical flaw. But that’s OK. “Bald men love other bald men,” he wrote back in 2000. And that’s true. I love Larry David. I couldn’t have picked a better role model.There are the times when Glen Durrant wakes up and tells himself that this is going to be the day. The day it all clicks. The day he feels like a triple world champion again. The day he feels something again. There are the times when he is watching old clips of himself and spots something and leaps upstairs to his practice room, convinced he’s identified the one tweak that will make everything all right again. Then there were the darker times. During the Premier League earlier this year, he would lie in his Milton Keynes hotel room with the lights out and his clothes on, wondering where it had all gone wrong. There was the time he went back to his old pub, the Cargo Fleet Club in Middlesbrough, to throw a few arrows with friends. But he was recognised instantly and a crowd began to gather and suddenly all the old frailties and tensions returned to the point where he could barely let go of the dart. There are the people who heckle him when he goes out. There are the people who have nothing but sympathy and good wishes, which is almost worse. Everyone wants to know what happened. How a player can reach the pinnacle and then just keep falling, endlessly falling. How the Premier League champion of 2020 can win one match in nine months. Durrant thinks he knows exactly what happened. But knowing it and fixing it are two entirely different things. This is not a sob story. Durrant wants to be very clear about that. “It’s been a traumatic year,” he says now from his home in Middlesbrough, “but I’m quite philosophical about everything. I’m not sat crying at home, feeling sorry for myself. If you ask me a question, I’ll give you an honest answer. That’s my values, the way I’ve been brought up. Darts has been very, very good to me, and you take the good with the bad.” And the good times were plentiful. A housing officer for most of his life, Durrant came late to professional darts, and yet in a few years won more than most players win in a lifetime. In 2017, at the age of 46, he won the British Darts Organisation world title for the first time. After two more world titles he switched to the more lucrative Professional Darts Corporation, quickly surging up the rankings. Last year, he became only the third player after Phil Taylor and Michael van Gerwen to top the Premier League table, before beating Nathan Aspinall in the final to claim his first PDC major. As he turned 50, Durrant had finally made good on his promise. Likeable, down-to-earth and battle-hardened, a glorious career autumn was unfolding before him. But already the cracks were beginning to appear in his action. “If you look at the Premier League final, there was something creeping into my game,” he says. “It’s not a natural throw. It’s pretty mechanical. I knew I was extending my arm too far back. Then you begin to overthink, and you start losing, and the confidence aspect comes into it. Like a golfer having the yips, or a footballer who can’t score from six yards out ... I was in panic mode.” It was the perfect time for a break, a rest, a reset. Instead, six hours after winning the Premier League he was on a plane to Germany to take part in a small European Tour event. A week later, he tested positive for Covid at Frankfurt Airport and was seriously ill for weeks, coughing so much he popped a rib. “That was pretty much the beginning of the implosion,” he says. “I just wish I hadn’t got on that plane. In hindsight, I was shattered.” Results continued to slide. In April this year he pitched up at Milton Keynes to defend his Premier League title, only to be eliminated after losing his first nine games in a row, getting humiliated on live television night after night. “Getting battered 7-0 or 7-1, and then heading back to a hotel room, no family around you, nine nights on the spin,” he remembers. “That takes a lot out of you.” Desperate for a win, any win, he returned to the smaller floor events, only to keep losing in the first round. One game, he was throwing so poorly he simply picked up his darts, shook hands and drove home. “I decided to go back to the local leagues, and that was an absolute disaster,” he says. “Every dart I was pulling and snatching. I went to Redcar races with my daughter and a guy shouted: ‘Now then Glen, are you still playing snooker?’ I said no. And he went: ‘Well you should be, because you’re shite at darts.’ And then about 20 people started laughing. People have such short memories.” Durrant’s world ranking was still high enough to earn him entry to major tournaments, but with his confidence in pieces it often felt more like an elaborate form of torture. At the World Grand Prix in October he was eliminated with an average of just 58, barely pub standard. As he prepares to face William O’Connor on Wednesday in the first game of the world championship, he has lost 27 of his last 28 matches stretching back to March. Fans, pundits and rivals have long since united in solidarity and sadness. “I don’t want that,” he insists. “I don’t want Michael Smith and all them saying nice things about me. The last thing I wanted was sympathy. I want people to hate me. I want to get under their skin. Gerwyn Price called me a fat elephant once. The niceness is nice, but I preferred it when people were horrible to me. Because it meant I was winning. “I’ve never once contemplated retiring. I’m realistic; I don’t have the dream of being a world champion again. All I want is to be competitive. I don’t want to be: ‘God, remember that guy who won the Premier League and capitulated within 18 months?’ I want to be someone who reached rock bottom, and started climbing back up.” In a way, the plight of Durrant is a cautionary tale for darts as a whole: a sport still largely resistant to coaching and analysis, where the magic can come in an instant and often disappears just as quickly. After retirement Durrant says he wants to use his experiences as a coach and mentor. For now, though, he has a career to salvage, and on the biggest stage of all. “My only focus for a long time has been Ally Pally,” he says. “If I can raise my game there, then as bad as the year’s been, it wouldn’t be the biggest disaster of all.”She has achieved an incredible amount at the age of 19, capping off a fantastic year with a BBC Sports Personality of the Year Award. Emma Raducanu is so young that she was not even born when the footballer Michael Owen was a teenage athlete, captivating the nation with a summer of similarly precocious performances. Which is perhaps why he felt the need to educate her. Owen, now 42, sent a tweet congratulating Raducanu for winning the award, while noting she was “the same age as I was waaaaay back in 1998” – the year in which he won the PFA young player of the year award while playing for Liverpool and burst on to the international scene at the World Cup in France. The tweet was taken by commenters as self-aggrandisement, spawning thousands of imitations from commenters amused by what they saw as his attempt to perform a “humblebrag” – sneaking a boast in under the auspices of a magnanimity. Some have ironically replicated the format, referencing moments from their own lives such as “me winning the best tame tawny owl in Ferndale competition in 1982”, “me winning the hotel darts tournament in Mallorca in 2013” or even “me eating a sausage roll a few weeks back”. Raducanu, from Bromley, was crowned sports personality of the year on Sunday after a year of unprecedented sporting success, which culminated in her winning the US Open. She beat strong competition for the award from rivals including the England footballer Raheem Sterling, the leading scorer for the team that made it to their first international final since 1966 in the Euros this summer; Tom Daley, who won gold for the first time at his fourth Olympics in Tokyo, after standing up for LGBTQ+ equality; Dame Sarah Storey, who became the most successful Paralympian of all time in Tokyo; Adam Peaty, who was Britain’s most successful swimmer; and Tyson Fury, whose trilogy fight with Deontay Wilder went down as one of the greatest title bouts of all time. Raducanu’s career so far echoes Owen’s trajectory, in which the teenager from Liverpool became an overnight global star after scoring an impressive solo goal against Argentina in the 1998 World Cup in France. As England’s youngest player and scorer, he was named sports personality of the year for his performance.Germany is to preserve Christmas but reimpose tighter rules on social contact before new year as the Omicron variant sweeps across Europe, sparking tougher measures from Sweden to Spain. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, met the country’s 16 state leaders on Tuesday to decide on new measures including a ban on gatherings of more than 10 vaccinated people. Children under 14 are expected to be exempt from the rules, which will not come into effect until 28 December. Unvaccinated people are already only allowed to meet a maximum of two people from outside their own household. The authorities have scrambled to speed up the country’s booster campaign. They are administering about 1m shots a day but remain dissatisfied with the relatively low proportion of people to have received their first and second doses, which stands at 70.3%. Rates of new infections and deaths have fallen over the past week, but health experts have repeatedly said this does not mean the situation is easing because figures for daily deaths and hospital admissions remain high. The Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases has called for “maximum contact restrictions”. It also recommends reducing travel to a minimum, accelerating the vaccination campaign and ensuring enough free coronavirus tests are available. It said how the pandemic evolved would depend on how people acted over the holidays, as well as how strongly the flu virus - which has epidemic potential - circulated this season. The European Commission emphasised the importance of boosters to combat Omicron, and said Covid vaccine certificates in the bloc would be valid for only nine months without a third shot. It said maintaining the same validity period was “necessary for safe free movement and EU level coordination”. The head of the World Health Organization said in Geneva on Monday night that holiday festivities would lead to “increased cases, overwhelmed health systems and more deaths” in many places. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus urged people to postpone gatherings. “An event cancelled is better than a life cancelled,” he said. “There is now consistent evidence that Omicron is spreading significantly faster than the Delta variant, and it is more likely people vaccinated or recovered from Covid-19 could be infected or re-infected.” Sweden said it would urge all employees to work from home if possible, impose tighter rules for social distancing and require seated-only service at bars, restaurants and larger public events. “We must now take joint responsibility and we need to adapt to the new reality,” the country’s prime minister, Magdalena Andersson, said. “I understand that many are tired of this. So am I, but we now have a new virus variant, which means we are in a new situation.” Concerns were also growing in Spain, where the country’s sixth coronavirus wave has sent infection rates soaring at it prepares to enter the Christmas season. The number of cases per 100,000 people hit 609 on Monday, up from 290 a fortnight ago. The surge is already putting some hospitals and medical centres under strain. The proportion of ICU beds occupied by Covid patients stands at 15.5% nationally, but it rises to 25% in the Basque Country and almost 30% in Catalonia. Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, has urged people to remain calm but called an emergency meeting of the country’s regional leaders on Wednesday afternoon to discuss the response. The Catalan regional government said on Monday that it was seeking legal permission to introduce a curfew between 1am and 6am that would begin on Friday and last for two weeks. It also plans to close nightclubs and limit gatherings to 10 people. The regional health chief, Josep Argimon, said the measures were needed because of the arrival of Omicron. “Infections have grown 100% over the past week,” he said. In Madrid, where the regional president, Isabel Díaz Ayuso, has fiercely resisted restrictions, arguing they are too damaging economically, school authorities have called on her administration to urgently consider shutting schools two days before the end of term to help curb the spread of the variant. Doctors in the capital and its region, where Omicron now accounts for 60% of new infections, have said immediate action must be taken to stave off the collapse of the health system. They have called for restrictions on the number of people allowed in bars and restaurants, caps on social gatherings and earlier vaccination of school-age children. And Portugal on Tuesday ordered nightclubs and bars to close and told people to work from home for at least two weeks starting on Saturday. “This still isn’t the normal Christmas we are used to,” prime minister Antonio Costa told a news conference. “If we do not adopt these measures now, the consequences on everyone’s lives will be much worse after Christmas and the new year.”High street hopes of a bumper Christmas have been dashed by the arrival in the UK of the Omicron variant, the latest snapshot of consumer activity has confirmed. The CBI’s monthly distributive trades survey reported a marked slowdown in activity after the government’s decision to trigger plan B measures as part of its response to the pandemic. The employers’ lobby group said sales growth had eased to its lowest since the spring, confounding expectations among retailers that they would build on November’s strong performance. While 44% of retailers said business was up on a year ago, 36% said it was down. The gap between the two – 8 percentage points – compared with +39 points in November. The CBI said more than half of firms that responded before the government’s plan B announcement on 8 December said sales were higher than last year, against a third of those that responded on or after that date. The survey was conducted between 24 November and 14 December. Retail sales were seen as broadly in line with seasonal norms in December, having been well above typical levels in November. Retailers said they were pessimistic about the outlook for January. Ben Jones, CBI lead economist, said: “Our December survey confirms what we have been hearing anecdotally about Omicron’s chilling impact on activity on the high street, with retail sales growth slowing and expectations for the coming month sharply downgraded. “On the supply side, retailers have been making progress in building up stocks, which were seen as more than adequate to deal with expected demand over Christmas. The concern now is the potential for rapidly rising sickness and staff absences to cause renewed disruption to supply chains in the new year. Samuel Tombs, UK economist at Pantheon Macro, said: “The sharp drop in the net balance of retailers reporting that sales were higher than a year ago suggests that annual growth in retail sales has slowed to a crawl. “The reported sales balance was at its lowest level since March. And the sales-for-the-time-of-year balance – which has a better relationship with the official data – fell to -2 in December, from +35 in November.”The UK government borrowed £17.4bn in November, outstripping economists’ predictions and suggesting debt could far overshoot officials’ forecasts if the Omicron coronavirus variant slows the economy as expected. It was the highest November borrowing since comparable records began 30 years ago, barring last year. During the furlough scheme in 2020, the Treasury under Rishi Sunak set successive peacetime records for monthly borrowing as it covered the costs of 80% of salaries for millions of people as well as support schemes for businesses. Significant borrowing has continued in 2021, with £136bn borrowed between April and November, with the vaccine and test-and-trace programmes adding to costs, according to data published by the Office for National Statistics (ONS). That was the second highest since records began in 1993. The November borrowing was higher than the £16bn a poll of economists by Reuters predicted. The government spent £32bn during November, £2bn more than it did a year before, thanks in part to spending on the vaccine programme and test and trace. Those costs are likely to rise in the coming months after the government raced to accelerate the uptake of booster jabs to try to reduce the number of hospitalisations in the Omicron wave. Rising inflation also drove higher debt interest costs of £4.6bn. Higher inflation raises borrowing costs because the government issues some of its debt via inflation-linked bonds, the returns of which follow the retail price index (RPI) measure. Annual RPI inflation – acknowledged by authorities to be a flawed measure – hit 7.1% in November, far above the 5.1% rate of consumer price index inflation. Government borrowing is likely to come under further scrutiny in the coming months from within the Conservative party. Public sector net debt – the amount borrowed over the years – was £2.3tn at the end of November, or 96.1% of GDP. That was the highest debt-to-GDP ratio since March 1963, when it was 98.3%. Sunak and the Treasury are thought to have pushed back against proposals for more coronavirus restrictions partly because of the cost to the government of reintroducing financial support for businesses that would be forced to close, and officials have previously briefed about the costs of regular booster jabs. Yet businesses have argued that they are suffering from a quasi-lockdown anyway, with customers deserting crowded spaces in order to avoid catching coronavirus before Christmas. Sunak on Wednesday revealed an extra £1bn in spending to help affected businesses. In his budget in October, Sunak said he wanted to cut borrowing from 7.9% of GDP in the current financial year, which ends in April, to 3.3% next year. However, the arrival of the Omicron variant is likely to slow GDP growth and to lower tax receipts, as people spend much less in pubs and restaurants. That will mean that official forecasts by the Office for Budget Responsibility are likely to have underestimated the amount the government will need to borrow to cover spending in the coming year. Bethany Beckett, a UK economist at Capital Economics, said: “These data predate the recent surge in coronavirus infections caused by the Omicron variant, with a near-term tightening of virus restrictions once again a possibility. Although the economy has got better at coping with restrictions with each new wave, we still suspect it would prompt a deterioration in the public finances via lower tax revenues and the potential reintroduction of government support schemes.” The ONS has revised down borrowing over the financial year so far by £9bn, but Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, a consultancy, said it was “likely to overshoot the OBR’s forecast” of £183bn. The drop in borrowing between November 2020 and November 2021 was the smallest so far this fiscal year, despite the absence of the furlough scheme, Tombs said. He also pointed out that tax receipts rose more slowly than anticipated by the forecaster, and that “the trend in public borrowing is about to deteriorate markedly” with slower economic growth likely.Closing summary - US stock markets open higher Wall Street’s main indices rose higher at the open on Tuesday, following the lead of Europe and Asia, rebounding from the previous day’s falls. Stocks were also boosted by strong financial results from the likes of Nike. European stock markets remained positive in afternoon trade on Tuesday, after the tumble in the previous session, as investors weigh up what the spread of Omicron means for the global economic recovery. London’s FTSE100, Germany’s DAX and the pan-European STOXX 600 all remained around 1.4% higher on the day during late-afternoon trade. The big story of the day in the UK was when chancellor Rishi Sunak finally delivered the Christmas gift that hospitality and leisure businesses had been demanding, ever since concerns about the Omicron variant caused their customers to cancel their festive plans, causing a severe decline in trade. However the size and scope of the £1bn funding package left many - including nightclubs and travel firms - expressing their disappointment. UK public borrowing surged in November as Covid cases started to rise again The spread of Omicron darkened the mood of German consumers, amid reports that Europe’s largest economy is about to reimpose tighter rules on social contact, before the new year. The move is expected the closure of nightclubs, restrictions on meetings of more than 10 vaccinated people and moving larger sports events back behind closed doors. Read my colleague Richard Partington’s analysis of Sunak’s bailout here: And to keep up with all the latest political developments, be sure to keep an eye on the Guardian’s Politics Live blog. My colleagues there are following the most recent announcements, including the decision by Scotland’s Nicola Sturgeon to cancel traditional Hogmanay street parties and move sporting events behind closed doors. You can follow all of the coronavirus news from around the world here: Thanks for joining me today, and we’ll be back with more news from the world of business, economics and the financial markets tomorrow morning. JP The Turkish lira is continuing its recent wild ride today, despite moves from the government to try to reduce the impact of currency swings on Turkish citizens. On Monday, President Erdogan announced a series of measures aimed at encouraging Turks to hold their savings in the lira, rather than other currencies such as US dollars. It came after the Turkish lira crashed to a record low against the dollar, after Erdogan insisted over the weekend that he was sticking to his economic plans, which have seen multiple interest rates cuts that have sent the currency tumbling. On Monday, the lira plunged by 10%, reaching a level of 18.4 to the US dollar, before shooting up to 12 after Erdogan’s announcement. It came after Turkey’s worst currency crisis in years, which saw the lira crash by around 40% in a little over a month. The lira has been trading lower today, at around 12.6 to the dollar, but remains volatile. Victoria Scholar, head of investment, at interactive investor, said the Turkish lira has fluctuated wildly in the last 24 hours: “After slumping 10% on Monday, the lira closed the session up over 20% in the biggest one-day trading range on record.” Reuters is reporting (quoting banking sources) that some foreign banks are reviewing their dollar lending limits for Turkish businesses, because of the currency’s wild movements. If this happened, it could push up borrowing costs. You read an in-depth report from Istanbul about the currency crisis and Turkey’s economy here: Trade unions and economists have criticised the government for - as they see it - not focusing on workers in today’s bailout announcement. The Trades Union Congress (TUC) said ministers should have offered targeted support for wages in today’s announcement, or should have increased sick pay. It’s calling for a new furlough scheme. Frances O’Grady, the TUC’s general secretary, said: The government has abandoned hospitality, arts and leisure staff. Millions of workers will go into Christmas worrying for their jobs and anxious about what they will do if asked to self-isolate. The chancellor must go back to the drawing board. We need a new targeted furlough scheme that covers at least 80 per cent of workers’ wages, and that guarantees that no-one furloughed is paid less than the minimum wage. Here’s the view of Torsten Bell, chief executive of the Resolution Foundation think tank: Representatives of the travel industry are also not impressed by the chancellor’s announcement, complaining they have been overlooked. Association of British Travel Agents (Abta) has accused Rishi Sunak of ignoring “the direct impact of government policy decisions on businesses reliant on international travel.” Luke Petherbridge, director of public affairs for Abta, said: Travel agents, tour operators and travel management companies will rightly be asking why they haven’t been given the same treatment as other businesses that are suffering at this time. Average annual revenue across the travel industry is down by nearly 80% on pre-crisis levels even before Omicron emerged, and the re-introduction of enhanced testing – both pre and post arrival – have added significant costs and notably dampened consumer demand. He added: “While extra funding has been allocated to the additional restrictions grants scheme, this will not go far enough to support a sector that has endured 21 months of restrictions. What’s more, travel businesses will have to compete with companies in other industry sectors to get some of this cash.” Abta is calling for, among other things, the extension of rates relief for all travel businesses in the financial year 2022-23, help for businesses which have to repay loans at the time of no income, and tailored winter resilience grants for the travel sector. Abta also is urging ministers to “urgently consider the case for furlough and other income support, especially if travel restrictions are going to be maintained for any significant period.” Meanwhile, Clive Wratten, chief executive of the Business Travel Association, said: It’s imperative that the arts, hospitality and leisure are given help through the latest wave of the pandemic. However, a vital part of the UK economy and the driver behind global Britain is being left in the cold. We urgently need the Treasury to correct this oversight and support our industry into 2022. This is the only way for there to be a safe return to international travel when conditions allow. Reactions are rolling in to the chancellor’s announcement of £1bn funding for hospitality firms, and while the support is broadly welcomed, it’s clear that plenty of businesses are feeling like this pre-Christmas offer is too small and too limited. The British Beer and Pub Association said this assistance is a “vital lifeline for many”. Emma McClarkin, the BBPA’s chief executive, said: “It will be absolutely essential that the government continues to monitor and support our sector for the long-term as we ride out the pandemic and into recovery. Ensuring our pubs and brewers continue to have the support they need, including further financial support if further restrictions are introduced, along with a clear timeline for the lifting any such measures. Our overwhelming hope is to remain trading and serving our customers and communities.” Business group the Institute of Directors called this a “welcome relief to many businesses.” Roger Barker, director of policy at the Institute of Directors, said: These measures will go some way to protect and compensate those most adversely affected. However, with the unwinding of a number of remaining support schemes at the end of Q1 2022, such as the VAT reduction for hospitality and business rates support, businesses also need the reassurance that these measures will now last for longer into 2022. Yet many businesses in the hospitality sector had been calling for much more sweeping assistance, including support with paying business rates. Trade body, the Night Time Industries Association (NTIA), has been sounding the alarm for a couple of weeks over the steep decline in trade. They are also fearful of the potential for further restrictions, which could see nightclubs closed entirely just before the crucial New Year’s Eve party (nightclubs in Wales have already been informed they have to close from 27th Dec). Michael Kill, chief executive of the NTIA said: “At this critical point, we need strong leadership and a clear pathway from government with a long term strategy for new Covid variants. The open/close strategy is crucifying businesses.” “Every pound of help is much needed. But this package is far too little and borders on the insulting.” Sacha Lord, the night time economy adviser for Greater Manchester, did not mince his words. Many pubs, restaurants and bars are breathing small sigh of relief this lunchtime after Rishi Sunak unveiled a much-requested support package for businesses whose trading has been hit by soaring Covid cases amid the spread of the Omicron variant. The £1bn funding package is mostly aimed at the hospitality and leisure sector, where businesses have seen trade dry up in recent days as warnings over social mixing have seen customers cancel bookings and stay at home. Chancellor Rishi Sunak said the spread of the Omicron variant means businesses in the hospitality and leisure sectors are facing huge uncertainty, at a crucial time. The bailout package consists of four elements: Grants for hospitality and leisure businesses in England, worth up to £6,000 per site. Further grants for businesses in England, worth £102m, intended to help businesss most in need. The resumption of the statutory sick pay rebate scheme, which will reimburse employers in the UK with fewer than 250 workers for the cost of paying statutory sick pay for Covid-related absences for up to two weeks. An extra £30m for arts organisations in the UK, paid through the culture recovery fund. However businesses in the night-time economy and travel industry are already expressed their disappointment with the size of the bailout. Read the full story here: The Welsh Government has announced new fines for employers - and workers - if they ignore new working from home rules. Workers in Wales could now face a fine if they continue to go into the office when they are able to work from home. It became a legal requirement in Wales to work from home yesterday, unless there is a “reasonable excuse” not to. The Welsh Government has also called on employers to make it possible for their staff to work from home. Someone could be fined £60 for going to work instead of working from home. Meanwhile employers could have to pay a penalty of £1,000 (rising to a possible £10,000 for repeated failure to comply ) for failing to allow their workforce to work from home. A Welsh Government spokesperson said: Additional measures have been introduced to limit the spread of the virus and protect public health. Further to our long-standing advice for people to work from home wherever possible, from Monday this will now be a legal requirement to work from home unless there is a reasonable excuse not to. We expect employers to take all reasonable steps to facilitate home working and provide employees with the support they need. The move came alongside a range of other measures being introduced in Wales to try to stop the spread of the Omicron variant. Indoor and outdoor sporting events will be played behind closed doors from Boxing Day onwards. Wales’ economy minister Vaughan Gething announced the changes. Sporting events over the Christmas period are one of the big highlights of the year. Unfortunately, the new Omicron variant is a significant development in the pandemic and could cause a large number of infections. He added: “Crowds will come back as soon as possible. We want everyone to be here to enjoy their favourite sports.” Gething also announced £3m spectator sports fund which will be made available to affected clubs and sporting venue. In addition, nightclubs in the nation are to be closed from 27th December. Could there finally be signs of incoming support from government that hospitality businesses have been clamouring for for several days? The Cabinet Office minister has said that the Treasury will respond today. Steve Barclay said the government was “acutely aware” that consumers had changed their behaviour as a result of advice from scientists to reduce socialising. It’s led to a steep drop-off in trade for many hospitality businesses - including cafes, pubs, restaurants and night-clubs - which depend on a busy December to get them through the traditionally leaner times at the start of the year. We’re acutely aware that, as a consequence of plan B, we have seen significant behaviour change,” Barclay told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “You see that for example, in restaurant bookings. That is why the chancellor [Rishi Sunak] has been engaging with industry leaders.” Barclay said Sunak was talking to industry figures about their financial predicament and the government would be saying more about this issue later on Tuesday. Barclay also said, in a separate interview, that the government was “keen to keep businesses open” and and that hospitality firms “should continue to plan for the bookings they have”. My colleagues on the Guardian’s Politics Live blog write that Barclay and Sunak were among the cabinet ministers at Monday’s meeting who were pressing for more data before they could agree to calls from Prof Chris Whitty, the government’s chief medical adviser, and Sir Patrick Vallance, its chief scientific adviser, for new restrictions going beyond plan B. You can follow all of today’s political developments here at the Politics Live blog: Oil prices are also holding steady this morning following the previous day’s falls. Taking a look at what’s going on with oil prices, they’ve somewhat shaken off Monday’s steep decline, and are trading slightly higher this morning, mirroring Tuesday’s muted European stock market rises. This comes despite investors’ concerns about the spread of Omicron and what it will mean for the global recovery, and of course demand for oil. Brent crude was trading 0.7% higher at $72.08 at 1030 GMT, while US West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude was just over 1% higher at $69.35. ICYMI - some large UK retailers are selling off Christmas trees for bargain basement prices, after consumers stayed away from shops over fears of the Omicron variant during a key trading weekend. My colleague Sarah Butler writes: Major retailers are having to offload Christmas trees for £1 or less after shoppers shied away from UK high streets and retail centres in the last weekend before Christmas. B&amp;Q has cut the price of its fresh trees – some costing £49 or more – to £1 or less at stores around the country. One shopper posted a picture on social media of trees priced as little as 10p in Abingdon, Oxfordshire. Homebase, which had already cut the price of all its fresh trees to £10 about a week ago, slashed prices to £5, while in some stores they were only £3.50. Industry insiders said some of the major chains appeared to have overbought trees in reaction to last year when many sold out about two weeks early. The Garden Centre Association said its members had mainly been cautious and so had mostly almost sold out. Iain Wylie, the chief executive, said Christmas trade in some areas had been affected by concerns about the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 and anyone with too many trees would need to discount heavily now to clear them. “You can’t just leave them – they are not worth a penny after Christmas,” he said. Read the rest of Sarah’s story here: The UK government borrowed £17.4bn in November, outstripping economists’ predictions and suggesting debt could far overshoot officials’ forecasts if the Omicron coronavirus variant slows the economy as expected. It was the highest November borrowing since comparable records began 30 years ago, barring last year. Last year during the furlough scheme the Treasury under Rishi Sunak set successive peacetime records for monthly borrowing as it covered the costs of 80% of salaries for millions of people as well as support schemes for businesses. Significant borrowing has continued in 2021, with £136bn borrowed between April and November, according to data published on Tuesday by the Office for National Statistics. That was the second highest since records began in 1993. Sunak and the Treasury are thought to have pushed back against proposals for more coronavirus restrictions partly because of the cost to the government of reintroducing financial support for businesses that would be forced to close, and officials have previously briefed about the costs of regular booster jabs. Yet businesses have argued that they are suffering from a quasi-lockdown anyway, with customers deserting crowded spaces in order to avoid catching coronavirus before Christmas. Read the rest of Jasper’s story here: A check in on how the European stock markets are faring this morning. As expected, shares across the region are on the rise - albeit in a moderate way - following yesterday’s falls. This comes after Asian shares gained on Tuesday. Investors are trying to assess how the spread of the Omicron variant will hit the global economic recovery At 0900 GMT: The UK’s FTSE100 - 1% up Germany’s DAX - 0.7% up France’s CAC40 - 0.7% up Pan-European STOXX 600 - 0.9% up Among the gainers in London on the FTSE are miner Rio Tinto (leading the risers), clothing and footwear brand JD Sports, and housebuilders Persimmon, Barratt Developments and Taylor Wimpey. The mood of consumers in Europe’s largest economy is darkening as the Omicron variant spreads across the region. According to the latest consumer sentiment index from Germany’s GfK institute, the outlook is expected to deteriorate in the new year. The January reading of the index was the lowest since June. Germany is currently in the grip of the fourth wave of Covid, which has already led to renewed restrictions in the country. Meanwhile, the health minister Karl Lauterbach has warned that a “massive” fifth wave of cases linked to the spread of Omicron is coming. Germany banned unvaccinated people from going into non-essential shops and other places, in a bid to control rising cases. The so-called “2G rules” only allow those who have been vaccinated or have recovered from the illness to go to certain places including football matches and Christmas markets. These rules have hurt Christmas trade, according to GfK economist Ralf Buerkl. There could also be more restrictions on the way. Germany’s new chancellor Olaf Scholz is meeting with the country’s state premiers later on Tuesday where they are expected to discuss - and then announce - new measures. Good morning, and welcome to our live, rolling coverage of business, economics, the eurozone and financial markets. The start of the week before Christmas brought a troubled trading day yesterday, with falls across Europe and Wall Street. However, things are looking a little brighter on this dark morning on the shortest day of the year. Asian stocks moved higher on Tuesday, and European shares are tipped to open higher, with some buyers on the lookout for Christmas bargains, although volumes remained thin just ahead of the festive break. London’s FTSE is currently tipped to open 1.3% higher, with Germany’s DAX expected to rise by 1.5% at the open. It’s a similar story for pan-European Stoxx 50 futures, which are trading 1.5% higher. Despite the muted cheer, plenty of worries remain about the threat of the Covid Omicron variant to the global economic recovery. The new variant, which is highly transmissible, is sweeping across the world and many nations are on mulling further restrictions and social distancing measures as a way of containing the number of cases. Overnight, New Zealand announced it was pushing back the staggered reopening of its international border until the end of February, when quarantine-free travel will be reintroduced for New Zealand citizens and residents in Australia. In the past few days, the Netherlands has gone back into lockdown. Germany has ruled out such a measure before Christmas, but the country’s health minister warned that the advancing wave of infections could not be stopped. All of this is having an impact on economic sentiment. In Germany, Europe’s largest economy, news just out shows that consumer morale is expected to dive further at the start of next year, as Omicron clouds darken the horizon. More on that shortly... Meanwhile in the UK, public borrowing figures have just been released. The government borrowed a total of £17.4bn in November, which came in some way higher than the average forecast of £16bn. This data comes as the chancellor Rishi Sunak is facing mounting calls for help from businesses - especially struggling hospitality and leisure venues - who have seen trade decimated as fearful customers have stayed at home. According to Bethany Beckett, UK economist at Capital Economics, the November figures “will be unwelcome news for the chancellor, who is once again facing the prospect of tighter COVID-19 restrictions and renewed government support to affected sectors.”The government’s health watchdog knew about anomalous tests at a private laboratory that gave at least 43,000 people potentially false negative Covid results almost a month before it took action, it emerged. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) was alerted on 14 September this year to “an unusual spike” in the numbers of people testing positive on lateral flow tests, but negative on supposedly more accurate PCR tests processed by the Wolverhampton lab Immensa, court papers have shown. According to a government response to a pre-legal action letter from the Good Law Project, the decision to stop the lab processing tests then only happened on 12 October. NHS test and trace suspended testing operations at the Wolverhampton centre after investigating the anomalous results. Test and trace said about 400,000 samples had been processed through the lab, the vast majority of which were negative results, but an estimated 43,000 people may have been given incorrect negative PCR test results, mostly in south-west England. The UKHSA, the successor body to Public Health England, is considering legal action against Immensa. But separately, the Good Law Project has filed judicial review proceedings to, it said, “ensure the government addresses the multiple failures in their oversight of the Immensa lab”. The organisation argues the lack of a proper system to monitor the accuracy of tests at such labs breached the Department of Health and Social Care’s duty to protect life, and the human rights of those affected. Responding to the pre-action letter, the government legal department set out the background to the accreditation of testers, and the chronology for the Immensa site. On 14 September, it said, UKHSA “was alerted to an unusual spike in the number of people testing positive on lateral flow devices but negative on PCR tests”, and looked at possible causes including potentially faulty lateral flows and “any link to school-age children”, an apparent reference to the efforts by some students to create artificially false test results. However, it was only on 12 October when “it was determined that the likely cause was a technical issue at the Immensa laboratory, and the laboratory ceased processing samples”. Part of the Good Law Project’s judicial review effort is to seek better safety checks at private labs, arguing that the false negative results contributed to the spread of Covid in the south-west and put people in danger. Jo Maugham, the director of Good Law Project, said: “A box-fresh unaccredited testing company was given a huge public contract; it then delivered tens of thousands of false negative test results. “Ministers have failed to provide an account of what happened and to implement proper safety checks at private labs to prevent this ever happening again. With a tidal wave of Omicron sweeping the country people need to know that test and trace won’t fail to protect them and their families and friends again.” Dr Will Welfare, the incident director for Covid at the UKHSA, said: “A full investigation remains ongoing and we will provide an update in due course; we cannot comment on any information that could form part of these investigations before they are complete. “We suspended testing at the Immensa Wolverhampton laboratory following an ongoing investigation into positive LFD results subsequently testing negative on PCR. Those affected were contacted as soon as possible.”The fourth Pinch of Nom cookbook, a collection of slimming comfort food recipes, has narrowly pipped Richard Osman to the top of the book charts this Christmas. Sales figures from industry analysts Nielsen Book reveal that the race to be Christmas No 1 was unusually close this year. While Pinch of Nom: Comfort Food by Kate Allinson and Kay Featherstone sold 56,367 copies in the week ending 18 December, Osman’s second cosy crime novel, The Man Who Died Twice, was just 1,107 copies behind in second place. According to Nielsen, the only time the festive battle was closer was in 2001, when Jamie Oliver’s Happy Days With the Naked Chef beat Delia Smith’s How to Cook: Book Three by just 326 copies. This isn’t Allinson and Featherstone’s first time at the top of the charts – their first book, Pinch of Nom, was released in 2019 and became the fastest-selling non-fiction book since records began, with sales of 210,506 copies in its first week. “Our data reveals that £637,000 was spent on copies of their Pinch of Nom books in the UK last week, at an impressive rate of one copy sold every 10 seconds,” said Philip Stone, an analyst at Nielsen Book. The festive period is key for booksellers, and The Bookseller reported that the books market rose by 13.6% in volume and 14.9% in value in the week to 18 December, with 9.3 million books sold, worth £86.1m. Osman, who took the Christmas No 1 in 2020 with The Thursday Murder Club, can comfort himself with the fact that he is the only author to have two titles in this year’s Christmas Top 10: The Thursday Murder Club sold 44,736 copies to come in fourth. Literary offerings from male celebrities were popular among book buyers this Christmas, with titles by Billy Connolly, Ian Hislop, Jeremy Clarkson, Bob Mortimer and David Walliams all in the Top 10. Walliams made the list with his latest children’s book, Gangsta Granny Strikes Again!, while Hislop fronts the latest Private Eye annual. Lisa Jewell’s thriller The Night She Disappeared, and the new Guinness World Records, complete the Top 10. At Waterstones, Bea Carvalho said sales had been strong “across a wide range of titles and genres”, from Paul McCartney’s The Lyrics to Janice Hallett’s cosy crime novel The Appeal, and Charlotte Higgins’ Greek Myths. Warren Ellis’s memoir, Nina Simone’s Gum, has also taken off, said Carvalho, describing it as “surely one of the year’s most surprising and original non-fiction books”, while Kate Davies and Lucille Clerc’s fairytale retellings, Fairy Tale Land, has had an enthusiastic response at the UK’s largest book chain. “Wintry cosy crime has been selling strongly, with titles such as Death on the Trans-Siberian Express appealing to fans of genre bestsellers such as Richard Osman’s The Thursday Murder Club,” said Carvalho, also praising this year’s “astonishingly strong lineup in literary fiction”, with Waterstones booksellers “particularly enjoying recommending Claire Keegan’s wonderful Small Things Like These recently”. UK Top 10 bestsellers: week ending 18 December 2021 1. Pinch of Nom: Comfort Food (Kate Allinson and Kay Featherstone) 56,367 copies sold 2. The Man Who Died Twice (Richard Osman) 55,260 3. Guinness World Records 2022 (Guinness World Records) 51,682 4. The Thursday Murder Club (Richard Osman) 44,736 5. Windswept &amp; Interesting (Billy Connolly) 44,223 6. Diddly Squat (Jeremy Clarkson) 37,961 7. And Away … (Bob Mortimer) 35,607 8. Gangsta Granny Strikes Again! (David Walliams) 34,055 9. Private Eye Annual 2021 (Ian Hislop) 30,452 10. The Night She Disappeared (Lisa Jewell) 27,740Liverpool’s assistant manager, Pepijn Lijnders, has described the decision to press on with the Premier League’s festive schedule as “absurd” and warned it will increase the risk to players’ health. Liverpool were among a small number of clubs at Monday’s meeting in favour of deferring one fixture from the three rounds scheduled to be played from 26 December to 3 January. They were dismayed that the recommendation did not receive wider support, given that 10 Premier League games have been postponed because of Covid-19 recently and a record 90 players and staff tested positive last week. Lijnders believes the decision to persevere with the festive programme is another example of authorities responding too late to the pandemic. “We think it is absurd we have to play within 48 hours [on 26 and 28 December] because it is a much higher risk of injury and the quality of the game will not be as good,” he said. “Football is a team sport so the moment we lose players we have to push players through these situations and the risk becomes bigger. I think it is absurd. “You have to ask the other teams why they want to play in these circumstances but I think it would be a wise decision, also because of our individual situation here with the Covid cases being so fresh, if we had more time before the next game.” Jürgen Klopp, along with his fellow Premier League managers, submitted his recommendations to the meeting but Lijnders insists the opinion of medical professionals should have taken priority. Liverpool’s assistant manager added: “For me the experts are not the managers, they are the scientists and the doctors and we should follow their guidelines. The Premier League should ask them, not the CEOs, not the managers, because health always comes position No 1, above everything. “We are in this job to protect our players and our staff and also their family members and that is why we have all these good measures in place and try to cut the chain with our testing. We follow the protocols and guidelines of the doctors and scientists. If there is one common behaviour in this pandemic over the last year it is we always acted too late, always – and that’s why we went from one health crisis into the other.” Liverpool host Leicester in the Carabao Cup quarter-final on Wednesday tonight when they will again be without Virgil van Dijk, Fabinho, Thiago Alcântara and Curtis Jones due to positive Covid tests. Jordan Henderson, who is ill but has not tested positive, and the injured Divock Origi are also sidelined. Lijnders, meanwhile, has confirmed he wants to return to management when his contract at Liverpool expires in 2024. The Dutch coach returned to Liverpool after a brief spell in charge of NEC Nijmegen in 2018 and remains keen on resuming his managerial career in the future. “That’s the plan, yes,” he confirmed. “Jurgen knows this. But this isn’t the time to speak about these things because I have a contract until 2024. When the time comes I will sit down with my management and see the options I have. But we are in the middle of this beautiful project and after that I will decide. But, yes, definitely, that’s the plan.”Eighteen years after what we thought was the third and final Matrix film, The Matrix Revolutions, Lana Wachowski has directed a fourth: The Matrix Resurrections. But despite some ingenious touches (a very funny name, for example, for a VR coffee shop) the boulder has been rolled back from the tomb to reveal that the franchise’s corpse is sadly still in there. This is a heavy-footed reboot which doesn’t offer a compelling reason for its existence other than to gouge a fourth income stream from Matrix fans, submissively hooked up for new content, and it doesn’t have anything approaching the breathtaking “bullet time” action sequences that made the original film famous. The first Matrix was a brilliant, prescient sci-fi action thriller that in 1999 presented us with Keanu Reeves as a computer hacker codenamed “Neo”, stumbling across the apparent activity of a police state whose workings he scarcely suspected. Charismatic rebel Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss) brings Neo to the mysterious figure of Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne) who offers our reluctant hero one of the most famous choices in modern cinema: the blue pill or the red pill. The first will allow Neo back into his torpid quasi-contentment, the second will irreversibly reveal to him the truth about all existence. He swallows the red and discovers all our lives exist in a digitally fabricated, illusory world, while our comatose bodies are milked for their energies in giant farms by our machine overlords. A vivacious and underrated sequel, The Matrix Reloaded, appeared in 2003 and later in the same year The Matrix Revolutions, in which the idea ran definitively out of steam: the awful truth was that the drab “reality” in which the rebels were fighting their tedious intergalactic war against these machines looked like Battlefield Earth, the dire sci-fi movie starring John Travolta. But the red pill and the blue pill was an irresistible meme gifted to political discourse at the dawn of the online age. Christopher Nolan’s Inception was surely influenced by The Matrix and when Succession’s digital media baron Lukas Matsson, played by Alexander Skarsgård, contemptuously compares social media users to Roman slaves, he is echoing ideas touted by the original film. Jeff Orlowski’s documentary The Social Dilemma, about social media serfdom, comes with Matrix-esque imagery – and Mark Zuckerberg is attempting to craft a new digital world called Meta. Moreover Lilly Wachowski, the original’s co-director, has intriguingly discussed the world of Matrix and its relevance to the dissenting politics of gender. The fourth movie wittily begins by showing us Neo in haggard and depressed middle age, operating under his normal name Thomas Anderson: he is an award-winning but burnt-out game programmer. But there are weird eruptions from within his alt.reality: an activist called Bugs (Jessica Henwick) tries to make contact with him, along with a renegade government agent (Yahya Abdul-Mateen II) who has assumed the persona of Morpheus. Meanwhile, Thomas’s obnoxious billionaire employer Smith (Jonathan Groff) seems a parallel version of the sinister Agent Smith played by Hugo Weaving in the original films. But Thomas’s analyst (Neil Patrick Harris) is on hand to assure him that this is all just his imagination. But is it? And is Thomas still deeply in love with Trinity, whom he sees every day in his local coffee shop? In some ways, The Matrix Resurrections has a degree of charm as a love story of middle age, and usually returning action franchises give their ageing male lead a younger female co-star. Not here: it’s a pleasure to see Moss return, but a shame to see her given so little interesting to do. The Matrix is an idea that is most exciting when it is starting to come apart: when there is a glitch. But the franchise is now a glitch-less narrative: we basically know all about the illusion and the “Battlefield Earth” reality out there in space which is where we are largely marooned: a huge, dispiriting crepuscular ruined cityscape glowing at its rocky edges, like the Verneian interior of a volcano. And the nature of the machines’ thinking and their motivations is not really solved by this fourth film, despite some playful new ideas about whether some of them are disloyal to their side. Lambert Wilson’s character The Merovingian, a veteran of the Machine War, returns, ranting enjoyably about the superiority of art, music and pre-digital conversation. Really, Resurrections doesn’t do much to remove the anticlimax that hung like a cloud over the cinema auditorium at the end of the third film in 2003. This movie is set up to initiate a possible new series, but there is no real creative life in it. Where the original film was explosively innovatory, this is just another piece of IP, an algorithm of unoriginality. • The Matrix Resurrections is released on 22 December in the US and UK, and on 26 December in Australia.A senior barrister who sued the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) after a colleague asked him to stop breaking wind in the room they worked in together has lost his case. Tarique Mohammed sued for harassment and told an employment tribunal that his repetitive flatulence was caused by medication he was on for a heart condition. He said the comment from his colleague Paul McGorry was “embarrassing” and violated his dignity – but the panel found it was a reasonable request to have asked him to stop. The prosecutor, who suffered a heart attack in 2014, also alleged he was discriminated against because of his disabilities and made a number of further allegations against his co-workers and bosses. He claimed they threw away his water bottles, asked him to work one day a week 60 miles away and failed to pay for his barrister’s practising certificate while he was on sick leave. The claims of disability-related discrimination were also thrown out by the panel, chaired by the employment judge Emma Hawksworth, in Reading, Berkshire. The CPS did accept that it treated Mohammed unfairly by not allowing him to work from home two days a week and leave work at 4pm to help him manage his condition, and by removing him from court duties, meaning he will receive compensation. His heart condition meant he had to take daily medication, the side-effects of which meant he had to remain at home for several hours after taking it. In 2016, he began sharing an office with McGorry, where the issue of his persistent flatulence was raised. “Mr McGorry was aware the claimant had had a heart attack but he was not aware of what medication the claimant was taking or that flatulence was a side-effect of the medication,” the tribunal was told. “There were repeated incidents of flatulence in the quiet room. On one occasion Mr McGorry asked [Mr Mohammed]: ‘Do you have to do that Tarique?’” Mohammed said it was due to his medication and when asked if he could step outside to do it, he said he could not. In February 2016 he was moved to another team that meant he did not have to attend court and was asked to work one day a week in Brighton, East Sussex, more than one hour’s drive from Guildford. He launched a grievance, which concluded that the CPS should have made allowances for him, and went on sick leave. His employment was terminated in April 2020. The tribunal threw out Mohammed’s claims of disability-related harassment and victimisation. “Many of the incidents about which [he] complains were unrelated to his disability … or were caused or aggravated by [him] overreacting,” the panel said. Of the flatulence, the tribunal commented: “Mr McGorry’s questions to [Mr Mohammed] were not asked with the purpose of violating [his] dignity or creating such an environment. It was not an unreasonable question to ask, when there had been repeated incidents of flatulence in a small office.”For the rapidly unravelling winter caretaker of Downing Street, it has been another paranoia-inducing few days. What with leaked pictures and leaked videos and leaked accounts of various gatherings, we have to ask: is there any party this lot weren’t at? I’m just peering at a 1921 photo of the Overlook Hotel’s July 4th Ball and … why yes. Will you look at that. There’s Boris Johnson, right in the middle, with half a wheel of brie jammed in his mouth. And there’s Dominic Cummings behind a palm, tucking away another vat of wine while considering himself better than all this. As with the final image of The Shining, the picture of the “business meeting” in the Downing Street garden during lockdown last year does rather make you question everything that has gone before. Ordinary people’s own stories of that time, so many of them shared on social media, are frequently utterly heartbreaking. Set against the mother who buried her 14-year-old boy at a tiny graveside funeral, with no wake, there is something viscerally repulsive about cabinet ministers characterising this cheese-and-wine garden social as perfectly understandable given that Downing Street staff work in “gruelling conditions”. Yet again we see the truest conviction of the Johnson-era lieutenant: that nobody works harder than them. Talk about metropolitan elitism. But this isn’t even a moral lecture, really – their own sense of any debt to society is a matter for them. Rather, it is an object lesson in professional efficacy. Why – WHY – were these people not even professionally self-interested enough to realise that as the setters of the rules in a deadly pandemic, it was mission-critical that they adhered at all times to both the letter and spirit of them? What a stunning failure of the imagination. Maybe they just thought they’d never get caught. Either way, as we await the known unknowns of the Omicron wave, it’s wild that No 10 staff have done as much to undermine trust in vital public health messages as mad conspiracists on YouTube. These Downing Street geniuses have yet again dealt a body-blow to longterm levels of trust in politicians and the political class in this country – and with the odd exception, they all still work there. Forgive me; they all still work “for us”. Have they finally now caught on that careless cheese and wine costs lives? I wouldn’t bank on it. They evidently didn’t learn the lesson even after discovering that careless automobile-based eye tests cost lives. Anyway, speaking of work meetings, weakling king Johnson is now reduced to holding two-hour-plus cabinets at which the decision is not to make a decision yet. Missing around the table yesterday was erstwhile Brexit minister David Frost, who seems to have tired of trying to renegotiate his own terrible deal with the EU. To appease Johnson’s flat-Earth backbenchers – hey, they’ve done their own research on the internet – the prime minister was reportedly considering installing Iain Duncan Smith in Frost’s place. Amazing. Would you like someone crackers with your cheese? This is like asking the stupidest end of the Marvel fandom which character they’d most like to see given more to do. Duncan Smith is basically Star-Lord. As for Johnson, reckoning IDS might be a good idea to sub on now has identical energy to former England manager Graham Taylor going: “We’ll put Wrighty on, shall we…? It’s made for Wrighty to come on and score.” In the end, he went for Liz Truss. But all this points to some vintage Christmas telly. On the BBC, I’m looking forward to David Tennant’s Phileas Fogg; and on the rolling news channels, I’ll be watching the Brexit revolution continue to devour its children. Also looking forward to the Easter schedules, when leadership hopeful Truss resigns from the Foreign Office because Johnson’s Brexit isn’t hard enough for her. (Liz is a former remainer, of course, but five-and-a-half years in to the easiest deal in human history, who’s counting?) Anyway. Back to the “work gathering”, which took place on Friday 15 May 2020. It was Dominic Raab who farted out that “gruelling conditions” line in defence of the prime minister on Monday, though it should be stated he himself wasn’t there. (Raab checks his lock-ups on Friday nights, adjusting the freezer dials if necessary.) I do enjoy how stratified the photo is. At top table, we have our endlessly self-styled first-class minds, including Dominic Cummings (history, Oxford) and the brilliant 4D strategist to whom he would go on to lose a power struggle, Carrie Johnson (history of art and theatre studies, Warwick). In this snap, Cummings is lolling about with a big glass of red, though exactly a week after it was taken, he’d have been able to spend his Friday evening reading the first news stories about his lockdown-breaking trip to County Durham, which – until all these revelations of Downing Street parties emerged – was the single biggest blow to the government’s own public health message during the entire pandemic. As you may be aware, Cummings has now been preposterously retconned as some kind of heroic Cassandra who was always rushing about trying to get lesser humans to listen to him. Moving down the patio, we have our business-class seats, and on to the lawn for a premium economy table which includes people reported to be James Slack and Jess Seldon (government communications) and Dilyn the dog (leg-humping, furniture chewing, and running the PPE contracts VIP lane). Standing on the grass, in economy/the hold, are a group reportedly including Matt Hancock, who that very afternoon had been explaining to the nation that they were only allowed to meet up with one person not in their household, and only if they kept two metres apart outdoors. So that’s where we are at time of writing. No – hang on – I forgot about placeman cabinet secretary Simon Case, who accepted the job of investigating a few other Downing Street parties, even while knowing that his own team had held an event last Christmas with drinks and snacks, which he had “walked through”. Only when this was found out did Case recuse himself. However small it may seem to some, this is in some ways the biggest story of all. The head of the entire civil service agreed to “investigate” something in which he knew he could be regarded as compromised. This isn’t so much something being rotten in the state of Denmark, as absolutely everything being rotten in the state of Denmark. Of course, the one thing of which we can be sure is that Johnson will be infinitely more concerned with finding out which person or persons are leaking all this stuff about how he and his people behave, rather than the behaviour itself. He’s got to be allowed his fun in peace, hasn’t he? Come on. All work and no play makes Boris a dull boy. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistAustralia’s defence department wrote to France’s Naval Group a week before the submarine contract was sensationally cancelled, acknowledging the successful completion of one requirement for moving to the next stage of the project. The three-page letter, obtained by Guardian Australia under freedom of information laws, shows the Australian government set out six conditions on which Canberra would agree to pass a key milestone in the $90bn project. The letter acknowledged that at least one of those conditions was “successfully completed” as of 8 September, and said the Australian government “has, to date, demonstrated its commitment to working collaboratively with Naval Group”. But the document also included a cautionary line that the next stage of the project – which aimed to deliver 12 conventionally powered submarines – remained “subject to Government approval”. The letter was sent eight days before the prime minister, Scott Morrison, dumped the French deal in favour of the new Aukus partnership with the US and the UK for nuclear-powered submarines. The move, which followed a year and a half of private deliberations, sparked a diplomatic rift with Paris, which complained of being blindsided and “stabbed in the back”. The tensions culminated in French president Emmanuel Macron’s direct accusation that Morrison had lied. Morrison labelled that accusation as “sledging” and a private text message from Macron was released, further angering French officials. The French foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, told a parliamentary hearing in late September that “someone lied”, because he could not reconcile positive correspondence from Australia’s defence department with the Aukus decision communicated by Morrison. The correspondence with Naval Group in the lead-up to the decision is a key piece of the Aukus puzzle, although to date the documents released do not show Australia giving a concrete assurance that the project would proceed. Instead they paint a picture of progress steadily being made towards highly technical requirements. Guardian Australia has previously reported on the contents of a letter sent on 15 September – hours before the Aukus announcement – which was at the heart of French claims of Australian double-dealing. In that letter, the director general of the Future Submarine Program, Royal Australian Navy Commodore Craig Bourke, confirmed “the exit of the Functional Ship System Functional Review (SFR) has been achieved as required”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But Bourke added a caveat about the government not yet granting authorisation to proceed. He said the Australian government “reminds Naval Group that this exit does not remove the obligations” outlined in a different letter sent a week earlier. The defence department has now released the earlier letter, dated 8 September, with some portions redacted. Bourke told Guillaume Jampy of Naval Group in Paris that “the purpose of this letter is to set out the path forward to ensure” the formal completion of the functional review and a subsequent milestone “can be achieved”. Bourke wrote that the next milestone was “necessary for Naval Group to verify and validate, and for the Commonwealth to have assurance of, the system performance of the Whole Warship to demonstrate the achievement of the functional characteristics of the Commonwealth’s requirements for the design”. Some parts of the document were blacked-out, on the basis that it contained information of a commercial value to the French contractor, which had been consulted as part of the FOI process. After one such redacted passage, Bourke wrote: “However, the Commonwealth has, to date, demonstrated its commitment to working collaboratively with Naval Group throughout this process. “In order to minimise disruption to the program, subject to Government approval and to enable the continuation of work under the [Submarine Design Contract], the Commonwealth advises it will agree” that Naval Group will exit the functional review “subject to the following conditions”. The letter outlined six criteria, including that certain technical requirements were “demonstrated to the Commonwealth’s satisfaction by 30 Aug 2021 – this has been successfully completed”. The second condition was that three action plans were consolidated into one plan approved by the commonwealth – but Bourke said that “at the time of writing this letter, this action remains open”. The other four criteria were blacked out. The FOI decision maker found that disclosing certain commercial arrangements “could reasonably be expected to benefit Naval Group’s competitors in winning future work for which Naval Group is competing by revealing the terms that Naval Group is prepared to accept”. Bourke advised Naval Group on 8 September: “Upon Naval Group completing the actions, and agreeing to the conditions … the Commonwealth will send a subsequent letter formally advising Naval Group it has exited [the functional review].” That follow-up letter was then sent on 15 September, hours before Morrison announced the project was being abandoned altogether in favour of a “forever partnership” with the UK and the US. Morrison, Boris Johnson and Joe Biden launched an 18-month study, to help Australia find a way to build at least eight nuclear-powered submarines. Australian officials say the plan is driven by increasing concerns about China’s assertiveness in the Indo-Pacific, and by Australia’s desire to project power farther north and for its submarines to be less easily detectible. The secretary of the defence department, Greg Moriarty, told a recent Australian Senate estimates hearing the contract with Naval Group had been terminated “for convenience” because “our requirements have changed” – not because of poor performance. Moriarty said he spoke with Naval Group representatives on 15 September – “the night before” the 7am announcement – to advise them of the decision to cancel the program. “They were surprised and disappointed, understandably,” Moriarty said. The Australian government has not revealed how much it expects to pay out to Naval Group in cancellation fees, nor the cost of scrapping the related deal with American contractor Lockheed Martin for the submarine combat system. The government’s budget update last week said the termination costs were “subject to negotiations with the companies, which have commenced”. The Australian defence minister, Peter Dutton, has previously urged France to put aside any “hurt feelings” over the scrapping of the contract, arguing the decision was in Australia’s “best interests” and the French “were going to be upset whenever they were told”.Christmas-time confusion over aged care home visitor restrictions could mean some families miss out on seeing loved ones, advocates say. There are already different rules in Australia state by state, and at different homes within states, with the spread of the Omicron variant creating a highly volatile situation. Advocates are pushing for coherent guidelines, and calling for a balance to be struck so residents are protected but not completely isolated. Aged Care and Community Services chief executive officer Paul Sadler said without guidance some homes would overreact and not even allow essential visitors, while there was also a risk of Omicron spreading through homes over Christmas. “It’s a balance of risks issue,” he said. “It’s about being cautious without being overreactive. “The risk is if the current circumstances continue and we don’t get guidance from the states and territories that we’ll end up with some people able to see family, and some not.” There are 54 outbreaks in residential aged care facilities, according to the federal health department’s most recent snapshot. There have been almost 600 over the course of the pandemic. The Council on the Ageing (Cota) has worked with aged care provider, carer and consumer peak organisations including ACSA to develop a visitor code for the industry, and is waiting for an updated, draft version to be approved by the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee. The AHPCC is the health emergency decision-making body, comprising all state and territory health ministers, and headed by chief medical officer Paul Kelly. Cota chief executive officer Ian Yates said agreement from federal and state authorities had proven “elusive” and that during consultation, feedback was “contradictory from one jurisdiction to another”. “Last year our problem was providers, this year it’s state health authorities,” he said. “There have been significant problems with different approaches in different states, and within states between different regions, and that means that aged care facilities are confused. “And families then get very confused.” Both Cota and Acsa want every resident to have the right to an essential visitor, someone who comes every day or two or three times a week, with appropriate controls. “Someone who gets to know the rules, who understands, who is fully vaccinated … so there is trust between the facility and them,” Yates said. Most residential homes are privately owned but approved by the federal government, and can be for-profit or not-for-profit. Others are owned and run by state governments. Yates said without a set of consistent rules, providers struggle. “Really good providers are managing this well, they communicate it well and they have good staff who they have trained and supported but middle-of-the-road providers struggle because they need a set of rules to follow, many of them don’t have the communications skills and there are all sorts of staff shortages.” Sadler said the code needed to be approved . He said Acsa and others would write to all health ministers outlining their concerns on behalf of the aged-care sector about the inconsistent advice. “If they don’t have a consistent process, we could have another St Basil’s where significant numbers of staff are stood down,” he said. At St Basil’s, a Victorian aged care home, 45 residents died from Covid. A further five died from neglect after the workforce started falling ill and were forced to quarantine without adequate replacements. Acsa is also part of an alliance calling for free or cheaper rapid antigen tests to screen for infections. Guardian Australia has contacted the AHPCC via the federal health department for comment.Suddenly it feels like March 2020 all over again. A new, super fast variant, confusion, fear, long lines at testing facilities, panic buying (of rapid tests this time, not toilet paper), being alarmed that a scratchy throat means you have it, epidemiologists urging us not to go to parties. Then there’s not being sure about whether you will be able to cross borders or get on a plane, being fearful about hugging elderly relatives, being unsure about whether your business will open, if your cashflow will hold and if you will get financial support if it shuts. We have been here before. The thing that connects this moment with the early stages of the pandemic is confusion, panic and people going their own way, doing their own thing. On Monday, as the Omicron outbreak surged, New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, announced his government was not reintroducing public health measures, such as indoor mask mandates. Instead he called for people to exercise personal responsibility. “We are treating the people of our state like adults,” he said. At the same time, the prime minister keeps telling us the era of governments telling us what to do constantly is ending. “We have got to move to the next phase of how we live with this virus,” Scott Morrison said on Tuesday. “The time for that heavy hand is behind us.” In the last years of the Roman republic, lawmaker Cicero famously wrote, “Salus populi suprema lex” – which translates as “the health of the people is the supreme law”. But you could say in Australia there has been a twist on this maxim. Now “the choice of the people is the supreme law”. Though different states and territories are deploying their own public health measures – and NSW may yet be pushed into a backdown on masks – there has been a significant shift – philosophically, as well as practically, away from the government’s previous use of lockdowns to control the virus, which were often enforced with heavy policing and hefty fines. When you have more individual choice, as we do now, you introduce a massive element of chaos and the unknown into the mix, as people go their own way. Add Christmas and widespread travel and socialising, and it has been a hot mess of a week, where people don’t really know what to do, or how they should manage it – just like the early days of March 2020. Some people have cancelled everything and are lying low, others are, in the words of Morrison on Tuesday, “keeping calm and carrying on”. Speaking to friends and colleagues a few days before Christmas, I’ve heard many tales of restaurant bookings cancelled; driving around the suburbs trying to buy rapid testing kits; being pinged as a contact; friends cancelling plans because they had been pinged; work Christmas parties cancelled; hours spent in testing queues; waiting days to get results back; asking people to do a rapid test before a dinner party; interstate Christmas plans up in the air; sick kids who may have Covid; trying to bring forward booster shots; and calculations about risks to elderly or sick relatives made with a variety of ever-changing inputs. And this not a fresh, spritely group of people dealing with pre-Christmas chaos – but rather people who are bedraggled, down to their final brain cells, longing for a normal Christmas, who have endured two long years of pandemic, who are tired, fed up and dispirited. The calculus they must make this week as part of their compact with the state to take “personal responsibility” is overwhelming. I speak to one friend, Jonno Seidler, who lives in Sydney. It’s a typical pre-Christmas story. “One of my best friends just got pinged who I recently saw, so I guess we’ll get a rapid test. I just had a work event where we had to get a test – because someone there was playing at a music festival. A lot of my friends are going to weddings and being told to take a test before the wedding. This week a lot of people are just staying home.” Seidler reckons people will largely do the right thing if given personal responsibility, “There’s a collective sense of social responsibility – the people who broke the rules – like the Byron guy, they are outliers. (If you broke the rules) you would be publicly shamed out of existence.” Another friend, Kate Schlunke, was driving down from the mid-north coast of NSW to Sydney for some pre-Christmas parties when she changed her mind about visiting Sydney. “There’s a party we have tomorrow where we have to catch public transport to get there, and there’s a pregnant woman and young kids who will be there. I don’t want to infect anyone and I don’t want to get infected – and I don’t want to be a close contact just before Christmas Day. A lot of people are holing up at the moment. You are only as safe as the most irresponsible person at the party. Right now we are adjusting our plans and need to do our own risk assessments for everything.” On Twitter on Monday I asked, “How do people feel about individual responsibility versus government intervention” – and in the hundreds of replies a lot of people said that it did not have to be an either/or. As the pandemic progresses and things get possibly worse over winter, setting will change – and the levers of government intervention and levels of personal responsibility will probably shift according to the seasons, the variant and other risk factors. But there were also a lot of responses from people who wished that NSW had just hung on to the indoor mask mandate and widespread use of QR codes until more was known about Omicron. People generally want to do the right thing – but before we get handed personal responsibility – a few things should have happened first. People need to make informed decisions about their risks and the risk they pose to others, based on hard data. That data is – do I have Covid? Am I a close contact? Was I at an exposure site? This data should help us through the minefield of pre-Christmas decision making – and should be available to us via the availability and affordability of rapid lateral flow tests and more testing clinics, with more available staff. This data is also theoretically available when we check in and use QR codes. Which, of course, have been scrapped in many settings in NSW. Personal responsibility only works when a person is reasonably informed about the risks.As Covid case numbers continue to surge across the country and testing wait times blow out, people are increasingly using rapid antigen tests. They are a convenient alternative to queueing for traditional polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests and an extra precaution before attending gatherings in the lead-up to Christmas. But with reports of shortages and varying levels of dependability, deciding what RAT kit to buy and when to use it can be difficult. The federal department of health says rapid antigen tests are a faster way of getting a result, but don’t replace PCR tests. So, which tests can you trust, and how much are they? Quality The Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) has approved 15 different rapid antigen testing kits, and categorised them according to their clinical sensitivity. The TGA based its judgment of the performance of each kit on studies done by the manufacturer that show the positive percent agreement (PPA) – the percentage of individuals that produced a positive test result using a rapid antigen test, in comparison with a positive result by PCR test. The TGA sets the minimum clinical sensitivity a testing kit must achieve before it is approved at 80%, which it labels as “acceptable sensitivity”. A kit with 90% PPA is labeled “high sensitivity” and a kit that records clinical sensitivity greater than 95% is considered to have “very high sensitivity”. There are only five kits that have been given the “very high sensitivity” label: All Test Sars-CoV-2 Antigen Rapid Test (Nasal Swab) Lyher Novel Coronavirus Antigen Test Kit (Nasal Swab) OnSite Covid-19 Ag Self Test (Nasal Swab) Panbio Covid-19 Antigen Self-Test (Nasal Swab) V-Chek Covid-19 Antigen Test (Saliva) The following have been given the “high sensitivity” label: All Test Covid-19 Antigen Rapid Test (Oral Fluid) Hough Covid-19 Home Test (Nasal Swab) My Covid Test Antigen Rapid Test (Oral Fluid) Orawell Covid-19 Ag Rapid Test (Saliva) RightSign Covid-19 Antigen Rapid Test Cassette (Nasal Swab) Testsealabs Covid-19 Antigen Test Cassette (Nasal Swab) And finally, the tests rated as “acceptable sensitivity” are: Roche Sars-CoV-2 Antigen Self Test (Nasal Swab) InnoScreen Covid-19 Antigen Rapid Test (Nasal Swab) Ecotest Covid-19 Antigen Saliva Test kit (saliva) CareStart Covid-19 Antigen Home Test (Nasal Swab) Although the varying degrees of clinical sensitivity are listed by the TGA, the University of Queensland infectious disease physician, associate professor Paul Griffin said any test approved by the TGA was worth using. “I’d recommend anything approved by the TGA – we’ve seen throughout the pandemic, with regards to testing and vaccines, that they are incredibly rigorous. “If they’ve approved it, and it is available, it’s a test I would endorse.” But Griffin was quick to point out that rapid antigen tests don’t replace PCR tests, particularly for people with symptoms. “These are really a useful additional layer of screening that we should certainly be using, but making sure we understand that the performance is not exactly the same as those laboratory-based tests.” Cost Rapid antigen testing kits cost roughly $10-20 per single test. Tests have been available for purchase at chemists and supermarkets since November, with many sold in packs of two, five, 10 or more. Considering businesses are responsible for purchasing their own testing kits, the costs can be substantial if workers need to get tested every day to protect themselves and their colleagues. High demand has also reduced availability, with many retailers selling out, causing prices to fluctuate online. The problem has been exacerbated by global supply chain issues that are delaying shipments of the tests into Australia. Business and union groups have called for the government to fund or subsidise tests, to allow greater accessibility. The Council of Small Business Organisations Australia (Cosboa), along with the Australian Council of Trade Unions and the Transport Workers’ Union, have also called on the government to intervene. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Some people may say $15 a pop is not expensive, but if you’re running a hairdressing salon with 20 people on different shifts throughout the day [it can add up],” Cosboa chief executive, Alexi Boyd told the Guardian. “We just need as many options as possible,” Boyd said. “Nothing is the golden ticket out of this but we need as many pieces of weaponry against it as possible.”A federal government department underpaid dozens of its staff a total of about $400,000 over nearly five years, documents reveal. The documents, released under freedom of information laws, show the Department of Social Services has acknowledged underpaying 68 current and former staff. The Fair Work Ombudsman later confirmed there were total underpayments of $400,550.24. The underpayments took place from October 2015 to February 2020, when the department says it became aware of the breach of its enterprise agreement and self-reported to the ombudsman. The public sector union claimed on Tuesday the department was aware of the issue from 2017. After an investigation, the Fair Work Ombudsman issued the department with a compliance notice in July. It said in the compliance notice that the department had contravened several workplace agreements. “To date, the underpayments arising as a result of these contraventions have not been rectified for [redacted] employees,” it said. The past and current staff who were underpaid worked in the department’s communications services branch. The underpayments related to the failure to pay overtime to staff who were required to monitor the media after hours. This included checking the department’s media inbox every 15 minutes. However, the staff were paid “restriction allowance” rather than overtime, because this was not considered “active work”, internal department documents say. The documents say the department has subsequently employed two part-time contract staff rather than Australian Public Service employees to carry out the work. Department officials noted in internal correspondence that the Compliance Notice was “non-punitive” and “at the ‘lower-end’ of remedy actions available”. It was “based on the actions already undertaken by the department prior to the notification”. Beth Vincent-Pietsch, the Community and Public Sector Union deputy national secretary, claimed the department was aware of the issue from 2017 and “failed to take any actions to rectify it until 2021”. “The CPSU is aware of underpayments of well over $10,000,” she said. “The department overtime forms were knowingly in direct conflict with the Enterprise Agreement. Even after issues were raised and acknowledged by HR and management, the form was never changed, which has led to this issue. “CPSU members are glad that the department has finally rectified the issue, but had they listened to workers when this issue was raised in 2017 this would have cost the department and workers a lot less pain.” A Department of Social Services spokesperson said the department determined in 2020 that its “on-call communication staff had been paid restriction allowance rather than overtime allowance which potentially resulted in underpayment of allowances for these staff”. “The department undertook an independent review of these arrangements and determined that additional allowances needed to be paid to 68 current and former staff,” the spokesperson said. “Back payments were made between March and May 2021. “The department self-reported this matter to the Fair Work Ombudsman in March 2021. “The Fair Work Ombudsman advised the department in July 2021 that the matter is closed and no further action is required.” The finance department also self-reported to the Fair Work Ombudsman earlier this year over the underpayment of at least 60 staff. A Fair Work Ombudsman spokesperson confirmed there were underpayments of $400,550.24 between October 2015 and February 2020. “The Fair Work Ombudsman confirmed DSS had rectified the large majority of these underpayments by the end of April 2021,” he said. He said a compliance notice rather than tougher penalties was an “appropriate enforcement tool in all the circumstances”. That included “DSS’s lack of any previous compliance history with the FWO, the confined nature of the breaches, the quantum, the full cooperation of DSS and various changes made by DSS to ensure sustainable compliance after February 2020”. “DSS complied with the Compliance Notice,” he said. “Under the Fair Work Act 2009, compliance with a Compliance Notice does not constitute an admission (nor does it constitute a finding) of a breach of workplace laws. “The FWO will continue to monitor DSS, as well as respond to any requests for assistance from workers.”Year after year the same few recipes haunt the internet like the ghosts of Christmas past. Coming at you with the ubiquity of a Mariah Carey carol is the Nutella/pastry Christmas tree. From the great tradition of cooking from the side of the packet, this is a recipe Ebenezer Scrooge himself may have imagined: a jar of hazelnut spread sandwiched between two layers of frozen puff pastry “scored in all the right places”, twisted to form “tree branches” and then – in an age where the camera always eats first – baked, shot and posted. Before I’m accused of punching down, let me establish my blue-collar credentials and admit to having made a Yule log from a packet of ginger nuts, whipped cream and Bundaberg rum. Its redeeming feature (other than the lashings of rum) is that it is actually delicious. Frozen puff pastry and a jar of cocoa-coloured sugar and palm oil is about as close to joy as needing a toboggan on the 25th. “I don’t want a lot for Christmas / There is just one thing I need” – and it isn’t this supermarket-shelf confection. Like many families, our Christmas table was always primed for the possibility of war, but there was some consensus: this time of year, the table should be groaning with relative luxury. It was more about the feasting, less about the ritual, but it was the day of the year where you would put – in the kitchen at least – the most amount of effort. Christmas crackers with corny dad jokes, the first of the season’s cherries, big bowls of prawns with cocktail sauce, a farm-reared turkey “the size of an emu”, a multitude of biscuits and small cakes, laden with sugar, butter and eggs from our own chickens. A never-ending ham. String bags of “exotic” nuts. Bowls of chocolates and lollies, grabbed by the handful by kids as they hurtled past, pursued by “you’ll spoil your lunch!”. Inter-family relations at our Christmas table were always fractious and spiced with loving animus, but the gift was always the amount of time, thought and effort that had gone into the offering. This recipe is for those who take joy in cooking for the people they love. Chocolate babka Prep 20 min Rest 3 hours Cook 45 min Serves 8-10 For the dough 750g plain flour 75g caster sugar 2 tsp salt 14g dried yeast 9 eggs 450g unsalted butter For the filling 60g unsalted butter 80g brown sugar 100g dark chocolate (70% cocoa solids) 2 tbsp cocoa powder For the egg wash 1 egg yolk 30ml pouring cream ½ tsp salt Set up your stand mixer with a dough hook. Enriched doughs like this are quite maddening by hand. Sift in the plain four. Add the yeast. You can use fresh yeast if you have access to it, but I find good-quality dried yeasts more than serviceable. Most recipes start by “hydrating” the dried yeast. This isn’t required. Just add it to the flour. Break your eggs, which should be room temperature, into a bowl and cut your butter, which should be fridge cold, into cubes. Turn your mixer to medium speed and add the eggs. Mix until the dough starts to form a homogenous mass. Commence adding the butter cubes one by one in fairly rapid succession. At this stage you can add the salt and sugar, which will help the butter incorporate. Continue to add the butter. This process shouldn’t take longer than five minutes. Halt proceedings and scrape down any ingredients making a run for it, and then kneed on medium speed until the dough is smooth and silky. Place the dough into a bowl that will allow it to double in size. Cover with cling film and leave to prove about 45-60 minutes to achieve this state. Knock it back with a good fist to the belly and refrigerate. I prefer to do this overnight to develop the flavour but two to three hours should make it cool enough to be manageable. Roughly chop the chocolate with a heavy knife and add to a small mixing bowl. Add the sugar, cocoa powder and cubed butter. Melt over a simmering pot of water or in the microwave (a much maligned machine which is always excellent for chocolate work). Leave to cool. Lightly flour your work surface and roll out your dough into a 500mm x 400mm rectangle. Spread the chocolate over evenly then roll the lot into a sausage. Stretch it out to about 600mm. Cut the sausage lengthways using a sharp knife, leaving one end intact. Grab a strand in each hand and plait them together, hand over hand, giving a slight twist to each as you go. Bring the ends together and fashion a loose knot of sorts, more for decoration than structural integrity. Carefully place onto a baking tray lined with baking parchment. Leave to prove under a tea towel for 40-50 minutes until it has recovered from your manipulation and risen by 30%. Preheat the oven to 180C and mix together the egg wash ingredients with a fork. Egg wash the dough and bake for 45 minutes until firm and golden. Allow to cool on a rack and decorate further if you like.Three health workers responsible for keeping Sydney’s St Vincent’s Hospital running throughout the pandemic share the stories hidden from public view. Chris Robinson, executive director of innovation and improvement Covid for me … I could describe it as sort of … the ideal job if you like, because when your job is all about change and improving things, a pandemic makes you have to change more than you could ever imagine. During Covid we shifted to the rapid expansion of our virtual care services, so we rapidly moved from a (focus on the) bricks and mortar hospital to delivering care beyond the hospital wards – something we’ll take to our other services. My role also oversaw the design and development of our pandemic wards – changing the way we care for patients in a medical and nursing perspective. The other element for me was the surge planning for the organisation. What happens when we have this many patients in the community? What happens when we get to this point of time in the pandemic? We were having to build flexible models that we were developing and trying and testing all at the same time. In some ways we were quite fortunate because we got that initial surge of Covid in March of 2020 and that … sort of raised more questions than provided answers. But it did mean that we started to move things towards what would, fast forward to 2021, have us well positioned to respond when we did have huge volumes of Covid patients coming through. Chris Yang, security supervisor During the Delta Covid wave, security had a few big tick boxes. The first was setting up and maintaining safe pass for Covid patient transfers, and coordinating with different departments to make sure the process was efficient and disciplined. The second big tick box was responding to Code Blacks and other emergencies in the high risk areas such as Covid wards; protecting the staff and maintaining safety for patients and visitors. The third was assisting the screening teams during visitation to make sure all the people including staff who come into the hospital came with safe condition of entries. What I’ve experienced during the pandemic has been extremely difficult and certainly busy for us. My department is running under pressure that comes from different divisions, from families and from the workplace. My wife is also a frontline worker, we have three little ones, they stay home, homeschooling. So we deal with Covid patients every single shift, we worry about bringing the virus home. We have to be extra careful at the workplace and after work. Henry Davoodifar, PPE and supply manager I’ve been in this organisation for 35 years, I’ve been in the warehouse and inventory all my life. It’s a challenging job but … every day you see different people, you have a different problem, and you deal with it. When the pandemic started, the first wave, everyone was surprised because we didn’t know how to deal with it. When the second wave came, we were more prepared … but we had problems in my department; staff were seriously ill … and spent a lot of time in hospital. My staff lifted their sleeves up and helped me and everyone in the hospital. I couldn’t have got through without the help of my team. The warehouse was supplying PPE and clinical goods all around the hospital … At first we concentrated on PPE which was very hard to get. Then when we got those products somehow we had to deliver them all around the hospital. It was challenging because we were in a race with other hospitals to get the products because the usage was high and … the wards needed product. The happy moments were when you get the phone call from the person in charge of the ward who just calls to say thank you, or they come down and give you a box of chocolates … I appreciate that a lot. They see what we’re going through.As we approach our second Christmas at the mercy of a virus that just won’t quit, one would think people would have accepted that supply chain issues and other Covid-related problems might mean low stock and delayed deliveries, as has been the case for going on two years. But after speaking to business owners and frontline retail staff, it seems this is far from true. The retail workers told me that most customers were perfectly gracious and well-behaved, but all reported a small group of shoppers that were hostile – even aggressive – in-store, online and on the phone, over matters that were quite clearly out of the service worker’s control. The word traumatised came up more than once. “People have learned nothing from the pandemic,” one employee of a major tech brand said. “They still want everything yesterday and think it’s my fault if they can’t have it. It’s exhausting.” Joint research by the University of Sydney and the Australian National University indicates that more than 50% of Australian retail workers have experienced customer abuse during the pandemic. “Workers feel disrespected and report that they have been on the receiving end of disrespectful treatment, threatening behaviour and bad manners from retail customers,” co-author Rae Cooper said. “This was especially the case for women, young workers and culturally and linguistically diverse workers.” “Some people are being really horrible,” one distressed employee in a big box store told me. “Just so, so rude. That’s why I’m wearing giant Santa earrings, so people will get distracted and not yell at me.” ‘It is quite difficult for smaller businesses’ With the Omicron variant now threatening to create even more mercantile obstacles and scrooge the world out of a merry yuletide once again, I asked a few smaller-scale retailers how they’re tracking, and what they’d like customers to know about the challenges they’re facing. Praising the “kindness and politeness” of the vast majority of customers, Mike Bennie of P&amp;V Wine + Liquor Merchants wants the public to understand that retail right now is “markedly different from pre-Covid times” and that customers should readjust their expectations and demands accordingly. Bennie recommends that people actually read delivery instructions, lengthy though some may be. He says not all food businesses have access to the complex GPS and time-based systems used by big players like Uber and Deliveroo. “Please understand that delivery and freight services are external parties.” While store workers “have applied all due diligence to the dispatch and care for the goods”, once they leave the shop, “it is beyond our control”. Emma Mulholland from eponymous fashion label Emma Mulholland on Holiday also emphasises the hurdles of being a small player in a space dominated by large chains and multinationals. “People’s expectations of online shopping and how quick their items should arrive has become hard to service,” she says. “They experience such fast shipping from large retailers. It is quite difficult for smaller businesses to keep up with the demand.” It may only take seconds to hit add to cart, but Mulholland urges people to shop with eyes wide open. “People get a bit excited without sometimes even noting what country they are buying from. I myself have done this. It’s hard not to get swept up in the moment, but it’s so important to look and understand the business’s policies before spending your money.” Empathy goes both ways, Mulholland says. “Not many businesses would ever intentionally ignore a customer. It’s important to remember that we are 100% willing to resolve your issue … We are just all trying to deal with things in as timely a manner as possible.” Avoid email bombardment So, what should customers do when and if problems arise? “Please be patient with our staff,” Bennie requests. “Starting by shouting might be a dramatic tool on stage, but in the presence of staff it’s likely going to undermine energy for finding a solution to your problems.” And a tip: “I’d suggest that tracking orders and goods via social media rather than via your return email invoice contact is a folly, and likely not the rapid response many would hope for.” In practical terms, Mulholland says customers should choose one method of communication when making an enquiry or reporting an issue. “We often find customers panic and bombard us with queries over several different platforms, emailing multiple addresses and posting or messaging on Instagram and Facebook. This creates a lot of confusion, as often it will start a chain of responses from multiple people.” And always go gently. “Remember there is a person behind the screen,” Mulholland says. “And if you wouldn’t talk to them like that in person, maybe consider that before sending it off.”’ The truth is, things are going to go wrong. Gifts won’t arrive in time, supermarkets will run out of stock, flights will be cancelled and La Niña will rain all over our beach parade. But if we all accept this now and acknowledge it’s nobody’s fault – especially not the woman at the counter or the man on the phone – we’ll all have a much nicer time. So tell your kids Santa might be late. Prepare your guests for a makeshift menu. Remember that perfection is a fallacy. Check your privilege. Breathe.While some people are winding down for the “holiday season”, others are gearing up for the busiest time of year. This year’s busy season is more uncertain than most – chalk it up to Omicron – but for now at least, it’s looking a lot like Christmas. Anyone who’s braved Christmas shopping knows that retail turnover peaks, reliably, in December. ’Tis also the season for filling the coffers in cafes, restaurants and hotels. But the latest iteration of the Covid-19 virus is putting a dent in already depleted coffers for some. A confirmed positive can put the entire Christmas party at risk. It can be a serious blow for a venue relying on bookings. Keeping things moving over the holidays is important not just for hospitality, but for the economy more broadly. As a general rule, Christmas is far from being idle time. Instead, the December-March period is almost always the economic bumper season, where we record the greatest amount of activity. Source: author calculations, based on ABS You’d think that this also means that we’re all hard at work generating this activity. Not so. Across most industries, average hours worked in a week falls over the December quarter. Why? The easiest answer is there are simply fewer working days: 75% of national public holidays fall in the December quarter. While not everybody gets the day off, the majority do – so we do less work almost by definition. This isn’t the full story though. There are changes in demand for, and supply of, labour over summer. Source: author calculations based on ABS On the supply side, many people who are employed don’t want to work over Christmas. For the past five years, more people have taken annual leave in January than at any other point during the year. While the people who are already employed are working less, there are also more people seeking employment. School and university holidays mean that between 2016 and 2020, there were on average 71,000 more 15-24 year olds in the labour market during the December quarter than at other times of the year. Combined, these factors mean that there is a generally larger labour force over the summer in headcount terms, but each worker is willing to supply fewer hours. This brings average hours down. In some industries, there is also less demand for labour. Businesses who sell to other businesses and government, for example, often face lower demand. Education providers including schools and universities are closed. Real estate agencies go quiet. Seasonal variations in demand for these businesses mean there is less work to be done. As a result, some companies shut down, compelling staff to take annual leave – whether they would like to or not. There’s a range of business reasons for this. For office-based industries, as an example, shutdowns are cost-saving. No need to engage a cleaner, or turn on the air conditioning. It also helps businesses to manage leave balances. Full- and part-time workers, who comprise about 73% of employed people in Australia, are entitled to annual leave. It’s a treasure chest that we protect fiercely. For employers, though, large annual leave balances are a liability to be managed. After all, an employee can leave – and take the treasure chest with them. It’s likely that employers will be particularly keen on encouraging people to take leave this year. Border closures and lockdowns mean that many of us have been hoarding leave. Roy Morgan estimates that working Australians had nearly 175m days of accrued annual leave in May. With median hourly earnings of $36, this implies a whopping $6.3bn in liabilities for employers. While there’s no evidence of a great resignation in Australia, the rumour alone of higher-than-normal turnover is likely to heighten anxiety. Some people may not have the luxury of taking leave over summer. While average hours may be lower, there are people who find the Christmas period especially busy, and stressful. Work, as much as the prospect of a real life family feud, can make the festive season less joyous for some. In a 2018 survey, more than half of small business owners said that they missed out on sleep and spending time with family because of work commitments. Spare a thought for your neighbourhood postie, too; estimates are that the postal network will be delivering more than 3m parcels every day. Whether you’re planning on working hard or hardly working, it has been a big year. We’ve had highs and lows, lockdowns and freedom days. If coronavirus has taught us anything, it’s a reminder to be kind to the people working on the frontlines. To the people who will be keeping the gears turning over the festive season, as they have been through 2021 – from all of us, thank you. • Jessica Mizrahi is an economic consultant and commentator. She has taught, researched and applied economics for over a decadeDuring lockdown, something weird happened. As the months dragged on and I burned through all the TV I would normally watch, I had to start picking shows that I wouldn’t ordinarily go near. At the same time, prolonged confinement made me a bit loopy. That’s how I became obsessed with Boss, a political drama that aired on Starz in 2011. Boss stars Kelsey Grammer as Tom Kane, the hard-as-nails mayor of Chicago. In the pilot, he is diagnosed with a degenerative brain disease that will leave him vegetative in a few years. The series follows Tom as he tries to keep his grip on Chicago’s political machine while hiding his worsening symptoms from those around him. In another world, Boss might have become House of Cards. It has a gritty, amoral main character played by an A-list star. It’s a pulp political drama disguised as prestige TV – all about corruption, betrayal and men in suits growling about how power means doing Bad Things. It received good reviews and awards buzz. Grammer even won a best actor gong at the Golden Globes in 2012. The only problem was that no one watched it. The pilot rated poorly and things got worse from there. Starz canned Boss after the season two finale, its story forever unfinished. But that doesn’t matter, because you don’t watch a show like Boss to see what happens to the characters or where the plot goes. You watch a show like Boss because it is completely bananas. Boss will give you a collection of moments so surreal, it will feel like you dreamed them after drinking too much cough syrup before bed. In one scene, Kane solemnly delivers a monologue about how power corrupts. For a while it seems he’s alone in his penthouse, until the camera reveals a completely naked woman seated at the far end of a very long dining table. Her entire job, apparently, is to sit there and listen to him. This happens multiple times throughout the show. There is a subplot where a construction worker accidentally causes Kane a minor political inconvenience. Kane’s subordinate responds by cutting the man’s ears off on a golf course and forcing the man to deliver them to Kane in a gift-wrapped box. Kane then puts the ears down the garbage disposal unit in his kitchen sink. In episode five, Kane invites a political rival into his office. As the man reassures him of his loyalty, Kane uses the office bathroom with the door open, leaves without washing his hands and forces the man into a handshake. Before you say “Lyndon Johnson used to do that”, Johnson used to do it after using the urinal. Kane is not peeing. Boss is desperately trying to be the next Wire or Sopranos and Grammer is supposed to get it there. But there’s a problem: Grammer is a giant ham. In all his best roles – Frasier Crane, Sideshow Bob, the wonderful, grift-running version of himself he played on 30 Rock – Grammer is bombastic and pompous, but it’s mostly for comedic effect. Whenever he plays it straight, things go badly wrong. Think of his role as King Herod in National Geographic’s adaptation of Killing Jesus by Bill O’Reilly. Or Guardians of the Tomb, the Chinese-Australian horror B-movie about giant funnel web spiders where he screams about “becoming God”. As Kane, Grammer hams it up harder than ever. The results are spectacular. You will never hear an actor milk a line like “Somebody … get me some water!” the way Grammer does. There are moments where Boss is genuinely good. When Kane stops chewing the scenery and confronts the awful truth of his illness, he is devastatingly vulnerable. Some of his fumbling attempts to reconnect with his estranged wife and daughter are touching and bitterly sad. But you forget those moments when Boss serves up yet another wildly implausible, ridiculously graphic public sex scene between Kane’s aide and his political protege. Or another Kane rant about “the greater fuckin’ glory of this glorious fuckin’ city!” while he twists someone’s ear like Miss Trunchbull in Matilda. Boss is the perfect lockdown binge. After you’ve run out of shows and isolation has destroyed your higher brain functions, it will be there to embrace the chaos with you.1 Liquid biopsies to monitor patients’ progress Advances in detection technologies mean that regular tests on blood or urine samples, known as “liquid” biopsies, could soon revolutionise how doctors monitor the effectiveness of treatments as a patient’s cancer evolves – and switch treatments earlier if there are any signs of resistance or relapse. Currently, changes in a patient’s cancer are monitored with scans and, occasionally, with surgical biopsies. However, scans give relatively little information about a tumour’s biology, while repeated surgical biopsies are invasive, becoming more difficult as the disease progresses and the patient becomes too unwell for such a procedure, or where tumours are in difficult-to-reach places such as the brain or lungs. In liquid biopsies, cells and DNA fragments that break away from a tumour and enter the bloodstream can be detected in blood or urine samples, providing doctors with regular updates on the changing molecular profile of the patient’s tumour. The technique is able to detect relapses sooner than scans in some patients. The challenge now is to make liquid biopsies suitable for routine clinical use. This approach, being developed by Cancer Research UK-funded scientists such as Prof Caroline Dive, of the University of Manchester, and Prof Jacqui Shaw, of the University of Leicester, would provide doctors with a simpler, much less invasive way to monitor a patient’s treatment, detect relapse and recurrence early, and maybe even diagnose the disease at an early stage. Top: the Cytosponge, a small capsule attached to a fine string. After swallowing, the capsule coating dissolves in the stomach, releasing a small brush which allows cell collection from the lining of the oesophagus; below: Prof Caroline Dive. Photographs: The Science Museum Group 2 A ‘sponge-on-a-string’ to detect early signs of cancer Around 9,300 people are diagnosed with oesophageal cancer each year in the UK, and survival rates are stubbornly low. Many don’t realise there’s a problem until they start to have trouble swallowing – and often this isn’t until a later stage in the disease, when it’s harder to successfully treat. Prof Rebecca Fitzgerald, who leads the Early Detection Programme at the Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, has, with her team, developed a “sponge-on-a-string”, called Cytosponge, that could be the answer to earlier detection of this disease. Barrett’s oesophagus is a common condition that, occasionally, can develop into oesophageal cancer, so people diagnosed with Barrett’s need regular monitoring to detect any signs of the disease. At the moment, it is usually diagnosed with an endoscope, which can be uncomfortable, time-consuming and expensive. Fitzgerald’s Cytosponge is a small sponge contained in a dissolvable capsule, tied to a string. After a person swallows the pill with water, the capsule’s coating dissolves in the stomach and the sponge expands. A trained nurse can then gently remove the sponge by pulling on the string, allowing it to collect cells from the lining of the oesophagus on its way out. These can be analysed in the lab using a test specially designed by Fitzgerald and her team, called TFF3, which highlights abnormalities associated with Barrett’s oesophagus. The Cytosponge could offer GPs a quick and cost-effective first step of investigation, and help them monitor people who are found to have Barrett’s. And it’s working. Recent results, published in The Lancet, showed that researchers found 10 times more cases of Barrett’s oesophagus in patients offered a Cytosponge than in those who were offered conventional investigations, and the test was also able to pick up early cancers. 3 Studying the microbiome Bowel cancer is the third most common cancer worldwide in terms of new cases, with more than 1.9 million people diagnosed in 2020. Now, research has uncovered that the trillions of microbes – bacteria, fungi and viruses – that make up the microbiome in our guts appear to play an important role in bowel cancer development. To explore this further, a team of more than 60 investigators across five countries, in specialisms including genomics, microbiology, immunology and oncology, known as the OPTIMISTICC team, is working across traditional boundaries of geography and discipline. They are part of the Cancer Grand Challenges programme, a funding initiative founded by Cancer Research UK and the National Cancer Institute in the US, offering up to £20m to teams tackling some of the most complex problems in cancer research. Together, members of the OPTIMISTICC team are unravelling the hidden world of the gut microbiome, led jointly by experts in Boston, Massachusetts – Prof Matthew Meyerson, at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and Prof Wendy Garrett, at the Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health. Their research is revealing how certain microbes inside the body can lead to cancer and how these microbes influence a patient’s response to treatment. Following analysis of thousands of stool samples from the UK, US, India, Vietnam, Argentina and Chile, the team published findings in 2021 that identified what could be a global signature linked to bowel cancer – a unique pattern of bacteria present in the microbiome that could reveal whether a person has, or is at increased risk, of the disease. This microbiome signature can be reliably detected in stool samples, potentially offering a simple and effective additional screening test (current screening tests look for blood in a stool sample). Plus, understanding how these microbes drive cancer and influence a person’s response to treatment could open up radical new ways to help people with bowel cancer around the world. Tumours mapped in virtual reality by the IMAXT Cancer Grand Challenges Project, as featured in the Cancer Revolution: Science, innovation and hope exhibition 4 Virtual reality tumours Using virtual reality (VR) coupled with sophisticated imaging and software technologies, scientists will before long be able to step inside interactive maps of patients’ tumours, looking at them in unprecedented detail, and understand better than ever how the cells interact and behave. Medicine, astronomy, molecular biology and VR – these are just some of the areas of expertise brought together by the IMAXT programme, part of the Cancer Grand Challenges initiative, under the leadership of Prof Greg Hannon, director of the Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute. By combining existing techniques with entirely new approaches, the team aims to build 3D tumours that can be viewed in VR, providing an entirely new way to study the many different cells that make up a tumour. By viewing the data in a 3D virtual environment, researchers will be able to walk right through the tumour, allowing them to examine how the cancer landscape, made up of cancer cells, immune cells and connective tissue, varies between and within tumours. They could also perform scientific analyses in real-time. Scrutinising every detail of a tumour in this way could transform the way cancer is understood, opening up ways for doctors to match patients to the best course of treatment for them. And the immersive experience should also open new opportunities for scientific collaboration. Researchers and physicians anywhere in the world could meet in VR spaces to study tumours in ways that simply aren’t possible in 2D. Top: Prof Greg Hannon; below: the iKnife, which can tell cancerous and healthy tissue apart. Photograph: Thomas Angus 5 The Intelligent Knife (iKnife) For some people with cancer, surgery can cure their disease. The problem is that surgeons tread a delicate line in trying to remove all the cancer without taking more healthy tissue than necessary. In breast cancer, for instance, surgeons commonly cannot easily detect where the tumour starts or stops. As a result, 20-30% of patients will go on to need further surgery to remove breast tissue to confirm that the tumour has been adequately removed. Modern surgery, including cancer surgery, often involves electrical devices that cut through tissues by vaporising them. The iKnife, developed by Prof Zoltan Takats and researchers in Budapest and London, is an experimental, and potentially revolutionary, surgical device that captures the smoke produced as it cuts, and analyses it to identify the chemical signatures of cancerous and healthy tissue. This allows surgeons to tell, in real time, what sort of tissue they’re cutting through to ensure they remove as much cancerous tissue as possible. Ongoing trials of the device, supported by Cancer Research UK and led by Daniel Leff, reader and consultant oncoplastic breast surgeon at Imperial College, London, are testing whether it is more accurate than conventional breast cancer surgery, and can reduce the need for multiple operations. Other trials are testing the iKnife in other types of the disease, including cervical cancer. To find out more about the innovations that Cancer Research UK has achieved through its work, please visit cruk.org/our-progress, or to donate to help future breakthroughs, visit cruk.org/donateNobody likes to think they may have a serious illness, so it can be tempting to dismiss potentially concerning symptoms as nothing to worry about. But when it comes to cancer, the statistics are stark: if detected early, many types of cancer are easier to treat and people have a higher chance of surviving them. Before the pandemic, about half of cancers in England were picked up early, helped by national screening programmes for breast, cervical and bowel cancer. But this figure, says Dr David Crosby, head of prevention and early detection research at Cancer Research UK (CRUK), is not where it could be, and has since been hit by the constraints of Covid. “It’s clear that the technologies and systems we currently have struggle to diagnose people with symptomatic cancers, and that’s for a range of reasons – staffing levels, capacity, and symptom awareness among both healthcare professionals and the public – and of course the impact of Covid. “All these problems need addressing, of course. But there’s a deeper issue, which is that so many cancers don’t actually cause clear symptoms, or their symptoms are vague and hard to recognise. That’s why it’s so absolutely crucial to invest in research to discover the signals of the earliest cancers, and use these insights to develop the technologies capable of detecting them.” It’s a challenge the research community is starting to rise to. It is increasingly focusing on detecting cancers at ever earlier stages – when they are smaller, less likely to have spread and most easy to treat. But compared with researchers working on cancer drugs, they face a range of hurdles – funding, testing, and the challenges of bringing their developments to market. When it comes to testing a cancer drug, researchers know that it will be evaluated in clinical trials of people who already have cancer; there is a clear number of steps to follow, and relevant outcomes (does it keep the cancer at bay or extend survival?). There are also well-defined regulatory hurdles to clear. This approach is largely standardised in assessing the safety and effectiveness of a therapeutic intervention. Top: A patient entering a CT scan; below: Prof Rebecca Fitzgerald For early-detection researchers, the path is far less certain. They must potentially test hundreds of thousands of healthy people to find those with early cancers, and then follow them for prolonged periods to establish if any cancers have been spotted early enough to make a difference. They also need to be sure their detection method is accurate, with an acceptable rate of downsides such as false positives. As their research progresses, the route to commercialising an early-detection product, and seeing it put into clinical use, is not well-defined. “So, it’s quite daunting,” says Prof Rebecca Fitzgerald, leader of the Early Detection Programme at the CRUK Cambridge Institute, whose own work focuses on the early detection of oesophageal cancers. “I think that has put researchers off, it has put funders off.” But early detection is at last coming to the fore, says Fitzgerald, because, for all the advances in cancer therapeutics, survival hasn’t increased as much as many have hoped. This can partly be explained by the nature of advanced cancer – when cancer cells have spread to other parts of the body. By these later stages, cancers have often evolved into a patchwork quilt of different mutant cells, some of which can be intrinsically resistant to treatment, or subsequently become so. Drug resistance is one of the biggest obstacles in the effort to cure more people of cancer – and arguably the best way to circumvent this is to diagnose cancers before they become too advanced. “Increasingly people realise that we need to be detecting it earlier because the [survival] figures speak for themselves,” says Fitzgerald. And with funding gaps starting to be addressed, she says, more researchers are finally becoming attracted to this field. Advances in early detection Fitzgerald herself has invented a device coupled to a lab test – the Cytosponge-TFF3 – designed to pick up Barrett’s oesophagus, a condition that can sometimes develop when the oesophagus has been damaged by acid reflux. This is known to put a person at a higher risk of oesophageal cancer, which is often found too late. If more people with Barrett’s were identified, they could be monitored for signs of cancer, allowing it to be picked up earlier. The Cytosponge is a swallowable “sponge-on-a-string” that GPs can use in their surgeries, helping them easily spot patients with Barrett’s without the need for an endoscopy, an expensive examination that involves the insertion into the oesophagus of a long, thin, flexible tube with a light and camera. In a recently published study of 13,000 patients with heartburn enrolled in GP surgeries across England, the researchers found 10 times more cases of Barrett’s oesophagus in patients offered a Cytosponge than in those who were offered conventional investigations such as endoscopy. The test, which takes 10 minutes to administer, involves a capsule the size of multivitamin attached to a thread. As it is swallowed, the patient or nurse holds on to a retainer card. In the stomach the capsule dissolves to reveal a compressed sponge. When the sponge is pulled back up, it collects cells lining the oesophagus, which are then analysed, using Fitzgerald’s TFF3 lab test, for signs of Barrett’s oesophagus and cancer itself. Motivated by heavier endoscopy waiting lists induced by Covid, the Cytosponge was rolled out in a pilot in England and Scotland last year. A randomised controlled trial is also being planned to assess whether using the Cytosponge to screen people, and so pick up cancer at an earlier stage, will save lives. Such early interventions are gaining traction. Measurement technology has progressed to a point where it is now possible to detect tiny traces of molecules in small samples of blood, urine and other bodily fluids, including DNA shed by growing tumours. A blood test has been developed in the US that has potential to detect more than 50 cancers at early stages, including some that are difficult to diagnose early, such as head and neck, ovarian and pancreatic cancers. The test is about to be piloted by the NHS in partnership with CRUK scientists. It will invite 140,000 people with no symptoms who will have an annual blood test for three years. Depending on the study’s outcome, it has the potential to be rolled out to millions in the UK. Top: Dr David Crosby; below: adenocarcinoma in the lung The future of early detection This comes at a time when scientists are realising that the field of early cancer detection requires not just more funding, but global collaboration between governments, academia and industry to hasten the pace of progress. This has spawned key partnerships such as CRUK’s International Alliance for Cancer Early Detection, bringing together expertise from the UK and the US. Crosby, who co-authored CRUK’s recent roadmap for the early detection and diagnosis of cancer, points to one particular area of interest in researchers: the large swathes of NHS data that could provide insights into cancer risk at a population level. Access to this information (such as smoking history, BMI, or family history) could help researchers rapidly advance new early detection techniques that can target people at higher risk. “Then we could target screening at more relevant populations,” he says. “So you’re more likely to help and to target intervention.” Public concern about privacy, he adds, needs to be addressed for this to be possible. Ultimately, no matter how far biology and technology take us, early detection offers the best chances of good outcomes. “We still need to better understand how to really get the message out there,” says Fitzgerald. “And how do we make these tests really easy, really accessible, just part of normal life? It’s easier to say than do.” To find out more about the importance of diagnosing cancer early, visit cruk.org/spotcancerearly, or you can support Cancer Research UK’s work in this area by visiting cruk.org/donateAnna Bertha Röntgen was less than impressed when, in 1895, she became the first person to see an X-ray of part of their body. “I have seen my death,” she reportedly exclaimed, on viewing the fuzzy image of the elongated, knobbly bones forming her left hand. Her German physicist husband Wilhelm showed her the picture shortly after his discovery of a form of electromagnetic radiation, called X-rays, that allowed him to take images of body structures. The achievement would land him the inaugural Nobel prize in physics in 1901. It also laid the groundwork for the invention of radiotherapy, which uses radiation to treat the symptoms of cancer, reduce the chances of it returning or to cure it. Today, radiotherapy is provided to a quarter of patients, either on its own or alongside other forms of therapy, which equates to around 130,000 people receiving it on the NHS every year. It has won a place as a mainstay of modern cancer treatment, coming a long way since Anna Bertha’s less than enthusiastic reaction to her husband’s groundbreaking work. Such have been the advances over the past 40 years, it is perhaps not surprising that public perception hasn’t kept up. “Radiotherapy has a bad press,” says Charlotte Coles, professor of breast cancer clinical oncology at Cancer Research UK’s Cambridge Centre. “It is often associated with words like ‘gruelling’. In reality, today’s highly targeted radiotherapy often provides the best chances of a cure with the least side effects. It’s cutting edge, cost-effective, and can be curative.” Top: A patient undergoing radiotherapy to the jaw in about 1929. Photograph: St Bartholomew’s Hospital; below: Prof Charlotte Coles Radiotherapy’s image problem is, in large part, historical. Three years after Röntgen’s breakthrough, the physicist Marie Curie discovered the chemical element radium, another source of radiation. Scientists in the US and Europe then began studying the use of radium and X-rays (here we’re talking about electromagnetic radiation, not images) to treat cancer. It would become clear that, as ionising radiation, both could harm as well as help. Early radiologists developed leukaemia after testing their machines on their own arms, while workers painting clock and watch dials with luminescent paint containing radium ended up with radiation poisoning. There was nonetheless growing evidence to support the use of radiation to target tumours. The British Empire Cancer Campaign (BECC), which was later renamed and then merged with another charity to form Cancer Research UK (CRUK), raised significant funds to buy radium and support research into its use during the 1920s. This support for pioneering physicists and radiologists drove advances in determining the safe doses of radiotherapy, protecting healthy tissue and improving cancer survival. In the 1930s, the BECC funded the work of the renowned English physicist Hal Gray – after whom the radiation unit of measurement the Gray is named – on how cells respond to radiation. In the early 20th century, the X-rays used in radiotherapy were relatively low energy but in 1937 doctors and scientists at St Bartholomew’s hospital in central London, now known as Barts, began using the first system that could deliver high-energy X-rays, providing improved treatment of deep-seated tumours. Another milestone came in 1953 with the deployment of a clinical linear particle accelerator (Linac) at Hammersmith hospital, in west London. Crucially, this demonstrated that high-energy radiotherapy beams could be delivered using affordable, reliable machines in a general hospital setting. “Scientists in the UK have played pivotal roles throughout the development of radiotherapy technology,” says Prof David Sebag-Montefiore, clinical director of the CRUK Centre of Excellence for radiotherapy research at the University of Leeds. Modern radiotherapy For most of the history of radiotherapy, doctors were limited by the 2D images of the tumours they were targeting. Technological advances during the 1980s drove developments so that a 3D image of a tumour could be built from a series of 2D scans. The resulting image was then used to shape treatment beams that better match the tumour shape and avoid damage to healthy tissue. Since then, advances have continued at pace. Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), which allows for the control of individual rays within beams of radiation, has also enabled improved targeting, especially of tumours with complex shapes. CRUK funded the first trial of its use in breast cancer, and then in cancers of the prostate, salivary glands, thyroid, throat and larynx, and head and neck. IMRT is now widely used to treat a range of cancers. Image-guided radiotherapy improves precision further by allowing doctors to fine-tune treatment in response to images of tumours captured just before and during treatment. “Over the last 30 years we’ve seen dramatic changes from pretty crude tumour targeting techniques to modern Linac machines that allow us to shape radiotherapy treatment with incredible precision,” says Sebag-Montefiore. Radiotherapy has also become less taxing for some patients thanks to changes in treatment schedules. The START trials, involving 4,450 women with early breast cancer across the UK, showed that, after surgery, lower overall doses of radiation given in fewer, larger doses were just as effective as bigger overall doses, and resulted in fewer side effects and led to improved quality of life. As a result of the work, led by the Institute of Cancer Research, London, and part-funded by CRUK, shorter courses of 15 treatments replaced the previous UK standard of 25 in 2008. Courses of fewer sessions are now also standard for men having radiotherapy for prostate cancer in the UK, following a 2016 report. The researchers who led the START trials have taken this “less is more” approach even further. In 2020, they published results showing that, for women with early breast cancer, five larger daily doses is similar in both efficacy and side effects to the 15 doses. Other research has shown that treating just part of the breast with radiotherapy is as effective as treating all of it for patients at low risk of relapse. “We can now do in a week what we had been doing over five weeks, with cancer control and side effects that are just as good, while improving the patient experience,” says Coles. “Through other technologies such as image-guided, intensity-modulated and partial-breast radiotherapy – where radiotherapy is delivered just to the affected area rather than the whole breast – we’ve improved outcomes further. There’s no doubt the UK has led the world on this.” Top: Prof David Sebag-Montefiore; below: Proton beam therapy. Photograph: The Christie NHS Foundation Trust Introducing proton beam therapy UK scientists are also playing leading roles in research on proton beam therapy (PBT), a relatively new form of radiotherapy. PBT uses doses of high-energy charged particles from the centre of atoms, called protons, to precisely target cancers. Its effects are highly localised. Protons are thought to cause less damage to healthy tissue and so cause fewer side effects. In addition, since the protons are absorbed by the tumour, there is no “exit dose”, meaning that proton therapy can be used to treat tumours close to critical organs. But to understand which patients might benefit most from proton therapy, it needs to be compared against conventional treatment in clinical trials – something the NHS has included in its provision for proton therapy. In the UK, in adults PBT is used to treat tumours which are difficult to treat by other means, and these form a national proton therapy indication list which includes cancers in the brain, base of skull and spine. In children, teenage and young adults, it’s used to minimise the chance of them developing secondary cancers later in life. More than 630 patients have had PBT at the Christie hospital, in Manchester, since it became the first centre to offer the treatment in the UK to NHS patients in December 2018. The Christie itself is a world recognised centre for the treatment of cancer by radiation. In the early part of the last century, its team of physicists and clinicians pioneered the use of radium, and in 1932 the hospital set the first international standards for radiation treatment. Since then, its clinical and scientific staff have continued to play a crucial role in the advancement of cancer treatment and care, culminating in the opening of the PBT centre, the first of a national programme. A second one started treating patients in December 2021 at University College hospital in London. Proton beam therapy at the Christie hospital in Manchester, with thanks to the Christie hospital NHS foundation trust. As featured in the Cancer Revolution: Science, innovation and hope exhibition Alongside treating people who have tumours on the national indication list, the two centres will also be conducting clinical trials of PBT’s wider use in breast, brain, and head and neck cancers, with other ideas for trials being developed. The trials have been designed through collaborations across the national radiotherapy research community. “The cancer types and numbers of patients treated with proton beam therapy could increase in future, depending on the results of these trials,” says Karen Kirkby, professor of proton therapy physics at the University of Manchester and the Christie. The radiotherapy research field received a substantial boost in 2019 when CRUK announced RadNet, its multimillion-pound plan to establish a network of seven national centres of excellence in radiation oncology and radiobiology. This latter field – the science of how cells and tissues respond to radiation – has huge potential to unlock future transformational advances in treatment. “This investment is truly transformational for radiotherapy research in the UK and we are really excited that this will enable world leading research to improve the lives of future cancer patients across the globe,” says Sebag-Montefiore, whose research team has received funding to investigate the use of artificial intelligence. Among the other projects RadNet is supporting are studies to work out how to adapt radiotherapy – including PBT – based on the specific biology of a patient’s tumour, studies to find ways to sensitise patients tumours to radiation, and to find ways to target tumour cells that have evolved and become resistant to traditional radiotherapy. Another new technique being developed is Flash radiotherapy, where the radiation dose is delivered in a fraction of a second (500-1,000 times faster than conventional radiotherapy), and appears to cause even less damage to healthy tissue while still killing tumour cells. Flash radiotherapy is very new, and can be delivered using the same machines that deliver PBT. There are a lot of questions still to be answered, but it could be used in the future to both cut treatment times and reduce side effects. “We need to get better at telling the public about the huge strides that have been made in radiotherapy,” says Kirkby. “There’s huge potential, with researchers, clinical teams and CRUK working together to carry out more brilliant research. This will keep what the NHS is able to offer right at the cutting edge – and deliver the best possible treatment for patients.” To find out more about Cancer Research UK’s work into radiotherapy and to donate to future progress in developing better treatments for patients, visit cruk.org/donateEverton are expected to renew efforts to sign Nathan Patterson from Rangers in January when Rafael Benítez hopes to strengthen both full‑back positions. The 20-year-old Scotland international was the subject of two bids from Everton in the summer, when Steven Gerrard, Rangers’ manager at the time, labelled their opening £5m offer “a joke”, but his suitors are ready to make a third attempt when the transfer window reopens. The right-back has made 11 appearances for Rangers this season, though only two starts in the Scottish Premier League, and established himself in the Scotland team that reached the World Cup play-offs. Everton have been heavily reliant on their captain Séamus Coleman at right-back this season and will need to improve on the £9m offer that was also rejected by the Scottish champions to finally land Patterson. They have already made progress in signing a new left-back, with an initial €21m (£17.86m) fee agreed with Dynamo Kyiv for Vitaliy Mykolenko. The Ukraine international, 22, has agreed terms on a five-year contract at Goodison Park and has undergone a medical before a transfer that could ultimately rise to €23m. His arrival would place the future of Lucas Digne into further doubt after the France international was dropped by Benítez and then declared himself ill for last week’s draw at Chelsea. As well as a right and left-back, the Everton manager is looking to sign a new central midfielder in January.A month after his acquittal on murder charges, Kyle Rittenhouse was given a standing ovation at a conservative conference in Phoenix on Monday night, as panelists discussed events in Kenosha, Wisconsin, in 2020, when the teen shot three men. The event, called AmericaFest, was held by Turning Point USA, a young conservatives group. As Rittenhouse took the stage, thousands of cheering fans chanted his name, along with his own theme song, adapted from his name. Hosts asked if any women in the crowd wanted to go on a date with Rittenhouse, prompting loud cheers. One audience member held a “Kiss me” sign, according to one spectator. Charlie Kirk, founder of Turning Point USA, praised Rittenhouse, telling him: “You’re a hero to millions, it’s an honor to be able to have you.” On stage, Rittenhouse, 18, reflected on how his trial matured him and discussed his decision to testify in his own defense. “I think my trial was an example of them trying to come after our second amendment rights, a right to defend ourselves, in trying to take weapons,” he said. In Kenosha last August, during a Black Lives Matters racial justice protest, Rittenhouse killed Joseph Rosenbaum, 36, and Anthony Huber, 26, and wounded Gaige Grosskreutz, 27, when he shot them with an assault rifle as he roamed the streets with other armed men acting as a self-described militia. The protest followed the shooting of a Black man, Jacob Blake, in the back by a white police officer, which left Blake partially paralyzed. In Phoenix on Monday, security guards ejected a journalist for asking Rittenhouse questions “too aggressively”. The independent journalist, Elad Eliahu, asked: “Excuse me, Mr Rittenhouse, can you tell me why you support” Black Lives Matter. Rittenhouse has said that he does. According to Eliahu, security officials “wrapped me up and removed me from the conference”. A Turning Point spokesperson said Eliahu “rushed Kyle a little too aggressively” and “he is for sure not coming back to AmericaFest”. Rittenhouse’s acquittal in November came after a trial that gripped America. Though the men Rittenhouse shot were also white, the trial was seen by many as a litmus test of the country’s racial divide. To such observers, events in the courtroom appeared to illustrate contrasting attitudes of law enforcement when confronted with white men claiming to be acting as vigilante-style informal security personnel, armed with assault rifles, and Black members of the public or BLM protesters. Rittenhouse has emerged as a mascot among Republicans. Writing in the Washington Post, Eddie Glaude, chairman of Princeton University’s department of African American studies, said many on the right regard Rittenhouse as the “poster child for a general feeling among some in this country that white America is under siege”. He added: “Rittenhouse defended himself, this argument goes, and white America must do the same.” • The sub-heading of this article was amended on 10 January 2022 to correctly refer to Kenosha, Wisconsin, not “Kenosha, Washington”.The jury in Ghislaine Maxwell’s sex-trafficking trial asked on Tuesday to review transcripts of testimony from three accusers. Jurors in Manhattan federal court sent the judge a note around 10.10am, saying: “We would like the transcripts, testimony of Jane, Annie and Carolyn.” Jane, who testified under a pseudonym, said Epstein started to sexually abuse her when she was 14. She told jurors Maxwell was sometimes present for, and participated in, such abuse. She also discussed alleged group sexual encounters and recalled meeting Maxwell in summer 1994, at a youth arts camp in Michigan. Carolyn, who testified under her first name, was also 14 when Epstein started to abuse her in the early 2000s. Prior to a sexualized massage, she said, Maxwell “came in and felt my boobs and my hips and my buttocks and said … that I had a great body for Mr Epstein and his friends”. Carolyn said Virginia Giuffre, an outspoken Maxwell and Epstein accuser, introduced her to the pair. Annie Farmer, who identified herself, testified that she went to Epstein’s New Mexico estate in spring 1996, when she was 16. Maxwell allegedly asked Farmer if she had ever had a professional massage. Farmer testified that Maxwell “said to get undressed and get [under] the sheet on the massage table, and I did. She pulled the sheet down and exposed my breasts, and started rubbing on my chest and on my upper breast.” Jurors did not ask to see testimony from Kate, the second woman who testified against Maxwell at trial. Kate alleged Maxwell lured her into sexual encounters with Epstein at age 17 in London, under the guise of giving him a massage, around 1994. Kate was above the age of consent where those encounters took place. Prior to her testimony, Nathan told jurors: “I instruct you that this witness is not a victim of the crimes charged in the indictment. To the extent you conclude her testimony is relevant to the issues before you, you may consider it. “However, you may not convict the defendant on the basis of the testimony regarding the sexual conduct between this witness and Mr Epstein, nor may you consider this testimony as any kind of reflection on Mr Epstein’s nor Ms Maxwell’s character or propensity to commit any crimes charged in the indictment.” Jurors began deliberations late on Monday after closing arguments consumed most of the day, but they worked less than an hour, in a large room where they can spread out for coronavirus safety reasons, before going home. Their first request came after about two hours of deliberation: nearly one hour Monday afternoon and about one on Tuesday. Maxwell, 59, was tried on six counts for her alleged involvement in ex-boyfriend Jeffrey Epstein’s sex-trafficking of minor teens. Prosecutors say Maxwell recruited and groomed the girls, making them feel sexualized massages were normal behavior. Maxwell, who pleaded not guilty, has been held without bail since July 2020. Epstein, a financier and convicted sex offender who counted Prince Andrew and Donald Trump among his powerful associates, killed himself about a month after his July 2019 arrest for sex-trafficking girls as young as 14. Maxwell’s lawyers say the government has used her as a scapegoat for Epstein’s crimes. On Tuesday afternoon the judge indicated to the jury that if they needed to continue deliberations into this Thursday that would be permitted. Court had previously been due to run only through Wednesday and resume next Monday if necessary. Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlThe chair of a global Robin Hood society has sought to draw a line under an ongoing row over the hero’s birthplace, emphasising the fact there is no concrete evidence he actually existed. A new book, Reclaiming Robin Hood, has reignited an age-old debate about the legendary outlaw by claiming he was born in Sheffield and arguing Yorkshire should embrace its connections to the legend. This has prompted some anger in Nottingham, which claims Robin Hood and his band of merry men as its own. Bob White, the chair of the World Wide Robin Hood Society, said the group welcomed debate over the supposed birthplace of the hero as it helps keep his story alive but it was impossible to accurately pinpoint his birthplace. “Arguments go on all the time as to who Robin Hood was, and whether he ever existed, so you don’t have a starting point,” he said. “No matter how many times he’s been referred to in different books and songs, you can’t prove who he was or that he actually existed, there’s no undisputed historical evidence. “Robin Hood has become a public icon for what he stands for, the fight for justice, and that’s the most important thing.” The question of Yorkshire’s claim to Robin Hood has been going on for decades, and even reached parliament in 2004 when the then Wakefield MP David Hinchliffe raised concerns the county was not making the most of its connections to the legend. The new book contains a chapter by Dan Eaton, a teacher at Loxley primary school in Sheffield, who claims to have pinpointed the exact location where a Robin Hood was born according to a 17th-century document. The famous outlaw is often referred to as Robin of Loxley. Dr David Clarke, a co-founder of the Centre for Contemporary Legend at Sheffield Hallam University and one of the book’s contributors, said: “It shouldn’t be taken too seriously. All we’re saying is, there is a lot of evidence that someone who called themselves Robin Hood was born in Sheffield, not necessarily the Robin Hood, because there is no such thing as the Robin Hood. “Why is that such a big deal? All we’re doing is examining the evidence, we’re not stealing something from Nottingham. But the fact that people are getting so hot under the collar about it, even now, 800 years after this person is supposed to have lived and died, suggests it does actually mean something to people.” Earlier this week, the current sheriff of Nottingham, Merlita Bryan, responded to claims in the book by reportedly saying: “Robin Hood is as much from Sheffield as Jarvis Cocker is from Nottingham. Everyone knows his arch-rival wasn’t the sheriff of Sheffield. “We get it – Yorkshire wants a piece of the legendary action … but really everyone knows that he was from Nottingham.” Reclaiming Robin Hood is part of an ongoing project to keep alive South Yorkshire’s connections to the hero, with plans for silver arrow plaques at key locations and a statue of a young Robin Hood. White, a former public relations officer for Nottingham city council, said the World Wide Robin Hood society would not be taking sides in the debate. “We’ve got a very open policy, we don’t argue with the various things that are put forward. We take everything onboard, because it’s all good for the legend. “There will always be a spin-off into the Yorkshire area,” he said, but added that from the 16th century onwards, Nottingham references – including Nottingham Castle, the sheriff of Nottingham and Sherwood Forest – have featured heavily in depictions of Robin Hood and “that has grown and continued ever since”. “The facts, if you like, have been overtaken by the fiction.”Rishi Sunak has been accused of failing to do enough to help embattled hospitality businesses through the Omicron wave after refusing to bring back furlough for the hardest-hit firms. Succumbing to intense pressure to offer financial support amid a collapse in pre-Christmas trade for pubs, restaurants and hotels, the chancellor announced a £1bn bailout package on Tuesday consisting of business grants and help with sick pay. However, it drew an angry response from bosses who told Sunak he was failing to grasp the severity of the Omicron shock to the economy and that a lack of clarity from the government over the need for further pandemic restrictions was making matters worse. Comparing the plan to a “dud cracker on Christmas Day”, Tim Rumney, the chief executive of the Best Western hotel chain, which employs 10,000 staff in the UK, said a return to furlough was vital if the current Covid wave continues. “It’s just so disappointing and underwhelming in every sense. It doesn’t go far enough in our opinion, it doesn’t go deep enough and it’s too little too late,” he said. Michael Kill, the chief executive of the Night Time Industries Association, said a stuttering open/close approach to government restrictions was “crucifying business” during a pivotal period for trading before Christmas. “Every pound of help is much needed. But this package is far too little and borders on the insulting,” he said. Sunak said the government was intervening because “the spread of the Omicron variant means businesses in the hospitality and leisure sectors are facing huge uncertainty, at a crucial time”. The bailout package comprises four elements: Grants for hospitality and leisure businesses in England, worth up to £6,000 per premise. The Treasury has set aside £683m for these payments, which will be administered through local authorities and will be available in the coming weeks. Further grants for businesses in England, worth £102m, intended to help businesses most in need, and again administered through local authorities. The resumption of the statutory sick pay rebate scheme, which will reimburse employers in the UK with fewer than 250 workers for the cost of paying statutory sick pay for Covid-related absences for up to two weeks. An extra £30m for arts organisations , paid through the culture recovery fund. In addition, the Scottish government will receive £150m, the Welsh government £50m and the Northern Ireland executive £25m under the Barnett formula to offset the England-only spending. Britain’s biggest business lobby groups broadly welcomed the plan hammered out after meetings with Treasury officials over recent days, although several other trade groups, large firms, Labour and unions criticised the lack of substance. It follows pressure on the chancellor to reboot the multibillion-pound furlough job support scheme to cushion the financial blow for firms and to help workers amid a worsening economic outlook and a cost of living squeeze. Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the Trades Union Congress (TUC), said the measures announced by the chancellor amounted to “abandoning” workers ahead of Christmas and as the pandemic worsened. “The economic support measures announced today are not conditional on employers keeping workers on and covering their wages. And they do nothing to fix the gaping holes in our sick pay system,” she said. The Treasury’s statutory sick pay rebate scheme covers employers’ costs, rather than supporting an employee directly, and does not boost the amount available. The TUC estimates 238,000 hospitality workers – about one in six of the workforce – do not qualify for statutory sick pay. “Millions of workers will go into Christmas worrying for their jobs and anxious about what they will do if asked to self-isolate. The chancellor must go back to the drawing board,” O’Grady said. No firm has been legally required to close under plan B, which was announced by Boris Johnson for England earlier this month and which extended the use of face masks, required Covid passes for some venues and encouraged working from home. But the move to plan B was quickly followed by advice from Prof Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, that people should limit their socialising over Christmas to people and events that “really matter” and this, combined with a surge in Covid cases, led to dramatic falls in the number of people going to pubs, restaurants and shows. The measures announced by the Treasury on Tuesday are intended to compensate for the loss of earnings that businesses are already suffering. Ministers have not ruled out imposing further restrictions on socialising after Christmas, which could lead to calls for a further bailout for hospitality. When Sunak was asked in an interview if businesses would be offered more support if the rules tightened again in the coming days, he gave a non-committal answer. He said he would always respond “proportionately and appropriately”, but he said the business grants he was announcing were “comparable to the grants that we provided for hospitality businesses when they were completely closed earlier this year”, and said other help for business was already in place until the spring. Shevaun Haviland, the director general of the British Chambers of Commerce, said the measures were “a positive starting point” that would provide “some welcome respite” to firms hardest hit by the latest Covid wave. But she urged the Treasury to ensure grants were paid out quickly, and said more help may be needed. “If restrictions persist or are tightened further, then we would need to see a wider support package, equal to the scale of any new measures, put in place,” she said.The Olympic champion diver Tom Daley has said countries such as Qatar and Saudi Arabia should not be allowed to host major sporting events while their governments continue to persecute gay people. Daley made the comments as part of this year’s Alternative Christmas Message, which airs on Christmas Day on Channel 4 at 5pm and offers a different take to the Queen’s traditional address to the nation. The decision to award the men’s football World Cup to Qatar, where homosexuality remains illegal, has prompted accusations of “sportswashing”. The term refers to repressive governments with poor human rights records using sporting events to gain the approval of western audiences. Daley said: “In 2022 the World Cup is being held in the second most dangerous country on Earth for queer people, Qatar. Why are we allowing places that aren’t safe for all fans and all players to host our most prestigious sporting events? Hosting a World Cup is an honour. Why are we honouring them? Holding a Formula One grand prix is an honour. Why are we honouring Saudi Arabia?” He said he had personally been “lucky” that he could live his life as an out gay man with his husband, Lance Black, and their son Robert – but highlighted how the rest of sport has a long way to go. He pointed out there are tens of thousands of professional footballers around the world – but Australian Josh Cavallo is the only openly gay top-flight men’s footballer. Daley said: “Well done Josh, I mean, your courage is amazing. But just think for a moment about the number of players who are too scared to speak up, and how lonely that must be. “Nearly 7% of people in the UK identify as gay or bisexual and there are about 500 Premier League players. That means statistically there are enough players for three football teams running out on to that pitch every week. At least one gay man at every single club in the Premier League, living a lie. So, if I had one Christmas wish it would be that next year, that changes. That one impossibly brave Premier League player steps forward and says ‘I am gay’. “That person would inspire gay people everywhere, give hope to thousands of teenagers struggling with their sexuality and save the lives of countless young people who don’t currently feel like they have a place in this world.” He used the speech to call for greater solidarity with transgender sportspeople, said trans rights are an inherent part of the gay movement, and praised trans athletes who competed at the Tokyo Olympics. “The fact that they achieved this in the current climate of fear and panic around trans people, makes their achievements all the more impressive. There is no LGB without the T,” he said. Daley, 27, this summer won his first Olympic gold medal – in the men’s 10-metre synchronised platform diving alongside Matty Lee – and was nominated for BBC Sports Personality of the Year. In addition to his success on the diving board, Daley last year took up knitting to help him remain calm and has now launched his own range of knitting kits. He said he had been proud to represent Team GB at the Olympics but there had been times when he didn’t feel he was mentally strong enough: “I felt I couldn’t dive. On some days the biggest leap was simply getting out of bed. “In the summer, Olympic gymnast Simone Biles withdrew from competition at the height of her career, put her hands up and said that she was struggling. We should all be inspired by the strength she showed, that it’s OK to not be OK, and when that happens that you are right to lay down boundaries and not to harm yourself to please others.”The European Commission is facing a backlash from Greta Thunberg and fellow climate activists over plans to include gas and nuclear energy in a “green” investment guidebook. Both energy sources are expected to feature in the next part of the EU’s “taxonomy for sustainable activities”, which is expected at the end of the year, following a period of intense political bargaining between the commission president, Ursula von der Leyen; the French president, Emmanuel Macron; and Germany’s new chancellor, Olaf Scholz. The EU taxonomy is a green classification system that is intended to guide investors to projects that are in line with Europe’s goal of net zero emissions by 2050 and better protection of nature. An EU official said gas and nuclear were likely to have “amber” status, meaning they would not be in the “green” category with wind and solar power, but would feature in the taxonomy. A senior EU diplomat said they expected to see nuclear in the text because “Von der Leyen seems to have promised it to Macron and the other nuclear states”. EU efforts will be closely watched by the UK, which is developing its own green taxonomy that the government says will “help clamp down on greenwashing – unsubstantiated or exaggerated claims that an investment is environmentally friendly”. The EU taxonomy became law in July 2020, but legislators left important details to be resolved through so-called delegated acts – secondary legislation meant for technical issues that is not subject to the same degree of ministerial and parliamentary oversight. Since then, the project has been overshadowed by a fierce political row that culminated when EU leaders meeting in Brussels last week were forced to abandon plans for a joint statement on energy policy. France wants a stamp of approval for nuclear, while Poland and eastern European states insist gas is labelled a “sustainable” investment. Germany’s new Social Democrat chancellor is under pressure from his Green coalition partners not to give in to pressure to include nuclear or gas in the system. Scholz downplayed the taxonomy last week as “a tiny issue on a much broader topic”. However, the growing expectation of a Franco-German bargain that brings gas and nuclear into the taxonomy has triggered an excoriating response from Thunberg and nine fellow climate activists. In an article on the Euractiv website, the young activists accused EU leaders of making empty promises at the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow, which ended with a fragile hope of keeping alive a target to limit global heating to no more than 1.5C. “There is no space for cowardly decisions, like allowing for this fake climate action,” they wrote, citing the taxonomy. Bas Eickhout, a Dutch Green MEP and vice-chair of the European parliament’s environment committee, said there was no need for Von der Leyen to include gas and nuclear in the taxonomy. “We have a taxonomy that is now working, and green labels for green activities have been agreed,” he said, referring to the first taxonomy list covering renewables and other green investments signed off earlier this month. “We don’t need green labels for gas and nuclear.” Including gas in the taxonomy would be inconsistent with promises at Cop26 to phase out fossil fuel subsidies, Eickhout said. “If Europe now starts calling [gas] green then you can forget about the 1.5 degrees.” The European Commission is expected to publish the draft taxonomy on 31 December, allowing a few weeks of consultation with experts and governments. The final proposals may be published on 12 January and could only be blocked by a super-majority of EU member states – an outcome no one expects.US federal regulators are expected to approve the first pills to treat Covid-19 as early as this week, it was reported on Tuesday. According to sources quoted by Bloomberg News, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) will give the go-ahead for Pfizer and Merck to launch groundbreaking oral treatments perhaps as soon as Wednesday. Amid a surge in cases caused by the Omicron virus variant, the approval of the Paxlovid (Pfizer) and molnupiravir (Merck) pills would come at a time “when we absolutely need it”, said Eric Topol, director of the Scripps Research Translational Institute, writing in the Guardian on Tuesday. “It’s a sign of light in a very long tunnel. But its extraordinary promise will not get realized unless we pull out all the stops to quickly get it made and distributed at mass scale.” Topol told Bloomberg the unusual late-year timing of the announcement reflected the urgency of the need for the medicines. Paxlovid performed well in clinical trials, showing almost 90% efficacy in preventing hospitalization and death in high-risk patients. Pfizer’s chief executive, Albert Bourla, said in a statement his company’s product could be “a critical tool to help quell the pandemic”. Molnupiravir has had a bumpy road towards the market. Last month the UK became the first in the world to approve the twice-daily pill, which is targeted at the elderly and those most vulnerable to severe disease. But cautious US regulators, while accepting its reduced efficacy compared with Paxlovid, sought independent analysis on the risks of birth defects and other problems in pregnant women. An FDA advisory panel has recommended approval. Emergency use authorization this week would indicate that such concerns were reduced or eliminated. Pregnant women were excluded from Merck’s study, and male and female subjects were instructed to use contraception or abstain from sex. Merck said testing on animals showed the pill did “not cause mutations or damage to DNA”. The studies revealed that molnupiravir reduced the combined risk of hospitalisation and death by 30%. The US government has ordered 10m courses of the Pfizer pill and about 3m from Merck, Bloomberg said. But the medicines are not expected to immediately be widely available. “We must find a way to rapidly scale pill pack production for wide accessibility and use throughout the world, whether that involves enacting the Defense Production Act in the United States or other bold measures,” Topol wrote in the Guardian. “If we had an unlimited supply of these pills, it could have an extraordinary impact on preventing illness, preserving our healthcare workforce, staving off spread, eliminating the need for lockdowns and school closings.”The UK government has decided it will not yet impose new restrictions in England to curb the spread of Omicron before Christmas, despite warnings from scientists that waiting until the new year will “almost certainly be too late to have a material impact on the epidemic”. In Scotland on Tuesday, Nicola Sturgeon announced some fresh measures, including cancelling Hogmanay street parties and spectator-free sporting events for the next three weeks. All sporting events will be behind closed doors in Wales from 27 December, as well as a 2-metre social distancing rule in offices and the closure of nightclubs. Three people in England speak about their Christmas plans and the government’s handling of the rise of the Omicron variant. ‘We need a change of government’ In Worcester, Sharon and her husband, John, have changed their Christmas plans because three family members tested positive for Covid. “I am so angry,” said the 60-year-old, who is a full-time carer for John, who has motor neurone disease. With two sons who are teachers and one daughter – another frontline worker – their original plan was to meet family and friends on Christmas Eve, then go for Christmas brunch at their youngest son’s house and spend the evening at their eldest son’s. Now the couple are just hoping they will be able to see their youngest son and his family on Christmas Day, when he is due to finish self-isolating. “If the government just did a two-week circuit break earlier in December then frontline workers, especially teachers and children, would not have gone home with Covid,” said Sharon. She thinks the government has been “wholly irresponsible” in the way it has dealt with the rise in Covid cases and feels “sad and frustrated”. “I understand it’s all our individual responsibility but at this time it’s not appropriate. People are feeling really vulnerable and scared and want support – even if it’s just clear messaging from the government,” she said. “To see Tory rebels vote against plan B measures shows they are not bothered about people. It feels really selfish and inconsiderate, especially with these stories about parties and gatherings. I think we need a change of government.” ‘Not knowing whether there will be more restrictions is the worst situation to be in’ Near Lancaster, Melissa and her partner, Austin, both in their 50s, are still unsure what to do about their civil partnership, which is due to take place on 29 December. “We have already reduced our number of guests to family only, but we just don’t know whether to cancel completely or go ahead,” said Melissa, who works in education. “Not knowing whether there will be more restrictions or not is the worst situation to be in.” The couple are expecting 25 guests, which involves four generations of family mixing. Their venue is flexible about them rearranging their date, as is the local refugee cafe that is providing catering for the evening. However, they have now exceeded their 14-day cancellation period with the registrars so risk losing about £350 if they cancel the event. “Whatever we decide has a knock-on effect for businesses and we don’t want to let people in the supply chain down,” she said. “One plan is to say to everyone that we will leave it up to them to decide if they are happy to come, but that affects the numbers for the venue and the catering. Ultimately, it’s our responsibility to make a decision to try to take care of everyone. “I can’t stand Boris Johnson and I think he’s incredibly hypocritical about everything. Unfortunately, the handling of Omicron cases is like Brexit – the Tory party splits are dictating the direction the country is going and I feel incredibly sad about that.” ‘I dread the thought of a January lockdown’ Olivia, a PhD student, left London for her parents’ house in Kent on 18 December as Omicron cases surged in the city. “I missed two Christmas parties, but I was worried about having to self-isolate alone in my house,” the 28-year-old said. “I’m just planning to get work done and be with my family, without seeing any friends. “I think they should have imposed some pre-Christmas restrictions, maybe sending kids home [from school] a bit earlier or restrictions on pubs, to try and offset the case rise and avoid the need for more measures later. “I dread the thought of a January lockdown.” Olivia is concerned about the lack of clarity around Covid guidelines in England and feels the government has dealt with Omicron “terribly”. “It did make me angry when I got on the train and saw no one was wearing masks. But the guidance has been confusing. Many people I know are being cautious – a friend cancelled his party and lost £250 on it – but then you see people who are not taking any precautions. “I queued up to get my booster and it’s frustrating to hear about people not getting vaccinated. There needs to be a push to get those people jabbed. I have followed Covid restrictions to the T in the past – but I cannot deal with another lockdown.”Nightclubs have warned that dozens of venues across the country will go bust if a “lockdown by stealth” means they are unable to welcome guests as near to normal as possible on New Year’s Eve. The head of the Night Time Industries Association (NTIA) said clubs are being “crippled” by the government’s decision to avoid a costly national lockdown in England that would have triggered greater support payments to businesses forced to close. Uncertainty deepened on Tuesday when the prime minister, Boris Johnson, said he could not “rule out” further measures after Christmas. “As an industry, we feel we are being sacrificed,” said Michael Kill, chief executive of the NTIA, which represents more than 1,200 independent bars, clubs and live music venues across the country. “If they want us to close, let’s just do it, and put in the support we need. But at the moment we’re are in ‘limbo land’ – they are allowing us to open, but they’re telling people not to come to us and to stay at home. “It is a lockdown by stealth, and it will lead to the death of nightclub businesses, and the loss of thousands of jobs.” Kill said he was “gobsmacked” at the inadequate provisions for nightclubs in the £1bn hospitality sector support fund announced by the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, on Tuesday. He said the grants of £6,000 per venue were “nowhere near enough” to prop up nightclubs over the critical Christmas and new year period. Some clubs make as much as a third of their annual revenue in December. “It is nowhere near enough, it is almost a drop in the ocean for us, it is almost an insult for an industry that has sacrificed so much in the last three weeks,” he said of Sunak’s measures. “We are going to see businesses go under and jobs lost. Some businesses make huge amounts of money on New Year’s Eve and Christmas, money that they need to pay for January.” He called for strong leadership and a clear pathway from government, with a long-term strategy for new Covid-19 variants. In Scotland, Edinburgh’s Hogmanay events have been cancelled and indoor venues limited to a maximum of 200 people if seated, or 100 for standing. Compulsory table service will also be required when the new restrictions come into place on 27 December. In Wales, nightclubs have been ordered to close from 27 December, including New Year’s Eve. Sacha Lord, co-founder of the Warehouse Project club nights in Manchester, described the government’s latest support package as “a disgrace and offensive”. “The chancellor has been sitting on this plan for days now, and it is nowhere near enough to save the industry. Now the help has been outlined, it is simply not enough,” Lord, who also served as Greater Manchester’s night-time economy adviser, said. “How can businesses that expected to take up to 30% of their annual revenues during December survive on £6,000 grants? “Irreversible damage has already been done and unless the package is immediately revised to provide adequate support, we are going to see more businesses close their doors for good. We cannot afford for the government to turn their backs on us again.” Lord called for immediate reintroduction of the furlough scheme, extension of business rates relief until the end of 2022, and a freeze on bounce-back loan repayments until the end of 2022 to help nightclubs weather the continuing crisis. A survey on the impact of the Omicron variant carried out by the Tourism Alliance for the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport found that 51% of businesses had suffered a slump in revenue of at least 50% in December – up from 34% in November. Lord said the threat of continued financial strain and impending job losses was also placing an intolerable strain on the health of night-time industry staff. “Workers are fearful for their future, which also has a massive impact on staff’s mental health as we head into the new year and many are left worrying about the unknown,” he said. “If you know someone who works in the industry, please check in on them.” However, the British Beer and Pub Association welcomed the chancellor’s support package as a “vital lifeline” that will “help compensate businesses for the dramatically reduced trade already being experienced in the run up to Christmas”. “It will be absolutely essential that the government continues to monitor and support our sector for the long term as we ride out the pandemic and into recovery,” the BBPA chief executive, Emma McClarkin, said.John Izbicki, who has died aged 91, was a journalist with the Telegraph for 30 years, covering the City, education and then Paris. A Jewish refugee from nazism, he arrived in Britain at the age of nine on 3 September 1939, the day that the UK declared war on Germany following the invasion of Poland. He had been born Horst Izbicki in Berlin, the son of Selma and Leonard Izbicki, who had moved to Berlin from Kolberg (now Kołobrzeg, in Poland) after the first world war. His father’s haberdashery store was one of 7,500 Jewish businesses attacked in 1938 on Kristallnacht. He always said that he shouted himself so hoarse during the attacks that his vocal cords never fully recovered. His father managed to get visas and train tickets and they prepared to leave. On his first morning in the UK, Horst and his mother had slept in a Leicester police cell, and woke to the smell of frying bacon. The kindly station sergeant asked the hungry boy his name. The reply, “Horst, sir”, prompted the response: “What sort of name is that?” Over his first bacon breakfast Izbicki and the policeman negotiated, and John emerged both fully committed to bacon and to renaming himself John, after the sergeant’s son. Eventually the Izbickis settled in Manchester, where John went to North Manchester grammar. He left at 16, did national service with the Royal Army Service Corps, read French and German at Nottingham University, went into journalism in Manchester and in 1959 joined the then Daily Telegraph. His background gave him a lifelong desire to help all refugees. He was regularly involved in the Jewish community, providing witness evidence, help organise Holocaust memorials, including speaking at Westminster Abbey. As his autobiography, Between the Lines (2013), recalls, his Fleet Street days included a friendship with Margaret Thatcher, begun when she was education secretary after he rescued her from a drunken journalist at a headteachers’ conference by asking her to dance. He also enjoyed warm relations with the teaching unions, notably the NAHT and NUT, and performed regular comedy turns at their conferences. John, a campaigner for educational reform, left the Daily Telegraph in 1989 to become public affairs director to the Committee of Directors of Polytechnics and played a leading role in their successful campaign to become universities. He then became became communications director at one, the University of North London. We became friends in the 1990s when I was editing Guardian Education and John was looking for a school with refugee pupils for a concert in the Royal Albert Hall. I introduced him to my husband, Terry Farrell, then head of a comprehensive in Haringey, St David and St Katherine, where black pupils made up 90% of the school, including many refugees; it also had a gospel choir. In 1972 John married Maureen Ryan. She died when their son, Paul, was 16; Paul settled in Australia, where he had two children. When in 1986 John married June Walker, a special needs teacher, she already had two children, Patrick and Anna, from her first marriage, so providing what he called his “off-the-peg family”. He is survived by June, Paul, Patrick, Anna and his grandchildren, Tyler and Chloe. • This article was amended on 23 January 2022, to correct details of John Izbicki’s surviving family.An Ashes tour heading south after two heavy defeats naturally brings players and the backroom setup into focus but, while changes to the XI now look inevitable, Chris Silverwood remains adamant he is the right person to be England’s head coach. Upon removing Ed Smith as national selector in April and turning these duties over to the head coach, the director of England men’s cricket, Ashley Giles, said Silverwood would have a “free run” at trying to regain the urn from Australia, albeit with the caveat that defeat would see “pressure on all of us”. Sitting 2-0 down on a tour that has been the much-referenced focus of the Test team for the best part of two years, all wriggle room has now evaporated going into the Boxing Day Test. Silverwood, fresh from what he described as a “truthful” dressing‑room debrief after the 275-run defeat in Adelaide, at least acknowledges the situation. Asked whether his position is now on the line before the squad travelled to Melbourne, Silverwood replied: “It always is. When you take a job like this you accept that. It is what it is. Do I believe I’m the right man? Yes I do or I wouldn’t have taken the job in the first place. You’re under pressure constantly. “I do believe I can turn it around, I believe I can. We have had those honest chats and I believe I have the right coaching staff around me to make that happen as well.” Not every issue falls at the feet of Silverwood, his assistants or the captain, Joe Root. Since the pandemic struck, England’s fixture list has been crunched. Rotation was well‑meaning but chiefly signed off from above with the Indian Premier League a non-negotiable. Sold as a chance to blood fringe players, it proved damaging to the Test team’s continuity while the T20 team went unaffected. England’s shortcomings with the bat, illustrated by two match-defining collapses, are longstanding too, reflecting a domestic system in which white-ball revenues are prioritised over red-ball development. Root is the sole player to average more than 40 in Test cricket since his own debut in 2012, and those tried include experienced pros, players picked on potential and international short-form talent that has not transferred. Losing two fast bowlers in Jofra Archer and Olly Stone to injury was unfortunate. Nevertheless, strategy has been highly questionable at times and exacerbated by two wasted years in the spin department, flitting between Dom Bess, Jack Leach, Moeen Ali or simply all-seam attacks regardless of conditions. And Silverwood and Root, it must be said, appear to read overseas pitches like they are written in the Russian alphabet. Five seamers and bowling first on a surface that started out green at the Gabba was surely the value play against Australian batsmen returning from a year out of Test cricket. Instead England batted first (doing so lamentably) and picked the subsequently plundered Leach after a summer on the sidelines. For the day-night Test in Adelaide they then eschewed a frontline spinner, only to see the surface rag for Nathan Lyon. Even with hindsight Silverwood and Root have refused to accept these as mistakes. It may be the public stubbornness of two otherwise personable Yorkshiremen, and acknowledgement has occurred privately. But looking back to the pink-ball Test in Ahmedabad this year, when England picked four seamers and Leach before 28 of the 30 wickets taken fell to spin, a pattern has emerged. England’s series has also been plagued by dropped catches and two wickets have been struck off for no-balls, while fielders have consistently missed when shying at the stumps. Shortcomings in talent are one thing, but there are few excuses for the basics of the game going missing at international level, however limited the preparation time. “Unacceptable,” was Silverwood’s appraisal. “We have to do better.” Even acknowledging the extremely challenging pitches at the back end of the India tour last winter, England’s past 11 Tests have returned just one victory. As such, Boxing Day at the MCG has taken on huge importance regardless of whether the destiny of the urn appears already settled by the weight of history. Silverwood backed Root’s public appraisal of Jimmy Anderson, Stuart Broad and Ollie Robinson not bowling full enough in Adelaide – albeit while also stating the Hawk-Eye data showed these lengths to be similar to those of the hosts – and said this made up part of the team’s debrief. The topic has raised eyebrows in Australia, most notably those of the country’s decorated former captain, Ricky Ponting. “I nearly fell off my seat when I heard that,” Ponting told cricket.com.au. “Whose job is it then to make them change? Why are you captain then? If you can’t influence your bowlers on what length to bowl, what are you doing on the field?” Silverwood went on to highlight how well players such as Marnus Labsuchagne (103 and 51) and Steve Smith (93 and six) left the ball compared to his own players and it is here where changes are expected beyond a recall for the rested Mark Wood among the seamers. Ollie Pope may have to be dropped given his struggles against Lyon and the openers, Haseeb Hameed and Rory Burns, are also vulnerable. Jonny Bairstow, Zak Crawley and Dan Lawrence are the spare batsmen on tour but they have not played since the warmup match, while a raft of hopefuls enjoying the low-key Big Bash League are on standby. Australia, meanwhile, have added the Victoria seamer Scott Boland to their squad, a call-up that suggests Josh Hazlewood will not be ready after his side strain. Pat Cummins, the captain, will return after his close‑contact Covid issue in Adelaide, upping the quality of a team piling pressure on England’s batsmen, bowlers and brains trust.Jofra Archer’s hopes of resuming his Test career remain in the balance after undergoing a second elbow operation that has ruled him out of England’s Caribbean tour in March. The 26-year-old fast bowler has not played international cricket since the visit to India in March and a comeback with Sussex last summer was aborted when the return of the stress fracture he first sustained in early 2020 forced him under the knife. But now England, clearly lacking Archer’s penetration with the ball during the current Ashes series, have revealed another procedure took place 10 days ago and no return date has been issued other than to indicate his absence for the entire winter. “The England and Wales Cricket Board can confirm that fast bowler Jofra Archer underwent a second operation on his injured right elbow on Saturday 11 December in London,” a statement from the governing body read. “The procedure addressed the longstanding stress fracture of his right elbow. A return to cricket will be determined in time, but Jofra will not be available for any of England’s remaining winter series.” As well as denying Archer the chance to face West Indies in the three-Test series that begins in Antigua on 8 March, it naturally raises concerns about his long-term ability to meet the physical demands of pace bowling in the longest format. Though released by Rajasthan Royals before the next Indian Premier League auction that takes place early next year, Archer will remain in high demand in both this competition and the global Twenty20 circuit more generally. Speaking to Fox Sports recently, however, Archer shared his hope of a return to the England setup while watching the ongoing struggle to compete in an Ashes series they trail 2-0 after defeats in Brisbane and Adelaide. Archer said: “I do miss being in the team setup and I hope that when I’m fit and ready I can get my spot back. But other than that, honestly, [the break] has been really good. The coaches and players all check in with me. I know I’m not forgotten and I’ve just probably been dealt an unlucky hand and I’m dealing with it.”Margaret, Duchess of Argyll may well have been “a vibrant, sexually liberated woman ahead of her time” (Duchess of Argyll sex scandal retold in new BBC drama series, 18 December), but at the time most members of the working class, including my parents, saw her as a parasitic, self-indulgent product of the capitalist system. As a result, they viewed this seedy trial with the soupcon of contempt and large dollop of hilarity that it deserved. However, perhaps one good thing did come from it – the following year’s Labour victory. Mary Fitzpatrick Glasgow • Polly Toynbee (Look at the lauding of David Frost and see a government deranged by the poison of Brexit, 20 December) refers to the “Clean Global Brexit” WhatsApp group. Does the name of this group indicate that for some Brexiters, leaving the EU is in practice so disappointing that they would now like to leave the world? Janet Dubé Peebles, Scottish Borders • My answer to the education secretary’s plea for retired teachers to return to the classroom (Report, 16 December) is: “Yes … if I am paid the same as the track-and-trace consultants, ie £6,000 a day.” Bob Epton Brigg, Lincolnshire • On seeing the banner proclaiming “Boric Presidente” on the front page of your print edition (21 December), I thought I was in the middle of the most appalling nightmare. John Huntley Letheringsett, Norfolk • When he wanted guests to leave, my grandfather used to get up, wind the clock, take his teeth out, announce, “I’m off now then,” and go to bed (Letters, 20 December). Jane Ghosh Bristol • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The diversion of military spending to combat pandemics, the climate crisis and poverty is certainly desirable, and 2% of the current obscene £1.49tn annually would be worthwhile (‘Colossal waste’: Nobel laureates call for 2% cut to military spending worldwide, 14 December). But how unambitious of these eminent scientists to set such a low figure. Why not 10%, 20%, 50%, or even, as Simon Jenkins has argued, 100%? Unrealistic? Perhaps, but if the human race is to survive the many threats to its future, it must learn to settle its differences without periodically slaughtering one another and squandering the Earth’s precious resources on the means to do so. And it is the realists, with their friends in the killing industry – the military-industrial complex – who profit from the slaughter, who have got us into this parlous state. A substantial part of that military spending is related to creating the means for the existential threat of a nuclear holocaust, one possible scenario leading up to what is described so terrifyingly by Julian Borger (‘15 minutes to save the world’: a terrifying VR journey into the nuclear bunker, 14 December). With the high probability of a nuclear detonation by accident, miscalculation or malfunction, the economic cost of these megadeath machines is just one more reason for demanding their abolition in the shortest possible time. Frank Jackson Former co-chair, World Disarmament CampaignIs it necessary to carry a diagnostic label simply to know oneself? Joanna Moorhead’s article suggests so, and this is a great shame (A lot fell into place’: the adults who discovered they were autistic – after their child was diagnosed, 16 December). Neurodiversity entails acceptance and, in its purest form, is inseparable from acceptance of human cognitive diversity in general. The very proposition that some individuals are categorically neurodiverse while others are not would fly in the face of the central tenet of neurodiversity, which denies that there can be any one normative or healthy type of brain or mind. Neurodiversity as a trait could only apply, therefore, to society as a whole, and not as a discriminant of individuals. I’m glad for the parents described in the article who have gained acceptance from employers, from spouses and from themselves by identifying with the autistic traits that they see in their children. But acceptance and reasonable accommodation of individual differences in cognition and behaviour ought to be the moral right of every human being, whether or not their particular differences fall under a diagnostic classification. And the danger of an overly broad application of the diagnostic term “autism” as a descriptor of human diversity in general (“increased diagnosis is good for everyone”) is that those whose autism profoundly limits their ability to communicate and to feel in charge of their senses, thoughts, feelings and behaviour might not be recognised as having very distinct needs for support. Why do we need labels to be nice to each other, and to ourselves? Let’s leave the “autism” label for those who need it most. Matthew Belmonte Sheffield • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.John Harris’s article (The fatal weakness of the Conservatives is not seeing the kindness in most people, 19 December) carried the evergreen quote of the Brittania Unchained (definitely not Unhinged) group: “Once they enter the workplace, the British are among the worst idlers in the world.” Your photograph showed employees of the public in the Downing Street garden, standing around chatting, with wine and cheese at hand, at a claimed “work meeting”. Having retired from the NHS, where consuming alcohol on hospital property was forbidden due do its effect on professional performance, and where late working hours meant working flat out into the next morning rather than just a balmy evening, I applaud the prime minister for promulgating the view of the Brittania Unhinged group even at the very heart of government. Dr Jonathan J Ross Sheffield • I was 18 when I first walked on to a Covid ward. I began the year studying cells and chemistry with my friends in sixth form and I ended it donning scrubs on my own in a small staff toilet preparing to cross the red line. I sat in the corner as a nurse asked if a family wanted to be taught how to put on PPE so they could see their daughter. “No,” they replied. They had done this many times before. Today was goodbye. Later that morning, in a sombre silence broken only by the buzzing and beeping of life-saving equipment, I assisted in taking a woman to the mortuary. This was my fourth trip of the day, but this time I noticed that the patient’s tag said she was scarcely much older than me. I took my break alone, to keep myself and others safe. That evening, I bought myself a pizza and ate it in a car park by the sea. The police promptly came and told me to go home. Perhaps I should have worn a suit and said it was a work meeting. Louis Sanderson Exeter, Devon • Thank you for your photo of the Downing Street party. Earlier on, I wrote to the Independent Police Complaints Commission urging it to investigate the Met’s behaviour in failing to investigate possible Covid breaches. Alas, it appears I can’t complain. Today it emailed me, saying: “In order to be eligible you must be either, a person directly affected by police conduct, a person who was adversely affected by police conduct or a person who witnessed the conduct at first hand. Any person who is aware of police conduct through a third party or, through a medium such as television, will neither be a witness, nor can they be adversely effected.” So despite the picture raising my blood pressure further, there is nothing I can do. Margaret Squires St Andrews, Fife • If this meeting was a work meeting, why was the future Mrs Johnson present? Alternatively, since she was present, does this not confirm that she has, as many suspected, an influence on the prime minister’s decisions? Honor Cooper London • If this was indeed a meeting, presumably somebody somewhere was taking minutes? Eleanor Jardine Hertford • I can hear Jim Royle from here in Lincoln: “Work meeting my arse!” And I agree with him. David Cordingley Lincoln • Mixing wine with work at No 10? For some of us, wine is essential for work, at least on Sundays. Fr Ed Hone Dean, St Edmund’s College, Cambridge • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.In 1994 , a bungalow owner in Devon called pest control to report that a mysterious “white ant” had chomped through her conservatory. Investigations eventually revealed the culprit was in fact a colony of millions of subterranean termites, the first and only colony ever recorded on UK soil. The call marked the beginning of a 27-year saga involving hundreds of thousands of pounds of public money and considerable headaches for the property owner and her neighbours in Saunton on the north Devon coast. Many experts thought the UK’s Termite Eradication Programme (TEP) was doomed to failure. Once imported, usually in something as innocent as a wooden wine crate or an antique pine wardrobe, the tenacious insects inevitably triumph and become endemic, thanks to their superior burying and reproduction skills. But now in Devon, human ingenuity and British bloody-mindedness have prevailed. After no signs of termite activity were detected for the past 10 years, the Saunton termite colony has officially been declared dead by a panel of international experts, saving the nation from a future where homeowners have to worry about termite infestations as well as wasp nests and rising damp. A final field inspection in May found no signs of termites in a zone 100 metres long and 30 metres deep, and the TEP is now in “decommissioning mode”, said Dr Ed Suttie, the termite terminator who has been involved with the TEP since it began in 1998 and has run it since 2003. No other country has ever won the termite war, he said: “It’s a world first.” There have been false dawns before in this battle of the beasties. Going into the new millennium there were no sightings of the termites for nine years. Then their beadlike antennae were again spotted rooting around in the soil, resulting in the eradication and monitoring programme being extended repeatedly until this year. The colony had made its home under two neighbouring bungalows, which were effectively condemned by the invaders. In 2012 one of the owners applied to demolish her property and start again, but was denied planning permission after a two-year battle. So crucial was the matter deemed to national biosecurity that the final decision was taken by the then communities secretary, Eric Pickles. He refused it on the grounds that the demolition and construction work could risk the termites spreading to a wider area, causing “potential catastrophic economic, environmental and social consequences”. A compromise was struck whereby she was allowed to build an annexe that Suttie says is “the UK’s only termite-proof building”. Burning down the infected buildings was not an option, he explained: “Termites were not actually living in the house – the wood in there was just their food source. They live underground, often many metres under the surface.” Suttie said both property owners had shown “amazing cooperation” over the decades, banned not just from most home improvement but also from removing any soil or wood from the site. They also had to let TEP officials plant “timber bait” in their gardens – essentially wooden stakes made out of aged pine, termites’ favourite food, which they could monitor for nibbles. Termite eradication involved the targeted deployment of “insect growth regulators”, a kind of hyper-intelligent insecticide that would stop the termites reaching maturity and reproducing. Had successive governments since 1998 not invested considerable amounts of public money in the effort, it could have been a very different story, said Suttie. Termites could have become endemic, eating their way through floor boards, door frames and beams across southern England, just as they do in Australia, parts of North America and southern Europe. The stakes are high: each year, termites cause more than $5bn (£3.8bn) in property damage in the US, according to the National Pest Management Association. Though the termites were first confirmed in Saunton in 1994, Suttie believes they may have been imported to the site as many as 70 years earlier: “Anecdotally, we’ve heard stories of gardeners referring to white ants and a greenhouse that had to be replaced.” Nick Harvey, who was the local Liberal Democrat MP from 1992 to 2015, remembers the “great anguish” of the bungalow owner who discovered the colony. His constituent believed a previous occupant had accidentally imported the termites in soil brought from the Canary Islands via some non-native plants, he said. Damian McBride, a special adviser to the shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry, who drew attention to the termite war in a Twitter thread, said he thought Suttie and others should be given honours for their unglamorous but essential public service. “What’s the moral of the story?” he asked. “You can make up your own, but for me, this is public service in its finest form – unseen, largely unknown and rarely heralded – but done with selfless dedication year after year simply because of what would happen to the rest of us if it wasn’t.” Engineers of destruction: termites v towns In forests and grasslands of their native tropics, termites are regarded as “soil engineers” that are vital to the maintenance of soil structure and ecosystem balance, according to BRE, which has run the government’s Termite Eradication Programme since 1998. But imported into urban environments, they are considered pests because of their ability to severely damage timber in buildings. Subterranean termites – the kind that caused havoc in north Devon – are now endemic in southern Europe, thanks to globalisation and the warming climate. If you live in a termite-infested area in France, you must, by law, supply a “termite-free” certificate when you sell a house and any building work must be certified termite-proof. Much of the UK is too wet for a subterranean termite colony to establish. But unluckily for the bungalow owners in Saunton, their properties were built on very light, sandy and well-draining soil among maritime pine trees that termites love. The houses were also built using a lot of pine timber, a delicacy for the greedy insects, which can chomp away undetected for months, hollowing out wood from the inside. Sometimes mistaken for white ants, worker termites are typically 4-6mm in length, are pale or whitish in colour, have beadlike antennae and lack a “waist” (a constriction of the first or second abdominal segments). A colony can form in the space of a match box but can be vastly bigger, as in the Devon case, comprising numerous “mud tubes” or tunnels that connect food sources and nesting sites.Edinburgh’s annual Hogmanay street party has been cancelled, while in Wales employees face £60 fines for failing to work from home as governments tightened rules to limit the spread of the Omicron variant. The Scottish and Welsh governments also imposed limits on sporting events from Boxing Day. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, reassured the public that they would not have to change their Christmas Day plans as she appealed to everyone to reduce their social contact and stay at home as much as possible in advance of Christmas and after the festive weekend. Sturgeon told MSPs on Tuesday that further protections were necessary, including all outdoor events being limited to 500 people, and indoor events including concerts limited to 200 people seated, or 100 standing, with 1-metre physical distancing required for any events still going ahead. The Welsh government said all sporting events would be held behind closed doors from 26 December and introduced a legal requirement to work from home unless there was a reasonable excuse not to, accompanied by a £60 fixed penalty notice for workers and £1,000 fines for companies. The GMB union warned this would affect “the poorest, most vulnerable workers”, while the Wales TUC general secretary, Shavanah Taj, expressed “shock and concern” at the decision. Scotland’s new rules will hit the Old Firm derby between Celtic and Rangers on 2 January and large-scale Hogmanay street parties: Edinburgh’s was planned to go ahead at a reduced capacity of 30,000. Omicron cases have increased in Scotland by more than 50% in a week. Acknowledging the disappointment of those looking forward to such events, Sturgeon said: “The much higher transmissibility of Omicron means large gatherings have the potential to become very rapid super-spreader events, putting large numbers at risk of getting infected very quickly. Limiting these events helps reduce the risk of widespread transmission.” She said this would also cut down the transmission risks of fans travelling to and from matches. “And second, these large events put an additional burden on emergency services, especially the police and ambulance services,” she added. Her statement included some other changes: • Non-professional indoor contact sports for adults should not take place during the three-week period from 26 December. • A requirement for table service only will be reintroduced for venues serving alcohol for consumption on the premises. • Indoor hospitality and leisure venues will be asked to ensure 1-metre distancing between groups. • People meeting indoors at home or in hospitality or leisure venues should be in groups of no more than 3 households. Sturgeon told MSPs that the S-gene dropout indicator for the Omicron variant now accounted for 62.9% of all cases in Scotland, compared with 27.5% this time last week. While there were increases across all age groups, the biggest – of 161% – was in 20- to 24-year-olds. She said that staffing shortages were already putting additional strain on health and emergency services, adding that 100 Scotrail services were cancelled on Sunday because of staff absence. Sturgeon said that she was “acutely aware” that the latest restrictions, as well as the advice to avoid socialising, had significant financial implications for many businesses. However, she questioned whether the latest announcement of a £1bn bailout package for UK businesses by the Treasury generated “new” money for Scotland, rather than being an advance allocation of money already budgeted for.A long-serving football coach who is facing claims he raped, groomed and exploited young players has been arrested in Gabon on suspicion of sexual abuse. Patrick Assoumou Eyi – known as “Capello” – has been accused of abusing boys in his previous post as the head coach of Gabon’s under-17 team and in his current role as the technical director for La Ligue de l’Estuaire, the country’s highest league. Eyi was arrested on Monday by police in Ntoum, 25 miles from the capital, Libreville. Last week he was provisionally suspended by Fegafoot, the Gabonese Football Federation, pending an investigation, after accusations by alleged victims were reported by the Guardian. Eyi did not respond to requests for comment from the Guardian before the publication of last week’s article. He has since denied the accusations against him and insisted that he was “a victim of my skills”. “I am not the man described to you, which is why in your investigations you will only find embittered, jealous people who live in the imagination,” he told the BBC. “What is happening in Gabonese football, can it be summed up by me alone?” Eyi has also been suspended from his role as general secretary of the AEEFG, Gabon’s Association of Football Coaches and Educators, pending the outcome of Fegafoot’s investigation. The government is to hold a judicial investigation into possible sexual abuse against children and young people in all sports in the country after the president, Ali Bongo, described the claims as “a very serious matter”. Since the Guardian’s article was published several more alleged victims have come forward to claim they were also abused by Eyi, with the former Gabon internationals Brice Makaya and Armand Ossey also claiming they were aware he had abused players. Makaya, a former striker who helped Gabon to qualify for their first Africa Cup of Nations in 1994 before serving as assistant coach to Eyi with the under-17s in 2014, said that he reported his concerns to Fegafoot that year but they were ignored. “Patrick Assoumou Eyi has repeatedly sexually assaulted children,” he told the Guardian. “Everyone inside Gabonese football was aware. I was a part of that system and I denounced his acts several times. I even denounced him several times to the federal bureau of Fegafoot.” In response, a statement from Fegafoot said: “The current executive committee was elected in March 2014. A few months later, the new executive committee put an end to the function of coach of Mr Assoumou Eyi and Brice Makaya. The latter never communicated accusations, suspicions, or denounced facts of this nature to the new executive committee.” Alleged victims of the coach have now been invited to submit their testimonies as part of an investigation being conducted by Fegafoot’s independent ethics committee – a process that will be open until 31 December. Ossey, another former striker who spent most of his career in France and represented Gabon at the Afcon in 2000, alleged Eyi’s abuse stretches back to the start of his career in the early 1990s when he coached regional youth sides. “I know Capello very well. He was close to getting me, I admit it,” he said. “Gabon is a small country, we all know who has done what. It is an open secret.” The players’ union, the National Association of Professional Footballers of Gabon, has also received testimonies from young alleged victims who claim to have been abused and is in the process of setting up support systems. Meanwhile, the Gabonese club Tout Puissant Akwembé have suspended their coach Orphé Mickala after he was accused on social media of sexually abusing young players. The Guardian attempted to contact Mickala for comment.A former police officer who spent more than 17 years in prison after being convicted of killing his pregnant partner has been freed after being found not guilty at a retrial. Gary Walker, now 57, was sentenced to life imprisonment in October 2004 for murdering Audra Bancroft at their home near Burton upon Trent. After a retrial at Warwick crown court, Mr Justice Holgate QC agreed with a submission by Walker’s barrister, David Emanuel QC, that there was no case to answer. The retrial heard evidence that Bancroft, 36, died as a result of a paramedic moving her from the recovery position on to her back and propping her head up, where she stayed for five hours, leading to positional asphyxia. The ruling was challenged by the prosecutor, Rachel Brand QC, but after a hearing at the court of appeal on Friday, it was upheld. Walker was found guilty and sentenced to a minimum of 12 years in prison after the prosecution alleged he had strangled Bancroft on 8 December 2003 shortly after finding out she had accrued £4,000 in debt on a credit card. He has continually maintained his innocence. During the retrial it was alleged Walker had met Bancroft on a street as he was returning from a night shift at Avonmouth police station, where he assaulted her before “frog-marching” the mother-of-three back to their home in Shipley Close, Branston. “Witnesses who lived in Shipley Close heard voices in the street, and on looking out of their windows they saw the defendant propelling Audra Bancroft along, holding on to her with his hand under her armpit, almost dragging her along,” Brand told jurors. “We say that he continued to assault her when he got her home.” Brand told the court that immediately after the incident, Walker suggested Bancroft’s ex-husband “might have been responsible” for her injuries and told people he had found her already injured in the street. The prosecution also alleged Walker “staged calls” and left voice messages on Bancroft’s phone to make it appear as if the couple were not together. One of two paramedics Walker called to the address said Bancroft had bruising to her face, a lump on her forehead and an injury to her lip. Her condition deteriorated and she went into cardiac arrest at about 8am and died an hour later in hospital. Walker claimed the injuries had been caused as he defended himself when Bancroft “went for him with a potato peeler”. A retrial was ordered in January after the court of appeal overturned the original conviction as unsafe. Holgate told the jury the prosecution would have to establish Walker had intended to kill Bancroft or to cause her serious injury, and that such injuries were “a substantial and operating cause of her death”. “I decided that on one critical issue, namely causation, no jury could be sure that the prosecution had proved its case to the standard of proof required in a criminal trial,” he said. “For that reason, the issue of causation could not, as a matter of law, be left to the jury to decide, and so Mr Walker had to be acquitted of both murder and manslaughter.”The prime minister has confirmed no further Covid restrictions will be put in place in England before Christmas. He said there was currently not enough evidence to justify tougher measures before Christmas but curbs could be imposed after 25 December. A bailout package worth about £1bn for businesses losing trade because of the Omicron surge was announced by the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, on Tuesday. The funding will primarily help firms in the leisure and hospitality sector, and follows concerns that they have faced cancelled bookings. The shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, has said Labour “will be going through the details” of the new measures for businesses, adding the government had been “dragged kicking and screaming” to announce them. Representatives of businesses that run nightclubs, music venues and events have responded to Rishi Sunak’s support package calling it “inadequate”. Michael Kill, chief executive of the Night Time Industries Association, said newly-announced support for the culture sector was “far too little” and “borders on the insulting”. Scotland’s Hogmanay street parties are cancelled, while sporting events will be spectator-free for the next three weeks, Nicola Sturgeon announced, while reassuring the Scottish public they will not have to change their Christmas Day plans. All sporting events in Wales will be held behind closed doors from Boxing Day due to the surge in coronavirus cases, the Welsh government has announced. The economy minister, Vaughan Gething, announced the new measures for both indoor and outdoor sporting events. Scientists have reacted with dismay to Boris Johnson’s decision not to impose fresh restrictions to curb the spread of Omicron, emphasising that waiting until the new year would “almost certainly be too late to have a material impact on the epidemic”. A top scientist has said we “cannot afford to cross our fingers and hope this crisis blows over”. Dr Jeremy Farrar, director of Wellcome, said in a statement: “As we have learned from the very beginning of this pandemic, it’s better to act sooner than later.” The effect that lockdowns have on people’s lives is as bad as going to hospital, Sir Iain Duncan Smith has warned amid the rise of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. The UK government borrowed £17.4bn in November, outstripping economists’ predictions and suggesting debt could far overshoot officials’ forecasts if the Omicron coronavirus variant slows the economy as expected. The DUP leader Sir Jeffrey Donaldson has tested positive for Covid, he has announced on Twitter. He said he fell ill after returning from London last week. A total of 897,979 booster and third doses of Covid-19 vaccine were reported in the UK on Monday, new figures show. The is the second highest figure on record, behind 940,606 doses on Saturday 18 December. A further 90,629 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases have been recorded in the UK as of 9am on Tuesday, the government said. The government said a further 172 people had died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19. That is all for today from the UK blog but do join me as I continue our Covid coverage on our global live blog below: With no further Covid restrictions expected before Christmas, the focus is now turning to whether the prime minister will instead impose restrictions in the run-up to new year. The Daily Mirror’s Pippa Crerar reports ministers are considering bringing in a “circuit breaker” lockdown lasting between two weeks and a month from 27 December. From the Financial Times’ Jim Pickard: Rishi Sunak has been accused of failing to do enough to help embattled hospitality businesses through the Omicron wave after refusing to bring back furlough for the hardest-hit firms. Succumbing to intense pressure to offer financial support amid a collapse in pre-Christmas trade for pubs, restaurants and hotels, the chancellor announced a £1bn bailout package on Tuesday consisting of business grants and help with sick pay. However, it drew an angry response from bosses who told Sunak he was failing to grasp the severity of the Omicron shock to the economy and that a lack of clarity from the government over the need for further pandemic restrictions was making matters worse. Comparing the plan to a “dud cracker on Christmas Day”, Tim Rumney, the chief executive of the Best Western hotel chain, which employs 10,000 staff in the UK, said a return to furlough was vital if the current Covid wave continues. “It’s just so disappointing and underwhelming in every sense. It doesn’t go far enough in our opinion, it doesn’t go deep enough and it’s too little too late,” he said. Read the full article here: Labour’s deputy leader Angela Rayner has criticised Boris Johnson’s “dither and delay” approach to Christmas plans. Sky News’ Tamara Cohen reports that during yesterday’s two-hour cabinet meeting, chancellor Rishi Sunak was among those ministers most opposed to bringing in new measures. Here’s a roundup of the key events from today: The prime minister has confirmed no further Covid restrictions will be put in place in England before Christmas. He said there was currently not enough evidence to justify tougher measures before Christmas but curbs could be imposed after 25 December. A bailout package worth about £1bn for businesses losing trade because of the Omicron surge was announced by the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, on Tuesday. The funding will primarily help firms in the leisure and hospitality sector, and follows concerns that they have faced cancelled bookings. The shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, has said Labour “will be going through the details” of the new measures for businesses, adding the government had been “dragged kicking and screaming” to announce them. Representatives of businesses that run nightclubs, music venues and events have responded to Rishi Sunak’s support package calling it “inadequate”. Michael Kill, chief executive of the Night Time Industries Association, said newly-announced support for the culture sector was “far too little” and “borders on the insulting”. Scotland’s Hogmanay street parties are cancelled, while sporting events will be spectator-free for the next three weeks, Nicola Sturgeon announced, while reassuring the Scottish public they will not have to change their Christmas Day plans. All sporting events in Wales will be held behind closed doors from Boxing Day due to the surge in coronavirus cases, the Welsh government has announced. The economy minister, Vaughan Gething, announced the new measures for both indoor and outdoor sporting events. Scientists have reacted with dismay to Boris Johnson’s decision not to impose fresh restrictions to curb the spread of Omicron, emphasising that waiting until the new year would “almost certainly be too late to have a material impact on the epidemic”. A top scientist has said we “cannot afford to cross our fingers and hope this crisis blows over”. Dr Jeremy Farrar, director of Wellcome, said in a statement: “As we have learned from the very beginning of this pandemic, it’s better to act sooner than later.” The effect that lockdowns have on people’s lives is as bad as going to hospital, Sir Iain Duncan Smith has warned amid the rise of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. The UK government borrowed £17.4bn in November, outstripping economists’ predictions and suggesting debt could far overshoot officials’ forecasts if the Omicron coronavirus variant slows the economy as expected. The DUP leader Sir Jeffrey Donaldson has tested positive for Covid, he has announced on Twitter. He said he fell ill after returning from London last week. A total of 897,979 booster and third doses of Covid-19 vaccine were reported in the UK on Monday, new figures show. The is the second highest figure on record, behind 940,606 doses on Saturday 18 December. A further 90,629 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases have been recorded in the UK as of 9am on Tuesday, the government said. The government said a further 172 people had died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19. I’m signing off for the day now. Thanks so much for joining me today and for all your comments and tweets. The prime minister has confirmed no further Covid restrictions will be put in place in England before Christmas. He said there was currently not enough evidence on the severity of Omicron, the hospitalisation rate and the impact of the booster programme to justify tougher measures before Christmas. However, No 10 say the prime minister is clear the situation is “finely balanced and remains difficult across the country”, with the Omicron variant continuing to surge and cases at an all-time high. The government has said it will continue to monitor the data closely and will not hesitate to act after Christmas if necessary. In a video message released on Tuesday afternoon, the prime minister urged people to exercise caution and to continue to follow the guidance, including by wearing a mask indoors when required, keeping fresh air circulating and taking a test when visiting vulnerable and elderly relatives. He also urged everyone yet to do so to get a booster of the Covid vaccine. People will be asking “why should we bloody well listen now” if the government tries to implement new Covid restrictions, a Conservative MP has said. But while Sir Roger Gale warned of a potential public “backlash”, he also stressed it would be “dangerous” to ignore the scientific advice, and raised concerns that the government may be “missing the boat” on implementing further public health measures in response to rising Covid rates. Meanwhile the chair of the All-Party Parliamentary Group on Coronavirus, the Liberal Democrat MP Layla Moran, said she believed people would accept more public health measures, but that it was “outrageous” the government did not hold a press conference and lay out the latest data on Monday because people needed the information to make decisions. I’m not averse to further measures based upon sound science. My worry is that we may be once again missing the boat because of the pressure the prime minister has been put under by his own backbench and as a result in part of course of his own folly, and that he may be reluctant to take action that is actually necessary. The Conservative MP for North Thanet stressed the need for adequate support for business and said without formal restrictions the hospitality industry is “between a rock and a hard place”. Gale told the PA news agency: I have been highly critical of many things that the government and the prime minister have done, but I wouldn’t wish to stop them doing the right things now. I think – there’s no doubt about this – there is a public reaction against being told what to do simply because, and I’m afraid this is true, people feel the government didn’t do themselves what they told us to do last time so why should we bloody well listen now. And I think there will be, if they were to try to do much before Christmas, I think there would be one hell of a backlash, and people would just say get stuffed I’m afraid – dangerous though that certainly would be. There’s no doubt the infection rates are rising alarmingly and there’s no doubt in my mind that fairly soon the health service is going to have even more real problems than it’s got now. Responding to rumours of some kind of circuit-breaker akin to a brief lockdown after Christmas, Moran said it would be “absolutely devastating for the country” and a sign of “government failure” to take the appropriate measures earlier, but she said she would back measures suggested by the scientific advisers to save lives. The only thing that could ease the threat to the NHS is a short circuit breaker to limit indoor social interaction, Christina Pagel, director of UCL’s Clinical Operational Research Unit has said in an opinion piece for the Guardian. She writes: The risks to the NHS come from three sides. First, Omicron has grown faster than any variant seen to date – including the original spread of Covid-19 in March 2020. The UK Health Security Agency reports that cases of Omicron have been doubling every two days in most regions of the UK. A certain percentage of newly infected people will need hospital treatment – even if Omicron causes less severe disease than Delta. Let’s say that the risk of hospitalisation with Omicron is half that of Delta, although the analysis from Imperial College London suggests this may be optimistic. With a variant that is doubling every two days that gives us only a two-day advantage. Whatever the eventual percentage of people with Omicron who will need NHS care, the absolute number seeking care will also double every two days. Because it takes seven to 14 days from infection to needing hospital, this rapid increase in demand for NHS services will not be seen immediately – probably not until after Christmas – but it will happen. Modelling by the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, Operational sub-group – which reports to the Sage committee – suggests that by the time we see this impact, four doublings may have passed. This means much higher levels of pressure on the NHS which we can’t do anything about if we wait for hospitalisations to rise before we act. Last Thursday, Sage estimated that without reducing transmission further (over and above plan B), there will be at least 3,000 daily admissions to hospital in England (equivalent to the first wave in 2020), and it could be much worse even than last January. So the question is not whether it will be bad for the NHS, but whether it will be just dreadful or catastrophic. Read more here: There have been 15,363 additional confirmed cases of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 reported across the UK, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said. This brings the total confirmed cases of the variant in the UK to 60,508. A further 90,629 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases have been recorded in the UK as of 9am on Tuesday, the government said. The government said a further 172 people had died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have now been 173,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. A total of 51,537,827 first doses of Covid-19 vaccine had been delivered in the UK by December 20. This is a rise of 39,793 on the previous day. Some 47,102,814 second doses have been delivered, an increase of 50,938. A combined total of 29,876,223 booster and third doses have also been given, a day-on-day rise of 897,979. Separate totals for booster and third doses are not available. Nicola Sturgeon told MSPs on Tuesday afternoon that, while her core advice remained to limit socialising, additional protections were necessary including all outdoor events limited to just 500 people, and indoor events including concerts limited to 200 people seated, or 100 standing, with one-metre physical distancing required for any events still going ahead. The new rules will hit the Old Firm derby between Celtic and Rangers on 2 January and large-scale Hogmanay street parties: Edinburgh’s was planned to proceed at a reduced capacity of 30,000. A total of 897,979 booster and third doses of Covid-19 vaccine were reported in the UK on Monday, new figures show. The is the second highest figure on record, behind 940,606 doses on Saturday 18 December. More than 29.8m booster and third doses have now been delivered in the UK, with 5.8m in the past seven days. The figures have been published by the UK’s four health agencies. The coming weeks “paint a very bleak picture” for exhausted nursing staff as coronavirus infections increase, a union has said. The Royal College of Nursing said nurses are “already physically and emotionally exhausted” by the pandemic but staff shortages due to Covid-19 mean they are now wondering “What is coming?” London’s biggest health trust, Barts Health NHS trust also warned that some of its operations may need to be cancelled in the new year due to rising coronavirus cases and staff absences. A spokesman for the trust said services are running as normal, but a contingency plan has been put in place in case staff need to be redeployed. Alistair Chesser, group chief medical officer, said: “Our hospitals are currently running as usual, but we have plans in place to redeploy staff in the coming weeks, should we need to. “We are only able to respond to this next challenge because of our dedicated staff who are prepared to do all they can to care for our patients, with many taking on extra shifts.” Horace Trubridge, general secretary of the Musicians’ Union, called for further support for performers. He said: “This is a particularly busy time for our members and many musicians will have been relying on the festive period and the new year to provide much-needed funds following the devastating effects of lockdown and the well-publicised difficulties. “It is absolutely crucial to their survival that the government recognises the economic abyss that our world-class players, performers, writers and teachers are facing. They need support and they need it now.” Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee chair Julian Knight welcomed further support for the arts but called for clarity on the likelihood of a lockdown, given its impact on the events sector. He said: “While we await the detail, the announcement of additional financial support for the entertainment and hospitality sectors is welcome. It will be important for this funding to help all those whose livelihoods depend on thriving theatres and live venues, whether they be on the stage, behind the scenes or front of house.” The acting artistic director of the Royal Shakespeare Company echoed the call for support across the sector, following news that 30 million will be made available through the Culture Recovery Fund. Erica Whyman said in a statement: “The theatre industry has once again been hit hard by Covid-19. All RSC current productions are impacted, as are so many across the country. We welcome the additional support through the Culture Recovery Fund and wait to hear further news about the 30 million boost. “Thanks to existing government support in the form of repayable finance, the RSC can weather some losses for a short period, although those losses will have a substantial impact on our future plans. “Not all theatres can survive this fresh wave, even in the short term, and the significant financial impact of ongoing cancellations means that additional support is urgently needed to sustain the brilliant recovery the sector has made. “Many of our most important cultural organisations are again in peril, and our freelance workforce are at particular risk, and remain essential to the success of our industry.” The chancellor’s announcement of £1bn for UK businesses losing trade because of the Omicron surge gives “welcome breathing space” to the industries struggling this winter, the CBI has said. Rain Newton-Smith, the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) chief economist, said: “The chancellor has provided welcome breathing space to boost confidence and provide support for hospitality and leisure businesses to keep their doors open through tough disruption to their crucial winter trading. “The latest targeted package offers a fair variety of support to help keep businesses open, with new central grants, flexibility on time to pay and sick pay support for SMEs. All this and more will help keep the economy open as we learn to live with the virus. However, Newton-Smith was critical that the travel sector was still “disappointingly out of scope” of the funding. She added: “If infection and hospitalisation rates continue to grow across the country, the potential of further measures will weigh on firms. The government must monitor the situation closely and ensure that any new restrictions go in lock-step with further targeted cashflow support to those firms most in distress across sectors impacted.” Scotland’s Hogmanay street parties are cancelled, while sporting events will be spectator-free for the next three weeks, as the Scottish government moves to reduce the risk of super-spreader events in the face of the far more transmissible Omicron variant, which now accounts for 62.9% of all cases. Nicola Sturgeon reassured the Scottish public they will not have to change their Christmas Day plans as she appealed to everyone to reduce contact and to stay at home as much as possible in advance of 25 December and after Christmas weekend The new rules will hit events such as Edinburgh’s annual Hogmanay street party, which was going ahead at a reduced capacity of 30,000. Sturgeon told MSPs that Omicron cases had increased by more than 50% in the past week – from more than 3,500 a day to almost 5,500 a day. While there were increases across all age groups the biggest – of 161% – was in 20- to 24-year-olds Sturgeon’s statement included some other changes: Non-professional indoor contact sports for adults should not take place during the three-week period from 26 December A requirement for table service only will be reintroduced for venues serving alcohol for consumption on the premises Indoor hospitality and leisure venues will be asked to ensure 1 metre distance, not within but between groups of people who are attending together People meeting indoors at home or in hospitality or leisure venues should be in groups of no more than three households Large-scale Hogmanay celebrations in Scotland are to be cancelled and live sports will be “effectively spectator-free” for three weeks from Boxing Day as the country introduces new restrictions on public events, Nicola Sturgeon has said. Omicron is now firmly established as the dominant strain of coronavirus in Scotland, the first Minister said. Updating MSPs, she said 62.9% of cases showed the S-gene dropout. She said: It is currently spreading rapidly across Scotland, and so the steep increase in infections that was predicted last week has now started to materialise. She said more restrictions were needed to slow the spread of the virus. Bereaved families have accused Boris Johnson of showing “flagrant disregard” for the public as ministers struggled to explain the justification for a wine and cheese event in Downing Street at the height of lockdown. A Cabinet Office inquiry into other alleged government parties in breach of Covid rules could be expanded after the Guardian published an image showing the prime minister alongside his wife and up to 17 staff in the Downing Street garden in May 2020. Amid growing fury over the photograph, Johnson said on Monday: “Those were meetings of people at work, talking about work.” Labour dismissed Downing Street’s explanation and said it amounted to evidence of law-breaking. The Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group said the lack of any signs of work, with red wine and a cheeseboard visible rather than laptops or pens, showed Johnson “presided over a culture of believing that the rules applied only to other people”. Read more from my colleagues Peter Walker and Jamie Grierson here: The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who has taken on David Frost’s responsibilities as Brexit minister, has issued a statement following a first call with EU commissioner Maroš Šefčovič, with whom she will negotiate the post-Brexit arrangements for Northern Ireland. She writes that UK government policy has not changed despite France and other EU member states calling for a reset in their relations following a rancorous period. Truss said: We want a constructive relationship with the EU, underpinned by trade and our shared belief in freedom and democracy. Resolving the current issues is critical to unleashing that potential. The UK position has not changed. We need goods to flow freely between Great Britain and Northern Ireland, end the role of the ECJ as the final arbiter of disputes between us, and resolve other issues. We must pick up the pace on talks in the New Year. Our preference remains to reach an agreed solution.“If this does not happen, we remain prepared to trigger Article 16 safeguards to deal with the very real problems faced in Northern Ireland and to protect the Belfast (Good Friday) Agreement in all its dimensions. Responding to the chancellor’s funding announcement, bodies representing the travel industry have reacted with dismay to the news that the support package will not help travel businesses. Luke Petherbridge, the director of public affairs for travel trade organisation Abta, said: The chancellor’s statement today once again ignores the direct impact of Government policy decisions on businesses reliant on international travel. Travel agents, tour operators and travel management companies will rightly be asking why they haven’t been given the same treatment as other businesses that are suffering at this time. Average annual revenue across the travel industry is down by nearly 80% on pre-crisis levels even before Omicron emerged and the re-introduction of enhanced testing - both pre and post arrival - have added significant costs and notably dampened consumer demand. As the sector approaches what should be the peak sales period for booking holidays for summer 2022, businesses are instead facing another round of heart-breaking and demoralising cancellations, with no indication that the Government is listening to the challenges they are facing. Clive Wratten, the chief executive of the Business Travel Association, warned that travel companies had been left out of the government’s new financial support package. He said: It is devastating to see that once again business travel and its supply chain have been left out of government financial support. It’s imperative that the arts, hospitality and leisure are given help through the latest wave of the pandemic. However, a vital part of the UK economy and the driver behind global Britain is being left in the cold. We urgently need the Treasury to correct this oversight and support our industry into 2022. This is the only way for there to be a safe return to international travel when conditions allow. The shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, has said Labour “will be going through the details” of the new measures for businesses, adding the government had been “dragged kicking and screaming” to announce them. “Support is welcome but we will be going through the details of this announcement to see which business and workers are included and excluded,” she tweeted, adding that Boris Johnson is too distracted by the revolt in his own party to act in the public interest. The shadow business secretary, Jonathan Reynolds, tweeted: As (Rachel Reeves) says support is welcome, but I hope (Government) appreciate the problems they have caused by the gap between this announcement and the press conference last week. As we await further announcements from the (Government), reassurance is needed this won’t happen again. Representatives of businesses that run nightclubs, music venues and events have responded to Rishi Sunak’s support package calling it “inadequate”. Michael Kill, chief executive of the Night Time Industries Association, said newly-announced support for the culture sector was “far too little” and “borders on the insulting”. He said: Businesses are failing, people are losing their livelihoods and the industry is crippled. Mixed messaging, coupled with additional restrictions, have had a catastrophic impact on our sector over the last two weeks. At this critical point, we need strong leadership and a clear pathway from Government with a long-term strategy for new Covid variants. The open/close strategy is crucifying businesses. Every pound of help is much needed. But this package is far too little and borders on the insulting. Mark Davyd, founder and chief executive of Music Venue Trust, described the announcement of a further £30m for the government’s culture recovery fund this winter as “inadequate” to deal with the impact of rising cases on the sector. He said: We will need to see further details on the £30m package announced to support the cultural sector. Our initial response is that this funding seems detached from the reality. If correct, it would be inadequate to deal with the scale of the problem - we note that grassroots music venues are not even mentioned in the statement despite DCMS having all the evidence they need that losses in this sector alone will run to £22m by end of January. Not everyone is impressed by the £1bn bailout for businesses. The government needs to provide certainty, not just handouts for Covid, a business owner has said. Nathan Godley, of restaurant supplier Premier Seafoods, told BBC Radio 4’s World at One: This time of year I need to know what I need for the restaurants and they are unsure what to tell me, and I am unsure what to tell my supplier. Fish doesn’t just go from the boat to the restaurant. There’s quite a few of us in this supply chain in between and we all need to know what is happening. Godley said he wanted an idea of how he could plan a week in advance, adding: “I don’t need any handouts. I am not asking for that. I am just asking for certainty.” Here’s some reaction to the news of the government’s support package for businesses hit by Covid restrictions. UK Hospitality chief executive Kate Nicholls said: This is a generous package building on existing hospitality support measures to provide an immediate emergency cash injection for those businesses who, through no fault of their own, have seen their most valuable trading period annihilated. It will help to secure jobs and business viability in the short term, particularly among small businesses in the sector, and we particularly welcome the boost to funds for the supply chain and event and business catering companies so badly affected by the reintroduction of work from home guidelines. Nicholls added there is a “real urgency” to get the funding to businesses. British Chambers of Commerce director general Shevaun Haviland said: These measures will provide some welcome respite to many of those businesses who have been hit hardest by the latest Covid measures. The chancellor and his team have engaged with us in talks over the past week, considered the experiences of chamber business communities and the proposals we put to them. We are pleased that the chancellor heard our call for additional grant funding for hospitality and leisure businesses, which will provide some much-needed support in the face of this increasingly difficult trading period. Clarity and speed will be needed to ensure that these grants are paid out swiftly to help these hard-pressed firms weather the next few weeks. Whilst these measures are a positive starting point, if restrictions persist or are tightened further, then we would need to see a wider support package, equal to the scale of any new measures, put in place. The Federation of Small Businesses (FSB) national chairman Mike Cherry said he hoped the measures would help small businesses facing hardship as a result of a decline in custom over Christmas. He said: These positive measures will help alleviate the intense pressures that small firms are currently under and hopefully arrest a significant decline in confidence over this year. With the prospect of one million people sick or self-isolating by January, we encouraged the Chancellor to bring back the Covid statutory sick pay rebate - we’re pleased to see our recommendation taken forward today. This move will reduce stress for small employers up and down the country, helping those who are struggling most with depleted cashflow. It’s vital that small firms - once again up against a massively disrupted festive season - can reclaim the costs of supporting staff. The government has also rightly taken forward other aspects of our 10-point plan, with £1bn worth of grant support for the hardest-hit sectors, alongside accelerated delivery of the business rates relief fund for supply chains launched months ago. The encouragement of HMRC to give as much breathing space as possible to small firms as we head towards tax return season will also come as a relief to many. We’ve always said that support needs to move in lockstep with restrictions and this intervention will help give small businesses confidence that this is the approach government will be taking. A bailout package worth about £1bn for businesses losing trade because of the Omicron surge was announced by the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, on Tuesday. The funding will primarily help firms in the leisure and hospitality sector, and follows concerns that they have faced cancelled bookings and plummeting custom since the government implemented its Covid plan B. According to UKHospitality, many businesses have lost up to 60% of their trade in December, which is usually their most profitable month. Sunak said the government was intervening because “the spread of the Omicron variant means businesses in the hospitality and leisure sectors are facing huge uncertainty, at a crucial time”. The bailout package consists of four elements: Grants for hospitality and leisure businesses in England, worth up to £6,000 per premise. The Treasury has set aside £683m for these payments, which will be administered through local authorities and will be available in the coming weeks. Further grants for businesses in England, worth £102m, intended to help businesss most in need, and again administered through local authorities. The resumption of the statutory sick pay rebate scheme, which will reimburse employers in the UK with fewer than 250 workers for the cost of paying statutory sick pay for Covid-related absences for up to two weeks. An extra £30m for arts organisations in the UK, paid through the culture recovery fund. In addition, the Scottish government will receive £150m, the Welsh government £50m and the Northern Ireland executive £25m to offset the England-only spending. Read more from my colleagues Andrew Sparrow and Richard Partington here: As the Omicron variant continues to spread throughout the country, most Britons seem to be taking matters into their own hands and self-policing in order to avoid catching Covid before the festive weekend, according to a survey conducted by Ipsos MORI. Here are some of the results of the survey: Nine in 10 (89%) say they have already or plan to wear their face mask more while the same proportion are already or will start sanitising/washing their hands more regularly. Eight in 10 (81%) are keeping or plan to keep their distance while socialising (such as not hugging or shaking hands with people), and a similar proportion have already or plan to have their booster jab (80%). Two-thirds say they have/will test themselves with lateral flow tests more regularly (67%) while the same proportion are shopping online rather than in store in order to avoid catching the virus. A majority of Britons are also taking matters into their own hands by avoiding public transport (58% have done so or plan to), not attending social gatherings in friends or family’s houses and not going to pubs or restaurants (both 57%). Just under half, 45% of workers say they are or are going to work from home instead of the office, while 47% that they have not/plan not to attend their work Christmas party. When asked to consider the restrictions currently in place to limit the spread of the coronavirus, just over four in ten say they are not strict enough (44%) while 36% say they are about right and another 16% that they are too strict. Gideon Skinner, head of political research at Ipsos MORI, said of the findings: As the debate continues on the best approach to deal with the rapid spread of the Omicron variant, Britons themselves say they are taking steps to avoid a Covid Christmas, such as wearing masks, washing hands and keeping their distance when socialising – and many are planning to get a booster jab if they haven’t already got one. Around four in ten say they have avoided social gatherings at others’ houses or going to pubs and restaurants, and another one in six say they plan to do so. Few expect there to be a quick return to normality, and on the restrictions themselves as throughout the pandemic most people think they are about right or not strict enough – only a small minority (although a slightly increasing one) think they are too strict. But views are split – not quite half think the restrictions are not strict enough, and there is a clear age divide, with older people more in favour of tighter restrictions than the young. The cabinet office minister, Stephen Barclay, has said imposing plan B Covid measures in England has caused ‘significant behaviour change’ to consumers’ habits, adding that the Treasury will respond to the concerns of businesses later on Tuesday. Speaking on BBC Breakfast, Barclay said implementing more restrictions would come at a ‘very significant economic cost’. David Deans of BBC Wales has shared a letter written by Tory Senedd leader Andrew RT Davies. Davies is calling for a recall of the Senedd and has complained that MSs should have the chance to debate and vote on new restrictions during recess. Although Nicola Sturgeon has assured the Scottish public they will not have to change their Christmas Day plans, the country’s Hogmanay celebrations hang in the balance today. The cabinet is considering this morning whether to cancel largescale events including Hogmanay street parties, concerts and sporting fixtures, before the first minister’s regular Covid statement to Holyrood just after 2pm. Wales has already announced plans to close nightclubs and to hold sporting events without crowds from Boxing Day. One major concern is Edinburgh’s annual Hogmanay street party, which is currently going ahead at a reduced capacity of 30,000, who must show evidence of a negative lateral flow test to attend the ticketed event. Yesterday London mayor Sadiq Khan cancelled a New Year event for 6,500 key workers and members of the public in Trafalgar Square. The announcement comes as the row between devolved government and the UK Treasury over Covid funding continues. Sturgeon was described as “utterly incredulous” to discover that neither the Prime Minister nor the Chancellor were on Sunday’s Cobra call with the devolved nations to discuss a further funding package. She has made it clear that she favour more significant and immediate restrictions but points out that her government, with no borrowing powers, cannot offer the necessary compensation for such closures. The Treasury announced further funding to devolved governments at the start of the week, but it remains unclear whether this is “new” cash or an advance of money already budgeted for. All sporting events in Wales will be held behind closed doors from Boxing Day due to the surge in coronavirus cases, the Welsh government has announced. The economy minister, Vaughan Gething, announced the new measures for both indoor and outdoor sporting events in a bid to slow the spread of the Omicron variant. The measures mean that a number of events, including the Welsh Grand National, football and rugby union fixtures, will be closed to spectators. Sporting events over the Christmas period are one of the big highlights of the year. Unfortunately, the new Omicron variant is a significant development in the pandemic and could cause a large number of infections,. We need to do everything we can to protect people’s health and control the spread of this awful virus. Throughout the pandemic we have followed scientific and public health advice to keep people safe. The advice is clear – we need to act now in response to the threat of Omicron. We are giving people as much notice of these decisions as we can. Crowds will come back as soon as possible. We want everyone to be here to enjoy their favourite sports. Read the full story here: What new measures are thought to be under consideration in England? The prime minister is understood to be considering three options to curb the spread of Omicron. The least restrictive would be asking the public to limit social mixing, without legal enforcement. This would bring England into line with measures in place in Scotland, where people have been advised to reduce their socialising and limit gatherings to three households. A step up from this would be mandatory restrictions on household mixing, the return of social distancing, and forcing pubs and restaurants to close at 8pm. The third option is a return to full lockdown, or something like it, with a two-week “circuit breaker” rumoured to be on the cards. Boris Johnson said on Friday he was not “closing things down”, but increasing pressures on the NHS may prompt a rethink. Given Omicron’s transmissibility, would 2-metre social distancing make a difference? Although Omicron appears to be more transmissible than previous variants, the fundamental mechanisms for transmission probably remain the same – the virus is emitted in aerosols and droplets from breathing, talking, singing, coughing and sneezing. Cath Noakes, a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) and a professor of environmental engineering for buildings at the University of Leeds, said: “We don’t yet know whether people with Omicron emit more virus or whether the balance of transmission at close proximity versus through the air at a longer distance has changed. But regardless, the concentration of aerosols and droplets is always greater at closer distance and hence physical distancing remains an important measure. “However, we know from experience throughout the pandemic – not just Omicron – that in many environments, 2-metre distancing on its own is not enough, and people can be infected when they share a poorly ventilated room with each other.” Another advantage of 2-metre distancing is that it restricts the number of people in indoor settings, reducing the chances of an infectious person being present – and the number of people they could transmit the virus to. For the same reason, the return of social distancing would be extremely bad news for hospitality businesses. Read the answers to more frequently asked questions here: There have been questions about whether parliament could be recalled from their break in time before Christmas day, but my colleague Andrew Sparrow points out that actually in theory, they could be called back to make a decision about Covid restrictions on the day itself: More museums have been forced to close due to the surge in cases of Covid-19. On Monday it emerged that at least five national museums, including the Natural History Museum and Edinburgh Castle were shutting their doors because of Covid-related staff absences. Several other attractions have also announced they have closed, or will close, early. They include London’s Museum of the Home, the Bexhill Museum, the Richmond Museum, and the Soldiers of Oxfordshire Museum (Sofo) in Woodstock. In a tweet Sofo said: “We’ve had to move to a #PlanB of our own - we now close from 5pm Sunday 19th December 2021.” The museum of the Home has announced it will close on Wednesday and will not reopen until 4 January. The museum of Richmond said it had decided to close for the festive season “earlier than planned”. Bexhill Museum, meanwhile, has closed until Boxing Day when it plans to reopen at 11am. A total of 764 deaths registered in England and Wales in the week ending December 10 mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). This is down 4% on the previous week and is the lowest number of deaths since the week to October 15, when the total was 713. Around one in 16 (6.4%) of all deaths registered in England and Wales in the week to December 10 mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate. Some 65 care home resident deaths involving Covid-19 in England and Wales were registered in the week to December 10, down slightly from 67 in the previous week. In total, 44,406 care home residents in England and Wales have had Covid-19 recorded on their death certificate since the pandemic began. The ONS figures cover deaths of care home residents in all settings, not just in care homes. The DUP leader Sir Jeffrey Donaldson has tested positive for Covid, he has announced on Twitter. He said he fell ill after returning from London last week. The UK government borrowed £17.4bn in November, outstripping economists’ predictions and suggesting debt could far overshoot officials’ forecasts if the Omicron coronavirus variant slows the economy as expected. It was the highest November borrowing since comparable records began 30 years ago, barring last year. During the furlough scheme last year, the Treasury under Rishi Sunak set successive peacetime records for monthly borrowing as it covered the costs of 80% of salaries for millions of people as well as support schemes for businesses. Significant borrowing has continued in 2021, with £136bn borrowed between April and November, according to data published on Tuesday by the Office for National Statistics. That was the second highest since records began in 1993. It’s Rishi Sunak, not the Bank of England, who needs to act to get the UK’s economy firing againCarys RobertsRead more The November borrowing was higher than the £16bn a poll of economists by Reuters predicted. Higher debt interest costs of £4.6bn and increased spending on the vaccine programme and test and trace contributed to the higher figure. Government borrowing is likely to come under further scrutiny in the coming months from within the Conservative party. Public sector net debt – the amount borrowed over the years – was £2.3tn at the end of November, or 96.1% of GDP. That was the highest debt-to-GDP ratio since March 1963, when it was 98.3%. Read more here: The Treasury is set to respond today to concerns of businesses suffering financially from the latest Covid wave, a minister has said, while a leading scientist has added that the country is facing the most uncertain period of the pandemic since March 2020. The cabinet office minister Steve Barclay said that, even though at cabinet on Monday ministers held back from a decision to press ahead with further restrictions, the plan B measures already implemented were having an impact. Barclay told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: We’re acutely aware that, as a consequence of plan B, we have seen significant behaviour change. You see that for example, in restaurant bookings. That is why the chancellor [Rishi Sunak] has been engaging with industry leaders. Barclay said Sunak was talking to industry figures about their financial predicament and the government would be saying more about this issue later on Tuesday. Barclay also said, in a separate interview, that the government was “keen to keep businesses open” and and that hospitality firms “should continue to plan for the bookings they have”. Read the full story here: “Infighting” and “jockeying” for the Conservative leadership has taken over from Covid decision-making, Labour has said. Asked by Times Radio whether the government has provided clarity by saying that decisions on new restrictions will be taken at a later date, Labour Party chairwoman Anneliese Dodds said this is not the case. She said: Most of the read-outs from those meetings and the rumours that have spread since suggest that really this is about disagreement within a group of senior conservatives, jockeying for position to be the next leader of the Conservative Party rather than actually soberly looking at the evidence both health and economic evidence and taking a decision. We do need a Government right now that is now focused on the national interest, not infighting within the Conservative Party. Dodds also said Labour would “follow the evidence” if it was in power, pointing to decision-making by the Welsh Labour government based on the latest scientific advice. Sir Jeremy Farrar, a former member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, has told the Today programme “each of us can do things today that will make the chance of further restrictions lighter”. He added: Omicron is spreading unbelievably fast. It is a phenomenal variant transmission. There is great uncertainty about what is it going to lead to in terms of pressure on the health system, people going to hospital, particularly people dying, but also what impact is it going to have on the broader society, staff absences, the ability to have functioning other services, so there is great uncertainty. My personal view is that I think we can wait at the moment until there are more restrictions formally placed. A top scientist has said we “cannot afford to cross our fingers and hope this crisis blows over” as the Omicron variant of Covid-19 spreads across the world. Dr Jeremy Farrar, director of Wellcome, said in a statement: “As we have learned from the very beginning of this pandemic, it’s better to act sooner than later.” He said it was essential that governments act “swiftly and accordingly, paying close attention to the data”. To bring Omicron under any form of control, he said, it’s critical that transmission is slowed. If not, we could see profound impacts on health systems but also across sectors such as education, hospitality, public transport, police and essential national infrastructure as infections prevent people from working. No country can afford to think they are an exception. It is staggering and deeply frustrating that two years into this pandemic – when we have gathered so much evidence and made huge scientific progress – that governments are still not anticipating events and acting early or working together anywhere near the scale that is required. He also warned that the government shouldn’t just focus on domestic issues but think about the bigger picture in order to get Covid under control. He said: Without a truly global response, where we urgently increase access to tests, treatments and vaccines in all countries – not just those with buying power – we cannot expect to achieve lasting recovery. Global leaders had indicated through pledges they understand the problem, but all too often these remain just that – pledges. We are far beyond the time for warm words. Countries around the world cannot afford to wait for high-income nations to act on their promises. We can do better. We must do better. At the same time, we must invest far more now in next generation therapeutics and vaccines, ones that not only stop sickness and death, but also prevent transmission and work against potential new variants. Next year, we must do what we have so far failed to do – we must get ahead of this pandemic and break this vicious reactive cycle. There would be “economic consequences” to further Covid restrictions, a minister has stated as he said Parliament is not yet due to be recalled to discuss new measures. Steve Barclay told BBC Breakfast: The prime minister has given a commitment that where there are additional regulations bought forward that parliament would be recalled in order that members of parliament can scrutinise and debate those issues, but we are not at that stage. We are looking closely at the data and we need to recognise there are economic consequences to further restrictions. There is much that we still don’t know but we are still looking at that data on what are very finely-balanced decisions. Barclay said people should have a “cautious” Christmas, according to a government minister who has changed his own plans. He told LBC he had downsized the number of family members at his Christmas celebrations this year, with only his in-laws attending. The cabinet office minister said: We are saying to people that they should continue with Christmas but do so in a cautious way. That is what I will be doing with my own family. We can all protect our families and friends by having the booster. When asked what a cautious Christmas is, he added: “I think it is thinking about how many people we need to see. Some of my family won’t be coming over at Christmas. My wife’s parents will be joining us but others will not.” New Covid restrictions are unlikely to be imposed before Christmas amid deep cabinet divisions but Boris Johnson warned further measures remain on the table, with data on the threat of Omicron monitored “hour by hour”. The prime minister was accused of failing to follow scientists’ advice on the need for immediate restrictions while leaving millions of people and businesses in limbo after a two-hour cabinet meeting ended with no decision on Monday. During the meeting, scientific advisers briefed ministers on the latest data including a steep rise in hospitalisations in London, with the UK’s highest number of Omicron cases, while 91,743 people tested positive for Covid on Monday across the UK. Afterwards, the prime minister said the arguments for and against stricter measures were “finely balanced” and the situation was “extremely difficult”. Read the full story by my colleagues Aubrey Allegretti, Peter Walker and Sarah Butler from last night here: The effect that lockdowns have on people’s lives is as bad as going to hospital, Sir Iain Duncan Smith has warned amid the rise of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 and uncertainty over whether or not new restrictions will be brought in. The former leader of the conservative party told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: We need to understand the effect of lockdown is dramatic across so many areas of people’s lives, which equates to the same as people going into hospital. He said the government to make a decision about further restrictions only when there is a “wider range of information on the effect of lockdown”. Duncan Smith said: We do not want to end up where we were last Christmas and we do have a significantly vaccinated population and that has a huge effect on hospitalisation, so we are under different circumstances than we were last January. Scientists have said waiting to implement further restrictions until the new year would “almost certainly be too late to have a material impact on the epidemic”. The prime minister announced after a cabinet meeting that he would not be introducing any further Covid restrictions for now, adding: “The situation is extremely difficult and the arguments either way are very, very finely balanced.” Yet, with Omicron infections currently doubling within 48 hours in most regions of the UK, the country may already have reached a ceiling where the rate of growth begins to fall and case numbers plateau. Paul Hunter, a professor of medicine at the University of East Anglia. believes that point could come within days, with or without interventions. “If we implement control measures now, they are unlikely to be sufficient to reverse the growth, only slow it,” he said. “But there may still be benefits in slowing the peak, in terms of flattening the curve.” One solution that appears to be on the table is a return to the “step 2” measures introduced as part of the roadmap out of lockdown earlier this year – chiefly, people only being allowed to socialise indoors with members of their household or a support bubble, and outdoor socialising being limited to groups of six people or two households, including at pubs and restaurants. Prof Christina Pagel, the director of UCL’s clinical operational research unit, said: Waiting for definitive evidence that it could cause the NHS to be overwhelmed will be too late to avert the crisis. Instead, the government should follow Sage [the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies] advice and return to step 2 of the roadmap immediately to prevent thousands of infections over the coming days and then monitor the situation hour by hour so that measures can be lifted as quickly as possible, hopefully even in time to enable limited household mixing over Christmas weekend. Read the full story here: The government will “say more” about its discussions with business leaders calling for more Covid financial support later today, a minister has said. When asked about measures to help businesses struggling this Christmas due to Covid restrictions, cabinet office minister Steve Barclay told BBC Breakfast: The chancellor was talking to industry leaders about this very issue last night. We will say more about this later today. We recognise obviously we are keen to keep businesses open and businesses should continue to plan for the bookings they have. We absolutely recognise that through Plan B and the behaviour change there has been an impact on those bookings. The government will “look closely at the data” about whether or not to have a circuit-breaker lockdown after Christmas, a minister has said. When asked if the measure was being considered, cabinet office minister Steve Barclay told LBC Radio: We are looking closely at the data, there is much we still don’t know about the severity of Omicron, how it leads to hospital admissions. We are looking particularly at the London data, there is a higher prevalence of Omicron particularly in London. Asked if he had been among members of the cabinet calling for more data before new restrictions were introduced, Barclay said: I think it is right that the cabinet has a full and robust discussion. That is what people would expect. It is right that we look at the balance between protecting lives and livelihoods. Steve Barclay told BBC Breakfast that the prime minister has given a commitment that where there are additional regulations bought forward that parliament would be recalled in order that MPs can scrutinise and debate those issues, but he added: “We are not at that stage”. He said: We are looking closely at the data and we need to recognise there are economic consequences to further restrictions. There is much that we still don’t know but we are still looking at that data on what are very finely-balanced decisions. Meanwhile, scientists have reacted with dismay to Boris Johnson’s decision not to impose fresh restrictions to curb the spread of Omicron, emphasising that waiting until the new year would “almost certainly be too late to have a material impact on the epidemic”.Boris Johnson: (picking up phone) Who’s that? Steve Barclay: It’s me. Steve. Johnson: Steve who? Barclay: Steve Barclay. Johnson: That’s not helping. Barclay: Minister for the Cabinet Office. Johnson: Seriously? I hadn’t realised things had got that bad. Anyway, Simon, how can I help? Barclay: I’ve been asked to do the morning TV and radio shows and I could do with a bit of help trying to work out what the government’s current position on most issues is. Johnson: You and me both, pal. Barclay: Anyway, I don’t want to crash and burn like the Raabster, so let’s start with the parties. Are we still holding to the bullshit line that people were actually doing some work at these gatherings? Johnson: I like the use of the word gathering. Be sure to use it. And yes absolutely. The parties were all bona fide non-parties. The amount of work that was done there was staggering. It was just a shame that everyone had been too pissed to remember any of it. Barclay: Right. Well, do remember to invite me along the next time you’re planning an after-work work session. They look like a lot of fun. And how shall I explain Carrie’s presence in the photo? Johnson: I dunno. She just wanted to take the piss out of Matt Hancock. Barclay: Don’t we all? Johnson: Anyway, just stall. People are getting bored of hearing about all the mega dos we had while the little people were dumb enough to follow the rules. Just say: “it was a work event, where people only talked about work” over and over again and the interviewer will soon change the subject. Barclay: So what’s the government line on bringing in new restrictions to deal with the worsening pandemic? Johnson: We haven’t got one … Barclay: What? Johnson: Only kidding! Barclay: Really? Johnson: Er … What I really meant is that we continue to follow the science at all times … Barclay: But we don’t. Because if we did we’d be imposing more restrictions right now … Johnson: You’re focusing on the wrong scientists. Chris Whitty, Patrick Vallance and all the gloomsters at Sage just don’t understand Christmas. What people really want to hear is that everything’s going to be just fine even if it means most of their relatives dying before the end of January. Barclay: So … Johnson: So we’re following the collected wisdom of the CRG. Barclay: The Coronavirus Recovery Group? Johnson: The very same! Barclay: But Mark Harper and Steve Baker are complete morons. Johnson: I know, I know. But I’m toast if I don’t do as they say. So the plan is to nothing before Wednesday at the earliest. Then we have a press conference to say more restrictions are probably coming after Christmas and hope to God the CRG don’t kick off too loudly. Barclay: I think I get it. Can I say if you’ll be going to any Cobra meetings in the meantime? Johnson: Sure. They’re in my diary as something to miss. By the way, I did just want to say thank you for every member of the cabinet standing up when I entered the room yesterday. Barclay: Oh, that? That was Rishi’s idea. He had got us all singing “Stand up if you hate Boris” while we were waiting for you. It was the most fun any of us had had in weeks. Rishi Sunak: Did someone mention my name? Johnson: Sadly yes … You do realise I’m planning on remaining as prime minister for the foreseeable future … Sunak: Whatevs … I can wait. Liz Truss: I can’t. Sunak: I suppose you want me to sort out a bailout package for all those businesses affected by our new restrictions? Though I can’t for the life of me see why everyone doesn’t use the free time like me to chill out on a mini-break in California. Johnson: But the whole point is that we haven’t imposed any new restrictions … Sunak: I know. But people are acting as if we have because they don’t trust us to make the right judgment calls on public health. I’ll tell you what I’ll do. I’ll stump up £1bn – not from my own personal bank account, of course, though sometimes I think it would be a whole lot easier if I did – and offer a few businesses £6,000. Johnson: Why £6,000? Sunak: Why not? It’s roughly what you spent on every Downing St party this time last year. Johnson: Fair enough. Sunak: It won’t be enough and people are bound to moan, mind. But don’t come running to me if loads more businesses go broke if we need to impose a circuit-breaker after Xmas. Truss: Er … excuse me. Isn’t it about time I had some attention? The trouble with that Lord Frost was that he was just too soft. Imagine only triggering article 16. I’m going to trigger articles 1 to 15 as well … Johnson: What have I done? Everyone: Nothing. That’s the whole point. Johnson: “Dear UK. I am planning to do nothing. Some of you will find it hard to tell the difference. Have a great Christmas and I hope you don’t die.” A Farewell to Calm by John Crace (Guardian Faber, £9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The convictions of four asylum seekers for driving small boats across the Channel have been found unsafe by the court of appeal in a ruling that identified systemic failings in such prosecutions. The three judges in the case said the convictions “must be quashed in due course”. Three of the men who appealed had their convictions quashed on Tuesday; a fourth man’s appeal is pending as the Crown Prosecution Service is seeking a retrial of his case. All four men were convicted after being filmed driving dinghies bringing asylum seekers across the Channel. But the judges said that in order to secure convictions in cases of this kind, the prosecution must prove that the person accused of driving the boat “knew or had reasonable cause to believe that his act was assisting entry or attempted entry into the United Kingdom without leave”. The men were all appealing against convictions they received at Canterbury crown court for assisting unlawful immigration by piloting small boats across the Channel. Lord Justice Edis, Mrs Justice May and Mr Justice Blake heard the case. They said in their ruling: “We invited the Crown Prosecution Service to help us on how it came about that the law was misunderstood when investigating, charging and prosecuting these cases.” New CPS guidance about this kind of case was welcomed in the judgment. The judgment states that criminal investigations and subsequent prosecutions were launched without careful analysis of the law and appropriate guidance to those conducting interviews, taking charging decisions and presenting cases to courts. “It appears also that the judges in the small number of courts where these cases are tried and defence practitioners followed the flawed view of the law which developed without conducting analysis of their own resulting in an erroneous shared approach. Although this is obviously less than ideal, allocating blame is less important than sorting out the consequences,” the ruling states. All four who were convicted helped steer the boats they were travelling in, were intercepted by Border Force vessels, escorted to shore and then taken to the Kent Intake Unit for the initial processing of their asylum claims. The four men whose convictions were found to be unsafe are: Samyar Ahmadii Bani, 38, from Iran, who was convicted in November 2019 and sentenced to six years in prison; Mohamoud al Anzi, 55, from Kuwait, who was convicted in February 2021 and sentenced to three years and nine months; Fariboz Taher Rakei, 60, from Iran, who was convicted in March 2021 and sentenced to four years and six months; and Ghodratallah Donyamali Zadeh, 37, from Iran, the only person to plead guilty, who was sentenced to two years in October 2020. The CPS is seeking a retrial in Rakei’s case. Seven other cases raising similar issues are due to be heard by the court in January. Tuesday’s ruling is the latest in a series of blows to the government, with the new nationality and borders bill ramping up penalties for those accused of steering dinghies across the Channel. The home secretary has suffered a series of defeats in the high court this year. They include: having to make payments to trafficking victims who had financial support removed at the start of the pandemic; being required to provide a grant of leave to remain for trafficking victims; and having to give protections for people in immigration detention who have HIV. Ben Stuttard, a solicitor at Commons who represented Zadeh, welcomed the ruling. “Pending cases before the crown court will no doubt be reviewed by prosecuting authorities and some cases may be discontinued. Mr Zadeh and others have served prison sentences in appalling conditions for a crime they did not commit and were denied the opportunity to fairly defend.” Karen Doyle, a founding member of Movement for Justice, also welcomed the judgment. “This judgment makes clear that seeking asylum is not a crime. However, several asylum seekers still face trial in 2022 and several are still in prison.” A CPS spokesperson said: “We won’t hesitate to prosecute those suspected of immigration offences if our legal test for a prosecution is met and [the offences are] against the law as it currently stands. “Since prosecuting these cases, new judgments have clarified a very complicated section of law. In the summer we published revised guidance – taking into account recent judgments – about prosecuting those who exploit and profit from the desperation of others or put lives at risk through controlling or piloting overcrowded small boats across the busiest shipping channel in the world or confining them in lorries.”The relief is immense. But so is the challenge that lies ahead. Gabriel Boric’s sweeping victory over his far-right opponent José Antonio Kast in Chile’s presidential election on Sunday was welcome to all those alarmed at the prospect of a leader who admires the country’s late dictator Augusto Pinochet and embraces Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro. Polls had predicted that Mr Boric would win modestly in the second round; instead, with a 12 percentage point lead on a high turnout – giving him more votes than any president in history – he has a resounding mandate. Now Chile’s youngest ever president-elect, just 35, must attempt to push through his ambitious pledges of sweeping reform – including abolishing the private pension system, raising taxes, increasing the minimum wage and forgiving student debt – in a polarised nation. Undoubtedly, many were driven to support him by the prospect of a Kast presidency, with potential echoes of both Pinochet and Trump. Mr Kast, the son of a Nazi, railed against migrants and the “gay lobby” and said he would ban abortion (already extremely tightly restricted). But the deeper roots of Mr Boric’s success lie in the explosion of protest in 2019 over the cost of living, inadequate welfare and public services in one of the world’s most unequal countries; 1% of the population owns 25% of its wealth, according to the UN. While foreign investors have long hailed Chile as a success story, more than half of households are classed as economically vulnerable. Many have had enough of free-market dogma. Though detractors warn that Mr Boric is inexperienced, others are hungry for a new start. Mr Boric is the most leftwing leader since Salvador Allende was overthrown by the 1973 coup, and was drawn into politics as a student protester, but he is hardly a firebrand. He positions himself in the European social democratic tradition. He is of a new generation: a feminist and environmentalist who wants better mental health services and who says he has obsessive compulsive disorder. He proclaimed that “if Chile was the cradle of neoliberalism, it will also be its grave”, but also moderated his message over the campaign and reached out to the centrist left. Following his victory, he has pledged to unite the country. His victory has buoyed those who see a swing to the left in Latin America – including Brazil’s former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, hoping for his own comeback next year. But while some hope the devastation that the pandemic has wrought in the US and Brazil has shown the perils of rightwing populists such as Donald Trump and Mr Bolsonaro, there is still plenty of power on the right. Mr Kast was unexpectedly swift and gracious in conceding the election. But the peso fell to a historic low against the dollar on news of Mr Boric’s win, and stocks plunged 10%, reflecting the business class’s fear that a system which has cherished their interests over those of ordinary Chileans is about to change. The right are also anxious about the rewriting of the Pinochet-era constitution. Mr Boric must now attempt to enact his agenda in a split legislature and to satisfy both his base and those he has more recently won over, while keeping the rightwing elite at bay. He has proved himself an adept negotiator and a pragmatic judge of political possibilities. He will never have needed those skills more.In August 1965, the German-born, Oxford-educated economist EF Schumacher published an article in the Observer. Titled “Help them to help themselves”, it criticised the prevailing model of aid to the developing world and proposed a new emphasis on regional planning and “intermediate technology”. If the west would give up trying to impose the latest production methods, he argued, it could instead unleash the “power of self-help”. That article led to the creation of a charity today known as Practical Action. The approach it pioneered, of supporting local people to make incremental changes to improve their lives, lies at the heart of the Guardian and Observer’s 2021 charity appeal. All over the world, as our recent “Living on the frontline of global heating” series showed, climate breakdown is having disastrous consequences for the people and communities who (along with their ancestors) have contributed least to the problem of global heating. Practical Action and the other three charities that we are supporting cannot stop carbon emissions. But they can, and will, help people in some of the hardest-hit areas and communities to adapt, survive and thrive. Practical Action does this by supporting farmers – for example, by supplying climate-resilient seeds and helping them to develop new practices. It also funds schemes that provide flood warnings, repair damage and develop clean energy. The Global Greengrants Fund UK, with whom we have partnered before, has overlapping aims, but a different focus: it identifies grassroots climate projects, including those led by indigenous people and focused on their rights, and awards micro-grants. In 2019, it channelled £250,000 donated by Guardian and Observer readers to rainforest protection groups in the ecologically critical Amazon basin. The Environmental Justice Foundation (EJF) campaigns for climate refugees, who lack status and protection in international law. In rich western countries, particularly those with temperate climates, we have so far been relatively protected from the most dangerous effects of the climate crisis. But all over the world, people are brutally exposed by environmental degradation, including deforestation, overfishing and water shortages. In the two decades since it was formed, the EJF has worked in some of the world’s least-accessible countries, using film and other tools to shine a light on human rights abuses linked to environmental insecurity. Finally, Kew is famous for its stunning gardens and botanical collections – one in London, another at Wakehurst in Sussex. But the Royal Botanic Gardens also has an important presence in Madagascar, one of the world’s diversity hotspots, where Kew scientists have worked for 40 years. The island is experiencing terrible droughts and cannot afford to build the pipeline that it needs to protect both nature and livelihoods, as was highlighted by its environment minister in Glasgow. The Kew charity will use its share of this year’s fundraising total to develop agricultural systems and restore denuded land (sometimes called rewilding) in such a way as to support people and protect their country’s extraordinary nature. The shortfall in the climate finance package promised by rich countries to poor ones is among the many grave failures of climate diplomacy. Our appeal cannot, of course, fill that huge gap. But thanks to the generosity of our readers, and despite the cancellation of last weekend’s telethon, we can make a meaningful difference to the lives of some of the people on the frontline of the climate crisis.Premiership rugby clubs would struggle to survive another lockdown, the Bristol director of rugby Pat Lam has warned, after tighter restrictions on sporting events in Wales and Scotland put officials on red alert. Matches in Wales will go behind closed doors from Boxing Day while crowds in Scotland will be capped at just 500 people for three weeks from 26 December. Lam has voiced his concerns should restrictions in England tighten while Six Nations organisers will also be paying close attention given Scotland are due to host England on the first day of next year’s competition on 5 February and considering there is no current end date to the new measures in Wales. Some Premiership clubs were driven to the brink of bankruptcy when the league was put on hold between March and August last year before last season was played out in largely empty stadiums. Compounding matters, central funding from the Rugby Football Union took a swingeing cut with some clubs losing around £1m a month before full crowds returned this season. On Tuesday the prime minister, Boris Johnson, did not rule out further restrictions being introduced after Christmas to combat the spread of the Omicron variant, which could in turn affect sporting events. Harlequins, who are hopeful of a crowd in excess of 70,000 for the Big Game at Twickenham next Monday, are now facing an anxious wait in the coming days. In the longer term, when asked if the Premiership could survive in the event of another lockdown, Lam, who revealed last week that Bristol’s cancelled match against the Scarlets cost the club £300,000, said: “I don’t think so. People look at us and think, ‘They have got [owner] Steve Lansdown, a billionaire,’ but what people tend to forget is we don’t have what Steve is worth. Steve has put in his time here close to £80m of his own money into Bristol rugby, and that is a lot of money. “We have a fantastic product. Professional rugby is a great game, but the reality is there are a lot of wealthy people who are losing money. I don’t mean to be all doom and gloom, but this is not as cosy as people think. I am pretty sure PRL [Premiership Rugby Limited] will be talking to the government. The decision by the Premier League to keep going was an important one for rugby as well.”The NHS has increased the daily rate of booster vaccinations by three-quarters in a week – but remains short of the roughly 1.5m jabs a day needed to match Boris Johnson’s promise of a booster jab for all those eligible by the end of the year. One group of health service bosses said the NHS “should not be blamed” if the target is not met, reflecting concern there could be political recriminations if the goal set by the prime minister just over a week ago is not reached. On Monday, 897,979 boosters were administered around the UK, compared with 513,722 a week ago, the day after the prime minister brought forward the vaccination target in a televised address. There remain 15.1 million people across the UK who had a second jab before the end of September and have not yet had a booster – and there are 10 days, excluding Christmas Day, to complete the programme in line with the prime minister’s pledge. Johnson had promised that everybody eligible aged 18 or over “will have the chance to get their booster before the new year” – a commitment that applied to England but has been matched by Northern Ireland. Wales has pledged to offer the jab to all able to receive one by the end of the year. NHS bosses were not given any notice of Johnson’s commitment. Saffron Cordery, the deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents NHS Trusts, said it had always known the pledge was ambitious – and emphasised the speed at which the number of vaccinations had been increased. “We must avoid a situation where blame is placed on the NHS, when staff are working completely flat out to get jabs in arms at a time when they are also working through a significant backlog of routine care,” she added. Scotland, however, has already walked away from matching Johnson’s promise. Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, wants 80% of the eligible population vaccinated with boosters before the new year and, on Tuesday, said she was confident that target would be met. The figures for England show that 753,793 people received a booster on Monday, leaving 12.5 million people who have had a second jab still awaiting the extra vaccination. That amounts to more than 1.2m jabs a day over the remaining 10 days. Adding Northern Ireland and Wales leaves 13.8 million eligible people to go, a required rate of 1.4m a day. Labour’s health spokesperson, Wes Streeting, said the party had called on ministers to increase the booster programme to half a million a day in October. “The government’s delay has left the NHS with a difficult target to hit, but if anyone can do it, they can.” But the Conservatives said the party would not take lessons from Labour. “They wanted to keep us in the European Medicines Agency – if we had listened to them our world-leading rollout would have been massively delayed,” a party source said.Antonio Conte has laid bare the depth of his anger towards Uefa over the decision to throw Tottenham out of the Europa Conference League, describing it as incredible, unfair, disrespectful and influenced by “personal interest”. The Tottenham manager, who said his players were “very, very disappointed”, also made clear his determination to fight it at a higher level – in other words, the court of arbitration for sport. The club have confirmed they will think about going there with an appeal although, at present, it is nothing more than a consideration. Spurs were unable to play their final tie of the group phase at home against Rennes on 9 December after they were affected by a Covid outbreak with eight first-team players and five coaches testing positive. On the advice of the Health Security Agency the club temporarily closed the first-team area of their training ground. Uefa rules say games can be postponed if a club have fewer than 13 available senior players and no goalkeeper. When Tottenham’s attempts to find a new date for the tie before Uefa’s cut-off of 31 December failed, the governing body awarded Rennes a 3-0 walkover, meaning Vitesse advanced from second place to a two-leg play-off for the last 16. Had Spurs beaten Rennes, they would have finished second. “There are no positives [about easing a crowded calendar] and, for sure, this is an incredible decision,” Conte said, before Spurs’ Carabao Cup quarter-final at home against West Ham on Wednesday night. “This decision is not fair. It wasn’t our fault. It was because we had many, many players with Covid and the government decided to stop our training sessions, to stop our training centre. We deserved to play the qualification on the pitch. I’m very disappointed with Uefa because everybody knows the problem. It means that maybe someone does not know very well the problem that we are having. And I think only some personal interest.” Conte was asked to explain what he meant by “personal interest”, although he did not really do so. “For me, it’s very, very difficult, it’s very difficult to understand this decision,” he replied. “Tottenham started to play in this competition from this summer and now it’s unfair – for a decision that is not in our hands – to tell Tottenham: ‘Thanks very much. You went here, here and here but now you lose 3-0.’ “Why? We honoured the competition to play and to go around Europe. But now Uefa is taking a decision that I don’t like. It is lacking respect about our job.” Spurs said in a statement on Monday that, despite the disappointment, they had “to accept this ruling … Our focus now turns to the competitions we remain in”. Plainly, though, Conte is not ready to give up. The winners of the Conference League will secure a spot in next season’s Europa League. “I hope that in the future, in the next step, with the court, something can change,” he said. “Now it’s not definitive. Uefa have taken this decision but then there is another step to confirm or not this incredible decision. “Is the next step court? Yes. We are confident that in another step, they take a normal decision. Not a decision in our favour, a normal decision. It was incredible what Uefa did but also in the explanation. I have read [they said] that Tottenham couldn’t play the game for Covid cases and, despite this, they took this decision. But we are very, very confident for the next step. I can’t accept this [from Uefa].” Conte, who reported all of his players were now Covid negative, has re‑energised the squad since taking over from Nuno Espirito Santo – nobody more so than Eric Dier, who has starred in the middle of the back three. “Eric can become one of the best players in the world in his position,” the Italian said. “This role is perfect for him.”At a long and difficult cabinet meeting on Monday, hawkish ministers demanded “incontrovertible evidence” that Omicron risks overwhelming the NHS to justify the cost of taking action, while on Tuesday Boris Johnson confirmed his view that there is insufficient evidence to justify new measures – yet. While some clarity on the hospitalisation rate associated with the new variant should be available within a day or two, scientists have warned that getting the evidence ministers want may be “a tall order”. So why is it so hard to work out, and what does that mean for decision-making? Omicron cases are doubling quicker than every 48 hours – which means the number of individuals who will develop severe disease is also rising exponentially. However, it takes roughly 10 days from testing positive for Covid for this increase to be observed in the hospital data. Ten days ago, the total number of confirmed Omicron cases in the UK was 1,898. As of 19 December, the cumulative total was 45,145 – although the true number will be many times higher because a lot of infected people are not getting tested and there is a delay in confirming suspected Omicron cases. Hospitals in London are reporting an uptick in Covid admissions but 10 days from now the number is likely to have mushroomed, regardless of Omicron’s severity, because of the sheer number of infections. Many scientists remain sceptical of claims Omicron triggers less severe disease. More certain is that many of those who have been vaccinated will experience less severe disease, meaning fewer of these individuals will be admitted to hospital. Yet pinpointing precisely how much impact vaccinations – and especially boosters – will have is fraught with difficulty. Modelling studies help, but these tend to predict a range of scenarios. “You go from something that’s not as bad as last winter, to much worse. From a policymaking point of view, that’s not that helpful, because they don’t assign any probability to any of those scenarios,” said Dr Raghib Ali, a senior clinical research associate at the University of Cambridge MRC Epidemiology Unit. “I think incontrovertible evidence is a tall ask,” said Prof Sheila Bird, formerly of the Medical Research Council’s biostatistics unit at the University of Cambridge. “What I imagine [minsters] are trying to do is work out [what] is the effect of the booster immunisations on hospitalisation rates for Omicron versus Delta. But that depends upon how many people were boosted about four weeks ago, then had two weeks to develop full protection from that booster, in that time got Omicron versus got Delta, and then were hospitalised.” Part of the problem is that things are constantly changing: the rate at which people have been receiving boosters has changed, while fear about Omicron’s spread has prompted some people to behave more cautiously or to seek PCR tests in greater numbers. Others have said that risk to the NHS and other sectors of society isn’t so much about disease severity as the extraordinarily high number of infections. “It is transmission that drives impact more than severity,” Jeremy Farrer, the director of the Wellcome Trust and a former member of Sage, told the Today programme. He said the country was in “the most difficult, most uncertain” period of the pandemic so far. Even with high uptake of booster vaccines, there will be some who remain more vulnerable to severe disease, and not everyone has been boosted or had time for those boosters to take effect. Then there are roughly 6 million adults who haven’t been vaccinated at all. “That’s a lot of people, when the level of transmission is what it is today,” Farrer said. Uncertainties remain, but Ali believes a clearer picture should emerge imminently. “The key metric, which takes into account both the intrinsic severity of Omicron and the degree of human escape, is the case hospitalisation rate – so, for a given number of cases, what proportion ended up in hospital?” he said. “With Delta, that’s currently about 2%. With Omicron, we don’t know yet, but I’d have thought that should be coming by this week, because there have been enough cases now.” Yet even this estimate will be only a rough guess, due to the small number of cases and their demographics. Dr David Pascall, a postdoctoral research associate, also at the MRC Biostatistics Unit, said: “Estimates can be made in real time, but the early estimates will be imprecise and biased. Stable precise estimates will be only possible to generate early next year. Probably in the latter half of January. “At the moment, Omicron cases have been rising most in younger age groups who are likely to have less negative outcomes on infection. We have reasons to expect that this won’t last, not least because of the increased intergenerational mixing expected over the Christmas period. This will have unpredictable impacts, given the questions still remaining over the effectiveness of vaccine protection against Omicron. “As such, we can have expectations about how severe infections in this wave will be, but incontrovertible evidence on both absolute severity and severity relative to Delta (over the same time period) can only be generated retrospectively after hospitalisations occur.” However, concern isn’t limited to the NHS being overwhelmed. High rates of absence in key sectors such as education, law enforcement, or food processing and delivery could have unforeseen impacts on our lives in the coming weeks. Dr Simon Clarke, an associate professor in cellular microbiology at the University of Reading, said: “People understandably focus on hospitalisations and deaths, but we should not overlook the effects of a mass sickness on public services, infrastructure and economic activity.” And then there’s long Covid: infections need to be minimised to prevent the risk of long-term disability and suffering, experts warn. Waiting for incontrovertible evidence is a high-stakes gamble. The government placed a similar bet in March 2020 when it delayed introducing measures as other countries locked down. It lost, resulting in months of restrictions, hardship and unnecessary deaths. The UK is in a better situation now, thanks to the vaccines, but Omicron has added an extra dimension of uncertainty. It’s by no means certain ministers won’t lose again.Most of the people who lost their lives when their flimsy dinghy sank in the Channel last month have been named for the first time in a new investigation. The BBC World Service has named 20 of the people who travelled to the UK in search of a better life but drowned in the early hours of 24 November. The investigation has pieced together the final hours of the overladen dinghy’s journey. Official reports say there were at least 31 passengers on board, including a seven-year-old girl, but relatives of those who drowned believe there were 33 on the boat. Not all of the bodies have yet been found. French media has reported that three bodies recently washed up on the beach in Calais, but they have not yet been identified. Among those on board were members of the same family and people who had formed friendships. All hoped the UK would provide them with sanctuary and safety. Many of those who died were from Iraqi Kurdistan, but there were others from Ethiopia, Afghanistan, Somalia and Egypt. Of the 27 bodies recovered, seven were women, two were teenagers and one was a child. Many had tried to reach the UK multiple times before, either by dinghy or using other means. The final phone messages pieced together by the BBC reveal a chilling change of tone, from optimistic messages when people first boarded the boat to a growing sense of fear and panic when its engine failed. The right side of the boat later deflated and started to take in water. A message from one of those who died, “Hybar” Bryar Hamad Abdulrahman, 23, said: “We are starting our journey tonight. Pray for us.” The stretch of sea they crossed, between Calais and Dover, is 21 miles wide. The Channel is the busiest shipping lane in the world. According to the BBC report, the dinghy is thought to have cost about £400 and had space for no more than 20 passengers. The journey is thought to have started at about 10pm and things seemed to go well until about 1.30am when water started coming into the dinghy as one side deflated. Things deteriorated drastically when the boat’s engine failed at about 2.30am. The boat is thought to have sunk within 30 minutes. The passengers were left clinging to the remains of the dinghy in icy waters. At 3.42am, two passengers succeeded in getting through to British authorities who are thought to have asked for their location and told them to keep their phone torches on to help rescuers find them. But the phones are reported to have slipped into the water before they could do this. One of the survivors, Mohammed Isa Omar, told the BBC: “I saw people dying in front of me.” He said that was is a strong swimmer and managed to swim to a ship, which rescued him. By the time daylight came, there were two sightings of dead bodies: the first by people in another dinghy who phoned emergency services; the second by French fisher Karl Maquinghen and his crew on the trawler Saint Jacques II, who saw 15 bodies in the water. The maritime border between the UK and France in the Channel is not a clear one. Relatives of those who lost their lives have started a legal case asking for a public inquiry so that the full facts of what happened that night – the position of the dinghy at various times and the calls to and responses from the various emergency services – can be known. The 20 dead named by the BBC are: Kazhal Ahmed Khidhir, mother of: Hadiya Rzgar Hussein, 22; Mubin Rzgar Hussein, 16; and Hasti Rzgar Hussein, seven. Baran Maryam Nuri Mohamed Amin, 24; Mhabad Ahmad Ali, 32; Rezhwan Yasin Hassan,19; and Mohammed Qadir Aulla, 21. Deniz Afrasia Ahmed Mohammed, 27; Bilind Shukir Baker, 20; “Hybar” Bryar Hamad Abdulrahman, 23; Harem Serkaut Perot Muhammad, 28; and Hassan Mohammed Ali, 37. Mohammed Hussein Mohammed, 19; Muslim Ismael Hamad, 19; Shakar Ali Pirot, 30; Sirwan Alipour, 23; Zanyar Mustafa Mina, 20; Pshtiwan Rasul Farka, 18; and Twana Mamand Mohammed, 18.At first glance, the picture published by the Guardian of Downing Street staff spending time together in the garden of No 10 last May seemed to answer one big question: yes, they did gather for cheese and wine. But since it was published, a series of increasingly complex explanations of the event have emerged: how it constituted a staff meeting but also amounted to “exhausted people … having a drink after the formal business had been done”, or otherwise “individuals having a drink outside working hours, but still discussing work”. The image has prompted a wave of analysis, intrigue, anger and of course memes. Days on, a close analysis of the picture itself, however, throws up a number of further mysteries that are yet to be resolved … 1 How do you endure 17 of your husband’s staff colonising your garden for an important work meeting? Carrie Symonds (now Johnson) was said to be enjoying time in her private garden and seems to have taken the most sensible approach: ignore the staff and talk to your husband. Baby Wilfred does not seem that fussed. He may be engaged in his own work projects. 2 What is the correct wine and cheese pairing for an important garden-based work meeting attended by a baby? The photo was taken in the early evening of 15 May 2020, the temperature a balmy 18C. If you must drink red wine in such weather while you work, as this group appears to be, go for “something light and chillable – like a Fleurie from Beaujolais in France,” suggests the master sommelier Ronan Sayburn, founder of the Ronan Sayburn wine academy. That would go well with camembert or brie, he adds. Sadly, not even the Guardian’s crack imaging team can provide a high enough resolution picture to identify exactly what is on the cheeseboard, but the large, hard oblong that is visible looks suspiciously like … cheddar. 3 What is the man who appears to be the prime minister’s principal private secretary doing with his arms? Since this is a work event, the attender identified as the senior civil servant Martin Reynolds is perhaps pondering next steps while emphasising that the total number of coronavirus cases as of that evening – 236,711 – is this high. Since it is a work event, we can rule out that Reynolds is gesturing vaguely towards the setting sun to indicate what a lovely evening it is to unwind with a nice glass of red wine and some hard cheddar. 4 What is the man who appears to be Dominic Cummings thinking? This figure, almost horizontal despite the support of a sturdy rattan chair, is obviously turning Reynolds’ point over in his steel-trap mind, readying himself to cut through all the nonsense with a revolutionary counterproposal, and certainly not zoning out while his counterpart bangs on about what a lovely spring it is. He also needs some new trousers, further supporting the case that this is Cummings. 5 Is the venerable bookseller Daunt braced for a backlash as a result of the unfortunate appearance of one of their beloved tote bags? “I’m gonna double check with my elders and betters, but that’s probably going to be a no comment from us,” says a nice man who answers the phone at Daunt HQ, remaining admirably composed under the same sort of media pressure faced by the Peloton PR team over that Sex and the City controversy. He calls back to add: “Yeah, it’s broadly no comment, except to say we won’t be putting it on our website.” 6 What is the minimum number of work accessories required for a productive meeting? This image suggests an estimate of: one smartphone on a table, face down; one notebook on a table, closed; one phone actively in use, in a huddle on the other side of the garden; 19, or 20 if you include Wilfred, or 21 if you include Dilyn the dog, of the best minds in Westminster operating at peak capacity with no pens to take notes or whiteboards to scrawl terrifying bullet points on. This is pandemic management at its very rawest and most thrilling: Downing Street unplugged. 7 Is having absolutely no fun sufficient to qualify a meeting as a work event? If so, this group are the best evidence for the essential nature of this gathering. Based on the admittedly limited clues available, we can surmise that the three on the left are smiling and nodding awkwardly as one of the two in the middle tells an interminable story about his commute; the man standing slightly apart in the middle has abandoned all pretence of good manners to check the Guardian liveblog on his phone; and the two men in blue shirts on the right are being forced to break off an enjoyable session muttering about how much they dislike their colleagues by the presence of the awkward figure in the dark suit, clearly a superior, maybe even a minister, trying once again to be part of the gang. Nobody could begrudge this lot the several bottles on their table, or feel anything but relief on their part that at least one of them appears to be in a cooler. 8 What are these two up to? Easily the most mysterious corner of the image. Are they plotting, or flirting? If plotting, does that constitute a work conversation? If those adorable flashes of white – rear to the right, snout to the left – are indeed Dilyn the dog alongside James Slack, the PM’s then official spokesperson, how long until he (Dilyn) notices the cheese on the patio and makes a run for it? And is anyone making a mental note that this would make a really good venue for an aide’s excruciating press conference in 10 days’ time explaining his need to take his eyes for a test drive?Scott Perry, a Pennsylvania Republican and the first sitting member of Congress to be requested to provide documents and sit for an interview with the committee investigating the Capitol riot, said on Tuesday he would not comply with the panel. The news came shortly after Donald Trump provocatively announced that he will hold a press conference at his Mar-a-Lago resort on 6 January, the first anniversary of the deadly attack on Congress. Perry’s refusal to appear sets up a potentially fraught battle if the panel decides to subpoena him and he – like other Trump allies – decides to ignore that too. The committee has already recommended other no-shows, such as Trump aide Steve Bannon, be prosecuted for their non-compliance. Perry claimed the 6 January committee was “illegitimate, and not duly constituted under the rules of the US House of Representatives”. Successive court rulings have said that the committee was properly formed and does have the investigative powers it is using. The House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, rejected an attempt by the minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, to put Republicans including Jim Jordan of Ohio – a close Trump ally and a subject of investigation regarding the Capitol attack – on to the 6 January committee. Only two Republicans, Trump critics Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger, are now part of its work. Trump announced his press conference in a statement replete with familiar invective and lies about supposed electoral fraud and the House committee. “I will be having a news conference on 6 January [2022] at Mar-a-Lago to discuss all of these points, and more,” he said. “Until then, remember, the insurrection took place on 3 November, it was the completely unarmed protest of the rigged election that took place on 6 January.” Five people, including a Trump supporter shot by law enforcement and a Capitol police officer, died around the events of 6 January 2021, when a pro-Trump mob stormed Congress after he told supporters to “fight like hell” to overturn his defeat by Joe Biden. More than 700 people have been charged with offenses connected to the riot. Most rioters were not armed with guns but attacked police with other weapons. Guns and explosives were found and bombs planted. On Monday, one rioter who attacked police was sentenced to more than five years in jail. Trump was impeached for inciting an insurrection but acquitted at his Senate trial when enough Republicans stayed loyal. His continued presence in national politics and apparent intention to run for president again has stoked jagged divides which some observers fear point the US towards serious discord or even civil war. On Monday night the disgraced former Fox News host Bill O’Reilly, with whom the former president has staged an arena tour, said Trump was “gonna run again”. “I’m trying to tell President Trump, run on your record,” O’Reilly told NewsNation. “He’s gonna run again. I said, Run on your record, because your record’s pretty darn good.’” Trump seems determined to run, or merely to retain control of the Republican party, through stoking division and anger with false claims about the election and the most serious attack on the US Capitol since the war of 1812. In stark contrast, Pelosi has announced that Congress will mark the first anniversary of 6 January in a spirit of “solemn observance”. “Preparations are under way for a full program of events,” she said, “including a discussion among historians about the narrative of that day; an opportunity for members to share their experiences and reflections from that day; and a prayerful vigil in the evening.” The 6 January committee also expects to stage events in the new year, with public hearings as it closes in on Trump’s role in the riot. On Sunday, Kinzinger said the panel would determine if Trump committed a crime. “Nobody is above the law,” he said. “He’s not a king. Former presidents, they aren’t former kings.” Trump has sued, so far unsuccessfully, to stop the committee accessing White House documents from his time in power. Two of his closest aides are in serious legal jeopardy for taking similar stands. Bannon has pleaded not guilty to contempt of Congress for refusing to cooperate with the 6 January committee. He faces a fine and jail time if convicted. The House has recommended the same criminal charge for Mark Meadows, Trump’s last chief of staff and a former congressman. On Monday, citing sources close to Trump, the Guardian revealed his deepening fear as the 6 January committee continues its work. “The former president’s anger largely mirrors the kind of expletives he once directed at the Russia inquiry and the special counsel investigation [led by Robert Mueller] when he occupied the White House,” the Guardian reported. “But the rapidly accelerating investigation into whether Trump and top aides unlawfully conspired to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s victory at the 6 January joint session appears to be unnerving him deeply.” On Twitter, Peter Strzok, a former FBI agent and member of the special counsel’s team, wrote: “Almost as if – what did he say about Mueller? – ‘I’m fucked.’”My mother, Lili Armstrong, who has died aged 106, was a survivor of Nazi Germany and her life was affected by many of the significant events of the 20th century. Born in Berlin during the first world war, she was the daughter of Jewish parents, Jenny (nee Gutman) and Samuel Weiss. Her father ran a mineral water company but contracted stomach cancer and took his own life when Lili was two. Later on she was an aspiring concert pianist and also represented Berlin as a teenage sprinter just as Adolf Hitler was coming to power. In 1937 Lili managed to charm officials into allowing her to attend an agricultural course in Yugoslavia, which was then an established gateway for entry into Palestine. Her mother died of a heart condition shortly before the start of the second world war, while her half-sister Klaera and nephew Kurt were both murdered in Nazi concentration camps. In Palestine, Lili met my father, Walter Levy (who later changed his name to Peter Munk). They married and my brother, Ariel, was born in 1944. Lili was there during the first Arab-Israeli war, leaving the newly founded state of Israel in 1948 to join Walter in London only after nearly two years of separation. Later my father started the Commonwealth Players, one of the first multicultural acting groups, with Lili designing and painting the scenery. The marriage never recovered from their time apart. I was born in 1952, possibly a last-ditch attempt to save it. In the late 1950s my mother started working for Neville Armstrong, of the publishers Neville Spearman. Their relationship began soon after that. In 1976 they set up home in Suffolk but did not marry until 1999, after Neville’s first wife had died, when they were well into their 80s; my parents had divorced in 1967. Lili was vivacious, optimistic and sharp-eyed. She was also an avid theatre-goer, a lover of yoga and shoe polishing. In 1997 her life story was documented in the interview she gave for the USC Shoah Foundation in California, Steven Spielberg’s video archive of Holocaust witnesses. In later years, Lili left Suffolk after Neville died in 2008. At 94 she moved to London to start a new life; a broken hip did nothing to dent her enthusiasm or energy. She was an accomplished artist, attending classes once a week, and going to lectures at the University of the Third Age until dementia stopped her. A woman whose life stretched of more than a century, she was a force of nature. Lili is survived by Ariel and me, eight grandchildren, Sophie, Josh, Charlotte, Matthew, Isobella, Phoebe, Flora and Reuben, and two great-grandchildren, Lila and Oliver.It is not yet like the end days of Theresa May, where every cabinet decision could be seen through the prism of would-be successors positioning for the coming fight. But it is fair to say that Boris Johnson’s Covid decision-making is taking place in a new context. This was highlighted starkly by coverage of Monday’s long and inconclusive ministerial gathering about the spread of the Omicron variant, which was followed by repeated briefings from various camps about the need to either act now or sit tight and await more data. After being able to only say that the threat from Omicron was being monitored “hour by hour”, Johnson did act on Tuesday: confirming there would be no new Covid rules for Christmas in England, while keeping open the possibility of a tougher regime afterwards. Johnson’s cabinet has always had its share of hawks and doves over pandemic measures, with plenty of leaks about who was in which camp. But matters have recently changed, on several fronts. The most crucial is that just two years after his massive general election win, the PM has hit turbulent political waters, with plunging approval ratings and weeks of terrible publicity leaving him the butt of prime-time TV jokes, and the target of chants at sporting events. This, coupled with a series of damaging U-turns and a perception of drift, has emboldened many Tory MPs to either switch off or rebel, most notably the 99-vote mutiny over new Covid measures last week. It was thus notable that in the flurry of briefings after Monday’s cabinet meeting, many of the ministers most frequently linked to opposing new curbs, something unlikely to be popular with Tory MPs or members, were those expected to court these constituencies should Johnson’s time in No 10 end. Among these were Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, Liz Truss, the foreign secretary and favourite of the party faithful, and Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary whose stint leading the Covid vaccine rollout has greatly boosted his status. It is not a hard-and-fast rule. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, who is potentially considering another leadership try, was identified as in the more pro-restrictions camp. But even here, allies of Javid were keen to stress this is based purely on the data about Omicron, countering any notion he has been captured by the public health “blob”, not an impression likely to go down well with grassroots Tories. All this is notably complicated by the fact that imposing new Covid restrictions on a largely vaccinated public involves more nuanced decisions than was the case a year ago, even with a fast-spreading new variant, and thus the lines between hawks and doves can blur. Similarly, even the most rule-sceptic minister would admit that with so relatively little known about Omicron, not least the severity of the disease it tends to cause, that a few days of dramatic data could easily swing the argument again. Downing Street has been keen to knock back suggestions of a cabinet split, noting that Monday’s meeting was only ever planned as an information-sharing event for ministers. But one thing is clear. Even if Johnson had wanted to limit people’s Christmas plans, whether by advice or formal regulation, it is by no means clear this was politically viable. In the visceral words of one Tory MP, speaking before Tuesday’s decision to put back any change until after Christmas, had Johnson imposed restrictions now he would be a “dead man walking”. The prime minister knows this. So do his MPs. But perhaps most crucially, so do his rivals.The next mayor of New York City, Eric Adams, said on Tuesday he would postpone his inauguration ceremony, which was set for 1 January, due to the rise in cases of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. He did so shortly after the current mayor, Bill de Blasio, announced that residents who get a Covid-19 booster shot by the end of the year will receive $100. “Today we’re announcing a $100 incentive for anyone who gets a Covid-19 booster at a city-run site or with our partner Somos Care,” De Blasio said. “This is a limited time opportunity – through 12/31. “This is the moment. Get your booster and protect your family and city,” he said. In his own statement, Adams, like De Blasio a Democrat, said: “It is clear that our city is facing a formidable opponent in the Omicron variant. After consulting public health experts, we have decided that [the] inauguration ceremony will be postponed to a later date.” The Omicron variant is spreading rapidly. According to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Omicron is now the dominant version of the coronavirus in the US, making up 73% of new infections last week. CDC data revealed a nearly six-fold increase in Omicron’s share of infections in just one week. New York state reported that nearly 22,000 people tested positive on Friday, the highest single-day total for new cases since testing became widely available. More than half of the positive results came from New York City. City data indicates that the percentage of people who tested positive reached nearly 8% during the week of 13 December, more than double the seven-day average from the previous week. According to Dr Eric Legome, who oversees two of Mount Sinai Health System’s seven emergency rooms, ERs have seen about 20% more patients – with all conditions – in recent days. “We’re seeing a lot more treat-and-release” coronavirus patients than in earlier waves, he said. Many are looking for tests, help with mild or moderate symptoms, or monoclonal antibody treatment. So far only few are requiring oxygen or a hospital stay, Legome said. De Blasio said that over the last seven days, the city had seen an average of approximately 9,300 new Covid cases. “That will continue to rise in the next few weeks,” the mayor said in a press conference. In a separate announcement on Tuesday, Joe Biden was to say half a billion at-home tests would be sent free to the public this winter in attempts to combat Omicron. Delivery will start next month and a website will be set up to allow people to order tests and have them delivered to their homes for free.My wife, Barbara Hanley, who has died aged 76 of cancer, was a potter of distinction and member of the Craft Potters Association. Under the name Barbara Lock she exhibited her ceramics all over the UK. She also taught pottery to young people with special needs and was a campaigner for the rights of descendants of Nazi persecution in Germany. Born in Bushey, Hertfordshire, she was the daughter of Barbara Isralowicz, a Jewish refugee who escaped Germany in 1938, and George Seymour, a teacher of deaf people. Her early years were spent in various parts of the UK before the family settled in north London, where she always felt most at home. She went to Willesden county grammar school. Married young to Desmond Lock, a campaigner of the political left, and living in Bournemouth, she raised three sons while managing to graduate in ceramics at Bournemouth College of Art (now part of Bournemouth University). She combined being a busy mother with developing her own pottery, and also branching out into teaching pottery to young adults with special needs, at the Strathcona centre in Wembley, after the family moved to London in 1982, and qualifying as an art therapist. She divorced and moved around 1990 to south Wales, where I met her and we became partners, marrying in 2002. Her pottery blossomed, with subtle variations of style and innovation. She had a preference for using raku clay, low-fired and unglazed, and subtle colours inspired by the land and seascapes of Wales and France; latterly her approach was more sculptural, and she created forms reminiscent of birds. A member of the Craft Potters Association, the leading organisation for ceramics, she had her last exhibition at their London gallery in 2018. She was instrumental in founding the Makers’ Guild in Wales and was an active member of South Wales Potters. In recent years she showed at the Kooywood gallery in Cardiff and the Attic gallery in Swansea. In 2017 Barbara wrote a remarkable letter to the Guardian denouncing Germany’s failure to award nationality to all descendants of Nazi persecution, not just those with a Jewish father. Her protest led to the foundation of the Article 116 Exclusions Group, whose work under the leadership of Felix and Isabelle Couchman finally led to a change. Many new German citizens thus owe Barbara a debt. With firm republican, socialist and internationalist convictions, Barbara had razor sharp intelligence and a vast range of cultural interests. She also had empathy for others and an instinctive generosity, all reinforced by a keen sense of humour. She is survived by me, her children, Michael, Alex and Ben, five grandchildren and her brother, Tony.Britain’s equality watchdog has said that racism alleged to have taken place at Yorkshire County Cricket Club was probably unlawful and threatened legal action if appropriate steps are not taken by the club to address discrimination. The club has faced widespread condemnation after its former player Azeem Rafiq alleged it was institutionally racist, detailing years of “inhuman” treatment and abuse he suffered in his two spells there, including players of Pakistani heritage being called the P-word. On Tuesday, Marcial Boo, the chief executive of the Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC), said: “The accounts of racism and discrimination at Yorkshire County Cricket Club were upsetting and deeply concerning. Sports are meant to bring people of all backgrounds together. Racism has no place in any sport, business or society. “We have now reviewed the documentation and we consider it likely that an unlawful act has taken place.” Boo said the commission had confidence that the new management at the club was taking appropriate steps to deal with past failures. Roger Hutton stepped down as the club’s chairman in early November, and Mark Arthur resigned as chief executive a week later after public outrage over the treatment of their former player and the handling of the investigation into Rafiq’s allegations. Earlier this month, the club’s entire coaching team departed, in a move the new chairman, Kamlesh Patel, said was “in the best interests of the club”. The EHRC also welcomed the agreement of a 12-point action plan between Yorkshire and the England and Wales Cricket Board, which has itself been criticised for inaction after Rafiq first blew the whistle last year and for failing to act on racism within the game more generally. However, the regulator warned that the club could end up in court if it did not adequately put the plan into effect. “We will … be monitoring the club’s action plan closely and we reserve the right to take legal action if the action plan isn’t implemented properly,” said Boo. “We aim to work with the England and Wales Cricket Board and the regulators of other sports to ensure that all those participating, whether for fun, fitness, or as professionals, are not subjected to discrimination and harassment.” In devastating testimony last month to the digital, culture, media and sport select committee, Rafiq told MPs that he had faced repeated racist comments from senior players throughout two spells at Yorkshire between 2008 and 2018 and that the club had done nothing to stop it. He said that racism also seeped into the England dressing room. Rafiq said he had felt suicidal and that his experiences meant he did not want his son “to go anywhere near cricket”. The Pakistan-born player also recounted how, as a 15-year-old at Barnsley Cricket Club, he had wine poured down his throat despite this going against his Muslim faith. On the same day the equality watchdog announced its response to Yorkshire’s action plan, the club announced it had entered into a partnership with a Pakistan Super League team, the Lahore Qalandars, which would include opportunities for players at all levels of each club to gain experience and playing time with the other. Patel said it would “represent an exciting step toward a Yorkshire County Cricket Club that is welcoming and supportive to all”.University College London has become the first university to formally cut ties to the LGBTQ+ charity Stonewall, saying its membership of Stonewall’s programmes could inhibit academic freedom and discussion around sex and gender. UCL announced that it would end its involvement with Stonewall’s workplace equality index, which rates employers on their policies, and its diversity schemes, following a recommendation from the university’s most senior academics. “Following a period of debate within our community and careful consideration of the issues, UCL has now taken the decision that we will not re-join Stonewall’s diversity champions programme or make a submission to the workplace equality index,” UCL said in a statement. The university said its discussions had been “informed by thoughtful and respectful debates” at its equality, diversity and inclusion (EDI) committee and its academic board, with the EDI committee voting to retain involvement with Stonewall. But UCL’s management instead sided with the academic board, which voted against retaining links after an anonymous ballot. “In weighing up all opinions in this debate, UCL’s senior leadership team has accepted the academic board’s advice about the fundamental need to uphold academic freedom and freedom of speech in an academic context, recognising that a formal institutional commitment to Stonewall may have the effect of inhibiting academic work and discussion within UCL about sex and gender identity,” the university said. A spokesperson for UCL said the university had “an unwavering commitment” to upholding the rights of LGBTQ+ staff and students. UCL’s senior management plans to establish an LGBTQ+ equality group “to tackle all forms of inequality, marginalisation, and discrimination experienced by LGBTQ+ colleagues and students” and develop an action plan. A Stonewall spokesperson said: “UCL decided not to renew their membership to the diversity champions programme almost two years ago in February 2020. Our work with organisations in no way impacts their ability to uphold free speech, it simply creates welcoming working environments for LGBTQ+ people – which in 2021, should not be a controversial act.” UCL – the largest campus university in the UK – was ranked 98th out of the more than 400 employers who submitted entries to Stonewall’s workplace equality index in 2018. In 2014 it had been the first university to join Stonewall’s global diversity champions programme. But it emerged earlier this year that UCL had withdrawn from the diversity champion’s programme in 2020, which it said it was a temporary decision taken as a result of a cost-cutting review during the Covid pandemic. Under the scheme, members paid fees for Stonewall to assess and advise on their internal equality policies. UCL’s move comes as Stonewall has seen several high-profile organisations, including the BBC and Ofcom, withdraw from its diversity champions programme in recent months. The University of Winchester has also previously withdrawn. • This article was amended on 27 January 2022. The picture caption in an earlier version said UCL was “the first university to leave Stonewall’s diversity programme”. As the article makes clear, UCL is the first to “formally cut ties”; Winchester, for example, said it left for cost reasons.Good morning! There are only a few more sleeps until Christmas and the morning mail will take a short break over the festive period. If you’re worried about missing your morning news fix, never fear! Five Great Reads will be stepping in. Every weekday, Guardian Australia’s lifestyle editor, Alyx Gorman, will be selecting five brilliant reads from across the Guardian. Sign up here. Australia could have 200,000 new Covid cases a day by late January without low-to-medium restrictions under a “worst-case scenario”, according to Doherty Institute modelling. That scenario would only be reached “if we do nothing” and is based on people not altering their behaviour, no change to the booster schedule and only basic public health restrictions being in place, according to a senior source. The modelling will be discussed in national cabinet today, along with the spike in Omicron cases and the vaccine booster program. Meanwhile, families could miss out on seeing loved ones in aged care over Christmas as inconsistent restrictions are causing confusion. Advocates are pushing for coherent guidelines and calling for a balance to be struck so residents are protected but not isolated. Australia wrote to France a week before the submarine contract was cancelled, acknowledging the completion of one requirement for moving to the next stage of the project. The document also included a cautionary line that the next stage of the project remained “subject to government approval”. The correspondence with Naval Group in the lead-up to the decision is a key piece of the Aukus puzzle, although to date the documents released do not show Australia giving a concrete assurance that the project would proceed. The US federal regulators are expected to approve the first pills to treat Covid-19 as early as this week. The news comes as countries around the globe scramble to get on top of the Omicron variant. Many countries are waiting until after Christmas to impose new restrictions. Portugal ordered nightclubs and bars to shut doors and is issuing work-from-home orders from 26 December. Likewise, the UK PM has hinted that new measures could be imposed post-Christmas, and Germany will reimpose tighter rules from 28 December, including a ban on gatherings of more than 10 vaccinated people. The European Commission has emphasised the importance of booster shots and said Covid vaccine certificates would be valid for only nine months without a third jab. Australia The Department of Social Services underpaid almost 70 current and former staff more than $400,000 over nearly five years, FOI documents revealed. The underpayments related to the failure to pay overtime to staff who were required to monitor the media after hours. Parents are running into difficulty booking Covid vaccine appointments for kids aged five to 11, with some being told to “check again in the next few weeks”. The AMA says it is unaware of supply constraints but it has been “given no information about how much is arriving”. The world The ruler of Dubai has been ordered to pay a divorce settlement which could reach more than half a billion British pounds to protect his ex-wife and their two children from the threat he poses to them. Vladimir Putin has said he will consider a military response if Russia feels threatened by Nato, in a sign that he is not ready to de-escalate tensions over a potential invasion of Ukraine. Donald Trump has provoked controversy after he announced he will hold a press conference at his Mar-a-Lago resort on 6 January, the first anniversary of the deadly attack on the US Capitol. More than 160 people drowned in two separate shipwrecks off the coast of Libya in the past week as refugees seek safety in Europe. Recommended reads Understanding service workers’ challenges and adjusting your expectations accordingly can ease shopping frustrations, writes Nadine von Cohen in an etiquette guide for holiday shopping. “As we approach our second Christmas at the mercy of a virus that just won’t quit, one would think people would have accepted that supply chain issues and other Covid-related problems might mean low stock and delayed deliveries, as has been the case for going on two years. But after speaking to business owners and frontline retail staff, it seems this is far from true.” During lockdown, Alex McKinnon burned through all the TV he would normally watch and was forced to start picking shows he wouldn’t ordinarily go near, including Boss, a 2011 political drama starting Kelsey Grammer as the hard-as-nails mayor of Chicago. Despite good reviews, Boss was cancelled after two seasons. “But that doesn’t matter, because you don’t watch a show like Boss to see what happens to the characters or where the plot goes,” he writes. “You watch a show like Boss because it is completely bananas. Boss will give you a collection of moments so surreal, it will feel like you dreamed them after drinking too much cough syrup before bed.” Listen From reckonings on race and gender inequality, to Australian sporting heroes shining on the international stage, Guardian Australia’s sports editor, Mike Hytner, and deputy sports editor, Emma Kemp, talk to Laura Murphy-Oates about the biggest moments in sport in 2021 for today’s Full Story. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. For three hours, writer Debbie Lustig fends off traffic and protects the ducklings like a crazy lollipop lady with a fishing net. Assistant news editor Rosemary Bolger introduces this gripping story for this edition of Australia Reads. Listen to the best of Guardian Australia’s journalism on Australia Reads podcast on Wednesday, Friday and Sunday. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport The former Australia captain Ricky Ponting has questioned Joe Root’s leadership aftter his comments about England’s bowlers during the Ashes, in which he said his bowlers needed to bowl fuller and “be a bit braver”. Ponting said that as captain of the touring side the onus is on Root to make changes. Media roundup Lockdowns have been ruled out and the Boxing Day Test will go ahead as planned, according to the Age, but Victorian officials may bring in density caps on events to prevent a worst-case Covid wave. Millions of Australians face a “cyber security ticking time bomb”, with sophisticated cyber actors exploiting new software vulnerabilities across more than 100,000 devices, apps and online games, the Australian reports. Coming up National cabinet meets at midday today. And if you’ve read this far … A senior barrister who sued the UK’s Crown Prosecution Service after a colleague asked him to stop farting in the room they worked in together has lost his case. The lawyer said his flatulence was caused by heart medication and argued that the request violated his dignity. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday from 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Chile’s future as a greener, fairer country, depends on the success of efforts to rewrite the country’s dictatorship-era constitution, president-elect Gabriel Boric said on Tuesday. After a meeting with the delegates elected last year to rewrite the 1980 constitution which enshrined the ideological legacy of General Augusto Pinochet, Boric called for Chileans to unite behind the project. “We all need to put our best efforts into [the constitutional process], independent of our political differences,” Boric said in Santiago. A stunning 78% of Chileans voted last year in favor of drafting a new document and another vote this year saw the election of a broadly leftwing assembly for the task. “If things go well for the convention, they will go well for Chile,” Boric said, confirming that he would respect the convention’s decision-making. The convention’s president, Elisa Loncón, an academic belonging to Chile’s Mapuche indigenous group, said that the convention would “open its doors to institutional collaborations”, but expected the body’s autonomy to remain intact. Boric won the largest majority ever recorded in a Chilean election to score a decisive victory over his far-right opponent, José Antonio Kast. Kast had strongly opposed rewriting the constitution and many voters were worried for the future of the process should he have won the presidency. But Boric’s victory means he will become Chile’s youngest ever president on 11 March 2022, a decade after he shot to prominence as a scruffy-haired protest leader in 2011. In Santiago, the euphoria of the result has yet to fully die and the tense uncertainty which characterized the runoff campaigns has mostly dissipated. After a bitter campaign, Kast quickly acknowledged his defeat, visiting Boric at his headquarters in the centre of Santiago on Sunday evening and declared that his rival “could count on him” when building a new future for Chile. As president-elect, Boric has been greeted by cheers and chants at each event he has attended. He gave his first speech on a large stage erected on one of Santiago’s main avenues on Sunday night, with jubilant crowds stretching as far as the eye could see in every direction. On Monday, Boric held a two-hour meeting with current president Sebastián Piñera at the presidential palace, La Moneda, flanked by his campaign chief Izkia Siches, 35, and political advisor Giorgio Jackson, 34. Boric’s progressive campaign includes ambitious promises which reflect the momentous generational shift underway in Chile. Boric prioritizes a green, sustainable post-pandemic recovery, and has pledged to raise taxes on the rich to fund public spending and welfare programs. He also wants to make Chile more inclusive than ever before. Boric confirmed on Tuesday that his cabinet will be gender-equal, saying that “women will be protagonists”, and that he hopes to incorporate those from beyond Santiago to recognize the “diversity and heterogeneity of our country”.The Scottish Professional Football League is locked in talks with Sky Sports amid a rising sense from top‑flight clubs that a winter break, due to start on 3 January, should be brought forward after crowd restrictions were imposed by Nicola Sturgeon. Scotland’s first minister has implemented a blanket match attendance limit of just 500 from and including Boxing Day, which will have a dramatic impact on the backdrop to the televised Old Firm match at Celtic Park on 2 January. Hibernian are due to meet Heart of Midlothian, live on Sky, a day later in Edinburgh. Within hours of Sturgeon confirming her plans, Celtic stated they wanted matches to be rearranged. A Celtic statement read: “In light of today’s announcement regarding supporters attending matches, Celtic can confirm that it has today requested that the SPFL bring forward the scheduled winter break and reschedule the fixtures affected by the regulations announced.” Hibs have echoed Celtic’s stance. “Every effort should be made to allow supporters to watch their team and the game they love,” the club said. Alan Burrows, the Motherwell chief executive, stated his belief that “we should start the winter break now”. While that is the widespread view, it is not universal. Sky’s exclusive live broadcast arrangement is crucial to the SPFL and means the subscription channel must agree to any switching of games. Sky provided no comment on its position. There is also concern within the league that there is insufficient calendar leeway to reschedule multiple matches. A fresh fixture guide must be provided by the league to clubs. Some club executives remain unconvinced stadiums will open up at even close to capacity after the initial, three‑week timeframe detailed by Sturgeon. Notably, there has been no public comment provided thus far by Rangers, who lead the Scottish Premiership. The Aberdeen manager, Stephen Glass, whose team face Hibs on Wednesday in front of an attendance likely to reach around 15,000, questioned the timing of the decision on crowd capacity. Glass said: “The bit I don’t follow the reasoning with is, why would you say this rule is really important in three or four days’ time but not tomorrow night? I don’t see the reasoning at all and I don’t see the sense in it.” In a statement, Aberdeen said: “These latest restrictions are likely to cost the club up to half a million pounds. The news this afternoon is a huge blow to all at Aberdeen FC and clubs across Scotland.” With those businesses still digesting the news from the Scottish parliament, St Mirren announced they had requested the postponement of their game against Celtic on Wednesday and the Sunday trip to Rangers because of a virus outbreak. “We have tried our utmost to fulfil the fixtures,” St Mirren said. “However, following further positive Covid cases this [Tuesday] morning we are unable to field a team for either match with a significant number of first‑team players and staff unavailable.” It was subsequently reported St Mirren’s bid had been rejected.The archbishop of Canterbury has said that people will have felt “sorrow and sadness” seeing the photograph of Downing Street staff drinking together last May because it will have reminded them of what they sacrificed. In an interview with ITV, Justin Welby hinted at his disapproval over the gathering, saying that leadership involved setting an example. Downing Street insists that the people featured in the photograph drinking in the No 10 garden in May last year – the prime minister, his wife, Carrie, and officials – were discussing work issues and that they were complying with the lockdown rules in force at the time. However, critics argue that the picture suggests a lockdown-busting social gathering, not a work meeting, and the gathering could now be included as part of the inquiry into other No 10 events last year that allegedly broke Covid regulations. Asked what he felt when he saw the picture, Welby told ITV: “I thought about the many people who’ll look at that and remember what they were doing on that day – and the sorrow and sadness they felt on that day because of not being able to see someone, or a bereavement, or the last time they saw someone they loved.” Welby said that he was “not quick to judge people” and that he wanted to wait for the outcome of the investigation. Asked if he accepted that lack of moral authority could cost lives at a time when people needed to follow public health messages, he agreed. “There needs to be truth and integrity and the cost of leadership is that you set an example,” he said. “You lead from the front, which means you obey the rules.” Welby spoke out as it was confirmed that a police watchdog is considering a complaint that officers on duty at No 10 allowed a lockdown-busting party to go ahead in December last year. Jenny Jones, a Green party peer, asked the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) to investigate following reports that a gathering took place on 18 December last year that involved food, party games and drinking late into the night. The event is already being investigated on behalf of the prime minister by Sue Gray, a senior civil servant, as part of her wider inquiry into Downing Street events that might have broken lockdown regulations. In her letter to the IOPC, sent earlier this month, Lady Jones said that officers are on duty at Downing Street protecting the building and that part of their job involves controlling access. “If there was an unlawful gathering taking place at No 10 Downing Street, then the police must have known, and were highly likely to have played an active part in organising or facilitating the illegal gathering,” she wrote. Complaints first have to be considered by the relevant force, and the IOPC initially referred it to the Metropolitan police. The Met referred it back, and on Tuesday Jones posted a message on Twitter saying it was now being considered. However, IOPC sources said the complaint was only being assessed to decide if a full investigation is merited. The IOPC normally only triggers a full investigation in response to a complaint from someone personally adversely affected by police misconduct. The Met has refused to investigate allegations of partying at No 10 last winter, saying that normally it does not investigate breaches of lockdown rules that took place in the past, but that if “significant evidence” becomes available it will review this decision.Households are among the biggest drains on Australia’s electricity grid, making up about 10% of our national energy consumption. For a greener future, we all need to reduce our home energy use. The best way to make a big impact is by switching to renewable energy. But what exactly does that entail? Renewable energy is created from resources such as solar, wind and hydro. Unlike the traditional power source of coal, which creates greenhouse gas emissions, contributing to climate change, when it is burned to produce electricity, renewable sources are environmentally friendly. It’s power that doesn’t hurt the planet. Making the move to a greener lifestyle - including adopting renewable energy - doesn’t have to feel overwhelming. Here’s a simple guide to getting started on your clean energy journey. Invest in eco solutions If you own your home, there are a couple of powerful changes you can make. An easy but effective measure is installing an energy monitor to track your electricity usage. You’ll be able to keep an eye on how much you’re using and rein things in if usage is getting a little high. Some models will even identify which specific appliances are draining your power. If you have a smart meter, it only takes a few minutes to set up energy monitoring. If you have a traditional meter will need to call in the electrician for what should be a pretty simple job. The more you know about your energy consumption, the better you can manage it. You could also look at insulating your home, if you haven’t already. Insulation helps keep your home at a comfortable natural temperature, meaning you’ll use less heating and cooling. In fact, it can cut home electricity use by up to 45%. Reduce your use The greenest energy is the energy you don’t use. An essential step towards creating an eco-friendlier home is cutting back on your electricity consumption. There are a few simple ways to reduce your energy use. One is washing your clothes using cold water. About 90% of the power used by our washing machines goes towards heating the water, so you’ll cut back massively on your energy consumption by ditching the heat. As a bonus, your clothes will last longer - hot water washes cause colours to fade faster. Other ideas include switching off appliances at the wall (items such as games consoles and televisions can consume electricity even when they’re not being used) and using LED light bulbs, which are more energy efficient than old incandescent or halogen globes. You could also consider adjusting the thermostat, as our heating and cooling devices are notorious for guzzling power. You don’t have to turn them off, just tweak the temperature - even a one-degree difference can make a big difference to the amount of electricity you use. Get with a green provider Your next step could be switching over to an electricity company that provides an eco-friendlier product. There are two main ways to tackle this. The first is to go with a retailer that offers a GreenPower, a federal government-accredited scheme that invests in renewable energy. GreenPower essentially allows consumers to opt in to pay extra on top of their power bills to financially support the development of wind turbines, hydroelectric stations and solar farms. It doesn’t mean the energy you use in your home will be from renewable sources - the grid is supplied by both renewable sources and coal-fired plants and you can’t choose what you get - but it does mean that you are supporting the production of more renewable power. Of course, opting to go with GreenPower will add to the cost of your bills, sometimes quite substantially. You could also do your own research into the more environmentally friendly power providers (keeping in mind that none are perfect - some are just better than others). An easy way to do this is by reading the Green Electricity Guide, a review and ranking of Australia’s electricity providers published by Greenpeace. An updated version of Australia’s guide will arrive in early 2022. Or better yet, invest in your own system To ensure at least some of the electricity you use at home is renewable, you can install solar panels. With your own renewable energy source ready to go, you’ll reduce your reliance on the electricity grid. Going beyond panels, you could also install a battery that stores the sun’s energy during the day for you to use when the sun goes down, so that you don’t have to tap into the grid after dark. This has the added bonus of taking pressure off the grid, as it stabilises energy supply and demand. With Plico, going green doesn’t come with big upfront costs. Plico makes solar power available on a subscription model, meaning you pay a weekly fee, starting at $36.90. This includes 10 years of servicing and maintenance on your solar system. Plico also monitors performance to make sure things are running optimally. It’s a model that enables all homeowners to reduce their footprint; bigger households can save money in the long term, too. A solar + battery system can be the best green power solution of all. Take the next step on your renewable journey and schedule a chat with one of the people at Plico.• A photograph (30 November, p13) showed a sunrise over the River Dove “near Mayfield, Derbyshire”. To clarify, the Dove acts as a county boundary at Mayfield, and the village is on the Staffordshire side of the river. • An article misnamed the UK Energy Research Centre as a council (UK relying on ‘outdated’ energy policy amid record gas prices, 15 December, p35). • Other recently amended articles include: The 50 best TV shows of 2021, No 5: Squid Game Hold the beef: McDonald’s avoids the bold step it must take to cut emissions Hundreds off work ill at leading London hospital trust as Omicron cases surge Gabriel Boric vows to ‘fight privileges of the few’ as Chile’s president New head of Unesco world heritage centre wants to put Africa on the map Denmark and Norway rush in stricter Covid measures as cases soar Rose Ayling-Ellis’s Strictly victory shows deaf people can do anything Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.Securing a Covid vaccine appointment for five- to 11-year-olds is proving difficult for some parents and carers who are being told to “check again in the next few weeks” when attempting to make a booking. Earlier this month the federal government said slots could be found through its vaccine clinic finder website from 15 December, with the first appointments available from 10 January. But when searching for appointments by postcode, many suburbs return a message stating: “Clinics are currently placing orders for the 5-11 year old vaccine. If you can’t find a suitable clinic or appointment, please check again in the next few weeks.” A University of Sydney epidemiologist, Prof Alexandra Martiniuk, said she had no luck trying to book an appointment for her six- and nine-year-old children via the HotDoc and NSW Health websites. She also could not book an appointment at GP offices she called. “They had no bookings available,” she said. “I checked again today [Tuesday] and HotDoc says bookings will start in five weeks and several GPs say to ring back later still.” Martiniuk said she was concerned booking websites would be overwhelmed once appointments do become available as people rushed to secure appointments before school returns for 2022. In Western Australia, a father living in the Perth suburb of Guildford said GPs in his area told him they had no appointment dates for five- to 11-year-olds and they were unsure of availability. “This is not isolated to my local area,” he told Guardian Australia. The father called the national Covid hotline for assistance. “Staff could not provide any clues as to when bookings would become available and just cited the January start date for administration,” he said. “Speaking to [federal health minister Greg] Hunt’s office was an exercise in frustration, with their office manager suggesting calling GPs but not citing which GPs were able to take bookings. They were unwilling to categorically state that you can’t book when asked directly.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A spokesperson for the WA health department said bookings for five- to 11-year-olds would be available “soon” through state-run clinics: “WA Health has been informed by the commonwealth that the vaccines are expected in WA within the next few weeks.” A federal health department spokesperson said the government had an agreement with Pfizer to receive a sufficient supply of the paediatric vaccine to cover all children aged five to 11 in Australia in January. “If individuals cannot find a suitable clinic or appointment, people are encouraged to check back regularly as more clinics and more appointments will be added over the coming weeks,” they said. The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners president, Dr Karen Price, said the vaccine rollout to children was critical but GPs were already under pressure after vaccinating the rest of the population. “The problem we face with rolling out Covid-19 vaccines to children is that vaccinating children is a more complex job compared to adults,” Price said. “Children require more time and care, as well as space because their parents come with them, and this has to be factored in by practices planning vaccine clinics. Without appropriate funding, it will be harder for practices to get the job done and make ends meet at the end of the day. And while GPs don’t get into this career for the money, our practices need to remain viable.” The president of the Australian Medical Association, Dr Omar Khorshid, said he had not been given any information about supply constraints. But he said some clinics may prefer to wait until the vaccine had been delivered and they had stock in-hand before opening bookings – and they could be waiting until after the Christmas holidays. “Practices have been able to order the paediatric vaccine for a couple of weeks now and those orders that went in by 17 December will be delivered by 7 January to be available from the 10th,” he said. “Orders in by the end of the month will be delivered by the 14th. Christmas is coming up and some practices won’t be open over the break, so practices need to factor that into how much they order. “We’ve been given no information to suggest any supply constraint, but these vaccines are only just arriving in the country so who knows, we have been given no information about how much is arriving. And with the booster program starting, the constraint may not be supply but the number of nurses available for paediatric vaccines and that will be variable across the country.”Half a billion at-home coronavirus tests will be sent free to the American public in the fight against Omicron, Joe Biden announced on Tuesday, while pushing back against resistance to vaccine mandates by saying they are intended “not to control your life, but to save your life”. The move is part of a renewed White House effort that includes the Pentagon calling up 1,000 troops to deploy to hard-hit hospitals and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (Fema) working to expand medical capacity. But as Covid-19 once again rages across America via the new Omicron variant, the president, speaking from the White House, did not discourage Christmas gatherings, impose vaccine mandates for domestic air travel or seek a new round of lockdowns. “I know some Americans are wondering if you can safely celebrate the holidays with your family and friends – the answer is yes, you can, if you and those you celebrate with are vaccinated, particularly if you’ve gotten your booster shot,” Biden said. The public should be “concerned” but not “panicked” about Omicron, he added. “This is not March of 2020. Two hundred million people are vaccinated. We’re prepared. We know more. We just have to stay focused.” Federal health officials said on Monday that Omicron has raced ahead of other variants and is now the dominant version in the US, accounting for three in four new infections last week. Biden, who earlier this month unveiled a winter plan to combat the pandemic dogging his political fortunes, has been forced to revise his strategy. He announced that his administration is buying 500m at-home, rapid tests this winter to be distributed for free to Americans who want them, with initial delivery starting next month. A website will enable people to order them to be delivered to their home for free. The decision follows growing pressure on the White House to make free tests more widely available. At a recent briefing, the press secretary, Jen Psaki, asked sarcastically: “Should we just send one to every American?” Critics pointed out that the UK does just that and wondered why the US could not follow suit. Biden said: “The federal government will purchase one half billion … additional at-home rapid tests with delivery starting in January. We’ll be getting these tests to Americans for free and we’ll have websites where you can get them delivered to your home.” A sixfold increase in Omicron’s share of Covid-19 infections in just one week has led to long queues at testing sites in large cities. Biden announced new federal testing sites around the country. The first will be created this week in New York, which just reported a record number of new daily cases. Biden also unveiled additional vaccination resources. Currently 73% of adult Americans are fully vaccinated. He acknowledged that breakthrough cases are inevitable. “We’ll see some vaccinated people get Covid, potentially large numbers,” he said, but noted that they are at very low risk of severe illness. He warned: “Omicron is a serious, potentially deadly business for unvaccinated people. If you’re not fully vaccinated, you have good reason to be concerned. You’re at a high risk of getting sick. And if you get sick, you’re likely to spread it to others, including friends and family, and the unvaccinated have a significantly higher risk of ending up in hospital or even dying.” The unvaccinated have an obligation to themselves, their family and their country to get the shot, the president added. “I promise you, it saves lives, and I honest to God believe it’s your patriotic duty.” He also urged parents to get their children vaccinated and said the government now has the knowledge and tools to keep schools open, even when Covid-19 cases are reported. Hospitals are battling rising Omicron hospitalisations, mostly among the unvaccinated, with some near breaking point and turning non-Covid patients away. Biden’s winter plan made more than 60 winter Covid-19 emergency response team deployments available to states. He is directing the defense secretary, Lloyd Austin, to ready an additional 1,000 service members – military doctors, nurses, paramedics and other medical personnel – to deploy to hospitals during January and February, as needed. Six emergency response teams – with more than 100 clinical personnel and paramedics – are deploying to six states now: Michigan, Indiana, Wisconsin, Arizona, New Hampshire and Vermont. This is on top of the 300 federal medical personnel that deployed in response to Omicron. In addition, Biden is instructing Fema to mobilise planning teams to work with every state and territory to assess hospital needs ahead of winter surges, and to start expanding hospital bed capacity. In his address from the state dining room, Biden condemned rightwing media personalities who spread anti-vaccine conspiracy theories. “The unvaccinated are responsible for their own choices. But those choices have been fuelled by dangerous misinformation on cable TV and social media. You know, these companies and personalities are making money by peddling lies and allowing misinformation that can kill their own customers and their own supporters. It’s wrong, it’s immoral. I call on the purveyors of these lies and misinformation to stop it. Stop it now.” He also defended vaccine mandates which have been opposed by Republican state governors in court. “My administration has put them in place not to control your life, but to save your life, and the lives of others,” he insisted. Early studies suggest the vaccinated will need a booster shot for the best chance at preventing omicron infection. Biden said: “I got my booster shot and just the other day former president Trump announced he had gotten his booster shot. It may be one of the few things he and I agree on.”Remember the name? The vast majority inside the Emirates Stadium already knew it. They even had a song prepared when Charlie Patino, an 18-year-old playmaker who has attained near-mythical status with his performances in youth football, limbered up beside the halfway line and waited for the ball to go dead. He made his entrance to rapturous applause and, 10 minutes later, had raised the roof with a smartly taken goal on his senior debut; if everything goes to plan it will be a quiz question a few years down the line and Sunderland, enterprising but well beaten, may not overly mind being the answer. “A beautiful moment,” Mikel Arteta said of Patino’s stabbed finish from six yards, which added a fuzzy glow to a Carabao Cup quarter-final that was already well won. “He is a kid that is coming through our system, a lovely kid. He is training with us almost every week. It was a dream. As a debut here, to score in front of our fans, a special moment.” Nobody with the slightest handle on Arsenal, and especially not those immersed in the minute analysis of young prospects that abounds on social media, will have escaped the hype around Patino. Those who know best believe he can handle it and you need not go far to find informed onlookers, views gleaned from putting boots on the ground, who believe Arsenal’s academy has developed an extraordinary talent. This glimpse felt all the more precious because it will not be repeated too frequently just yet. “Now we have to cook him slowly,” Arteta said, miming the shape of a pot. If Patino requires proof that the path does not always run smoothly he need only look at Arsenal’s real matchwinner. Eddie Nketiah is another product of their system but, at 22, feels he is going stale without starts in the Premier League. He has rejected a new contract but offered a timely demonstration of his qualities here, particularly given the intrigue surrounding Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang. Nketiah’s hat-trick came from a cumulative range of around 15 yards, although two of those goals were flicked in quite sublimely; he has an old-school poacher’s quality that might best have fitted a top-six team two or three decades ago, but could yet have played his way back into Arsenal’s present. “He has incredible work rate, he has pace and has the smell for goals,” Arteta said. “He wants to be the best and works all the time to do that. He’s a player that has come through our system and that’s why we want to keep him.” Nketiah’s potency helped guarantee a margin of victory that was slightly harsh on Sunderland, who showed in spells why they are fighting for promotion from League One. Around 5,000 away fans had decided the epidemiological situation was no barrier to a journey south; they saw Lee Johnson’s side take pains to assert themselves, deserving the goal from Nathan Broadhead that gave Arsenal a mild headache at half-time but ultimately proving ripe to be picked off. “I thought the lads played really well in patches,” Johnson said. “It’s a massive lesson for them, the best lesson you could possibly feel.” The first part of it was handed down by Nketiah, who bundled in with his thigh after Lee Burge had done well to save Rob Holding’s free header. Sunderland had started well enough, although Elliot Embleton had struck his own bar as Arsenal turned the screw. A second goal followed when Nicolas Pépé, sharp enough despite having played only 12 minutes since the previous round of this competition, took a return pass from Cédric Soares and saw his shot deflect in off Callum Doyle. Broadhead dinked neatly past Bernd Leno after a slick move but would not complete the first half, departing with an injury. Arsenal pulled clear from there, Nketiah darting in to touch Nuno Tavares’ waist-high cross past Burge on the volley four minutes after the interval and then gorgeously backheeling in Pépé’s centre just before the hour following the winger’s nutmeg on Denver Hume. “I’m desperate to play football, every player wants to play,” Nketiah said. “All I can do is work hard and it will work itself out. As long as I play for Arsenal I’ll give my all.” Pépé’s future is beset by its own question marks, but he had one more flourish left. It may have been the most important: a step inside worked space to find Patino, who had timed his run from the edge of the box, in added time. Whether or not Pépé remains at Arsenal much longer, at least he can say he was there. “He still has a lot of competition in front of him, he is really young and he needs to go step by step,” Arteta said, again trying to cool any impatience around Patino. In time, this may resemble more of a leap.A man accused of assaulting Chris Whitty in a central London park attended a court appearance via video link from his bedroom while wearing a dressing gown after saying he had tested positive for coronavirus. Jonathan Chew, 24, and estate agent Lewis Hughes, 23, filmed themselves with England’s chief medical officer as he walked through St James’ Park in Westminster on 27 June. Footage of the pair appearing to put Whitty in a headlock as they demanded a selfie went viral after the incident. Chew, who denies common assault, appeared at Westminster magistrates court on Tuesday via video link from his bedroom in a dressing gown which slipped down to reveal his bare chest. His lawyer Peter Fallen told the court he had tested positive for coronavirus. Shortly before the hearing started, Fallen told the court he was withdrawing from the case because he was “professionally embarrassed”. “I am no longer able to continue to represent Mr Chew, I’m sorry to tell you, for professional reasons,” he told the court. Senior district judge Paul Goldspring allowed the trial to continue after Chew said he was happy to proceed without representation. “Me, Mr Jonathan Chew, doesn’t want to be represented,” he said. Daniel O’Donoghue, prosecuting, questioned Chew’s positive Covid test results. He told the court police had tried to make inquiries but the NHS refused to share confidential information with them. When police visited Chew’s address to see if he was isolating, his brother’s girlfriend answered the door and said he was not living there. She added that she did not know where he was and was not aware that he had Covid. During the hearing, Chew became increasingly exasperated and insisted Whitty should be at court for the trial. “The law is that I have the right for him to come,” he told the court. “I want Chris Whitty there.” “I suspect I know a bit more about the law than you do,” Goldspring replied, explaining that Prof Whitty does not legally have to attend court as the facts of the case had been agreed between the prosecution and defence. But Chew responded: “You’re getting it all wrong. I’ve been in court. I’ve agreed that Chris Whitty has to be in court. “I feel like I’m innocent. I’m answering an assault charge which I don’t think I’ve done.” Goldspring replied: “A remarkable recovery, I might say, from where you were two minutes ago.” Chew, however, said that he had “diagnosed coronavirus”, adding to the judge: “Are you saying corona is not real now? Feel like what you’re doing now is victimising me. You’re calling me a liar.” Goldspring said: “Your cavalier approach to the severity of these proceedings is breathtaking.” “What does cavalier mean?” Chew interjected. “Let me finish,” said Goldspring. “I’m entirely satisfied that you’re not so unwell that you can’t participate in your trial.” However, Tuesday’s trial had had to be vacated until 4 January 2022 because Chew was unable to see the CCTV evidence via the video link. “There does come a point, whether or not Mr Chew can or can’t see [the CCTV], that the proceedings become a bit of a farce,” said Goldspring. Chew has been tasked with finding new legal representation before then and he must appear in person. He is on conditional bail and must stay at the given address. Hughes admitted common assault in July and was handed an eight-week jail term suspended for two years. He lost his job as an estate agent after his employer saw the footage.Nick Ames was our man down Ashburton Grove tonight. His report is in, so get clicking, good people. Thanks for reading this MBM. Stay safe and warm. Nighty night! Lee Johnson’s turn. “I thought we had a really good spell after we scored, and Arsenal found it difficult to get us off the ball. Overall I have to say I’m very proud of the players. We’ve been beaten 5-1 but at the same time we have had spells in that football match. There are a couple of poor goals in there, good from Arsenal’s point of view. It’s a good experience for our players. Now they know the standard. Even our senior players can take that away. They have to be at their maximum. They’ll also get confidence from that game, we did carry a threat. There’s a lot of positives. It was a really good game and we can use it as a motivation.” Mikel Arteta talks to Sky. “It was great. We are in the semis. We started well enough, but had a period when we suffered. Then we picked it up in the second half. Eddie Nketiah wants more minutes, it’s difficult to go against that, but as a club and me personally, I really want him to stay here, and that’s what we are trying to do. He is a really important part of our squad. Charlie Patino is a player with a lot of personality, so we’re delighted for him, it’s something special.” He also wouldn’t be drawn on whether we’ll see Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang over the Christmas period. The man of the match, Eddie Nketiah, speaks to Sky. “It’s a great feeling. I just want to say thank you to my team-mates. I had some really good assists today. I just had to be in the right place. It was nice to interact with the fans, you can’t beat having them in the stadium. We started a bit sloppy but we buckled up and improved in the second half. All in all, I think it’s a good display. This competition is where I’ve been getting starts and opportunities to play, so wherever I’m asked to play I’ll do my best for the team. I’m there if my manager needs me. I’m desperate to play football, but all I can do is keep working hard and hopefully I’ll get opportunities. I’m here, I’m under contract, and as long as I play for Arsenal I’ll give my all.” Sunderland go across to applaud the 5,000 fans who had made it down to support them. They’re awarded a warm ovation. They might have been on the end of a beating tonight, but the League One side gave Arsenal a game in the first half, and this experience should serve a grand old club well as they fight to rise back up the divisions. Mikel Arteta meanwhile blows a kiss to the Arsenal faithful. Tonight couldn’t have gone any better for the Gunners, who are the first club through to the last four of the League Cup. Arsenal make it to the semis, thanks to a hat-trick from Eddie Nketiah, and a cherry-on-the-cake debut goal from 18-year-old Charlie Patino. Nketiah walks off with the match ball, not a bad early Christmas present at all! 90 min +2: Kimpioka comes on for Stewart. What a moment for Charlie Patino! Xhaka finds Pepe down the right. Pepe pulls back, and Patino slides in to steer a lovely shot into the bottom right! He runs off with a look of sheer delight, mixed with a little disbelief, spreading across his face. A goal on debut, and another star is born! Merry Christmas, Charlie! 90 min: “I suppose we could call it a cricket score: England’s after the first over of every innings in Australia.” Simon McMahon, ladies and gents. He’s here all week. Try the mince pies. 88 min: Sunderland’s wait for a first League Cup goes on. They’ve lost two finals in the past, in 1985 to Norwich and 2014 to Manchester City. Look how cute Steve Bruce looks here! 86 min: Doyle is booked for an agricultural tackle on Patino. Who breaks a butterfly upon a wheel? 85 min: Martinelli cuts in from the left and slips a ball down the channel for Nketiah, who goes over under pressure from Wright. For a second, it looks as though the referee has pointed to the spot, and cheers go up accordingly, but it’s a goal kick instead. It would have been a soft penalty. 83 min: Both players are good to continue. 82 min: Martinelli and Wright accidentally clash heads. Both are down in the centre circle. On come the medical men. 80 min: Smith Rowe is replaced by the highly regarded 18-year old Charlie Patino. A huge roar greets the debutant. 79 min: Nothing comes of the corner. 78 min: Flanagan channels his inner Beckenbauer and romps down the right wing to win a corner. Before it can be taken, Gooch and Emberton are replaced by Evans and O’Brien. 76 min: Martinelli drops a shoulder with a view to sending Wright away for a copy of the Standard and 20 JPS. Wright upends him with a super-late tackle and goes into the book. 75 min: Pritchard goes straight for goal, whipping the free kick towards the top left. An easy parry for Leno. 74 min: Gooch is blocked by Cedric out on the left. Free kick. Sunderland throw plenty of men into the six-yard box. 73 min: Arsenal can wrap a couple of their big names in cotton wool now. Off come Odegaard and White, on come Martinelli and Gabriel. 71 min: Sunderland, to their eternal credit, continue to press and harry. But they can’t get hold of the ball right now. 69 min: Pepe draws a foul from Doyle, and this is a free kick in a dangerous position on the right. Everyone in the box! Odegaard shapes to cross, then tries to surprise Burge with a snapshot towards the bottom right. The effort sails harmlessly wide. 67 min: Tavares whips in from the left. Pepe should meet it at the far post, but mistimes his lunge towards the ball and the danger is gone. Sunderland are hanging on now, desperately trying to keep the score respectable. On that subject, here’s Simon McMahon: “I see that Sunderland have Gooch, Stewart and Broad(head) in their starting XI, while Arsenal have Holding and Tavaré(s). Maybe we’ll get a cricket score?” 65 min: Pepe romps past poor Hume again, leaving him in the dust with an adroit pullback and flick forward. He tees up Odegaard, whose shot is parried well by Burge. 63 min: Thing is, Sunderland haven’t even played badly. To the contrary, they’ve impressed for much of the match, pressing efficiently and asking a few questions of Arsenal. But Premier League quality will out. 61 min: Smith Rowe and Tavares combine down the left. The ball’s fired low and hard towards Nketiah, who tries to burst into the box but takes a heavy touch and isn’t able to get a shot away. For the first time this evening, Sunderland are beginning to look a little ragged. 60 min: Pepe, having just stripped Hume of his dignity, breezes past him down the right again. Hume is forced to drag him down, and into the book he goes. Nketiah completes his hat-trick with another sumptuous finish! Pepe nutmegs Hume along the byline to the right of goal, and pulls back for Nketiah, who back-flicks into the bottom left. That is delightful! Arsenal have one foot and four toes in the semis now. 57 min: Hume busies himself down the left and feeds Stewart further up the flank. Stewart’s low cross-cum-shot is smothered by Leno. 56 min: Xhaka comes on for Balogun. 55 min: Sunderland are this close to reducing their arrears. Embleton saunters in from the right and, from distance, sends a vicious curler towards the top-left corner. Leno’s beaten all ends up, but the ball sails inches wide. What an effort. It would have been some goal. 53 min: Balogun is booked for a frontier-justice lunge on Wright, who seconds before had clashed, fairly, with Nketiah. The referee calms everything down quickly enough. 52 min: Now Hume crosses from the left, but Stewart is flagged offside in the middle. A good response, this. 51 min: Sunderland aren’t going to give up yet, and Neil drives down the inside-left channel to win a corner. Pritchard’s delivery is cleared by a booming White header. ... but they’re up against it now. Some space for Tavares down the left. He whips low, towards the near post, where Nketiah flicks gorgeously across Burge and into the bottom right. A delightful finish, and Arsenal’s two-goal cushion is restored! 48 min: Pritchard fizzes a low cross in from the right. It’s a dangerous ball, but nobody else in yellow has kept up with play. Hume tries to meet it at the far post, but he’s never getting there. Throw, but an early sign that Sunderland plan to give this a good go. 47 min: Having lost Broadhead to a hamstring problem, another injury would be a huge blow to Sunderland’s front line. Thankfully it appears Stewart is good to continue. Sunderland get the second half started. Within ten seconds, Stewart is down, Balogun having accidentally caught him on the right boot. Half-time entertainment. The Gunners mope off. Sunderland have a spring in their step. A reminder that Arsenal shipped a two-goal lead the last time they hosted Sunderland in the League Cup, losing 3-2 in November 2002, Marcus Stewart the two-goal hero for the Black Cats. History isn’t about to repeat itself, is it? 45 min +3: Sunderland finish the half strongly, winning a corner from which Pritchard warms Leno’s gloves. 45 min: Broadhead won’t be able to continue. He trudges off, a black cloud over his head, but at least he’s made a mark on this match with that delicious finish. Hume comes on in his stead. 44 min: Smith Rowe meets a half clearance with a blistering volley that’s well parried by Burge. Sunderland aren’t happy, as Broadhead was down elsewhere, having possibly tweaked something. Arsenal were under no obligation to play the ball out, but play eventually stops and on comes the trainer. 43 min: The first lull of the evening. They’re allowed. They’ve earned it. 41 min: Pepe juggles with the ball as he enters the box from the right. He can’t quite get it under control for a shot, so spins and decides to go down, claiming a foul by Gooch. The referee isn’t interested, and here’s a reminder that there’s no VAR tonight, so play clatters on. This is breathless and highly entertaining. 39 min: Sunderland have enjoyed the lion’s share of possession since going two down. This has been a very impressive period of play from the League One side, who are currently hassling Arsenal in a no-nonsense fashion. 37 min: Pritchard whips the free kick into the mixer. Flanagan should score from six yards, stooping to head, but sends a dismal effort wide right. His blushes are partially spared as the flag goes up, correctly, for offside. 36 min: Sunderland are pinning Arsenal back here. Flanagan is caught in a pincer movement between Smith Rowe and Nketiah, and it’s a free kick in a dangerous position out on the right, a chance to load the box. 35 min: A corner from the left leads to one from the right. The second one is blootered clear by Smith Rowe. 34 min: Winchester latches onto a loose ball down the right, cuts infield, and sends a low curler towards the bottom left. Leno is forced to extend fully and turn around the post for a corner. 33 min: Arsenal nearly restore their two-goal cushion in short order, Balogun latching onto a long pass down the right. Burge comes out of his area, copping Balogun’s first-time shot straight in his startled face! Sunderland clear, and we have a game on here! Pritchard spins out of trouble in the middle of the park and sends Embleton bombing down the middle. Embleton slips a perfect ball down the inside-left channel for Broadhead, who reaches the box and dinks over Leno, sending the ball elegantly bouncing into the empty net. Now that’s a response! 29 min: Arsenal ping it about, probing this way and that. Sunderland have deflated a little since the second, understandably so in the circumstances. Their support does its level best to offer encouragement. Pepe Runs At Gooch Down The Right (pt. XXXVII in an ongoing series). He exchanges passes with Cedric and, upon receiving the return, roofs a shot into the top right. The ball was helped in by a deflection off Wright. 26 min: Broadhead runs at White down the left, forcing the Arsenal defender all the way back. He feeds Gooch, who loops towards Stewart at the far post. Stewart is over-eager in his efforts to win a header, bundling Elneny over. Free kick. 24 min: Doyle passes straight to Pepe, and soon enough the ball is at the feet of Balogun, just inside the Sunderland box, in room to the left. Once again, the young man’s finishing lets him down, scuffing a first-time sidefoot straight at Burge. Somewhere in the multiverse, Balogun has just scored twice in as many minutes. 22 min: It should be two. Pepe slips Cedric into space down the right. He reaches the byline and loops towards the far post. Balogun, six yards out, heads harmlessly down and wide left. A bad miss from a player who has been rattling them in for the under-23s. 20 min: Gooch has struggled against Pepe from the get-go, and now he picks up a booking after sliding in hysterically from behind. Should Sunderland make it to the semis, he’ll now miss the first leg. 19 min: Sunderland come again, Pritchard crossing from the right and finding Stewart on the edge of the six-yard box. Stewart attempts a backheel that doesn’t come off, but this is a good response to falling behind from the League One team. 18 min: Sunderland, to their great credit, come straight back at Arsenal, Gooch sailing into space down the left. However his attempt at a cross is no good whatsoever, sailing deep into the stand behind the goal. Cedric swings the corner into the mixer. Holding rises and plants a header goalwards. Burge does extremely well to parry, but the ball falls to Nketiah, who bundles the ball over the line from close range. It had been coming. 16 min: Pepe runs at Gooch down the right again. As he threatens to break into the box, Stewart comes back to help, and clips him on the ankle. Free kick. Odegaard swings it to the far post, where Stewart makes up for his mistake by clearing out for a corner with players lurking. However ... 15 min: Tavares makes good down the left again. His looping cross is volleyed clear by Gooch. Arsenal are beginning to turn up the heat a little. 13 min: Nothing comes of the resulting corner. Arsenal so close to a fortunate opening goal. 12 min: Tavares and Smith Rowe combine swiftly down the left. The former crosses low and hard. The ball takes a huge deflection off Embleton, swinging a foot to intercept, loops over Burge, and twangs off the crossbar! Pepe gets onto the rebound but his shot is blocked out for a corner. 10 min: The loudest roar of the evening so far as Tavares miscues a simple pass and hoicks the ball straight out of play. Sunderland’s travelling support are in party mode right now, and they’re making themselves heard. 9 min: Pepe runs at Gooch down the right and executes a crisp nutmeg, but Doyle comes across to blooter clear. Both teams are very much on the front foot. 7 min: Arsenal go up the other end, Cedric crossing from the right, Nketiah heading harmlessly over the bar. A lovely open start to this match. Meanwhile here’s Charles Antaki, a self-styled “Self-Righteous Fan” who writes: “The TV pictures spanning the crowd show about one in a thousand wearing a mask, surrounded by jabbering, and later no doubt shouting and screaming, other fans in close proximity. I’ve just got over blaming Thatcher, so now it’s about time to blame someone currently in authority (of a kind). Oh, and Balogun! That will be interesting.” 5 min: Stewart tries to burst into the Arsenal box down the inside-left channel. He gets past Elneny, then trips over. He wants a penalty, but he’s not getting one, and there’s no VAR tonight, so that’s that. There didn’t seem to be a whole load of contact. 3 min: Sunderland take the first shot in anger. Gooch crosses from the left. The ball’s not cleared, and falls to Pritchard, who swivels cutely to the left of the D and sends a fairly weak effort straight at Leno. 2 min: The Emirates is far from full, understandably so given the situation with Covid, a few days before Christmas. Sunderland have taken over 5,000 down with them. Arsenal get the first half underway ... but only after a knee is taken by the home side. Sunderland opt to remain standing. A light smattering of boos as a result. Off we go, then. The teams are out! Arsenal are in their famous red and white combination, which means Sunderland can’t wear theirs; the visitors sport yellow and blue instead. “Somewhat old-school of Sunderland to bring a Winchester to a duel with the Gunners,” writes Peter Oh, quick on the draw as ever. We’ll be off in a sec! Sunderland boss Lee Johnson, who took Bristol City to the semi-finals in 2018, speaks to Sky. “It should be fun. The boys have got to enjoy it. Sunderland have been in the Premier League but these boys haven’t, so they’ve got to enjoy the occasion. It’s a short career and a fantastic stadium, the surface is brilliant, and we have to bring our best because Arsenal are a fantastic team. I believe in my players. I think we’ll be a threat for anybody. I trust us in possession to be dangerous. It’s a great test and a bit learning process on the pitch.” Mikel Arteta talks to Sky. He first reports that Ainsley Maitland-Niles is ill, while Calum Chambers has tested positive for Covid-19. “We are giving some players some minutes who absolutely deserve them. In the case of Folarin Balogun, he has not been around us too much but he deserves a chance with us tonight. He will have more opportunities. He should enjoy the moment. Complacency is a word that does not exist in football, so we have to be at our best.” Arsenal make nine changes after beating Leeds United 4-1 at Elland Road on Saturday evening. Only Ben White and Martin Odegaard retain their places. Bernd Leno returns in goal, while Cedric Soares, Rob Holding, Nuno Tavares, Mohamed Elneny, Nicolas Pepe, Eddie Nketiah, Folarin Balogun and Emile Smith Rowe also start. Still no Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang in the squad. Sunderland make two changes from the side that drew 1-1 at Ipswich over the weekend. Lee Burge and Elliot Embleton replace Ron-Thorben Hoffmann and Leon Dajaku. Arsenal: Leno, Cedric, Holding, White, Tavares, Elneny, Odegaard, Pepe, Smith Rowe, Nketiah, Balogun. Subs: Tierney, Partey, Gabriel, Saka, Lacazette, Ramsdale, Xhaka, Martinelli, Patino. Sunderland: Burge, Wright, Flanagan, Doyle, Gooch, Winchester, Neil, Embleton, Pritchard, Stewart, Broadhead. Subs: Evans, O’Brien, Cirkin, Xhemajli, Patterson, Younger, Hume, Dunne, Mbunga-Kimpioka. Referee: Simon Hooper (Wiltshire). Fourth in the First Division plays third in League One. You’ve probably got this down as a home banker, then, especially if you’ve also factored in the recent head-to-head record between these teams: Arsenal have won eight of the last 11 matches, to the aggregate tune of 22-5, and the other three games were 0-0 draws. With all this in mind, Sunderland are priced at 14s to win this League Cup quarter-final. But it’s football, and you never know. Covid is doing its worst, while Arsenal historically go freestyle in the League Cup anyway, so chances are we won’t be seeing Mikel Arteta’s first-choice XI tonight. Sunderland on the other hand are unlikely to make too many changes, with their next match nearly a week away, and can play with the underdog spirit of a team with nothing to lose. A perfectly balanced cup-tie, then? We shall see, soon enough. Kick off at the Emirates is at 7.45pm GMT. It’s on!The latest update about the number of Premier League players who are vaccinated against Covid-19 shows that English football is crying out for strong leadership when it comes to getting jabs in arms. The figures are infuriating. On Monday it was revealed that 16% of top-flight players remain unvaccinated. The vaccination journey has crawled along and even now, with Omicron forcing a raft of fixture postponements, some players are still refusing to do their civic duty. The willingness to digest misinformation about the vaccine on social media remains a problem, although perhaps there will be a shift in attitudes if different rules are brought in for the unvaccinated. A two-tier system was a topic of discussion when clubs debated the disruption caused to the schedule on Monday. Proposals include unvaccinated players travelling separately to games, facing an additional check to get into stadiums and having meals away from vaccinated teammates. There will be a backlash if those rules ever come into place. There will be talk of players being blackmailed. Twitter experts will say that vaccines do not stop people catching Covid. The response is that under government guidelines unvaccinated players must isolate for 10 days if deemed a close contact of anyone who has tested positive, even if they produce negative results. It is not difficult to understand. After all at least one Premier League match was called off because unvaccinated players were isolating. This is when the sympathy for teams struggling to fulfil fixtures disappears. This, unfortunately, is the point that Thomas Tuchel failed to take into account when he was asked about vaccination rates before a heavily depleted Chelsea visit Brentford in the last eight of the Carabao Cup on Wednesday night. “You know that it’s causing an issue,” Tuchel said. “But it’s not that we have all unvaccinated infected. We have vaccinated players who are positive. I don’t want to get involved in pointing fingers and starting the hunt for non‑vaccinated people. This is a choice to make.” Tuchel, who is vaccinated, was also asked about the potential rule changes. “There can be regulations around this,” the Chelsea manager said. “You have to live with the consequences. But we cannot force people to get vaccinated. I will not change my opinion on that. And I am not the guy to comment on that. There are experts in this country, all over Europe. Ask them and ask me please about football.” Sadly Covid is the game’s dominant talking point. Chelsea, whose vaccination rate is unknown, have six players in quarantine and Tuchel could pick a very odd team against Brentford. Trevoh Chalobah and Andreas Christensen are injured, N’Golo Kanté will not be risked after his exertions during Chelsea’s goalless draw at Wolves last weekend and Tuchel could have to use untried academy players. In that context Tuchel, who was angered by the league’s decision not to call off the Wolves game, is entitled to point out that Chelsea are at risk of picking up more injuries if they have to play three games in eight days with only 14 senior outfield players available. Yet if the German is going to make a persuasive case for player safety, then he must also engage on vaccines. Tuchel has repeatedly shied away from the topic, offering a series of vague non-answers, and it was frustrating to hear him suggest that vaccines are a personal choice. We are in a pandemic. The moral and social imperative is obvious: getting vaccinated protects both the individual and wider society. As for the implications for football, unvaccinated players are clearly putting the game at risk. Their personal choice has professional consequences. Footballers cannot work from home and there is an argument that any unvaccinated player who has to quarantine as a close contact of a positive case should not be deemed a Covid absentee. Games should not have to be called off because a player trusts Instagram instead of scientists. The selfish disregard for employers, teammates, opponents and fans needs calling out. Tuchel is mistaken to leave it to Jürgen Klopp. Liverpool’s manager, who has called vaccines a moral obligation, is a leader; he knows that the personal choice line does not wash. It is a weak position to adopt and the disappointment is that Tuchel could make such an articulate argument for vaccines. Having covered him closely since January, I see Chelsea’s brilliant manager as an intelligent, funny and hugely interesting man. Football needs people such as Tuchel to speak up. It is time he realised the power of his voice.The National Hockey League will not send its players to compete in the men’s ice hockey tournament at the Beijing Olympics due to Covid-19 concerns as the highly transmissible Omicron variant of the coronavirus spreads globally, ESPN reported on Tuesday. The NHL agreed last September to pause its regular season so the world’s top players could compete in Beijing with the caveat it could withdraw if Covid-19 disruptions forced games to be rescheduled during the Olympics window. That had begun looking increasingly likely in recent days with the NHL being forced to postpone 50 games in Canada and the United States after a growing number of players entered Covid-19 protocols while Omicron tore through professional sports leagues with fully vaccinated players testing positive. The NHL did not immediately respond to a request for comment. ESPN said a formal announcement on opting out of the Beijing Games was expected within the next 24 hours. The NHL had until 10 January to withdraw from the Beijing Olympics, scheduled for 4-20 February, without financial penalty. Players had mostly been eager to return to the largest international stage. But concerns that a positive test in China could lead to a 21-day quarantine and delay returning to their families and NHL clubs had dampened that enthusiasm for some. “Obviously, it’s unsettling if that were to be the case when you go over there,” Edmonton Oilers star Connor McDavid, who was expected to be a top player for Canada, said last week. NHL commissioner Gary Bettman said in early December that the decision on participating in Beijing would ultimately come down to the players, but added that the league’s concerns had “only been magnified” by the Covd-19 outbreak. The NHL, unhappy over the prospect of interrupting a regular season to send their most valuable assets overseas where they could get hurt, ended a run of participation in five consecutive Winter Olympics when it decided not to go to Pyeongchang in 2018. The presence of NHL players at the Olympics made the men’s ice hockey tournament one of the marquee events of the global sporting showcase. Their absence will have an impact on the Canadian and US teams the most, given their entire Olympic hockey rosters would be made up of NHL players. Other medal contenders like Sweden, Finland, Russia and the Czech Republic are somewhat less dependent on NHL talent. The Washington Capitals-Philadelphia Flyers game scheduled for Tuesday night became 50th NHL game delayed this season for coronavirus-related reasons. The league said Covid-19 issues with the Capitals prompted the postponement. Defenseman Justin Schultz and forward Daniel Sprong began the team’s morning skate in Philadelphia but were pulled off after their test results came back. Wiping out Capitals-Flyers left the Tampa Bay Lightning at the Vegas Golden Knights as the only game left in the NHL this week. The league and players’ association agreed to begin the annual holiday break early and push off the games that were scheduled for Thursday. “It’s not fun to see all these games getting canceled,” Lightning defenseman Victor Hedman said. “It’ll be interesting to see the make-up dates and when they’re going to fit those games in, but for us to focus on that, we can’t do that.”In the moments before a 6.2-magnitude earthquake struck the northern California coast on Monday, roughly half a million phones began to buzz. An early-alert system managed by the US Geological Survey sent warnings out before the ground started to shake, giving residents in the sparsely populated area vital time to take cover. The earthquake brought significant shaking but minimal damage in Humboldt county, about 210 miles north-west of San Francisco, and officials said it was an excellent test of the alert-system. It was the largest magnitude quake that’s occurred since the system, known as ShakeAlert, was officially rolled out across the west coast. “We got some reports from folks that they got up to 10 seconds’ warning before they felt shaking. That’s pretty darn good,” said Robert de Groot, a ShakeAlert coordinator with the USGS. ShakeAlert issues warnings through a series of agencies and apps including the MyShakeApp, public wireless emergency alert systems, and the Android operating system, powered by Google. A data package is created from information provided by USGS sensors and – within seconds – shows up on phones. Some apps that provide alerts are available to download but even some who didn’t have an app on their phone were notified. Affected individuals are instructed to drop, cover, and hold on. Having extra seconds to do so can save lives. This event provided an opportunity for the scientists and system operators to test and improve ShakeAlert so it will be even better when the next big earthquake strikes. “We can run as many simulations and tests as possible but we are really going to learn the most from real earthquakes,” de Groot said. “It’s giving us the chance to use the system and learn how to do a better job of alerting people.” The earthquake occurred just after noon and was centered off the coast, near a tiny town called Petrolia that’s home to fewer than 1,000 people. The nearest population center, Eureka, is about 45 miles north. That left only about 25,000 people in the range of strong or very strong shaking, according to the US Geological Survey, though residents as far away as Sacramento and the San Francisco Bay Area reported feeling trembling. The Humboldt county sheriff’s office of emergency services did not issue any evacuation orders, though a few roads were closed due to rockslides. The US Geological Survey estimated economic losses of less than $10m and no fatalities. Photos showed shattered store windows, broken bottles fallen into store aisles and tiles that had fallen loose from a commercial building’s ceiling. The area last suffered an earthquake of a similar magnitude in 1993, when one person died, according to the USGS. Jane Dexter, manager of the Petrolia General Store, told the San Francisco Chronicle the rumbling and shaking had lasted for about 20 seconds. Glass bottles fell off the shelves at the store, bursting on the floor, but no one was hurt, she said. “It was bigger than [anything] I’ve felt in a long time out here,” she told the Chronicle. There have been dozens of aftershocks ranging from 2.6 to 4.5 in magnitude, according to the USGS, through Monday and Tuesday. Though the quake originated off the coast, it did not trigger a tsunami and the National Weather Service announced that there was not a threat of one. Even as alerts improve, officials emphasized how essential it is for residents and visitors to earthquake-prone areas across the west coast to be prepared. “It is one tool in a larger toolbox,” said De Groot. Everyone should have an emergency earthquake kit, copies of important documents, and plenty of bottled water for each person in the household. “[ShakeAlert] is just an enhancement for them to use to keep safe.” The Associated Press contributed to this reportTributes have been paid to the Spain rugby union player Kawa Leauma who has died, aged 32. The lock, who was in Amsterdam for Spain’s Six Nations B match against the Netherlands, had reportedly sustained head injuries from a fall and was admitted to hospital in a critical condition. He underwent emergency surgery, but died in hospital. “We regret to announce the death of Kawa Leauma,” the Spanish Rugby Federation confirmed. An official statement said: “The Spanish Rugby Federation regrets to announce the death of Kawa Leauma overnight, AMPO Ordizia and XV del León player, who suffered an accident on Saturday 18 December after Spain’s match against the Netherlands in Amsterdam. “At the express wish of his wife, who is currently travelling to the Dutch capital, we cannot give any further information at the moment and we ask for the utmost respect for her and her family. Rest in peace, Kawa.” Leauma had played for Samoa’s under-20s and a number of Auckland clubs before switching his allegiance to Spain where he joined the first division club Ordizia. He had made just one unofficial appearance for Spain but was left out of the 52-7 victory in Amsterdam – a World Cup qualifier – because of issues over his eligibility. “Deeply saddened to hear of the passing of Spain international Kawa Leauma,” the former England captain and World Rugby chairman, Bill Beaumont, tweeted. “My thoughts are with his teammates &amp; family at this difficult time.” • This article was amended on 22 December 2021. An earlier version mistakenly used a picture of Leauma’s Ordizia teammate Anthony Matoto.Oxford and AstraZeneca have taken “preliminary steps” to produce an updated version of their coronavirus vaccine to specifically target the Omicron variant, a scientist at the university has said. Sandy Douglas, a research group leader at Oxford, told the Financial Times that an updated vaccine could be used to “respond to any new variant more rapidly” than previously believed. “Like with many previous variants of concern, and together with our partners AstraZeneca, we have taken preliminary steps in producing an updated vaccine in case it is needed,” he said. “Adenovirus-based vaccines [such as that made by Oxford/AstraZeneca] could in principle be used to respond to any new variant more rapidly than some may previously have realised. [They have] really important advantages, especially where need and logistical challenges are greatest.” AstraZeneca said: “Together with Oxford University, we have taken preliminary steps in producing an Omicron variant vaccine, in case it is needed, and will be informed by emerging data.” Calls for people to have booster shots have intensified around the world as countries rush to contain the spread of the Omicron variant amid record case rates. Researchers at Imperial College London published a study last week indicating a booster shot could provide up to 80% protection against the Omicron variant. The modelling, which involved both AstraZeneca and Pfizer vaccines, showed vaccine effectiveness of between 0% and 20% after two doses, and between 55% and 80% after a booster dose. The study was based on limited information on Omicron. Imperial researcher Prof Azra Ghani said: “One remaining uncertainty is how severe the disease caused by the Omicron variant is compared to disease caused by previous variants. “Whilst it may take several weeks to fully understand this, governments will need to put in place plans now to mitigate any potential impact. Our results demonstrate the importance of delivering booster doses as part of the wider public health response. “Prioritising these boosters to high-risk populations over primary vaccination in younger age groups should be part of this response in countries where dose supply is limited.” Recent analysis by the UK’s Health Security Agency (UKHSA) indicates that a booster offers significantly improved protection against symptomatic infection from the new variant when compared with just two doses. Whereas two Covid jabs do not offer strong protection against symptomatic infection from Omicron, those who have received a booster jab remain up to 70% protected. The analysis shows that the AstraZeneca and Pfizer vaccines provide much lower levels of protection against symptomatic infection from Omicron than Delta, making the double-jabbed vulnerable to the variant. In a study published in The Lancet medical journal on Monday, researchers found the protection afforded by two doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine began to wane three months after the second jab. However, the Omicron variant was not circulating at the time of the study. Researchers behind the findings wrote: “We found waning vaccine protection of [the vaccine] against Covid-19 hospital admissions and deaths in both Scotland and Brazil, this becoming evident within three months of the second vaccine dose. “Consideration needs to be given to providing booster vaccine doses for people who have received [the vaccine].”