The extraordinary claims in the testimony from a young Foreign Office whistleblower of the chaos of the Afghanistan withdrawal will raise fresh questions about Dominic Raab’s leadership of the department – and not just during his absence on holiday. The most damning of Raphael Marshall’s allegations refer to the period when Raab was in direct control of the evacuation, the week after his return. Marshall was a desk officer who has told MPs on the foreign affairs select committee that he worked in the Foreign Office’s Afghanistan crisis response team. In a 39-page statement provided to MPs, he described to them how he loved the department and how he had hoped to spend his career there. During last August, however, he said he witnessed turmoil, incompetence and irrationality with potentially deadly consequences for those Afghans who begged the FCDO for help. During the fall of Kabul in mid-August, Raab was holidaying with his family in Crete. With the country descending into chaos, Raab was forced to deny he was actually paddle-boarding at the time the Taliban entered the capital. He claimed he had been kept informed throughout and had been involved in key meetings. But he also admitted he had delegated crucial tasks, including telling another minister to make a call to assist in the evacuation of former British military translators. That moment made him the focal point for the anger of Conservative MPs at the spectacle of a humiliating retreat from the Taliban after 20 years of military involvement. Yet Marshall’s testimony suggested there was little improvement in the situation once Raab returned from holiday on 16 August. He described how junior staff with no experience or knowledge of Afghanistan were asked to make life-or-death decisions. In the final days of the evacuation effort, with extremely limited capacity for removals, Raab was asked to personally approve exceptional cases. But Marshall claimed Raab took “hours to engage” – and then returned the files, asking for them to be submitted in a different spreadsheet format. “There was very little time left for anyone to enter the airport, therefore the foreign secretary’s choice to cause a delay suggests he did not understand the desperate situation at Kabul airport,” Marshall told MPs on the committee. Yet, according to Marshall, Raab still declined to defer the judgment to officials. “In the circumstances, it is hard to explain why he reserved the decision for himself but failed to make it immediately.” Marshall said he believed the delay meant some never made it to the airport. The prime minister’s own conduct has also been called into question. Few visas were granted after 25 August, apart from those for the staff of animal rights charity Nowzad, which had become a cause célèbre, on the direct intervention of Boris Johnson. Marshall has claimed the intervention to bring some of the animals to the UK put soldiers at risk and that staff were prioritised ahead of British army interpreters. Raab has insisted everyone was caught by surprise by what happened in Afghanistan and that criticism of him was irresponsible. He also defended himself for having been on holiday, saying he had been in constant contact as the Afghan situation deteriorated before his return. Despite his protestations, Raab has arguably paid some price for his leadership during those weeks after Kabul fell, being demoted from foreign secretary to justice secretary – with the consolation prize of the title of deputy prime minister. That role has so far appeared to have little consequence, apart from an unedifying row over whether Raab’s successor, Liz Truss, or Raab should have access to the grace-and-favour stately home Chevening. And cross-government reviews, which might have been designated to Raab, such as the investigation into measures to stop small boats crossing the Channel, have been handed to the Cabinet Office minister, Steve Barclay. But Neil Coyle, a Labour member of the select committee that heard Marshall’s testimony, believes Raab has not paid anywhere near enough of a political price for what had happened. “It speaks volumes about this government that the minister ultimately responsible for the chaos, deaths and dysfunction in trying to evacuate from Afghanistan was promoted to deputy prime minister,” he said. Raab was once viewed as a likely future Tory leader, talked of in the same breath as Truss and Rishi Sunak, especially after his caretaker leadership during the prime minister’s Covid hospitalisation. The Afghanistan debacle most likely means the end of that ambition – though Johnson himself managed to overcome a blundering stint in the same role. It will be little comfort those whose emails sat in FCDO inboxes, asking the foreign secretary to save their children’s lives.Tens of thousands of Afghans were unable to access UK help following the fall of Kabul because of turmoil and confusion in the Foreign Office, according to a devastating account by a whistleblower. A former diplomat has claimed bureaucratic chaos, ministerial intervention, lack of planning and a short-hours culture in the department led to “people being left to die at the hands of the Taliban”. The evidence of Raphael Marshall was deemed so serious that an internal inquiry was launched when he presented his account to the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) permanent secretary, Sir Phillip Barton, at the end of August. It is likely the whistleblower’s evidence and the launch of the still unpublished internal inquiry contributed to the decision to move the then foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, to a new cabinet role. Marshall, an Oxford graduate with three years in the diplomatic service, had volunteered to work on the FCDO’s special cases team at the height of the crisis in August following the sudden fall of Kabul to the Taliban. He has now quit the department and, in testimony to the foreign affairs select committee published on Tuesday, he reveals the extent of the chaos he witnessed. At one point at the height of the crisis, he says he was the only person working on the evacuation desk, and was having to make life and death decisions on individuals to be evacuated on the basis of entirely haphazard criteria. He has claimed Raab showed a misunderstanding of the haphazard process and desperate position at Kabul airport by delaying several emergency evacuation referrals. Rather than acting immediately, Raab – he said – insisted on further, better formatted evidence. “It is hard to explain why he reserved the decision for himself but failed to make it immediately,” Marshall says. Marshall claims some of those that needed Raab’s consent never reached the airport, and in another case the team went ahead without waiting any longer for a response by Raab. Marshall has also questioned whether Downing Street had been correct to tell parliament that all emails from Afghans attempting to leave the country had been processed by 6 September. The whistleblower also reveals the uproar inside the Ministry of Defence when Boris Johnson ordered an Afghan animal charity to be given priority for evacuation. In his testimony, Marshall claims: “There was a direct trade-off between transporting Nowzad’s animals and evacuating British nationals and Afghan evacuees, including Afghans who had served with British soldiers.” The civil servant worked for a team responsible for helping people whose lives were at risk due to their connection with the UK. The applicants did not qualify for the Arap (Afghan relocations and assistance policy) scheme – which was meant for those who had been directly employed by the UK government. But they included Afghan soldiers, politicians, journalists, civil servants, feminists, aid workers and judges. In his testimony, Marshall estimates between 75,000 and 150,000 people (including dependants) applied for evacuation under the special case scheme. The vast majority of these applicants feared their lives were at risk as a result of their connection to the UK and the west and were therefore eligible for evacuation. In a 39-page statement to MPs on the foreign affairs select committee, Marshall estimates fewer than 5% received help. Marshall says: “At the height of the crisis on the afternoon of Saturday 21 August, I was the only person monitoring and processing emails in the Afghan special cases inbox. “No emails from after early Friday afternoon had been read at that point. The number of unread emails was already in the high thousands, I believe above 5,000, and increasing constantly.” Marshall said that, given the excess demand for places, it was critical that credible selection criteria were applied, but he says this did not happen. Instead, he claims the criteria provided were entirely subjective. “Staff were scared by making hundreds of life and death decisions about which they knew nothing,” he says. Specific failings include a rigidly enforced eight-hour working day culture, the inability to match the computer systems of the FCDO and the Department for International Development (DfID) – which had merged with the Foreign Office in 2020, the lack of computers for soldiers in Kabul calling forward selected evacuees, a complete lack of expertise including language skills, and a lack of coordination with US allies. He claims the parallel Arap scheme was equally dysfunctional, saying that on the evening of Thursday 26 August, there were 4,914 unread emails in the Arap specific inbox. There was confusion between the two email inboxes meaning cases were left for days without anyone noticing, he alleges. For five nights in succession, he claims no night shift staff were deployed. DfID staff recruited to help “were visibly appalled by the system”. Yet despite the urgency of the situation, the default expectation remained that staff in the FCDO would only work eight hours a day, five days a week. FCDO employees were only asked to work shifts for which they volunteered. He adds that despite repeated requests it was not possible to find how many names had already been called up for evacuation, meaning the department never knew how many slots were still available. In the end, soldiers at the airport selected individuals on the basis of the order of their names on a Home Office spreadsheet. He says it is unclear why, in contrast to the Ministry of Defence, the civilian planning for the evacuation was seemingly not finalised until four or five days after the fall of Kabul. His statement to MPs adds: “Many of these emails also documented numerous recent grave human rights abuses by the Taliban, including murders, rapes and the burning of homes. “The contrast between HMG’s statements about a changed Taliban and the large number of highly credible allegations of very grave human rights abuses HMG has received by email is striking.” Marshall reveals he urged the permanent secretary to consider whether the chaos was so systemic that a breach of the ministerial code had occurred, but he was told the code did not in effect cover acts of inefficiency. A source close to Raab said: “We evacuated over 500 special cases, including journalists, women’s rights activists and extremely vulnerable individuals. “The major practical challenge to evacuation was verifying identity and securing safe passage to the airport, not the speed of decision making. At all times, the team’s focus was on saving lives.” A UK government spokesperson said staff, including 1,000 from the FCDO, “worked tirelessly to evacuate more than 15,000 people from Afghanistan within a fortnight … [in] the biggest mission of its kind in generations and the second largest evacuation carried out by any country”. They added: “The scale of the evacuation and the challenging circumstances meant decisions on prioritisation had to be made quickly to ensure we could help as many people as possible. “Regrettably we were not able to evacuate all those we wanted to, but ... since the end of the operation we have helped more than 3,000 individuals leave Afghanistan.”Child deaths in England fell by about 10% during the first year of the coronavirus pandemic to what could be a record low, according to the first study of its kind. The findings sharply contrast with overall mortality for England’s population, which was 14% higher than the previous year. The number of children in England who died fell to 3,067 between April 2020 and March 2021 – 356 fewer than were recorded in the previous 12 months – with the fall particularly marked in under-10s and those with underlying health problems. It is likely to represent the lowest level of child mortality on record, researchers at the Universities of Bristol and Cardiff found. In Archives of Disease in Childhood, they wrote: “What these data show is that, during 2020–21, when multiple measures were introduced with the aim of reducing morbidity and mortality from Covid-19 in the adult population, there was an unexpected fall in overall child mortality in England, most marked in younger children and those with underlying health conditions and infectious disease other than Covid-19. “The magnitude of this fall (around 10%), including those children living in the most deprived conditions, a group for whom previous attempts to reduce excess mortality have generally been less successful, makes clear that we need to investigate what aspect of societal reorganisation and the restrictions faced by the whole population have had this effect.” The study used data from the University of Bristol-led National Child Mortality Database (NCMD) – a first-of-its-kind initiative to collect comprehensive and timely data on every child death in England. Researchers sought to quantify the relative risk of childhood deaths across England during the first year of the pandemic, compared with the year before. Findings from the analysis showed that deaths from non-Covid infections and other underlying conditions fell, and there is some evidence of fewer deaths from substance abuse. In addition, the reduction in mortality appeared to occur during the winter months, where the seasonal increase, often caused by infections other than Covid, was not apparent, researchers said. This period coincided with the prolonged lockdown in England from January to April 2021. Prof Karen Luyt, programme lead for the NCMD and professor of neonatal medicine at the University of Bristol, said: “There was clear evidence that the reduction in mortality was seen in two key areas: those children with underlying health conditions and those who died of infectious diseases other than Covid. “Our data demonstrate that child deaths caused by seasonal infections are potentially substantially modifiable at population level. “It is therefore important that we learn from the effects highlighted in this study to improve the outcome for the most vulnerable children in our society.”Damning new light has been shed on the hour-by-hour decisions taken and frustrations encountered by a civil servant trying to help desperate Afghans flee the country in the days after the Taliban takeover. These are some of the key criticisms made by Raphael Marshall, a former desk officer at the Foreign Office. Thousands of emails went unread The government falsely claimed each request for evacuation was logged, when in fact thousands of emails – including many sent by MPs – went unread, Marshall said. When Tom Tugendhat, the chair of the foreign affairs committee, complained to the then foreign secretary Dominic Raab’s private office that 10 cases he had raised in an email had not been read, a message was sent back to Tugendhat saying: “We were processing them.” But Marshall said that was wrong: “In fact, none of these cases had so far been processed at all.” Marshall estimated that up to 150,000 people applied for evacuation, but that fewer than 5% of those got any assistance. He added: “It is clear that some of those left behind have since been murdered by the Taliban.” When a new system was introduced following fury at the masses of unread emails, Marshall said all emails were then read, but nothing was done with their contents and that he thought this was “to allow the prime minister and the then foreign secretary to inform MPs that there were no unread emails”. The inbox was also at one point temporarily locked, which Marshall believes was evidence that the initial process was merely “a public relations purpose”. Evacuees prioritised without consistency Even for those whose pleas for help were read, the criteria for deciding who should be eligible for evacuation was “unhelpful”, Marshall said, because they did not lay out which, if all, should be met, leaving the decision to individuals’ discretion. He claimed Raab approved a list of professions that should be prioritised – such as judges and intelligence officers – but that this was not provided to people processing the emails. This meant guards who had protected the British Embassy were not prioritised for evacuation, Marshall said. A lack of evidence required to back up people’s claims about how much danger they were in also meant it was possible that “some evacuation spots were misallocated to people”. Those picked were then added to a spreadsheet; however, Marshall said, the summaries of people’s cases were “inconsistent and likely often misleading”. A second spreadsheet was then created on which a single senior civil servant narrowed down further the people to prioritise. “There was therefore no effective review of these decisions,” Marshall said. Lack of staff, experience and equipment No members of the Afghan special cases team had studied the country or worked on it previously, Marshall said. He said the “team leader” on two morning shifts “did not know that the correct term for people from Afghanistan was Afghans and referred repeatedly to ‘Afghanis’”. Lack of experience was also a problem. Until 24 August, Marshall said calls were made “only in English”, adding that the Dari text of emails inviting Afghans for evacuation was inaccurate, because it said a printed version of the email was necessary to enter Kabul airport, when in fact a digital copy was enough. Soldiers drafted in to help with the evacuation requests were also given laptops that did not work because the FCDO’s IT department had not issued the passwords to unlock them. Marshall believed this could “directly result in the deaths of people unnecessarily left behind”. FCDO ‘working culture’ Despite the gravity of the situation, Marshall said, the default expectation remained that FCDO staff would continue to work normal hours, and only be asked to do extra shifts. This resulted in frequent personnel changes and “serious shortages of capacity”, Marshall said, blaming a “deliberate drive by the FCDO to prioritise ‘work-life balance’”. He concluded: “The FCDO’s approach has undermined organisational effectiveness.” Poor integration between departments Once the FCDO finalised the evacuation list, the details were sent to the Home Office for security checks. However, anyone who had not provided all relevant details in their initial request – such as passport number and date of birth – was eliminated from the process. It took six hours for the Home Office to start confirming who had passed security clearance, and most took longer. This was a “predictable consequence” of sending one group of around 1,000 names in a single batch, Marshall said. The night before the mass list was sent, a shorter list of “very high priority cases” was sent over. But Marshall said that when he checked on its progress 24 hours later, he discovered it had been “lost somewhere”. When soldiers were drafted in to fill shifts civil servants could only be requested to fill, Marshall said their MoD clearance was not recognised by the FCDO, so they “had to be escorted” to “guard against potential espionage”. Even within the Foreign Office, civil servants who worked at the former Department for International Development who had volunteered to help were “appalled by our chaotic system” and could not have live documents or access to the shared inbox because the IT systems had not been integrated, Marshall said. PM’s push to evacuate animals at ‘direct expense’ of those at risk of murder Despite the huge numbers of people trying to escape, Marshall said the FCDO “received an instruction from the prime minister” to use “considerable capacity” to help animals leave Afghanistan that were in the care of Nowzad, the charity run by Paul “Pen” Farthing. The fact that Nowzad said it could charter a plane itself was irrelevant, because British soldiers would have to spend time escorting the animals instead of human beings and there was limited capacity at the airport, he concluded. Marshall believed the government “transported animals which were not at risk of harm at the direct expense of evacuating British nationals and people at risk of imminent murder, including interpreters who had served with the British Army”.Fahim, a journalist who had worked with British media organisations, was one of thousands of Afghans who approached the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) for help to escape Afghanistan after the Taliban’s conquest this summer. Told he was cleared to travel with his family to the UK, he was also one of the many left behind as the promised help from the FCDO failed to materialise. A Panjshiri journalist, Fahim (not his real name) has not slept in the same house for more two nights in a row since the Taliban takeover four months ago, fearful for his life. Leslie Knott, a documentary film-maker who has been trying to help Fahim leave Afghanistan, told the Guardian what happened. “On 18 August [in the midst of the evacuation crisis], I was asked for names of journalists who had worked with British news agencies so they could be included on a manifest for evacuation. “[Fahim], his wife and nine children were included on this list that was submitted to the FCDO. He quickly received news that he was cleared by the FCDO and that he should pack his bags, keep his phone charged and be prepared to leave at any moment. “No phone call ever came. Repeated attempts to reach the FCDO went nowhere.” Fahim takes up the story. After initial contact by email with UK officials at the beginning of the evacuation crisis, he says he has heard nothing. “They asked about me. Living in Kabul. What my problems were. It was a long time ago now. They were in touch two months ago. Since then I’ve heard nothing. I tried several times to contact them.” Knott said what was most “heart-wrenching” was the knowledge that Fahim and his family were convinced by their contacts with the FCDO that they would be leaving. They even called her to ask how they should best prepare to leave. “He wanted to know how much food they should bring for the children and how to secure their house. They were in the mindset they were leaving, so it was devastatingly disappointing.” For many others who had worked closely with the west and western organisations, it was a similar story. Told they were cleared to travel, they say they did not hear back from UK officials either with coordination details for reaching the airport and evacuation flights, or later after the last flights had gone. And while some managed to make their way to Pakistan and leave that way, many others have remained trapped in Afghanistan. Another Afghan journalist, who like Fahim had been cleared to leave for the UK with his family, sent a message, seen by the Guardian, after the last British flight had left, saying simply they had been left behind and asking for help. That journalist eventually managed to escape Afghanistan by himself.David Tennant has criticised the suggestion by the former media minister John Whittingdale that public service broadcasters should make “distinctly British” programmes. In September, Whittingdale announced government plans to force the BBC, ITV and Channel 4 to make more programmes that celebrate British values. Ministers plan to include the objective in new UK media laws to be drawn up next year. While major global players including Netflix, Amazon and Disney have invested in British content, there is concern that shows are too generic because they are made for an international audience, without reflecting true “Britishness”. Whittingdale pointed to Only Fools and Horses, Fleabag and Doctor Who as examples of distinctly British creations. But Tennant, who played the Doctor between 2005 and 2010, criticised this. He said: “Is there some inherent criticism within this plea for more Britishness?” he said in the Radio Times. “Did Britishness mean ‘made in Britain’ or programmes that have a certain political viewpoint?” The Scottish actor questioned whether the government was actually pleading for artists to be more sympathetic towards it. “Why would the government feel they need more sympathy directed towards them? Perhaps that’s a question they should ask themselves, rather than trying to blame it on the television industry,” he said. Tennant plays Phileas Fogg in the upcoming BBC production of Jules Verne’s 1873 novel, Around the World in Eighty Days. In the story, Fogg and his newly appointed French valet attempt to circumnavigate the world on a wager of £20,000. Verne wrote the novel as France reeled from its military defeat by Prussia and a failed working-class revolution in Paris. His protagonist, a wealthy Victorian gentleman with a stiff upper lip – previously played by David Niven and Steve Coogan among others – has been interpreted as an attempt by the author to explain the zenith of Empire and the invulnerability of upper-class white men. Tennant’s Fogg is a helpless and befuddled has-been, who at one point relies on the help of a black man and a woman. “In many ways Phileas Fogg represents everything that’s alarming and peculiar about that old sense of British Empire,” Tennant said. “Potentially, it’s a story about an England that should elicit very little sympathy.” Verne, he added, “chose to make Phileas Fogg a particularly stuffy Englishman. We’re showing a different type of stuffy Englishman. He’s very damaged, everything is a trauma for him.” Filming for the series, written by the Life on Mars co-creator Ashley Pharoah, was abandoned in March 2020 due to the pandemic, and later completed under restrictions. “It was quite alarming. You didn’t really know how dangerous it would be to be on set with 100 people,” Tennant said. The actor recently won an Emmy for his portrayal of the serial killer Dennis Nilsen in ITV’s Des, which also won six National Television awards. Tennant said the production team had not wanted to tell a titillating and sensationalist story, but it was important to continue to tell stories “about how badly it can go, and how dysfunctional some of our human brethren can become”. The initiative to make “British” programmes was announced in a speech due to be given by Oliver Dowden before he was replaced as the culture secretary by Nadine Dorries.Travel firms have called on the government to provide urgent financial help as fresh Covid-19 restrictions come in to force on Tuesday, hitting holiday travel just before the peak booking period. Turnover has been at just 22% of normal levels for tour operators, according to figures from the travel association Abta. Hopes for recovery, lifted last month by the reopening of transatlantic travel and the removal of all destinations from the red list, have been dented by rules brought in since the emergence of the Omicron variant. Travellers must take a pre-departure test from Tuesday before they set out for the UK. The red list was extended to Nigeria on Monday, after South Africa and others 10 days ago, meaning that all returning citizens must enter mandatory hotel quarantine. Abta said the new restrictions could “tip companies over the edge”. The restrictions on South Africa have effectively ended holiday travel before the destination’s peak season, while additional testing and the reintroduction of PCR instead of lateral flow tests have dented consumer confidence. It warned that smaller businesses may find it difficult to survive after two lost summer seasons. Employment across the travel industry has halved since the beginning of the pandemic in March last year, according to Abta research. Booking volumes over summer and autumn this year are 28% of that period in 2019, and reported turnover for the last financial year averaged only 22% of pre-pandemic levels. The industry has called for the government to provide more support for firms, as well as capping the cost of PCR tests for travellers. Mark Tanzer, chief executive of Abta, said: “Public health must come first, but the government should be looking to soften the blow to travel companies by providing financial support in the shape of grants and the return of furlough for travel staff. We can’t go on like this with requirements changing but nothing to support those businesses worst affected. “Not only has there been an absence of any specific support for the sector, but many companies have either been excluded or refused access to the general grant funding – so it’s no wonder that many of our members feel totally abandoned by the government.” The TSSA union weighed in with calls for more help for the industry. Its general secretary, Manuel Cortes, said: “Travel companies are already saying that bookings are collapsing since the new restrictions were introduced last week – and they’ll become tougher from tomorrow. “The government must provide bespoke support for our travel sector, including a furlough scheme so that those employed in the sector don’t pay with their jobs for containing the spread of the Omicron variant.” The Department for Transport was approached for comment.Sajid Javid and Nadhim Zahawi have taken to Twitter to mock the Daily Telegraph for apparently confusing them with each other in a tweet on Monday. Javid, the health secretary, shared a thinking emoji with a screenshot of a Telegraph Twitter update showing the picture of his colleague, Zahawi, alongside the headline: “Omicron has spread in community, confirms Sajid Javid. Follow our latest updates on our coronavirus liveblog here”. The education secretary shared Javid’s tweet and wrote: “As far as I know, side effects of Omicron don’t include growing a goatee and glasses …”. Javid had been updating MPs in the House of Commons on Omicron and measures the government is taking in the hope of containing the spread of the new variant. He confirmed there was community transmission of Omicron “across multiple regions of England”. He also told the Commons that there were now other methods that labs had brought in to detect suspected Omicron, and this capability was being expanded so that all testing centres would be able to pick it up “very soon”. Just last month, a Conservative MP lost his senior role with a charity for apparently mixing up the same two cabinet ministers. James Gray was told to step back as a commander of the St John Ambulance after he introduced the then vaccines minister, Zahawi, as the health secretary at a parliamentary reception last month, seemingly confusing him with Javid, who occupies that post.Since early October, residents of Carson, California, have been sickened by a noxious smell coming from the Dominguez Channel that has been likened to “a rotten egg” or “the stench of death”. Now, officials have pinpointed a cause: a fire at a warehouse that stored beauty and wellness products. South Coast Air Quality Management District, the agency tasked with investigating the foul stench, said on Friday that the large warehouse fire, which began on 30 September and took several days to extinguish, caused vast amounts of chemicals to flow into the 15-mile canal. That spurred a die-off of plants living in the waterway, which in turn produced huge amounts of hydrogen sulfide, a flammable and colorless gas that can be harmful to human health. The agency has issued notices of violation to four companies connected to the warehouse. The rancid odor was first reported on 3 October, and by 6 October the air management agency was receiving more than 100 complaints a day. Residents of Carson, a city in Los Angeles county that is home to predominantly people of color, were complaining of severe headaches, fatigue and respiratory problems as levels of the gas increased. According to the air quality district, hydrogen sulfide levels at one point reached nearly 7,000 parts per billion, about 230 times higher than the state nuisance standard. More than 3,000 people moved into hotels – paid for by the county – to escape their symptoms, and 27,000 air purifiers were delivered to homes to mitigate the scent. Even now, residents say the smell is not gone. On a Facebook group set up by residents, people are still reporting problems. For Ana Meni, a resident who temporarily relocated to a hotel, the ordeal is not over. She has since returned home and says the smell is not as bad as before, but she is still suffering from headaches almost on a daily basis and has problems with throat irritation. “Over-the-counter medicine doesn’t help,” she says. “The only relief I have is to get out of the city. The moment I do, the headaches go away.” Meni says her sister has even worse symptoms, with nonstop nosebleeds that have forced her to visit the emergency room a few times since they returned home. Mark Pestrella, the Los Angeles county public works director, reported to the county board of supervisors that his department had spent about $54m on cleaning the channel, as well as on hotel rooms and air purifiers for residents. That could increase to $143m if the cleanup lasted until March, he said. As for the companies whose products caused the die-off, last month, the LA county counsel, Rodrigo A Castro-Silva, sent a letter to their attorneys, telling them that they must preserve anything that could be considered evidence if the county took legal action. The LA Times reports that the letter says the September fire was ignited by illegally stored flammable materials, including hand sanitizer and antibacterial wipes. Eight residents have filed a class-action lawsuit against the companies, alleging that the fire caused the hazardous smell. Meni says she’s trying to be optimistic, given the new actions by authorities. LA county and the city of Carson have considered the situation finished, but residents are left wondering about the lingering smell and its long-lasting impacts. “I have no idea what it is in the air that is still making us all sick,” she says. “It wasn’t like this at all before the Dominguez Channel incident.”One month ago in Invercargill, New Zealand, a massive cardiac arrest stopped my dad Richard mid-conversation while raving away to his grandnephew Finn. Twenty minutes without sufficient oxygen left him with catastrophic brain damage. Richard lasted 10 days off life support, but his unbridled enthusiasm was extinguished that day. I thought I’d never hear his voice again … until I did. Trapped alone for a week in New Zealand’s shambolic hotel quarantine system, the horror of seeing my incapacitated dad through Zoom’s digital veil was too much. And receiving only his laboured breath down the phone line made it hard to verbally articulate my love and gratitude – the only way I could was through playing him music. Often those songs were written by one of his heroes, Nick Cave. A road trip through New Zealand’s North Island is my first memory of Richard playing me Cave’s music – a CD of 2001’s No More Shall We Part. Having just moved on from the soundtrack to South Park: Bigger, Longer &amp; Uncut, the experience was revelatory. Hearing Cave’s strange music as we sped past tī kōuka trees and greying fence posts was the first time I really thought about music – as a music writer I now do that a lot. No More Shall We Part ushered me out of adolescence. I discovered The Boatman’s Call in my mid-teens and bought the Abattoir Blues/The Lyre of Orpheus double album on its release in my first year of adulthood. Encountering Cave’s music was inevitable but it’s forever inseparable from memories of my father. I spent my first night in Invercargill alone with Dad at Southland hospital, where I continued my musical vigil curled up in a La-Z-Boy chair. I played Cave’s boisterous Dig, Lazarus, Dig!!! to lighten the mood until Richard’s groans intensified, prompting a call to the nurses out of fear I’d instigated his final boogie. Music – along with photography – was Richard’s great joy. The variety of music he exposed me to is the foundation of my music writing (I’m a photographer, too). His interest wasn’t manufactured for others, coming instead from an unrelenting curiosity in the world’s creations. While in the womb he played me Tom Waits; he blasted me with Beethoven’s 5th at five days old and I blasted puke right back. Our house was filled with Dr John’s Creole incantations, the Ethiopian jazz great Mulatu Astatke, Taj Mahal’s intercontinental blues and Bonnie Raitt’s perfect I Can’t Make you Love Me. I compiled that music to play at Richard’s cremation. Dad loved receiving my recommendations as our friendship grew with age, so I included music important to me too: Charles Bradley’s aching soul cover of Black Sabbath’s Changes; and Musicology by Prince, an artist I’d inspired him to re-evaluate. Picking the perfect Cave track proved fraught until Google unearthed a live recording of Push the Sky Away, the encore of the last concert Dad and I attended together – Nick Cave and Warren Ellis playing their film scores with the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra at Hamer Hall. Cave conducted and quipped while Ellis twirled in symbiosis with his violin. Richard wept that night and soon so would I. I decided on Push the Sky Away to close the playlist at Richard’s cremation, only realising on the morning of the ceremony that the recording was from the very concert we had attended. Sun filtered through a chapel window crusted with salt from Dunedin’s Andersons Bay, illuminating a few family members seated over two rows of pews, roses from my cousin’s garden and Richard’s simple pine casket. Hunched over and sobbing, my hands cupped cheeks sticky with grief. But as my tears swelled with the orchestra’s strings, and the crowd’s applause escalated with the choir, I encountered something miraculous. In that moment I realised my dad was roaring somewhere in there too, with me by his side, howling together with pure, overwhelming joy. Nick Cave’s music has bestowed Dad and I with many gifts but none greater than this – the most profound musical experience of my life, an ecstatic transmission containing what I considered lost, the chance to hear Richard’s voice one last time. I can bring Dad to me now, any time I need him.The White House will stage a diplomatic boycott of the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing, press secretary Jen Psaki confirmed. American athletes are still expected to compete in the games, but the Biden administration will not be sending any representatives, in a protest against China’s human rights abuses. The justice department is suing Texas over its redistricting plan, arguing that Republican lawmakers violated Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act in their efforts to shore up the party’s electoral advantage. “The complaint that we filed today alleges that Texas violated Section 2 by creating redistricting plans that deny or abridge the rights of Latino and Black voters to vote on account of their race, color or membership in a language or minority group,” Attorney General Merrick Garland said during a press conference. Congress is bracing for another fight over the debt ceiling. Lawmakers approved a short-term debt ceiling suspension in October, delaying a potential default, but they must now take up the issue again. Democratic leaders are considering adding a debt ceiling provision to the National Defense Authorization Act, but it’s unclear whether such a proposal could pass the House. Former Republican senator David Perdue officially entered the Georgia gubernatorial race. Perdue is challenging sitting Republican Governor Brian Kemp, who has faced criticism from Donald Trump and his allies for refusing to attempt to overturn Biden’s 2020 victory in Georgia. The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating a deal between Trump’s new social media venture and a special-purpose acquisition company, according to a new filing. Trump’s reported talks with the chief executive of the company Digital World earlier this year may have violated SEC rules. The Republican congressman Devin Nunes of California announced his retirement from the House to lead the new Trump social media venture. The congressman has long claimed without evidence that social media companies have been trying to censor Republicans and has sued Twitter over parody accounts that mocked him while pretending to be his mother and his cow. The Justice Department has closed an investigation into the abduction and murder of Emmett Till, the Black teenager who was lynched by two white men in 1955. Till’s murder, after the 14-year-old was accused of whistling at a white woman, galvanized the civil rights movement. Three years ago, federal authorities reopened the case after a historian’s book threw doubt on statements the woman, Carolyn Bryant Donham, made in prior court proceedings. – Maanvi Singh and Joan E Greve The Justice Department has closed an investigation into the abduction and murder of Emmett Till, the Black teenager who was lynched by two white men in 1955. Till’s murder after the 14-year-old was accused of whistling at a white woman, galvanized the civil rights movement. Three years ago, federal authorities reopened the Till case after a historian’s book quoted the white woman, Carolyn Bryant Donham. denying that Till had made advances toward her - potentially throwing doubt into statements she made in prior court proceedings. The DOJ cited the statute of limitations and the fact that Donham denied the historian’s account that she had lied in dropping the case. Donham’s former husband and another man confessed to Till’s murder after being acquitted by an all-white jury. Federal officials had also previously revisited the case in 2004, and closed it after prosecutors said that the statute of limitations kept them from pursuing charges. Devin Nunes was one of Trump’s earliest and strongest supporters in Congress, serving as an adviser to the former president’s transition team after the election. In 2018, the congressman released a “Nunes memo” questioning the legitimacy of the investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 elections by alleging that former Trump adviser Carter Page was improperly surveilled. The memo, which bolstered Donald Trump’s unsubstantiated claims that the Obama administration was spying on him, caused much frenzy when it came out. Read more: Shortly after Devin Nunes announced his retirement, the Trump Media &amp; Technology Group announced that the congressman would become the venture’s chief executive officer. In a statement, Nunes said: “The time has come to reopen the Internet and allow for the free flow of ideas and expression without censorship.” The congressman has long claimed without evidence that social media companies have been trying to censor Republicans. In his lawsuit against Twitter, he claimed he had endured “an orchestrated defamation campaign, one that no human being should ever have to bear and suffer in their whole life”. The suit also accused Twitter of censoring “viewpoints with which it disagrees” by shadow banning conservatives. The parody accounts pretending to be the congressman’s cow and his mother mocked him over revelations that his family had moved its farm to Iowa from California long before he used his agricultural roots as part of his campaign in central California. Later, the Trump justice department subpoenaed Twitter for information related to a parody account that criticized Nunes, federal court records revealed – even though a judge ruled that the representative could not sue the social media company. The Republican congressman Devin Nunes of California announced his retirement from the House. He wrote in a letter to constituents that he is leaving his position as a representative in order to pursue a “new opportunity to fight for the most important issues I believe in”. “I’m writing to let you know I’ve decided to pursue this opportunity, and therefore I will be leaving the House of Representatives at the end of 2021,” Nunes wrote. Nunes, 48, has served as a congressman since 2003. He was a member of the Intelligence Committee during Donald Trump’s first impeachment and has been a staunch ally of the former president. Nunes is also infamous for suing Twitter over mocking tweets from accounts called themselves “Devin Nunes’ Mom” and “Devin Nunes’ Cow”, and then being informed that he cannot sue the parody accounts for defamation. Andrew Roth in Moscow and Julian Borger in Washington: The US has said it would send reinforcements to Nato’s eastern flank in the wake of a Russian invasion of Ukraine, as well as imposing severe new economic measures, in a warning to Moscow on the eve of talks between Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin. Biden will also make clear to Putin that the US will not rule out future Ukrainian membership of Nato, as the Russian leader has demanded, a senior US official said. With an estimated Russian 100,000 troops already gathered within striking distance of the borders, the crisis is the worst since 2015, when Moscow staged a large-scale incursion into Ukraine, clandestinely sending tanks and artillery to encircle Ukrainian troops and compel Kyiv to sign a peace agreement in Minsk that has since come close to collapse. The official pointed out in a briefing to reporters before the Biden-Putin video summit that the first Russian military intervention in Ukraine led to more US troops and equipment to be deployed in eastern Europe, and there would be similar response this time. Read more: That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: The White House will stage a diplomatic boycott of the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing, press secretary Jen Psaki confirmed. American athletes are still expected to compete in the games, but the Biden administration will not be sending any representatives to protest China’s human rights abuses. The Justice Department is suing Texas over its redistricting plan, arguing that Republican lawmakers violated Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act in their efforts to shore up the party’s electoral advantage. “The complaint that we filed today alleges that Texas violated Section 2 by creating redistricting plans that deny or abridge the rights of Latino and Black voters to vote on account of their race, color or membership in a language or minority group,” Attorney General Merrick Garland said during a press conference. Congress is bracing for another fight over the debt ceiling. Lawmakers approved a short-term debt ceiling suspension in October, delaying a potential default, but they must now take up the issue again. Democratic leaders are considering adding a debt ceiling provision to the National Defense Authorization Act, but it’s unclear whether such a proposal could pass the House. Former Republican Senator David Perdue officially entered the Georgia gubernatorial race. Perdue is challenging sitting Republican Governor Brian Kemp, who has faced criticism from Donald Trump and his allies for refusing to attempt to overturn Biden’s 2020 victory in Georgia. The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating a deal between Trump’s new social media venture and a special-purpose acquisition company, according to a new filing. Trump’s reported talks with the chief executive of the company Digital World earlier this year may have violated SEC rules. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer paid tribute to Bob Dole in a floor speech, after he and House speaker Nancy Pelosi announced the former Republican senator would lie in state in the Capitol on Thursday. “Throughout his life, Bob Dole redefined and elevated what it has meant to be a public servant,” the Democratic leader said. Praising Dole’s many bipartisan accomplishments, Schumer added, “I always admired his steadfast advocacy for veterans, for Americans with disabilities and his love for his country.” It is a festive family photo with seven broad smiles and a Christmas tree. But one other detail sets it apart: each member of the Massie family is brandishing a machine gun or military-style rifle. The photo was tweeted last week by Thomas Massie, a Republican congressman from Kentucky, with the caption: “Merry Christmas! PS: Santa, please bring ammo.” A few days earlier, a school shooting in Michigan left four teenagers dead and seven people injured after a 15-year-old student allegedly went on a rampage. Massie’s post earned widespread condemnation but was also seen as indicative of a performative, provocative brand of Republican politics, calculated to go viral, “own the libs” – that is, provoke outrage on the left – and contribute to the outsized influence of supporters of Donald Trump. “Here his family’s got guns under a Christmas tree just after four kids were killed,” said Elaine Kamarck, a former official in the Clinton administration. “The guy’s abominable but that’s what’s happening to the Republican party. They’re flat-out nuts. There’s a piece of the Republican party that now supports violence.” Joe Biden’s decision to stage a diplomatic boycott of the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing is attracting some praise from Republican lawmakers. “The Administration is right to refuse diplomatic presence at the Beijing Olympics: America will not turn a blind eye to China’s predation, persecution, and genocide,” said Republican Senator Mitt Romney. Republican congressman Ken Buck, a member of the House foreign affairs committee, added, “I applaud President Biden for refusing to send American diplomats to the Beijing Olympics in February, and I hope every freedom-loving nation joins the US. Genocide must not be rewarded.” Bob Dole, the former Republican senator and presidential nominee who died on Sunday at the age of 98, will lie in state in the Capitol Rotunda on Thursday. House speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer announced the honor in a joint statement released this afternoon. “Senator Dole was an extraordinary patriot, who devoted his entire life to serving our nation with dignity and integrity,” Pelosi said. “Senator Dole exemplified the greatest generation, and while I never had the pleasure of serving in the Senate with him, his reputation and his achievements, and most of all his character preceded him,” Schumer added. Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell said, “Those of us who were lucky to know Bob well ourselves admired him even more.” According to Pelosi and Schumer’s statement, the Capitol will hold a formal arrival and departure ceremony for Dole’s casket. Because of coronavirus precautions, the ceremony will only be open to invited guests. After delivering his prepared remarks on the need to lower prescription drug prices, Joe Biden was asked whether he believes Congress can still pass the Build Back Better bill by Christmas. “As early as we can get it,” the president told reporters. “I want to get it done no matter how long it takes.” Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer said this morning that he still wants the upper chamber to pass the $2tn social spending package by Christmas. “Our goal in the Senate is to pass the legislation before Christmas and get it to the president’s desk,” the Democratic leader said in a letter to colleagues. “I will continue to remind you that there are more long days and nights, and potentially weekends, that the Senate will be in session this month.” Joe Biden is now delivering remarks on his Build Back Better agenda and the need to lower prescription drug prices for American families. The president noted that some drugs are far more costly in the US when the same exact treatments are available at a lower price in other nations. One anti-cancer drug that costs $14,000 in the US is sold for $6,000 in France, even though it is distributed by the same manufacturer in both nations. “We can agree that prescription drugs are outrageously expensive in this country,” Biden said. “Doesn’t need be that way.” The Justice Department is suing Texas over its new electoral maps, saying the plans illegally make it more difficult to participate in the electoral process. Minority voters accounted for 95% of Texas’ population growth over the last decade, but there are no new majority-minority districts in the new plans. Texas Republicans, who control the redistricting process, drew the lines to shore up their advantage across the state, blunting the surge in the state’s non-white population. The suit says Texas violated Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act, which prohibits voting practices that discriminate on the basis of race. “The complaint that we filed today alleges that Texas violated Section 2 by creating redistricting plans that deny or abridge the rights of Latino and Black voters to vote on account of their race, color or membership in a language or minority group,” Attorney General Merrick Garland said during a press conference. Vanita Gupta, the number three official at the Justice Department, noted that some of the districts were drawn with “discriminatory intent.” She also noted that Texas is a repeat offender when it comes to voting discrimination, highlighting that courts have repeatedly found that the state has discriminated against minority voters over the last several decades. This is the first redistricting lawsuit the Justice Department has filed this year. Last week, the Department made filings in three cases challenging new voting restrictions in Arizona, Texas, and Florida, defending the scope of Section 2. A reporter asked press secretary Jen Psaki why the Biden administration is still sending athletes to the 2022 Olympics, even as the White House refuses to send a diplomatic delegation to Beijing. “We believe US athletes, people who have been training, giving up a lot of blood, sweat and tears preparing for these Olympics, should be able to go and compete, and we look forward to cheering for them from home,” Psaki said. The press secretary argued the diplomatic boycott clearly demonstrated that the US would not treat the games as “business as usual” in light of China’s human rights abuses. China has said a diplomatic boycott of the forthcoming Beijing Winter Olympics by the Biden administration would be “a stain on the spirit of the Olympic charter” and “sensationalist and politically manipulative”, in what appears to be a further rift in the already strained bilateral relations. The last time the US staged a full boycott of the Olympics was during the cold war in 1980, when the former president Jimmy Carter snubbed the Moscow summer Games along with 64 other countries and territories. China’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian, on Monday accused Washington of “hyping a ‘diplomatic boycott’ without even being invited to the Games”. “I want to stress that the Winter Olympic Games is not a stage for political posturing and manipulation,” Zhao said. “It is a grave travesty of the spirit of the Olympic charter, a blatant political provocation and a serious affront to the 1.4 billion Chinese people.” The US diplomatic boycott comes amid escalating tensions between China and many western countries. It was first raised by Joe Biden last month when he said he was considering a “diplomatic boycott” as pressures grew in the US Congress over its concerns about China’s human rights record, including over the treatment of Uyghurs and other Muslim minorities. Politicians including Nancy Pelosi, the speaker of the House of Representatives, have advocated a boycott as protest. The White House will stage a diplomatic boycott of the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing, press secretary Jen Psaki has just confirmed. “The Biden administration will not send any diplomatic or official representation to the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics and Paralympic Games, given the PRC’s ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity in Xinjiang and other human rights abuses,” Psaki said from the briefing room podium. The announcement comes two months before the games are set to begin. American athletes are still expected to compete in the Olympics, even as the Biden administration will not be sending any representatives to Beijing. “The athletes on Team USA have our full support,” Psaki said. “We will be behind them 100% as we cheer them on from home. We will not be contributing to the fanfare of the games.” Psaki said the White House determined it would be wrong to deny athletes the opportunity to compete in the games, and she argued the lack of a diplomatic delegation would still send a “clear message” about the administration’s priorities. Donald Trump celebrated the news that former Republican Senator David Perdue has entered the Georgia gubernatorial race, but he interestingly has not yet offered his formal endorsement to the candidate. “Wow, it looks like highly respected Senator David Perdue will be running against RINO Brian Kemp for Governor of Georgia. David was a great Senator, and he truly loves his State and his Country,” the former president said in a new statement. “This will be very interesting, and I can’t imagine that Brian Kemp, who has hurt election integrity in Georgia so badly, can do well at the ballot box (unless the election is rigged, of course).” Trump has repeatedly criticized Kemp for refusing to attempt to overturn Joe Biden’s 2020 victory in Georgia, and he had encouraged Purdue to launch a primary challenge against the incumbent governor. The Washington Post has announced the death of Fred Hiatt, its editorial page editor, this morning. He was 66. Hiatt died in New York, where he suffered a heart attack while visiting his daughter in late November. A statement from Post publisher Fred Ryan, widely shared by Post staffers, said in part: “All of us who worked with Fred know what a deep loss this is and how profoundly he’ll be missed. “Over the past two decades, Fred’s leadership made the Post editorial page into the most consequential in the news industry. Nearly every person in the department was hired by Fred a great testament to his ability to identify and retain top talent. “A 40-year veteran of the post, he built friendships through the company and made immense contributions as a writer and editor and a mentor to so many.” Among responses, Peter Baker, chief White House correspondent of the rival New York Times wrote: “Devastating news. Fred was a first-rate journalist, smart and incisive, gentle but strong, open minded and thoughtful but never fooled by the propagandists of Washington or Moscow. Most of all, he was the epitome of decency and principle in an indecent and unprincipled age.” Details of a briefing call on the Biden administration’s options in regards to a feared and expected Russian invasion of Ukraine are beginning to come out. Joe Biden and Vladmir Putin are due to talk tomorrow. We’ll have more soon. In the tweeted words of Olivier Knox of the Washington Post, the options involve sanctions and other non-lethal moves: “On a conference call organised by the White House, a senior administration official (anonymously) said this when asked whether Biden will warn Putin tomorrow that the US might respond militarily to a Russian invasion of Ukraine: I don’t want to use a public press call to talk about the particular sensitive challenges that President Biden will lay out for President Putin, but I would say the United States is not seeking to end up in a circumstance in which the focus of our countermeasures is the direct use of American military force (as opposed to support for Ukraine’s military and Nato partners, new sanctions). Knox adds: “Biden has been speaking to European allies, and will continue to do so. He’ll speak to Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy after the call to Putin. But Secretary of State [Tony] Blinken will speak to Zelenskiy before the call to Putin, the official said.” The Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, has teed up a big couple of weeks in the chamber with a statement about Joe Biden’s Build Back Better Act, the $2tn package of domestic spending priorities which passed the House after a lengthy wrangle and must now survive the Senate. “Our goal in the Senate is to pass the legislation before Christmas and get it to the president’s desk,” he said this morning. “Of course, there are other priorities we plan to address before the end of the year as well, including voting rights, debt limit, NDAA… “I will continue to remind you that there are more long days and nights, and potentially weekends, that the Senate will be in session this month.” Here’s where the day stands so far: Congress is bracing for another fight over the debt ceiling. Lawmakers approved a short-term debt ceiling suspension in October, delaying a potential default, but they must now take up the issue again. Democratic leaders are considering adding a debt ceiling provision to the National Defense Authorization Act, but it’s unclear whether such a proposal could pass the House. Former Republican Senator David Perdue officially entered the Georgia gubernatorial race. Perdue is challenging sitting Republican Governor Brian Kemp, who has faced criticism from Donald Trump and his allies for refusing to attempt to overturn Joe Biden’s 2020 victory in Georgia. The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating a deal between Trump’s new social media venture and a special-purpose acquisition company, according to a new filing. Trump’s reported talks with the chief executive of the company Digital World earlier this year may have violated SEC rules. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating a deal between Donald Trump’s new social media venture and a special-purpose acquisition company, according to a new filing. The Wall Street Journal reports: The Securities and Exchange Commission is probing a potential merger between Trump Media &amp; Technology Group and the SPAC Digital World Acquisition Corp., Digital World disclosed Monday. The SPAC said in October that it is taking Mr. Trump’s social-media company public in a deal that valued it at roughly $875 million, including debt. After the deal was announced, The Wall Street Journal and other media outlets reported that Mr. Trump met with Digital World Chief Executive Patrick Orlando early this year and before the SPAC had raised money. If the meeting is deemed to have represented substantive deal talks, it could violate SEC rules. That is because SPACs aren’t supposed to have a target company identified at the time they initially raise money, analysts say. Trump has been searching for ways to more effectively communicate with his supporters since he was removed from Twitter and Facebook earlier this year, after he incited the Capitol insurrection. Donald Trump’s penchant for four-letter words is well-known, to the extent that his four-year presidency prompted soul-searching among some US media outlets about which words could properly be printed. The Guardian has long had few such scruples. With that in mind, here’s our report on remarks at Mar-a-Lago on Saturday night in which the former president called reporters “crooked bastards” and Gen Mark Milley, chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, a “fucking idiot”: Donald Trump is pushing back against the claim, made by former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows in his new book, that the then-president tested positive for coronavirus before his first debate with Joe Biden. “The Fake News continues to push the false narrative that I had Covid prior to the first debate,” Trump said in a new statement. “My Chief of Staff Mark Meadows confirmed I did not have Covid before or during the debate, saying, ‘And yet, the way that the media wants to spin it is certainly to be as negative about Donald Trump as they possibly can while giving Joe Biden a pass.’” In his book, Meadows details how Trump received a positive test result three days before the September 2020 debate, but the president then received a negative result with a separate test. The Guardian’s Martin Pengelly reported last week: Meadows writes of his surprise that such a ‘massive germaphobe’ could have contracted Covid, given precautions including ‘buckets of hand sanitiser’ and ‘hardly [seeing] anyone who ha[d]n’t been rigorously tested’. Meadows says the positive test had been done with an old model kit. He told Trump the test would be repeated with ‘the Binax system, and that we were hoping the first test was a false positive’. After ‘a brief but tense wait’, Meadows called back with news of the negative test. He could ‘almost hear the collective ‘Thank God’ that echoed through the cabin’, he writes. For years, Helen Butler has been on a mission to increase voter turnout, especially among Black voters, in Georgia and across the south. She’s used to the skepticism. People she meets wonder why they should bother, because their vote won’t matter. No matter who’s in office, longstanding problems won’t get solved. Last year, she listened as Joe Biden promised he would protect the right to vote if he was elected president. “One thing the Senate and the president can do right away is pass the bill to restore the Voting Rights Act … it’s one of the first things I’ll do as president if elected. We can’t let the fundamental right to vote be denied,” he said in July last year. And so, after Biden was inaugurated, Butler and many others expected that voting rights would be one of the first things the president and Democrats addressed. Instead, during the president’s first year in office, Butler has watched with dismay as Biden and Democrats have failed to pass any voting rights legislation. Meanwhile, Republicans in Georgia passed sweeping new voting restrictions, one of several places across the country that made it harder to vote. “It is disheartening, I can tell you, out of all the work we’ve put in to have fair elections, to get people engaged, and to have the Senate that will not act to protect the most sacred right, the right to vote, is unheard of,” Butler said. David Perdue’s announcement that he will challenge sitting Governor Brian Kemp for the Republican nomination comes less than a week after Democrat Stacey Abrams launched her own gubernatorial campaign. Abrams’ campaign sets up a potential rematch against Kemp, depending on whether he can best Perdue. Kemp narrowly defeated Abrams in the 2018 gubernatorial race, although she blamed the loss on voter suppression. In the years since, Abrams has devoted herself to voting rights, establishing the organizing group Fair Fight to help register hundreds of thousands of voters in Georgia. Democrats have credited Abrams with helping to carry Joe Biden and Senators Jon Ossoff and Raphael Warnock to victory in Georgia. The gubernatorial race will test whether Democrats can achieve another statewide victory in the historically conservative state. Former Republican Senator David Perdue has officially launched his primary challenge against Georgia Governor Brian Kemp. In a video announcing his bid, Perdue warned of the potential peril of electing Democratic gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams and blamed Kemp for Republican losses in the Georgia Senate runoffs earlier this year. Perdue narrowly lost his own runoff race to Democratic Senate candidate Jon Ossoff, who was elected alongside fellow Democrat Raphael Warnock in January. “This isn’t personal; it’s simple. He has failed all of us and cannot win in November,” Perdue said of Kemp in his announcement video. “Instead of protecting our elections, he caved to Abrams and cost us two Senate seats, the Senate majority, and gave Joe Biden free rein.” Donald Trump had encouraged Perdue to jump into the race, as the former president has continued to attack Kemp for refusing to attempt to overturn Biden’s 2020 victory in Georgia. Trump is expected to soon formally endorse Perdue’s primary challenge, according to CNN. The largest oil and gas companies made a combined $174bn in profits in the first nine months of the year as gasoline prices climbed in the US, according to a new report. The bumper profit totals, provided exclusively to the Guardian, show that in the third quarter of 2021 alone, 24 top oil and gas companies made more than $74bn in net income. From January to September, the net income of the group, which includes Exxon, Chevron, Shell and BP, was $174bn. Exxon alone posted a net income of $6.75bn in the third quarter, its highest profit since 2017, and has seen its revenue jump by 60% on the same period last year. The company credited the rising cost of oil for bolstering these profits, as did BP, which made $3.3bn in third-quarter profit. “Rising commodity prices certainly helped,” Bernard Looney, chief executive of BP, told investors at the latest earnings report. Gasoline prices have hit a seven-year high in the US due to the rising cost of oil, with Americans now paying about $3.40 for a gallon of fuel compared with around $2.10 a year ago. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Congress is bracing for another battle over the debt ceiling, as lawmakers look to avoid a default that would have devastating effects on the US economy. The debate comes two months after Congress approved a short-term debt ceiling suspension that delayed a potential default. Politico reports: House Democratic leaders have discussed adding a provision addressing the debt ceiling to the final National Defense Authorization Act and voting on it as soon as this week, according to a senior Democratic aide. That’s assuming, of course, that compromise NDAA language is ironed out between the two chambers. Senate Minority Leader MITCH MCCONNELL has privately signaled to Majority Leader CHUCK SCHUMER that he could go along with this idea, which would end their months-long stalemate. But as Politico notes, it remains unclear whether such a proposal can pass the Democratic-controlled House, given some progressive pushback to the NDAA. And with Democrats’ extremely narrow majority in the House, speaker Nancy Pelosi can only afford a few “no” votes in her caucus if she wants to pass the bill. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.Today’s Covid blog is now closed but you can follow our latest live coronavirus coverage here. Thanks for joining us, stay safe and keep up-to-date with all Covid developments here. Nightclubs in France will be ordered to close for four weeks from Friday to counter a Covid surge that has put hospitals under strain. New Covid restrictions are to be introduced in Norway after a recent increase in infections. Britain’s health minister said there is now community transmission of the Omicron variant across regions of England. The Czech government will order Covid-19 vaccinations for people working in hospitals and nursing homes as well as police officers, soldiers and some other professions and all citizens aged 60 and older. A new range of pandemic restrictions will be imposed in Poland this week. Italy tightened restrictions on people still not vaccinated, limiting their access to an array of places and services. Children in the Philippines’ capital Manila returned to school after a near two-year suspension. India’s cases of the Omicron variant rose to 21 over the weekend, officials said, while Nepal and Thailand detected their first cases. South Africa is preparing hospitals for more admissions, as the Omicron variant pushes the country into a fourth wave of infections. Austria’s general lockdown will end on 11 December for those who have been vaccinated. All private employers in New York City will have to mandate Covid-19 vaccinations for their workers. Combining a first dose of the AstraZeneca Covid-19 vaccine with a second dose of either the Moderna or the Novavax jabs results in far higher levels of neutralising antibodies and T-cells compared with two doses of the AstraZeneca jab, a study has found. The finding has important implications for lower-income countries that have not yet completed their primary vaccination campaigns, as it suggests you do not need access to mRNA vaccines – and therefore ultra-cold storage facilities – to trigger an extremely potent Covid-19 vaccine response. The strongest T-cell response of all was generated by a dose of the AstraZeneca vaccine followed by a dose of the Novavax vaccine – both of which can be stored in a standard refrigerator. Read the full story from our reporter Linda Geddes here. Nightclubs in France will be ordered to close for four weeks from Friday to counter a Covid surge that has put hospitals under strain, the prime minister said on Monday. “We will close the nightclubs for the next four weeks. This measure will apply from next Friday until the beginning of January,” Jean Castex, who emerged from quarantine last week after contracting the virus, said. “We have all had a tendency to lower our guard” in recent weeks, he added. “The situation demands an individual as well as a collective effort,” Castex said in a televised address. A raft of new measures will be coming into force according to a statement from the ministry of health. France has confirmed only 25 cases of the new Omicron variant but officials say the number could jump significantly in the coming weeks. On Sunday, the health ministry reported more than 42,000 cases in the previous 24 hours, and more than 11,000 patients in hospital - the highest number since August - with 2,000 in intensive care. Hello it’s Samantha Lock joining you as my colleague Jedidajah Otte takes a break. As I’m reporting to you from Sydney here are some Covid figures just released from Australia this morning. The state of New South Wales recorded 260 new Covid-19 cases and two deaths, while Victoria recorded 1,185 new Covid-19 cases and seven deaths over the past 24 hours. The Victorian ombudsman has also handed down her finding on the Victorian Covid-19 border permit system, describing it as ‘unjust’ and ‘inhumane’. The Queensland border is opening next Monday, with the state set to reach 80% double vaccination sometime this week. State premier Annastacia Palaszczuk told ABC that once the Queensland border is open, it’s open for good. Austria’s general lockdown will end on 11 December for those who have been vaccinated, health minister Wolfgang Mückstein said on Monday evening, but will continue for those who have not been inoculated against Covid-19. The president of intensive care physicians, Walter Hasibeder, expects that it will take another week until the number of Covid patients in intensive care units begins to drop. But the situation would remain critical until only 10% of the intensive care places are occupied by Covid patients, Hasibeder said. Currently, that figure stands at 30%. On Monday, Austria recorded 4,625 new infections and 48 deaths from the virus. A further 15 suspected cases of Omicron were also reported in Vienna on Monday, Der Standard newspaper reported. Brazil has recorded 4,385 new Covid-19 infections in the past 24 hours, as well as 108 further virus-related deaths, the health ministry said on Monday. The South American country has now registered 22,147,476 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 615,744, according to ministry data, in the world’s third worst outbreak outside the US and India and its second deadliest. With 65% of the population fully vaccinated, the rolling 14-day average of Covid deaths has fallen to 211 per day, compared with a toll of almost 3,000 a day at the peak of the pandemic in April, Reuters reports. Healthcare disruptions linked to the Covid-19 pandemic led to malaria killing 69,000 more people in 2020 than in the previous year, but a worst-case scenario was averted, the World Health Organization said on Monday. In total, over 627,000 people globally – most of them babies in the poorest parts of Africa – were killed by malaria last year, compared with 558,000 in 2019, the WHO said in its annual malaria report. The number is far higher than the 224,000 people reported to have died from Covid in Africa since the start of the pandemic. About two-thirds of the additional malaria deaths in 2020 were due to coronavirus restrictions disrupting prevention, diagnosis and treatment of malaria, the WHO said. But efforts to maintain health services in the face of the challenges meant Sub-Saharan Africa did not see the doubling of malaria deaths in 2020 that the WHO had warned was a possibility, Reuters reports. Instead, the number of deaths in the region rose 12% compared with 2019, according to WHO data. Pedro Alonso, director of the WHO’s global malaria programme, said: Thanks to urgent and strenuous efforts, we can claim that the world has succeeded in averting the worst-case scenario of malaria deaths. Experts hope the fight against malaria might gain considerable ground following the WHO’s recommendation in October that RTS,S, or Mosquirix – a vaccine developed by British drugmaker GlaxoSmithKline – should be widely given to children in Africa. The US Centers for Disease Control &amp; Prevention (CDC) has urged Americans to avoid travel to France, Portugal, Tanzania and Jordan after their Covid-19 risk level was elevated to “very high”. The four countries have been added to a list now comprising 83 countries around the globe that Americans are advised to avoid travelling to. Since today, all air travellers, regardless of citizenship or vaccination status, have to show a negative pre-departure Covid-19 test taken the day before they board their flight to the US, after the CDC shortened the timeline for required testing for all international air travellers last week. Former UK prime minister Theresa May has urged the government to find ways for the population to learn to “live with Covid” rather than respond to new variants by “stopping and starting sectors of our economy”. May and other senior Conservative MPs on the backbenches questioned the government’s response to the Omicron variant in the House of Commons on Monday. May said: The early indications of Omicron are that it is more transmissible but potentially leads to less serious illness than other variants. I understand that would be the normal progress of a virus. Variants will continue to appear year after year. When is the government going to accept that learning to live with Covid, which we will all have to do, means we will almost certainly have an annual vaccine and that we cannot respond to new variants by stopping and starting sectors of our economy which leads to businesses going under and jobs being lost? Conservative former cabinet minister Theresa Villiers criticised the government’s decision to impose “new expensive requirements” for international travel, while former transport secretary Chris Grayling urged health secretary Sajid Javid to “face down the more conservative elements of the scientific community, do the right thing and keep the restrictions as minimal as possible”. Hello, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be at the helm of this blog for the next few hours. Feel free to get in touch with pertinent updates, tips or comments, you can reach me on Twitter @JedySays or you can email me. The Omicron variant of coronavirus is now circulating within the community in the UK, according to the health secretary, Sajid Javid. He told MPs “multiple regions of England” were seeing cases not linked to international travel. But he added that none of the 336 people with a confirmed case of Omicron had been admitted to hospital. New Covid restrictions are to be introduced in Norway after a recent increase in infections, the country’s health minister has said. “These measures will be felt in our daily lives,” Ingvild Kjerkol said, adding that the new measures had become necessary because of a rise in infections and the uncertainty of the potential impact of Omicron. All private employers in New York City will have to mandate Covid-19 vaccinations for their workers, the city’s mayor, Bill de Blasio, has announced. The vaccine mandate for private businesses will take effect on 27 December. De Blasio also announced an extension to the city’s Covid passports to all people aged over five years old. A sweeping vaccine mandate is to be imposed in the Czech Republic, with care workers, nurses, doctors, police and soldiers, and anyone else aged over 60, to be ordered to take a coronavirus vaccine. “Other countries are taking this path,” The health minister, Adam Vojtech, said. “It is a trend that will prevail across Europe.” A vaccine mandate for public sector workers in Slovenia was struck down as unconstitutional by the country’s highest court. “Such a condition is comparable with obligatory vaccination, which is something that first requires a change in the law on infectious diseases,” the constitutional court said of the mandate, which the government had aimed to impose on 1 October. A new package of pandemic restrictions will be imposed in Poland this week, the prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, has said. “Tomorrow, or the day after tomorrow at the latest, we will present a second (package) related to the Christmas situation, and as reaction to the virus’ Omicron mutation,” Morawiecki said. Vaccine mandates would be included, he said. An epidemiologist who has been a prominent voice of caution in handling the Covid pandemic has been appointed minister for health in Germany. Olaf Scholz, who is to succeed Angela Merkel as chancellor, picked Karl Lauterbach for the closely watched appointment, according to the US-based news agency the Associated Press. Croatia, Nepal, Russia and Argentina were among the countries reporting their first cases of Omicron. In Thailand a health official said on Monday that the country’s first suspected case of the new variant had been detected but authorities would withhold confirmation ahead of further test results. The variant has also been found in at least 16 US states. Nigerian high commissioner to the UK, Sarafa Tunji Isola, described a ban on travel between the two countries as “travel apartheid”. “We’re not dealing with an endemic situation, we are dealing with a pandemic situation, and what is expected is a global approach, not selective,” Isola said. “Omicron is classified as a mild variant – no hospitalisation, no death.” South Africa is preparing its hospitals for further admissions, as the Omicron variant pushes the country into a fourth wave of Covid-19 infections, the president, Cyril Ramaphosa, said in a statement on Monday. Ramaphosa said Omicron appeared to be dominating new infections in most provinces and urged more people to get vaccinated against Covid-19. That’s it from me, Damien Gayle, for today. Twenty five cases of the Omicron variant have so far been identified in France, the health minister has said. Olivier Veran said 21 cases were imported from people returning from countries in southern Africa, and four were the result of local infection. The Omicron variant seems much more contagious than the Delta variant, he added. Veran also said that France is aiming to start offering Covid-19 vaccination to all children aged five to 11 from 20 December, provided health authorities give the go-ahead. None of the 336 people with a confirmed case of Omicron in the UK have been admitted to hospital, according to the health secretary. Conservative MP Sir Desmond Swayne (New Forest West) asked Sajid Javid in the Commons: “How many of those who have tested positive in the UK are ill?” Sajid Javid said: “The number of confirmed cases in the UK is 336 - they are all by definition infected. He added: “Some may be asymptomatic, others will be feeling ill. None of them, so far, as far as I am aware, have been hospitalised.” Looks like it’s going to be a grim festive season for nightclubbers in France this year. I’ll bring you more on this as it comes in. The Omicron variant of coronavirus is now circulating within the community in the UK, according to the health secretary. Sajid Javid told MPs on Monday that “multiple regions of England” were seeing cases of the variant that were not linked to international travel. He could not guarantee the variant would not “knock us off our road to recovery”, as the “the window between infection and infectiousness may be shorter for the Omicron”. Javid told the Commons there were now 261 confirmed Omicron cases in England, 71 in Scotland, and four in Wales. He said: We are learning more about this new variant all the time. Recent analysis from the UK Health Security Agency suggests that the window between infection and infectiousness may be shorter for the Omicron variant than for the Delta variant, but we don’t yet have a complete picture of whether Omicron causes more severe disease or indeed how it interacts with the vaccines. We can’t say for certain at this point whether Omicron has the potential to knock us off our road to recovery. The UK government said that as of 9am on Monday, there had been a further 51,459 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases across the country, and a further 41 people had died within 28 days of testing positive for the virus. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have now been 170,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. A sweeping vaccine mandate is to be imposed in the Czech Republic, with care workers, nurses, doctors, police and soldiers, and anyone else aged over 60, to be ordered to take a coronavirus vaccine. The health minister Adam Vojtech, who spoke to reporters via videolink from his own Covid self-isolation, said his ministry would issue a decree adding the Covid-19 shot to other compulsory vaccinations this week. “Other countries are taking this path,” Vojtech said. “It is a trend that will prevail across Europe.” Those who refuse would be barred from working in the selected professions, Reuters quoted him as saying. Vojtech said he would go ahead of the decree in spite of the likelihood that it will be curtailed by a new centre-right government which may take power as soon as next week. A senior member of the incoming coalition said on the weekend that the future cabinet would scrap the mandate for citizens over 60, but may uphold the obligation for selected professions. Only 59.6% of Czechs are vaccinated, compared to an EU average of 66.4%, according to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Early findings from studies carried out in the UK suggest that one in eight people hospitalised with Covid may have suffered heart damage, according to a report in the Telegraph. One study led by the University of Glasgow analysed a random sample of 161 recovering patients, 90% of whom had needed hospital treatment, scanning their hearts, lungs and kidneys a month or two after they had been discharged. “About one patient in eight had evidence of heart inflammation,” Colin Berry, a professor of cardiology, told the Telegraph. “That is a high incidence.” Berry stressed that the research had not yet been peer reviewed. A second study, at Oxford university, also found inflammation of organs in people who had needed hospital treatment for Covid. Dr Betty Raman, a British Heart Foundation clinical research fellow, used magnetic resonance imaging to study the brains, hearts, livers and kidneys of volunteers for post-hospitalisation studies. Raman’s study was ongoing, but she told the Telegraph a preliminary assessment of 58 patients had found “inflammation of multiple organs, the heart and vascular system in particular”. This is Damien Gayle back at the helm. In Australia, an alliance of legal services have urged the New South Wales government to to stop chasing people to pay Covid fines, saying have been issued incorrectly and have disproportionately hurt Indigenous Australians, homeless groups and people living with a disability, reports Christopher Knaus. A Thai health official said Monday that the country’s first suspected case of the new omicron variant had been detected but authorities would withhold confirmation ahead of further test results. Head of the department of medical sciences, Supakit Sirilak, said at a daily press briefing reported by Reuters that the “likely” case of the omicron variant had been identified in an American businessman who tested positive on 1 December after entering Thailand from Spain. “The analysis result confirms a 99.92% chance of it being the omicron variant. The ministry and private laboratories are now running parallel tests and we will know the result today. Initially, it is likely to be the first omicron case of Thailand,” Supakit said at the briefing. Nearly 70 nurses and doctors working in the intensive care unit at a Spanish hospital have tested positive for Covid-19 after attending a Christmas party, health authorities said on Monday. Reuters reports: Sixty-eight medics at the University Regional Hospital in Malaga had been diagnosed with the coronavirus, the Andalusian regional government said. Health authorities said they were investigating the source of the infection but added all 68 attended a Christmas party on 1 December at which 173 people were present. Another possible source of the infection could have been a large meal for hospital staff, authorities said. In the UK, 51,459 people tested positive for coronavirus on 5 December, according to official figures. This represents a 9% rise on last week. There were 41 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, a fall of 0.2%. Switzerland has released longer-term figures showing that there were 5,928 coronavirus-related hospital admissions between the start of its vaccination campaign in December 2020 and August 2021. German-language news source 20 Minuten reports that 14 deaths were recorded among those who were double vaccinated, and 437 among unvaccinated patients. Italy reported 92 coronavirus-related deaths on Monday against 43 the day before, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of new infections fell to 9,503 from 15,021. Reuters reports: Italy has registered 134,287 deaths linked to Covid-19 since its outbreak emerged in February last year, the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain and the ninth-highest in the world. The country has reported 5.12 million cases to date. Patients in hospital with Covid-19 - not including those in intensive care - stood at 5,879 on Monday, up from 5,597 a day earlier. Rachel Hall here looking after the blog - please do send over any tips, ideas or thoughts to rachel.hall@theguardian.com. New Covid restrictions are to be introduced in Norway after a recent increase in infections, the country’s health minister has said. “Tomorrow, we will come up with a new measure because we have got a situation with a lot of infection with the Delta variant. In addition, we have the Omicron variant that spread quickly,” Ingvild Kjerkol told NRK, Norway’s public broadcaster, on Monday, according to The Local. “These measures will be felt in our daily lives,” she said. New and tighter pandemic restrictions are also expected to come into force in Poland this week. Another announcement by Bill de Blasio this morning, which we underplayed a little in our earlier post, is that all children aged over five will soon need vaccine passports to enter restaurants, theatres, museums or arcades in New York City. Speaking on MSNBC, de Blasio announced that from 14 December, children between five and 11 will need to have had at least one dose of coronavirus vaccine to enter a range of public locations in the city. It will be a serious impediment to many youngsters. Just 20% of people in that age group are vaccinated, Newsweek quoted de Blasio’s press secretary, Danielle Filson, as saying. The “Key to NYC” coronavirus vaccine passport programme began in August, with adults initially required to show proof of one dose of vaccine to enter a range of establishments. Under the new rules, anyone aged over 12 will now need to have have received two doses of coronavirus vaccine to be eligible for a pass. A vaccine mandate for public sector workers in Slovenia has been struck down as unconstitutional by the country’s highest court. “Such a condition is comparable with obligatory vaccination, which is something that first requires a change in the law on infectious diseases,” the constitutional court said, according to the national STA news agency. The government had wanted to impose the mandate from 1 October, but the court blocked enforcement of the rule until it had made its ruling. Government officials were not immediately available for comment, Reuters said. Slovenia has so far fully vaccinated some 55% of its two million inhabitants, below the European Union average. Slovenia had recorded a resurgence of daily Covid cases since October. But in recent days the the number of new daily infections has been falling. On Sunday, Slovenia reported 775 new cases, down from 1,116 on Saturday. All private employers in New York City will have to mandate Covid-19 vaccinations for their workers, the city’s mayor, Bill de Blasio, has announced. The vaccine mandate for private businesses will take effect on 27 December. De Blasio said it is is aimed at preventing a spike in Covid infections during the holiday season and the colder months. “We in New York City have decided to use a preemptive strike to really do something bold to stop the further growth of Covid and the dangers it’s causing to all of us,” de Blasio said on MSNBC’s Morning Joe programme, according to the Associated Press. “All private-sector employers in New York City will be covered by this vaccine mandate as of 27 December.” The city already has vaccine mandates for hospital and nursing home workers and city employees including teachers, police officers and firefighters, as well as a separate mandate for employees of private and religious schools that was announced last week. De Blasio said he expects the new mandate to survive any legal challenges, despite a temporary block issued by federal courts on an attempt by the president, Joe Biden, to impose a similar mandate nationwide. Current New York City Covid-19 rules also include at least one vaccine dose for indoor restaurant dining, entertainment venues and fitness centres. Under new mandates for indoor dining, entertainment and gyms, two shots will be required for people over 12. One shot will be required for children aged five to 11, who are not covered by the current mandate, de Blasio said. A coronavirus lockdown in place in Slovakia should be extended by a week, the country’s health minister has said. The minister, who was not named by Reuters, reportedly said he would ask the country’s cabinet to approve the extension of the lockdown until 16 December. In the past few weeks Slovakia has endured one of the world’s worst waves of coronavirus pandemic. A lockdown shutting most shops and services was imposed on 25 November. A primary school in Scotland has closed for five days after a number of Covid cases among staff believed to be linked to the Omicron variant. Todholm Primary in Paisley, Renfrewshire, closed on Monday, after an undisclosed number of staff were identified as close contacts of people infected with the latest variant of the coronavirus. A spokesperson for Renfrewshire county council told the Daily Record: Todholm primary school will temporarily close tomorrow - Monday, December 6 for 5 days. This follows NHS Test and Protect contact tracing that requires members of the school community to self-isolate, including school staff. This is due to Covid-19 cases linked to the school confirmed as or likely to be the new Omicron variant. Due to the number of staff asked to self-isolate we have taken the decision to close the school and to switch to remote learning from Monday morning. The decision has been taken as we are unable to maintain appropriate staffing levels and is not a public health matter. Following identification of cases, a further risk assessment was carried out by public health and environmental health teams and all appropriate health and safety measures were found to be robust. Croatia has also reported its first cases of Omicron, joining Nepal, Russia and Argentina in confirming the new variant within their borders. The country’s public health agency said it had detected two cases. “We are not sure about the source of the infection as neither of those two people had travelled abroad. We believe they got infected at a business meeting at which both participated,” said Bernard Kaic, an epidemiologist. Guests from abroad had been present at the business meeting, he added. Disruptions in services led to tens of thousands more deaths from malaria in 2020, the World Health Organization has said. The UN health agency said Covid-19 had reversed progress against the mosquito-borne disease, which was already plateauing before the pandemic struck. But, it added, urgent action had averted a far worse outcome. According to the WHO’s latest World Malaria Report, there were an estimated 241m malaria cases worldwide in 2020 - 14m more than a year earlier. The estimated death toll from the disease rose 69,000, to 627,000. About two thirds of the additional deaths were linked to disruptions in the provision of malaria prevention, diagnosis and treatment during the pandemic, the WHO said. Sub-Saharan Africa accounted for about 95% of all malaria cases and 96% of all deaths. About 80% of deaths in the region were among children aged under five. But the agency stressed that the situation “could have been far worse”, pointing to its projection early in the pandemic that service disruptions could cause malaria deaths to double. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director-general of the WHO, said: “Even before the COVID-19 pandemic struck, global gains against malaria had levelled off. “Thanks to the hard work of public health agencies in malaria-affected countries, the worst projections of COVID’s impact have not come to pass. Now, we need to harness that same energy and commitment to reverse the setbacks caused by the pandemic and step up the pace of progress against this disease.” Eighteen out of 19 Covid samples sequenced in Namibia have turned out to be the new Omicron variant, the country’s health ministry has said. The finding suggests the variant, first flagged by neighbouring South Africa and Botswana late last month and since labelled “of concern” by the World Health Organization, is also highly prevalent in the southern African country. The Omicron cases were detected predominantly in and around Windhoek, the capital. The region that recorded 536 out of 695 new infections countrywide in the first five days of December. The other non-Omicron sample sequenced among the 19 was the Delta strain. Scientists around the world are trying to establish the impact of the new variant on contagion, disease severity and vaccine resistance. “We must remain on guard while we wait for further investigation about this variant,” Namibia’s health ministry said in a statement, according to Reuters. A new package of pandemic restrictions will be imposed in Poland this week, the prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, has said. “Tomorrow, or the day after tomorrow at the latest, we will present a second (package) related to the Christmas situation, and as reaction to the virus’ Omicron mutation because the situation is indeed not looking good … We have many deaths,” Morawiecki told a news conference, according to Reuters. “We will strengthen the vaccination mechanism, making it compulsory for some jobs. We are considering this and we will certainly discuss stronger restrictions in certain places for people who are not vaccinated.” Current pandemic restrictions in Poland include limits on the number of people allowed into public venues, such as restaurants, bars and shops, the wearing of masks in enclosed spaces, and curbs on travel to seven African countries – a recently introduced response to the emergence of the Omicron variant. The health ministry reported 13,250 new coronavirus infections on Monday and 25 Covid-related deaths, but numbers are usually lower after the weekend. So far, 54% of Poles are fully vaccinated, lower than the 66.4% average in the European Union. Coroners in England have said lessons must be learned from failings made by overstretched services that struggled to adapt during the Covid pandemic, as details of inquests into deaths only now emerge, write Guardian reporters Sarah Marsh and Pamela Duncan. At the height of the pandemic, everything from mental health and coastguard services to care homes had to quickly change how they operated, and coroners across England are highlighting failures made during this time through reports that identify avoidable deaths. They include a woman who missed out on vital mental healthcare because of Covid cancellations and a frail elderly woman who fell and died in a care home after she was put into self-isolation. These notices, known as reports to prevent future deaths, are issued in very rare cases when it is decided that if changes are not made another person could die. An epidemiologist who has been a prominent voice of caution in handling the Covid pandemic has been appointed minister for health in Germany. Olaf Scholz, who is to succeed Angela Merkel as chancellor, picked Karl Lauterbach for the closely watched appointment, according to the US-based news agency the Associated Press. The agency described Lauterbach as a “media-savvy lawmaker who lacks executive experience but has been one of Germany’s most prominent voices urging caution and strict measures against Covid-19”. The appointment comes on the heels of tough new restrictions, at both state and federal levels, that largely target people who have chosen to remain unvaccinated. The German parliament is to also consider a general vaccine mandate. Asked about prospects for the Christmas period, Lauterbach said that “an important aim must be to bring the case numbers down so far that we can recommend travel without endangering people”. The deputy first minister of Scotland has said people should take a Covid test every time they want to leave the house. John Swinney said that is what he was doing to ensure the maximum level of protection for his household and the public at large. Swinney told the BBC’s Good Morning Scotland programme: We want people to increase the frequency of the use of lateral flow tests, away from the two times per week to much more frequently when they are socialising and interacting with others. Personally, I am now doing a lateral flow test every day I am going out with the prospect of meeting other members of the public outside my household. I would encourage others to do exactly the same, because that gives me confidence I’m protecting my household and it gives me confidence I’m protecting other people. Ruptly, the Russian state-backed video news agency, has published some interesting footage of the anti-lockdown protests in Brussels that were broken up by police using teargas and water cannon. You can read more about what happened here in this news report. After nearly two years out of school, some children in Manila, the capital of the Philippines, began returning to classrooms on Monday, amid extensive infection control measures. The children, part of a trial at 28 schools in the capital region, were sat down at desks fitted with plastic screens, wearing face masks, Reuters reported. The government aims to reopen all schools in January, as it tries to return the country to normal after imposing some of the world’s toughest pandemic restrictions. A hundred schools in lower risk areas reopened last month. Precautions in the trial openings include capping class sizes at 15 pupils to avoid overcrowding. The Philippines, which has has recorded 2.84 million Covid-19 cases and 49,499 deaths in total, is one of the last countries to reopen schools. Daily infections have fallen sharply to below 1,000 since 24 November, from a peak of over 20,000 in September, paving the way for a wider economic reopening. This is Damien Gayle taking over the live blog for the rest of the day. Sarafa Tunji Isola, the Nigerian high commissioner to the UK, has said of the recentlty imposed travel ban that “the reaction in Nigeria is that of travel apartheid. We’re not dealing with an endemic situation, we are dealing with a pandemic situation, and what is expected is a global approach, not selective. Omicron is classified as a mild variant – no hospitalisation, no death. So the issue is quite different from the Delta variant.” UK government’s policing minister Kit Malthouse immediately hit back, and said describing measures imposed on numerous African nations as “travel apartheid” is “very unfortunate language”. UK prime minister Boris Johnson has denied scientists’ allegations that introducing travel restrictions to slow the spread of Omicron is like “shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted”. South Africa is preparing its hospitals for further admissions, as the Omicron variant pushes the country into a fourth wave of Covid-19 infections, President Cyril Ramaphosa said in a statement on Monday. Ramaphosa said Omicron appeared to be dominating new infections in most provinces and urged more people to get vaccinated against Covid-19. A man was fined €400 for travelling by bus in Rome without a valid health pass as new measures against the unvaccinated started in Italy. The “super green pass” bars the unvaccinated from a host of social, cultural and sporting activities, including dining inside at bars and restaurants. The incoming government in Germany wants to make Covid-19 vaccinations mandatory from 16 March for people working in hospitals, nursing homes and other medical practices, according to a copy of draft legislation Nepal, Russia and Argentina were among countries detecting the Omicron variant for the first time. Argentina’s health ministry said there case was a fully vaccinated person who arrived on 30 November from South Africa via the US, and who had given a negative PCR test prior to travelling and another negative antigen test upon arrival in Buenos Aires. Argentina has today approved Russia’s one-dose Sputnik Light as a standalone vaccine and a booster shot. Cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant have risen to 21 in India over the weekend and people must step up for vaccination, officials said. A probable case of the Omicron variant has been identified in a crew member of a Norwegian cruise ship that reached New Orleans on Sunday. Dr Anthony Fauci said the threat to the US from the Omicron variant remained to be determined – but that signs from South Africa, where the variant was first detected, were encouraging. The Omicron variant has been found in at least 16 US states so far, with the number of cases “likely to rise”, Dr Rochelle Walensky, the head of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said on Sunday. Prof Dame Sarah Gilbert cautioned that while it was increasingly obvious that ‘this pandemic is not done with us’, the next one could be more contagious, more lethal, or both. She called for more funding for pandemic preparedness. Critical care consultant Dr Zudin Puthucheary said it could be five years before Covid-19 intensive care unit (ICU) patients “reach their normal lives again”. People with cold-like symptoms should work from home and avoid Christmas parties in a bid to stem the spread of coronavirus, according to Tim Spector, from the Covid Zoe app. Prof Paul Hunter, from the school of medicine at the University of East Anglia, said there was concern that Omicron “is spreading rather more quickly than the Delta variant” and there were probably more than 1,000 cases in the UK at the moment. He said: “I think the early signs are that it will probably spread quite quickly and probably start outcompeting Delta and become the dominant variant probably within the next weeks or a month or so at least.” That is it from me, Martin Belam, today. I will be back bright and early tomorrow. Andrew Sparrow has our combined UK politics and Covid live blog. Damien Gayle will be here shortly to guide you through the rest of the day’s coronavirus developments from around the world. Argentina and Russia have joined the ranks of countries that are reporting they have detected their first cases of the Omicron variant. According to Reuters, Interfax cited consumer health regulator Rospotrebnadzor as saying that 10 people who returned to Russia from South Africa had tested positive for Covid-19. RIA said Omicron had been detected in two arrivals from South Africa. Argentina’s health ministry said their case is a 38-year-old resident of the western Argentine province of San Luis, who arrived on 30 November from South Africa on a flight via the US and has been in isolation since. The patient involved, who was fully vaccinated, had given a negative PCR test prior to travelling and another negative antigen test upon arrival in Buenos Aires, the ministry said. The person tested again after finding out colleagues at a work event in South Africa had tested positive for Covid. “The epidemiological objective currently is to contain and delay the possible community transmission of new variants of concern,” the ministry said. The patient was in close contact with four people, who are also in isolation but have no symptoms and their PCR tests have been negative, the ministry said. All will be subjected to another PCR test at the end of their isolation. Here’s that video clip of Prof Dame Sarah Gilbert delivering the 44th Richard Dimbleby lecture, and cautioned that while it was increasingly obvious that ‘this pandemic is not done with us’, the next one could be more contagious, more lethal, or both. She called for more funding for pandemic preparedness. Argentina has approved Russia’s one-dose Sputnik Light as a standalone vaccine and a booster shot, the Russian Direct Investment Fund (RDIF) said, citing Argentina’s health ministry. Argentina was one of the first countries to widely use Russia’s Sputnik V Covid-19 vaccine. Reuters quote the RDIF saying that a study in Argentina showed Sputnik Light was an “effective universal booster” when combined with vaccines produced by AstraZeneca, Moderna, Sinopharm and CanSino. A man was fined €400 for travelling by bus in Rome without a valid health pass as new measures against the unvaccinated kicked in on Monday. The 50-year-old reportedly told police that he was planning to get vaccinated against Covid-19 over the next few days. It was the first fine issued after the requirement for the “green pass”, which shows proof of immunisation, of having recovered from Covid-19 or testing negative within the previous 48 hours, was made mandatory when travelling on buses and underground trains across Italy. The measure was already in place for long-distance trains and domestic flights. Thousands of police officers are carrying out controls on public transport. The man was caught after getting off a bus in central Rome. Meanwhile, the “super green pass” also took effect on Monday and bars the unvaccinated from a host of social, cultural and sporting activities, including dining inside at bars and restaurants. The new rules, which were announced in late November, have led to a sharp increase in the number of bookings for first-time jabs. Andrew Sparrow has launched our UK politics and Covid live blog for the day. You can find that here. I’ll be continuing on this live blog with the latest global coronavirus news. A party of the sort that is alleged to have taken place inside Downing Street last December might not necessarily have broken the strict lockdown rules in place at the time, the policing minister, Kit Malthouse, has appeared to argue. Malthouse’s comments contradicted those made by Dominic Raab, the justice secretary, who conceded on Sunday that a “formal party” of the sort reported would have been contrary to the then-Covid-19 guidance. Malthouse also took a different view to Raab’s claim that the police “don’t normally look back and investigate things that have taken place a year ago”, saying it would be right for police to follow up any formal complaints about the event. Questions about the gathering on 18 December last year, when London was in the top level of Covid restrictions, dogged Malthouse throughout a round of media interviews on Monday, one intended to showcase a new government strategy on drugs. Read more here: Ministers at odds over Downing Street Christmas parties Critical care consultant Dr Zudin Puthucheary said it could be five years before Covid-19 intensive care unit (ICU) patients “reach their normal lives again”. The member of the Intensive Care Society Council in the UK raised concerns that there are not enough staff to rehabilitate patients who are treated in ICUs. PA Media quotes him telling Sky News: “People who have chosen to be unvaccinated make up the vast majority of patients on the intensive care unit at the moment, and certainly most of our pregnant patients are unvaccinated. “These are the young people – the vast majority of them do survive, 60% of our patients are currently surviving. But that survival comes with a huge cost and that needs rehabilitation. We don’t have the staff, have the resources to rehabilitate these patients, and it may be up to five years before they reach their normal lives again. “But 40% of these people are dying, and they don’t need to die had they been vaccinated.” Asked about winter pressures on the NHS, he said: “Things aren’t great in hospitals right now. As we gear up for winter, we have intensive care units that are full, wards that are full and a dropping number of stuff.” Cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant have risen to 21 in India over the weekend and people must step up for vaccination, officials said. The western state of Rajasthan reported the most number of Omicron cases with nine, followed by eight in Maharashtra, two in Karnataka and one each in Gujarat and the capital, New Delhi. “The people of Delhi must get fully vaccinated, wear a mask and maintain social distancing,” its health minister Satyendar Jain said on Twitter. He said the city’s first Omicron patient was being treated at a state-run hospital. Some 94% of its adults had received at lease one dose, he added. Reuters note that the country has fully vaccinated 51% of its 944 million adults and given at least one dose to 85%. Tens of millions of people, however, are overdue for their second dose despite ample vaccine supplies, government data shows. India reported its first two Omicron cases in the southern state of Karnataka on Thursday, including in one person with no recent travel history. Most other cases have been in people who have recently come from abroad, but doctors said the mutated virus was already spreading in the local population as well. The UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson has denied scientists’ allegations that introducing travel restrictions to slow the spread of Omicron is like “shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted”. Visiting police in Merseyside, PA Media quote the Prime Minister telling reporters: No, I think what we’re doing is responding to the pandemic. We were the first country in the world to take decisive measures to tackle Omicron. We put about 10 countries automatically, immediately, on to the red list and we said that anybody coming from any country in the world would have to quarantine for a couple of days. We’re now going further and toughening those measures up as we see the spread of Omicron around the world. I don’t think we need to change the overall guidance and advice we’re giving about Omicron in this country. We’re still waiting to see exactly how dangerous it is, what sort of effect it has in terms of deaths and hospitalisations. People with cold-like symptoms should work from home and avoid Christmas parties in a bid to stem the spread of coronavirus, according to Tim Spector, from the Covid Zoe app. The professor of genetic epidemiology at King’s College London told Times Radio the UK should be “much more open-minded about who we are testing” and “get more people to isolate at least for a few days with cold-like symptoms”. “At the moment, we’re estimating that somewhere between one and three and one in four colds are actually due to Covid,” he said. And so that’s quite a high rate of people that are currently not even bothered to get a lateral flow test, or getting a PCR test, going to parties and spreading it around. “So if that transfers to Omicron then we’re going to be compiling that problem much faster than we would need to.” PA Media quote him saying: “We want to tell people that if you don’t feel well that day, don’t go out, don’t go to work, work from home, because the start of that sniffle, the start of that sore throat, that headache could be a mild dose of Covid that is just breaking through your vaccine. “So I think everyone needs to be much more aware of a whole range of symptoms and not wait for the loss of smell or taste which may never come, not wait for fever, not wait for that persistent cough.” Nepal has detected its first two cases of the Omicron variant of coronavirus, the health ministry has said. A 66-year-old foreigner, who had entered Nepal from a country with confirmed Omicron variant on 19 November, and another 71-year-old person who was in close contact with him tested positive for Omicron on Sunday, the ministry said in a statement. It did not identify their nationalities. “Both of them are in isolation and getting healthcare under the supervision of health workers,” the statement said. Sixty-six other people who had contacts with them were traced and all tested negative, it added. Gopal Sharma reports for Reuters from Kathmandu that Nepal recently banned travellers from eight African countries and Hong Kong over fears about the Omicron variant of the coronavirus. The UK government’s policing minister Kit Malthouse has immediately hit back about that, and said describing measures imposed on numerous African nations as “travel apartheid” is “very unfortunate language”. PA Media quote him telling BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: It’s very unfortunate language to use. We understand the difficulties that’s created by these travel restrictions, but we’re trying to buy a little bit of time so that our scientists at Porton Down can work on the virus and assess how difficult it’s going to be for us to cope with as a country. Sarafa Tunji Isola, the Nigerian high commissioner to the UK, has had some strong words this morning about border closures over the Omicron variant. PA Media quotes him telling BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: The reaction in Nigeria is that of travel apartheid. Because Nigeria is actually aligned with the position of the UN secretary general that the travel ban is apartheid, in the sense that we’re not dealing with an endemic situation, we are dealing with a pandemic situation, and what is expected is a global approach, not selective. Omicron is classified as a mild variant – no hospitalisation, no death. So the issue is quite different from the Delta variant. I mean, the position has to be taken based on scientific and empirical evidence. It is not a kind of panicky situation. Here is a reminder of England’s travel red list: Prof Paul Hunter, from the school of medicine at the University of East Anglia, said there was concern that Omicron “is spreading rather more quickly than the Delta variant” and there were probably more than 1,000 cases in the UK at the moment. He told BBC Breakfast it was not clear how evidence from South Africa would translate to the UK as we have a highly vaccinated population. PA Media quotes him saying: How it’s likely to spread in the UK still uncertain, but I think the early signs are that it will probably spread quite quickly and probably start outcompeting Delta and become the dominant variant probably within the next weeks or a month or so at least. The big remaining question is actually how harmful it is if you do get Covid with this Omicron variant, and that’s the question that we’re struggling to answer at the moment. He said travel restrictions would have a minor impact, adding that “one of the problems with travel restrictions like this is that it then de-motivates other countries to actually be open about their own situations for fear of what they would see as economic sanctions. So I think once the infection is spreading within a country, then border restrictions don’t really add anything. We’ve known that long before Covid. This has been knowledge that we’ve had for decades, if not centuries, to be honest.” Asked if the UK was closer to the start of the pandemic than the end, he said: “I wouldn’t necessarily agree totally with that. I think this virus is around, going to be around, forever. “The last time we had a big coronavirus outbreak we think was 130 years ago and that virus is still circulating, we get infected with it fairly regularly, every three to six years, and it basically just causes the common cold. “That is likely the way that this pandemic is going, so we will be repeatedly infected with Covid, we will be repeatedly infected with new variants but by and large, they’ll just be another cause of the common cold and at that point, we’ll stop worrying about it, but we’re not we’re not quite there yet.” One of the other things that UK policing minister Kit Malthouse was questioned about on Sky News this morning was travel restrictions and testing requirements to travel. He said: We have to recognise that all these things are impositions on people’s lives and lifestyles. They’re obviously an extra cost and they cause difficulty for the travel industry. Now we need to try and smooth that as much as possible, and be proportionate about our response. We’ve got family overseas. We’re going to be travelling at Christmas, where we will have done tests in and out, in and out both ways. And it is a total pain, especially if you’ve got kids, right? So we understand. So we have to be proportionate and make judgments at the right moment. That’s what we’ve done. And it feels to me as if in the face of the unknown of this virus at the moment, for the next few weeks, that’s where we need to be, We’re in a much better place than a lot of countries right now. The decisions we made in the summer are paying dividends. That booster programme is going really well, 20 million people now I think and rising. The government’s own figures show that of those in the population aged 12 and above, 88.8% have had a first dose of a vaccine, 80.9% two doses, and 35.2% have a had a third or booster jab. There have been 20.2m booster jabs administered. A quick snap from Reuters here that a man in his 30s who had been in Italy has tested positive for the Omicron variant in the third case to be found in Japan. Speaking at a news conference, chief cabinet secretary Hirokazu Matsuno provided no further details, not saying which country the traveller was coming from or giving his nationality. While doing the media round this morning, UK policing minister Kit Malthouse has been repeatedly asked about whether police should investigate the Christmas party that is alleged to have taken place at No 10 Downing Street last year while London was under tier three Covid restrictions which would have made such a gathering against the regulations. On Sky News, he said: No 10 are are reassuring everybody that all rules were complied with during that period, and I take that reassurance at face value. But no doubt if the police are alerted, they will have a look, and they’ll form a view, and we’ll all learn more about it in the days to come. My colleague Peter Walker has summed up the Malthouse response thus: Eric Berger writes for us that the Omicron variant brings fresh concern for US mental heath after ‘grim two years’: “Despite vaccinations, we still see that people are not back to pre-pandemic levels of wellbeing,” said Silvia Saccardo, a social scientist and co-author of a recent study on college students at the University of Pittsburgh students. “And they are not back to pre-pandemic levels of physical activity, which could have consequences as well, and this is quite worrisome, because if lifestyle habits and wellbeing don’t naturally rebound, it’s important to think about what to do, about interventions to help them.” Psychologists and others who study mental health attribute the high rates of anxiety and depression to continued worries about the virus, and lingering trauma from the worst parts of the pandemic. That is not unusual, said Sharon Hoover, co-director of the University of Maryland-based National Center for School Mental Health. For example, more than 18 months after Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans, 15% of youths exposed to the natural disaster continued to suffer from serious emotional disturbances, such as anxiety disorders, compared with a 4.2% national average, according to a study in the Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Like the twentysomethings Isaacs has seen, children and teens have also missed out on significant life events, Hoover said, and “that doesn’t get remedied overnight by reintroducing those things”. Read more of Eric Berger’s report here: Omicron brings fresh concern for US mental heath after ‘grim two years’ On Sky News this morning, UK policing minister Kit Malthouse has been asked several questions about Covid and the Omicron variant. One was whether given that there appear to so far have been no deaths or hospitalisations involving the new variant, was the UK government over-reacting. He said: We’re being proportionate and precautionary. Obviously we don’t know completely what this variant is going to do. We know it seems to be quite infectious, but we don’t know yet exactly how difficult it’s going to be for people’s bodies to cope with it. Research is ongoing. We’ve got world beating science, you know, world leading scientists who will be able to give us those answers over the next two or three weeks. In the meantime, what the Prime Minister has said said is, let’s be careful, right, let’s take it steady. Let’s make sure we’re masked in certain areas where we think there’s likely to be transmission. Let’s think about travel more carefully and make sure we do testing at the border to restrict the virus coming into buy us a bit more time. But fundamentally, let’s be proportionate and get on with our lives to some extent and try and have as merry a Christmas as we possibly can. So we’re learning as we go. Don’t forget Omicron is quite a way down the alphabet. That means between delta and now we’ve been through a number of variants that haven’t got very far. Let’s see where this one goes. On that last point the World Health Organization has identified five variants of concern: Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta and Omicron. A variant of concern, they say, has been demonstrated to be associated with one or more of the following changes at a degree of global public health significance: Increase in transmissibility or detrimental change in Covid-19 epidemiology; or Increase in virulence or change in clinical disease presentation; or Decrease in effectiveness of public health and social measures or available diagnostics, vaccines, therapeutics. There are currently two other variants of interest – Lambda and Mu – which are being investigated for their potential to become a variant of concern. Nesrene Malik has filed her latest comment piece for us today, saying that Covid jingoism will not protect the west from the threat of Omicron: There is something farcical about a political decision-making complex that has learned nothing from the past two years – two years during which the UK has tried to minimise and assume, at almost every turn, that it could escape the fate of other countries. Two years during which a very particular strain of Anglo-American swagger has emerged – one that falsely believes that if we raise our walls high enough, stockpile our vaccines and establish travel apartheid, then the pandemic will be over for us, even if it continues to rage elsewhere. It does not seem to matter that during these two years, the worst tragedies did not happen abroad, but within our borders. They happened in our care homes, our hospitals, and in the wake of government indecisiveness over locking down (thrice) when it was clear that cases were rising. Imagine how many lives might have been saved had the UK government put the promised “protective ring” around care homes with the deftness and speed it red-listed and categorised other countries. But we are living in a state of inertia, where politicians continually fail to see that the problem is not that the virus and its variants make their way to the UK, but what happens when they do. Read more here: Nesrene Malik – Covid jingoism will not protect the west from the threat of Omicron Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London, taking over from Samantha Lock. Here’s an update on the latest Covid figures in the UK. Over the last seven days there have been 322,042 new coronavirus cases recorded in the UK. Cases have increased by 5.4% week-on-week. There have been 830 deaths recorded in the last week. Deaths have decreased by 2.1% week-on-week. Hospital admissions have decreased by 0.8% week-on-week. At the latest count on the UK government’s own dashboard, there were 7,373 people in hospital in total, of whom 895 are in ventilation beds. Kit Malthouse is the government minister doing the media round this morning. Initially he is being asked on Sky News about new plans for dealing with drugs in England and Wales. I’ll bring you any Covid lines that emerge if he gets asked about that. South Africa is preparing its hospitals for more admissions, as the Omicron variant pushes the country into a fourth wave of Covid-19 infections, President Cyril Ramaphosa said in a statement on Monday. Ramaphosa said that Omicron appeared to be dominating new infections in most provinces and urged more people to get vaccinated against Covid-19. “As the country heads into a fourth wave of Covid-19 infections, we are experiencing a rate of infections that we have not seen since the pandemic started,” he said, adding that over the last week, the number of daily infections has increased five-fold. While we do not yet know what impact the Omicron variant will have on hospital admissions, we have been preparing hospitals to admit more patients, and we are investigating how we can quickly secure medication for treating Covid-19. “We will soon be convening a meeting of the National Coronavirus Command Council to review the state of the pandemic. This will enable us to take whatever further measures are needed to keep people safe and healthy,” he added. If you’ve just joined us, here’s a rundown of all the top Covid developments: The incoming German government wants to make Covid-19 vaccinations mandatory from 16 March for people working in hospitals, nursing homes and other medical practices, according to a copy of draft legislation seen by Reuters on Sunday. Thailand has detected its first case of the Omicron coronavirus variant in a US citizen, who had travelled to the country from Spain late last month, a health official said. South Korea reported another 4,325 confirmed Covid cases in the past 24 hours and a further 41 deaths. India reported an additional 8,306 new cases in the last 24 hours and a further 211 deaths. The nation’s active caseload currently stands at 98,416 and is the lowest reported in 552 days. South Africa reported a daily increase of 11,125 new cases on Sunday, a slight decrease in the number on previous days. New Zealand purchased 60,000 courses of Pfizer’s oral antiviral medication to treat early infections of Covid, subject to Medsafe approval, prime minister Jacinda Ardern announced. A probable case of the Omicron variant has been identified in a crew member of a Norwegian Cruise ship that reached New Orleans on Sunday. Dr Anthony Fauci said the threat to the US from the Omicron variant remained to be determined – but that signs from South Africa, where the variant was first detected, were encouraging. The Omicron variant has been found in at least 16 US states so far, with the number of cases “likely to rise”, Dr Rochelle Walensky, the head of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said on Sunday. Thailand has detected its first case of the Omicron coronavirus variant in a US citizen who had travelled to the country from Spain late last month, a health official said on Monday, Reuters reports. The confirmed case in the man, who had arrived on 29 November, makes Thailand the 47th country to have found the new variant, Opas Karnkawinpong, Director-General of the Department of Disease Control, told a news conference. “This first confirmed case of Omicron variant is a 35-year-old man who is a US citizen who lived in Spain for a year,” Opas said adding that the patient had mild symptom. Opas said health authorities were conducting further tests of people who had come into contact with the man, but said all contacts so far were low risk. Thailand banned travellers from eight African countries including Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe at the start of December amid concerns about the Omicron variant. Opas said authorities had also limited travel from other African countries and were monitoring for more potential cases among international travellers. A probable case of the Omicron variant has been identified in a crew member of a Norwegian Cruise ship that reached New Orleans on Sunday after detecting Covid-19 among some crew and guests, the Louisiana Department of Health said. The probable case was found among 10 people who tested positive for the virus on Saturday, the health agency said in a tweet on Sunday. Another seven cases have since been reported, it added, taking the total number of cases among passengers and crew of Norwegian Breakaway, a cruise ship owned by Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings Ltd , to 17. “At this time, there have been no changes to scheduled future sailings on Norwegian Breakaway,” a spokesperson for Norwegian Cruise Line said in a statement to Reuters. The cruise ship departed New Orleans on a week-long cruise on 28 November and had stops in Belize, Honduras and Mexico, the health agency said. “NCL has been adhering to appropriate quarantine and isolation protocols,” the department said in an earlier tweet. Australia’s travel ban to several southern African countries due to the outbreak of the Omicron variant has been labelled as discriminatory by a senior diplomat. South Africa’s high commissioner to Australia, Marthinus van Schalkwyk, said the ban needed to be overturned due to large numbers of Omicron cases being detected in other continents and not just in parts of Africa. “We believe it is discrimination, because the only difference is these countries [on the travel ban list] are on the African continent,” he told ABC Radio on Monday. “The ban is unfair, there is no evidence the ban works, the World Health Organization confirms that.” The travel ban to nine southern African nations was announced in the wake of the Omicron variant being detected. It also led to a two-week delay to the entry of visa holders without a medical exemption, which is now set to take place from 15 December. The Omicron strain continues to cast a bit of a shadow over the financial markets with stocks in Asia struggling in Monday’s session thanks in part to concerns about the pandemic renewing itself. Japan’s Nikkei eased 0.5% but Korea, Australia and Chinese blue-chip stocks were all in positive territory. The UK, European and US markets are expected to rise at the opening bell on Monday. Kyle Rodda, market analyst at IG in Melbourne, said on Monday that as Omicron cases spread to more countries “there’s no clear sense” on what it all means for the global the economy. He added: “However early indicators are that the strain is more virulent, vaccine resistant at least to some extent, but maybe a little milder than previous strains. Concerningly, it also seems to hit kids harder than any other variant. To what degree these things are true is practically unknown at the moment. But markets seem to be pricing in that it’s going to have a negative impact on global economic activity.” Hong Kong was down 1.2% partly because Evergrande, the troubled Chinese property giant hinted that it might not meet its latest default deadline, taking its shares down 11% on Monday. South Korea has just released its daily Covid numbers with another 4,325 confirmed coronavirus cases recorded in the past 24 hours. A further 41 deaths were also reported, taking the cumulative nationwide total to 3,893. Thailand has also reported 4,000 new coronavirus cases and 22 deaths on Monday, taking the nationwide tally to more than 2.1 million cases and 20,966 deaths since the pandemic began. More than 57% of people in Thailand have received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine, health ministry data showed. India has reported an additional 8,306 new Covid cases in the last 24 hours, according to recently released figures from the ministry of health. A further 211 deaths were also recorded. The nation’s active caseload currently stands at 98,416 and is the lowest reported in 552 days. On Sunday, Dr Mansukh Mandaviya, India’s minister for health, announced over 50% of the eligible population had been fully vaccinated. US president Joe Biden has announced that health insurers in the US must cover the cost of at-home Covid testing from next month. Private health insurers already cover the cost for PCR tests taken at a doctor’s office but will now cover tests taken at home, too. For those Americans not covered by private health insurance, free tests will be made available at other locations across the country. “The bottom line, this winter, you’ll be able to test for free in the comfort of your home and have some peace of mind,” Biden said. New Zealand has purchased 60,000 courses of Pfizer’s oral antiviral medication to treat early infections of Covid-19, subject to Medsafe approval, prime minister Jacinda Ardern has announced. “It’s a big step forward for the management of Covid-19 globally. That brings the suite of Covid medicine secured and managed by PHARMAC to six in total, three of which are already in use in our hospitals and the rest of which, subject to Medsafe approval, will arrive in New Zealand early in the new year,” Ardern said. The prime minister said alongside vaccinations, hospital treatments were already reducing the likelihood of people needing intensive care, with rates in Auckland dropping from 5.7% seen early in the pandemic to 3%. Health experts will provide a more extensive briefing at the end of the week about the treatments, Ardern said. The country reported 135 new cases of the Delta variant in the community on Monday, bringing the total in the current outbreak to 9,171. The nation’s eligible population - 12 years and older - is set to hit the 90% double-vaccinated goal by 15 December. Germany has reported an additional 27,836 daily Covid cases and 81 deaths, according to recently released figures from the Robert Koch Institute. The European nation is currently mulling compulsory vaccinations for some health care employees in order to curb the spread of the virus. Germany has recorded a cumulative total of 103,121 deaths and 6,185,961 confirmed coronavirus cases. The Johnson &amp; Johnson booster shot may work well for those who originally had a Pfizer vaccine, a recent study has found. Researchers at the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston studied 65 people who had received two shots of the Pfizer vaccine. Six months after the second dose, the researchers gave 24 of the volunteers a third dose of the Pfizer vaccine and gave 41 the Johnson &amp; Johnson shot. Both vaccines boosted the number of Covid-fighting T-cells but the T-cell increase delivered by the Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine was twice as high as that of Pfizer’s, according to the research. Volunteers who received a third Pfizer dose saw their antibody levels jump after two weeks, and then decline by a quarter by the fourth week. The Johnson &amp; Johnson booster more than doubled antibody levels between the second and fourth weeks where Pfizer’s antibodies were still about 50% higher than Johnson &amp; Johnson’s. Both levels were well above the threshold scientists believe is needed for strong protection. The results differ from earlier studies, including a “mix and match” clinical trial organised by the National Institutes of Health that reported that all three authorised vaccines — from Pfizer, Moderna and Johnson &amp; Johnson — caused antibody levels to rise when used as a booster, with Johnson &amp; Johnson’s shot providing a much smaller boost than the others. The difference between the two studies might be explained by the length of delay between shots, the New York Times suggests. In the NIH. trial, many of the volunteers got their booster shots after three or four months, versus the new study’s wait of six months. The Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine therefore seems to have benefited more from the longer wait. The study was funded in part by Johnson &amp; Johnson and has not yet been published in a scientific journal. The coronavirus pandemic is far from over and the next one could be even more lethal, the creator of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine has said. Prof Dame Sarah Gilbert cautioned that while it was increasingly obvious that “this pandemic is not done with us”, the next one could be worse. Delivering the 44th Richard Dimbleby lecture, due to be broadcast on the BBC on Monday, Gilbert said that despite the destructive nature of a two-year pandemic that had already infected more than 265 million people, the next one might be more contagious and claim even more lives. “This will not be the last time a virus threatens our lives and our livelihoods,” she said. “The truth is, the next one could be worse. It could be more contagious, or more lethal, or both.” Read the full story by our reporters Andrew Gregory and Jessica Elgot here. South Africa has reported a daily increase of 11,125 new Covid cases on Sunday, a slight decrease in number on previous days. Just one death in the country was reported over the last 24 hours, bringing the nationwide tally to 89,966. US Senator Bernie Sanders has called upon pharmaceutical companies to share their vaccines, describing the current global vaccine inequality as “obscene”. “This is obscene. Last week, 8 investors in Pfizer and Moderna became $10 billion richer as news about the Omicron variant spread,” Sanders tweeted on Sunday evening. “It’s time for these pharmaceutical companies to share their vaccines with the world and start controlling their greed. Enough is enough!” The global disparity in vaccination rates is evident in the map below. Health experts continue to call for action to tackle the crisis of vaccine inequality between rich and poor countries. Failure to vaccinate the world against coronavirus created the perfect breeding ground for the emergence of the Omicron variant and should serve as a wake-up call to wealthy nations, campaigners have said. Scientists and global health experts have called for action to tackle the crisis of vaccine inequality between rich and poor countries. The longer large parts of the world remained unvaccinated, they said, the more likely the virus was to mutate significantly. The emergence of such a variant threatens to derail efforts to end the pandemic. The World Health Organization says the heavily mutated Omicron variant is likely to spread internationally and poses a very high risk of infection surges that may have severe consequences in some places. Winnie Byanyima, executive director of UNAids and co-chair of the People’s Vaccine Alliance, a campaign group, said: Omicron is with us because we have failed to vaccinate the world. This should be a wake-up call. “Business as usual has led to huge profits for pharmaceutical firms, but many people left unvaccinated means that this virus continues to mutate. It is the definition of madness to keep doing the same thing and expect a different outcome. We need to press reset.” Read the fully story from our reporter Andrew Gregory here. Dr Anthony Fauci said on Sunday the threat to the US from the Omicron variant remained to be determined – but that signs from South Africa, where the variant emerged, were encouraging. “Clearly in South Africa Omicron has a transmission advantage,” Fauci told CNN’s State of the Union, “because … they were very much at a low level then they had almost a vertical spike upwards, which is almost exclusively Omicron. Thus far – though it’s too early to really make any definitive statements about it – it does not look like there’s a great degree of severity to it. “But we have really got to be careful before we make any determinations that [Omicron] is less severe or it really doesn’t cause any severe illness comparable to Delta. But, thus far, the signals are a bit encouraging regarding the severity. But, again, you got to hold judgment until we get more experience.” The incoming German government wants to make Covid-19 vaccinations mandatory from 16 March for people working in hospitals, nursing homes and other medical practices, according to a copy of draft legislation seen by Reuters on Sunday. The European nation is currently battling a surge in Covid infections as officials propose more drastic measures to curb the spread before Christmas. The Social Democrats, Greens and Free Democrats, which are set to form the new German government on Wednesday, are set to present the legislation to parliament in the coming week. The draft seen by Reuters said staff working in these areas would have to prove that they are vaccinated or recovered from Covid-19 or present a medical certificate to show they cannot be vaccinated by 15 March. The draft legislation also grants permission for dentists, veterinarians and pharmacists to be allowed to give shots for a temporary period with the appropriate training. The proposed legislation extends until 15 February temporary measures that would allow Germany’s federal states to introduce more drastic lockdown measures if needed, the news agency reports. The Omicron variant has been found in at least 16 US states so far, with the number of cases “likely to rise”, Dr Rochelle Walensky, the head of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said on Sunday. Walensky told ABC News: “We know we have several dozen cases and we’re following them closely. And we are every day hearing about more and more probable cases so that number is likely to rise.” California was the first US state to confirm the presence of the variant. Colorado, Connecticut, Hawaii, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin have also followed suit, according to a Reuters tally. Many of the cases were among fully vaccinated individuals with mild symptoms, although the booster shot status of some patients was not reported. The Delta variant continues to account for 99.9% of new Covid cases in the United States, Walensky added. Hello everyone, and welcome to today’s coronavirus live blog. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be bringing you all the latest developments from around the world. Let’s dive right in. The Omicron variant has been found in at least 15 US states so far, the head of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Sunday. “We know we have several dozen cases and we’re following them closely. And we are every day hearing about more and more probable cases so that number is likely to rise,” CDC Director Dr. Rochelle Walensky told ABC News in an interview, adding that the Delta variant remains the majority in cases nationwide. Omicron has been detected in the Northeast, the South, the Great Plains and the West Coast. Wisconsin, Missouri and Louisiana are among the latest states to confirm cases. Germany’s incoming new government is set to make Covid vaccinations mandatory for workers of hospitals, nursing homes and other medical staff by 16 March, according to draft legislation seen by Reuters. The Social Democrats, Greens and Free Democrats, which are set to form the new German government on Wednesday, are set to present the legislation to parliament in the coming week. Here is a snapshot of the key developments: Protests in Brussels, Belgium, against government restrictions to suppress Covid turned violent on Sunday, with police firing teargas and water cannon at demonstrators who threw cobblestones and fireworks. There has been a “concerning” jump to 183 confirmed cases of the Omicron variant in Denmark, local health authorities said. Five senior health officers in Jordan were sentenced to three years in prison on Sunday, for causing the deaths of ten Covid patients in March following an oxygen outage. Russia recorded 32,602 infections and 1,206 deaths. Poland confirmed 22,389 cases and 45 deaths. Italy reported 15,021 new Covid cases and 43 deaths on Sunday, 16% up from 12,927 on the same day last week. The UK detected 43,992 positive Covid infections in the past 24 hours, up 21% from 36,507 cases on Sunday last week. A further 54 deaths were reported. France recorded 42,252 new Covid infections in the past 24 hours, the health ministry said, a percentage change of 188% from the 14,646 cases recorded on Sunday three weeks ago. Singapore detected 552 Covid infections and 13 deaths on Sunday, taking the seven-day average to 971 cases a day. The UK’s NHS will be in a “very, very difficult position” if the Omicron variant were to lead to a surge in hospital admissions in the UK, the president of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine has warned. The Omicron variant is highly transmissible, but has a less than 1% chance of re-infection and typically results in “milder” disease, a South African researcher as said. Covid is not over and the next pandemic could be more lethal, the creator of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine Prof Dame Sarah Gilbert has said. The World Health Organization continues to reject travel bans against southern African countries, with Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus tweeting it is “disappointing” and “dismaying” to see bans on flights.The US justice department is ending its latest investigation into the death of Emmett Till, a Black teenager who was brutally abducted, tortured and killed in 1955, without filing any charges after failing to prove that a key witness lied. Till’s family said it was disappointed by the news that there will continue to be no accountability for the infamous lynching. “Today is a day we will never forget,” Till’s cousin, the Reverand Wheeler Parker, said during a news conference in Chicago. “For 66 years we have suffered pain ... I suffered tremendously.” The DoJ reopened the investigation after a 2017 book quoted Carolyn Bryant Donham, a white woman, as saying she lied about Till whistling and making sexual advances toward her. But the investigation ended without charges against Donham, who told the FBI that she had never recanted her accusations. The justice department said in a news release Monday that there is “insufficient evidence to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that she lied to the FBI”. The killing galvanized the civil rights movement after Till’s mother insisted on an open casket and Jet magazine published photos of his brutalized body. Relatives have publicly denied that Donham, who is in her 80s, recanted her allegations about Till. Officials also said that Timothy B Tyson, the author of 2017’s The Blood of Emmett Till was unable to produce any recordings or transcripts in which Donham allegedly admitted to lying about her encounter with the teen. “In closing this matter without prosecution, the government does not take the position that the state court testimony the woman gave in 1955 was truthful or accurate,” the news release said. “There remains considerable doubt as to the credibility of her version of events, which is contradicted by others who were with Till at the time, including the account of a living witness.” Days after Till was killed, his body was pulled from the Tallahatchie River, where it was tossed after being weighted down with a cotton gin fan. Two white men, Roy Bryant and his half-brother JW Milam, were tried on murder charges about a month after Till was killed, but an all-white Mississippi jury acquitted them. Months later, they confessed to the murder in a paid interview with Look magazine. Bryant was married to Donham in 1955. In 2004, the justice department had opened an investigation of Till’s killing after it received inquiries on whether charges could be brought against anyone still living. The department said the statute of limitations had run out on any potential federal crime, but the FBI worked with state investigators to determine if state charges could be brought. In February 2007, a Mississippi grand jury declined to indict anyone and the justice department announced it was closing the case. Bryant and Milam were not brought to trial again and they are now both dead. Donham has been living in Raleigh, North Carolina. The FBI in 2006 began a cold case initiative to investigate racially motivated killings from decades earlier. A federal law named after Till allows a review of killings that had not been solved or prosecuted to the point of a conviction. The Emmett Till Unsolved Civil Rights Crime Act requires the justice department to make an annual report to Congress. No report was filed in 2020, but a report filed in June 2021 indicated that the department was still investigating the abduction and murder of Till. The FBI investigation included a talk with Parker, who previously told the AP in an interview that he heard his cousin whistle at the woman in a store in Money, Mississippi, but that the teen did nothing to warrant being killed.Agricultural production will be the largest total volume of commodities Australia has ever produced, with a historic gross production value of $78bn, the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences is predicting. Despite flood and rain damage in the eastern states, the estimation in the Abares Agricultural Commodities report for the December quarter in 2021-22 is an upward revision of $5.4bn from the outlook issued in September, which was already considered record-breaking for surpassing $70bn. The report said the prediction was a result of further improvements in domestic growing conditions, downgrades for key overseas competitors driving prices higher, and steep increases in logistics and fertiliser costs worldwide. Dr Jared Greenville, Abares executive director, attributed the historic production value to these favourable conditions in addition to 30-year price highs. “It would be the first time in at least half a century that production will increase for so many products at the same time,” Greenville said. The export value is also at an all-time high, having been revised up $6.5bn to $61bn – the largest revision made to exports. Fiona Simson, the president of the National Farmers’ Federation, said: “Whilst the recent floods in Queensland and NSW have been devastating for those affected communities, that impact is not enough to take the shine off the whole of agriculture’s performance.” Simson said the strong performance despite the impact of the weather reflects the diversity of Australian agriculture: “When every commodity is doing well, then we perform strongly.” She said it was positive to see the record prices across livestock, commodities and exports translating to value at the farm gate. “Most farmers feel buoyant about how agriculture is performing,” Simson said. She also believes the agricultural outlook reflects why land prices are also at an all-time high: “There’s unprecedented demand for agricultural land at the moment. People recognise the future potential of growing food and fibre in Australia.” But Greenville acknowledged there was uncertainty as to how long prices would remain at these levels. “Supply chain disruptions, higher fertiliser prices and heavy rainfall domestically will continue to be watch points,” he said. The report said its forecast accounted for the effects of substantial rainfall and localised flooding in east coast growing regions last month. It found: “This will delay harvests and result in isolated crop losses, but it is unlikely to reduce national harvest tonnage significantly. The larger impact will be on grain quality, with a higher than usual proportion of the crop being lower-value feed-grade wheat.” But Brett Hosking, chair of Grain Growers and a farmer at Quambatook in Victoria, believes it will be another month before anyone can accurately evaluate the extent of the damage, as flood waters are still moving through affected areas and further rain is predicted. Hosking said while it was a big crop, “it depends on which growers you talk to”. While Victoria and Western Australia had “fantastic finishes” to their end of year, he said, it was a different story for many farmers in New South Wales and parts of South Australia, where Hosking says the total loss of crops and crops being downgraded will result in at least $1bn worth of lost income for rural communities. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter While the report also cited that the record production came off the back of favourable weather conditions, Hosking said it was good management rather than favourable conditions that had contributed to the positive outlook. “Growers would say the last 12 months hasn’t been favourable. Where I farm in Victoria, for example, we didn’t get rain until late in June, which would typically be a disastrous year. “But good management has allowed growers to take advantage of whatever weather has presented itself, and produce the crop.” Simson also credited farmers’ innovation in growing their crops to realise the potential of the higher prices at the moment. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityPatients are paying a difference of more than $800 for the exact same medical procedures depending on their private health insurer, a new report from the Australian Medical Association shows. Different insurer rebates for the same procedure result in some patients paying $800 more for a coronary bypass, almost $600 more for a knee replacement and more than $500 more for child birth, the report, published on Tuesday, found. Australian Medical Association (AMA) president Dr Omar Khorshid said navigating insurance policies remains “confusing and complex” for patients. “Benefits paid by insurers for the exact same service vary significantly – our selection shows that the smallest variation across a handful of insurers was 8% but goes as high as 46%,” he wrote in a foreword to the report. “This amount of variability is why the AMA was called for a minimum amount returned to the health consumer for every premium dollar paid. There needs to be a standardised return that is higher than the current private health insurance industry average right now.” The report found most complaints about private health insurance were about non-payment or delayed payment of benefits, or disputes about the gap paid; premium increases; membership issues; waiting periods for pre-existing conditions; and service, including information provided that did not meet patient needs. “Incorrect or unhelpful information can lead to people misunderstanding what they are covered for, and result in insured patients facing unexpected out-of-pocket costs,” the report found. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “This can be particularly problematic when the advice from an insurer is provided verbally or in-person. Moreover, online detail about a policy or in brochures can be challenging to understand for the majority of consumers.” Reforms that were intended to make private health insurance less confusing for patients were found to have failed. In 2019, private health insurance policies were labelled as gold, silver, bronze or basic, with “plus” versions of those categories also available. Gold policies represent the highest level of coverage and basic, the lowest, with the labels created to help consumers more easily identify what level of coverage they need to avoid junk policies. But a Choice review found more than 215 silver and silver plus policies cost more than gold policies from competitors, meaning consumers are still confused and paying more for less coverage. The AMA has encouraged people to review their private health insurance policy to make sure it meets their needs. Doctors also needed to be accountable, Charles Maskell-Knight, a former senior public servant in the commonwealth department of health and private health insurance expert, said. “Most insurers have the same no/known gap arrangements available to doctors across the ACT and NSW,” he said. “However, the report card shows that in almost every case there is a much lower proportion of no gap services in the ACT compared with NSW, reflecting the charging practices of ACT doctors.” He said the AMA report had also “glossed over” the relationship between gap payments and premiums. “Eliminating gap payments would need medical benefits paid by insurers to increase by about $750m, assuming that doctors did not increase their charges in response,” he said. “To fund this insurers would need to increase premiums for hospital cover by around 4% on top of any other premium increases.” Australian Prudential Regulation Authority member Geoff Summerhayes warned in 2020 that only three private health funds will be financially viable within two years if the industry does not take urgent action to break out of its “death spiral” caused by young people abandoning private health insurance, as it offered them little value for money. It means those with insurance tend to be older people with more expensive medical claims.A man imprisoned during a case in what an appeals court labelled an “affront to justice” says his ordeal has left him suicidal, angry and struggling to work. In rare proceedings, federal circuit court judge Salvatore Vasta is being personally sued for his actions during a routine property settlement matter that appeared before him in 2018. Vasta repeatedly threatened to jail the man, believing he was not disclosing some of his financials, and at one point told him to “bring your toothbrush”. “I have told you, I will put you in jail in contempt of this court if you talk over the top of me. Do you understand?” Vasta said. In December 2018, Vasta erroneously believed another judge had found the man, known as Mr Stradford, guilty of contempt during a previous mention of the case. Vasta sentenced him to 12 months’ imprisonment, to serve six. The federal court has heard Stradford was given no hearing, no chance to put evidence or submissions, and was never actually found guilty of contempt. His barrister, Perry Herzfeld SC, has described the case as the “grossest parody of a court hearing”. Stradford claims the sentence triggered a harrowing ordeal, and that he was assaulted behind bars, attempted to die by suicide, and intimidated and taunted by other inmates and guards. He was released after about a week, once the error was realised. An appeal court later found that the imprisonment order was “an affront to justice”. In evidence on Tuesday, Stradford said the experience had irrevocably changed him. He struggled to sleep, became suicidal, and began to have nightmares about being handcuffed, and of multiple faces attacking him, a nightmare evoking his initial experience of prison. “That’s why when we recount all of these events, in my mind I don’t see them as memories any more,” he said. “I see it as a nightmare that happened a few years ago, and to try to pull back in those nightmares, that’s why I’m not so clear on some things. “I’ve deliberately tried to put it to the side of my mind, just to try to keep putting it away, every time it comes.” He can’t shower without being reminded of prison showers. His work has suffered significantly, he said, unable to concentrate or deliver on promises, and quickly reacting in anger if challenged. “The person I was before, I’m not now,” he said, fighting back tears. “In terms of physical reaction … I get angry, I get upset, I find myself sitting there talking to myself, in a rage. It’s just hard because I’ve got my fiancee and she’s supported me and I’ve done nothing but let her down.” The case is a rare test of the concept of judicial immunity, which generally protects judges from being sued for errors in their decisions. Vasta has acknowledged that he made a mistake. But his barrister Jeremy Kirk, SC, said the error had been detected and rectified through the appeals process, as it should have been. He said the case brought against Vasta would mean that if any inferior court judge – including magistrates – made an error while jailing someone, they would be liable to a civil claim. “That is a startling conclusion, in our respectful submission,” Kirk said on Tuesday. The hearing continues in the federal court before Justice Michael Wigney. • Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467; Kids helpline 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636Australian companies listed on the stock exchange repaid just 5.73% of the $4.2bn in jobkeeper they received over the past two years, figures released by the corporate regulator reveal. The data was released by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission on Tuesday under legislation passed by the government with the support of Pauline Hanson’s One Nation party following public uproar after some companies receiving the wages subsidy paids dividends and executive bonuses. However, it covers only companies listed on the ASX because the government, with Hanson’s support, rejected efforts by crossbenchers and the opposition to extend coverage to Australia’s 10,000 biggest businesses. Payments under the jobkeeper scheme totalled more than $90bn and also flowed to thousands of unlisted companies, schools and charities. The scheme, the Morrison government’s third attempt at an economic stimulus package, began in March last year and finished at the end of March this year. Listed companies received $1.65bn of jobkeeper in the 2020 financial year and $2.56bn in the 2021 financial year, the new Asic figures show. They repaid just $26.8m in 2020 but amid rebounding profits and increasing political pressure this increased dramatically in 2021 to reach $241m in 2021. Companies are not obliged to repay the subsidy, but there has been increasing public pressure for those that increased their revenues to do so. The new figures disclosed by Asic on Wednesday show the total amount received by each listed company that has provided it with the information under the new laws. This means that the figures are bigger than those previously released by some companies in their annual financial accounts because those companies only disclosed the amount paid to employees who continued working during the pandemic. Paying employees who continued to work directly boosted company profits by reducing how much they had to spend on their payroll, which is typically a businesses’ biggest expense. The figures show that Premier Investments, the retail group controlled by billionaire Solomon Lew, received total jobkeeper payments of $87m, less than previous industry estimates of about $100m. Premier paid Lew dividends totalling more than $47m in 2020 and 2021 and has said that jobkeeper receipts were not taken into account in determining dividend payments and bonuses. Premier has repaid what it described as the “net benefit” it reaped from jobkeeper of $15.6m. Qantas, which had much of its fleet grounded during the pandemic due to state border closures and the Morrison government’s ban on Australians travelling internationally, was the biggest recipient of jobkeeper among listed companies, receiving a total of $856m. It hasn’t paid a dividend since March last year and in the 2020-21 financial year its revenue plunged 58.4% to $5.93bn and it posted a loss of $1.83bn. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Labor frontbencher Andrew Leigh, who has campaigned vigorously over jobkeeper’s flaws, said the data was a “Clayton’s disclosure” compared to similar job subsidy schemes overseas that give far more information about payments to all recipients and accused the government of being “allergic to transparency”. “We think we ought to have jobkeeper information in the public domain for every business with turnover over $10m because this is taxpayers’ money,” he said. “If this kind of transparency is good enough for conservative governments in the US and UK it should be good enough for our conservative government.” He said the percentage repaid by listed companies was in line with that disclosed across all businesses in New Zealand. However, unlike the New Zealand data, the Australian figures do not reveal what unlisted companies have repaid. “Almost all of repayments have come from the publicly listed firms,” Leigh said.Fugitive Peter Foster has been arrested six months after failing to appear in a Sydney court to face fraud charges. A federal police taskforce arrested Foster, 59, at a house near the Victorian town of Gisborne, in the Macedon Ranges north-west of Melbourne, on Tuesday. Nigel Ryan, an AFP assistant commissioner alleged Foster tried to evade police, but “didn’t get far from the back door”. Ryan said Foster was taken to Royal Melbourne Hospital for assessment after telling officers he had a medical condition. He said Foster was “living quite comfortably” in the property where he was found. “We’ve been investigating this matter for more than six months so, it indicates that he has probably been there for a good amount of time.” Queensland police issued a fresh warrant for Foster’s arrest in May after he failed to attend a hearing at Sydney’s Downing Centre local court. He was originally arrested on a beach in Port Douglas, in far north Queensland, in August last year on charges brought by NSW police of defrauding $2m worth of bitcoin through a sports trading scam. The 120 bitcoin at the centre of the case were worth more than $8.6m at market prices on Tuesday. In May, NSW police dropped the charges but the Queensland force immediately issued a new arrest warrant. Foster was on bail when he failed to appear at the Downing Centre court. The court heard he attended the office of his lawyer, Justin Lewis, earlier in the day but in the afternoon Lewis told the court he was unable to locate his client. Under his bail conditions, Foster was required to surrender his passport, wear an electronic ankle bracelet and was banned from accessing the internet or using a mobile phone. He was required to stay inside his home in Dover Heights, in Sydney’s eastern Suburbs, and not leave except for a medical emergency, to report to police or see his lawyers. Federal police said Foster would be extradited to Queensland. “This arrest is a considerable result and a testament to the excellent working relationship between the AFP and Queensland police,” Ryan said. “We have been working hand in glove together and this man would still be at large without their operational input”. He said there was “nowhere to hide” for people sought by the AFP’s fugitive apprehension strike team. “The AFP, with our partner agencies, are relentless in ensuring those wanted for crimes face justice,” he said.The chief executive of a US mortgage company has drawn criticism after he reportedly fired 900 employees on a Zoom call. “I come to you with not great news,” Vishal Garg, CEO of Better.com, is heard saying at the beginning of the video call made on Wednesday last week. Footage of the call was widely circulated on social media. “If you’re on this call, you are part of the unlucky group being laid off. Your employment here is terminated effective immediately,” Garg continued, citing changes in the market, “efficiency” and “productivity” as the reasons behind the mass termination. “The market has changed … we have to move with it in order to survive,” the 43-year-old offered as explanation. “Ultimately it was my decision and I wanted you to hear it from me.” He then reportedly said the employees could expect an email from HR with details of severance and benefits. Garg, a self-described “serial entrepreneur”, said the decision was “really, really challenging” and noted it was the second time in his career he had made such job cuts. “I do not, do not, want to do this. The last time I did this I cried. This time I hope to be stronger,” he said during the call. One now-former employee described the call as “three minutes tops,” in an interview with The Daily Beast. “They dumped us like trash. We were there since the beginning and worked hard for the company and for our roles,” another said. The mortgage lender startup reportedly received a $750m (£564m) cash infusion from investors last week and was recently valued at around $7bn, according to Forbes. The company, which says it uses technology to make homeownership “faster and more efficient”, is backed by Japanese conglomerate Softbank. Kevin Ryan, Better.com’s chief financial officer, said the company had laid off 9% of its employees after the call, according to Forbes. “Having to conduct layoffs is gut-wrenching, especially this time of year; however, a fortress balance sheet and a reduced and focused workforce together set us up to play offense going into a radically evolving homeownership market,” Ryan said in a statement to Forbes.In Baixo Alentejo province, there is a stretch of near-treeless undulating country centred roughly on the town of Castro Verde. It is sheep-grazed land, historically rotated on a four-year fallow cycle with a cereal crop. This agricultural regime has created a habitat known technically as pseudo-steppe (it’s not true steppe, but created by deforestation from the Roman period onwards). Today, 86,000 hectares of it sit within a special protection area, almost equal in size to the landholdings of all the UK’s wildlife trusts. Its headlines usually involve its most glamorous species – Iberian lynx, Iberian imperial eagle and great and little bustards – not just rare in Iberia, but some of the rarest animals on Earth. On one morning, however, I focused on something equally glorious. The context is everything, because this is unprepossessing country, whose subtle suite of pastel shades centres on a kind of grey fawn. It is immensely restful on the eye but, in truth, it looks rather dull, and add to it the quietude of winter and it could seem dead and melancholic. But not to any naturalist. Through the scintillating blue air, there came to me in waves the sounds of skylarks overhead, showering down corresponding flocks of their joy-filled chirrup notes. A few trees by a derelict farmhouse held several hundred Spanish and house sparrows, rushing back and forth, maintaining their own salty palaver. All along the fence lines were chiffchaffs and black redstarts sallying to feed. Thekla larks and goldfinches called from every hollow, and in each gnarled evergreen oak there came rattling salvoes of corn bunting song. These were nearly all grey-brown streaky birds in a grey-brown place, but they add up to something summarised by Mike McCarthy in The Moth Snowstorm: “blessed, unregarded abundance”. It is almost impossible to find the same in our fragmented islands today. I doubt, for example, there’s a flock of 500 sparrows anywhere in Britain. As I luxuriated in this commonplace commotion, an Iberian imperial eagle flew past. As often happens when you try to anticipate a bird’s unobserved flight path behind a near slope, it never reappeared. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryNovak Djokovic has been named in the Serbian team for January’s season-opening ATP Cup in Sydney, significantly increasing the likelihood the world No 1 will play in the Australian Open. Organisers of the third edition of the ATP Cup say Djokovic has committed to the men’s men’s 16-country tournament scheduled for 1-9 January, with an article on the official ATP Tour website stating that “top seed Serbia, headlined by world No 1 Novak Djokovic, will lead Group A”. That was backed up by an ATP press release following Tuesday’s Cup draw, which “revealed world No 1 Novak Djokovic and world No 2 Daniil Medvedev are the top-ranked singles players for Serbia and defending champions Russia respectively”. Speculation about whether Djokovic will contest the 2022 Australian Open has followed the 34-year-old for months, given all players attending Melbourne Park must be fully vaccinated against Covid-19 and he has repeatedly declined to publicise his vaccination status. To play without being vaccinated in Sydney, the New South Wales government would have to apply for an exemption and Djokovic would have to undergo 14 days of quarantine upon arrival. That same option was also open to the Australian Open organisers, but the Victorian government has said it would not apply for exemptions. If unvaccinated, Djokovic would have to arrive in Sydney by 16 December in order to complete the mandatory 14-day quarantine for unvaccinated travellers before the competition starts on 1 January. He has previously spoken about the pitfalls of quarantining before playing a tournament, and his inclusion in the Australian Open warm-up event makes it likely he intends to chased a 10th title in Melbourne from 17 January. Australia has been included in pool B alongside defending champions Russia, and strong squads from Italy and Austria. The Australians will be lead by Alex de Minaur, along with James Duckworth, Max Purcell, John Peers and Luke Saville. The Russians will be spearheaded by world No 2 Medvedev as well as Andrey Rublev, Aslan Karatsev, Roman Safiullin and Evgeny Donskoy. Serbia will start favourite in Group A, which will also feature Norway, Chile and Spain, although world No 6 Rafael Nadal has not been included in the latter’s line-up. A winner of 20 grand slam titles alongside Djokovic and Roger Federer, Nadal is still expected to contest the Australian Open.Once upon a time, people came to South Perth mostly to go to the zoo or play a round of golf. Those times are in the past. On the back of considerable infrastructure and construction projects – some completed, some in progress – the suburb has emerged as one to watch. The new-look Mends Street precinct next to the South Perth foreshore and ferry terminal was unveiled in late 2019. The redevelopment brought public art – the Mindeerup installation celebrates the area’s Indigenous Nyoongar heritage, and a giant 700kg rhinoceros sculpture watches over the water – to the region, as well as a suite of new tenants, including the new Quest South Perth Foreshore, a 90-room apartment hotel. A rhinocerous made out of scrap metal by artist Jordan Sprigg is a feature on the South Perth foreshore. Whether you’re staying for a day, night or week, these recommendations will help you experience South Perth like a local. See a different side of Perth Starting at Quest South Perth Foreshore, we asked business owner Michael Bevilaqua for his top tips. “From the South Perth side of the river, you get a different perspective of the city, especially at night,” he says. “It’s a beautiful place to walk around and see the Swan River. You can take a ferry from here to Elizabeth Quay and explore around there, then come back here and have a pub meal and some beers at the Windsor Hotel.” After a walk around Sir James Mitchell Park and the Scented Gardens, Italian bakery-cafe Dolce &amp; Salato ticks the box for family dining during the day. “The staff are friendly and they do great cannoli, pastries and pizza,” Bevilaqua says. “Their pizzas are massive and could easily feed a family of 10, I reckon. They’re some of the biggest in Perth.” A modern take on Italian dining Carlos Leal, one of Dolce &amp; Salato’s directors, recommends casual Italian eatery Automatic. “It’s a lovely, modern place that’s not traditional Italian,” he says. “They do good pizza, too. We make pizza, but ours is a patisserie-style, which is different, and we sell it by the square and slice. I love going and having a slice of Italian pizza al piatto – ‘on the plate’. The margherita or prosciutto and rocket pizza are good choices.” Beyond the pizza, Leal shares Bevilaqua’s sentiments about South Perth’s location on the Swan River, and loves the ferry service that connects the foreshore with the CBD. “Since I came to Perth in 2006, I’ve been fascinated by the ferry,” he says. “It’s such a nice experience to find in the city.” Local secrets Bevilaqua’s next top tip is The Good Grocer, which is open 24 hours, making it both a giant pantry and (literally) all-day diner. Ash Henderson, assistant manager of The Good Grocer, says: “People don’t know there’s a boutique liquor store attached to the grocer called The Wine Box. It’s like a destination liquor store that’s set up the same way that we run The Good Grocer. You come in and you go, ‘wow’. You’ll find boutique beers and high-end spirits.” Henderson isn’t short of dining recommendations, either. “Miss Chow’s is probably number one for eating,” he says. “They do awesome dumplings and you can’t go wrong with your Peking duck. The sticky rice dessert is unreal as well.” Miss Chow’s owner, Jacquie Chan (pictured), says: “At Miss Chow’s, you sort of get a feeling that you’re not in Perth. The views are just so beautiful. You see the river and you can see the ferries coming along. In summer, we open up all the windows to create an inside-outside kind of a feeling.” And it seems the feeling is mutual. “The Good Grocer is a little secret in South Perth that not many people know about,” Chan says. “I love that place. When you walk in, you’ll see a lot of gourmet products that you don’t find in the normal local supermarket. That’s one shop that I’ll walk into and get a bit lost in. There are so many beautiful things. They’re very gourmet and they sell nicer produce that’s not readily available in other stores.” Chan also likes to go to La Patisserie for its artisan almond croissants. “There’s always a queue in the morning.” A neighbourhood with a village feel Henderson’s other top tip is boutique store Merchants on Mends Street, which stocks everything from clothes to garden tools. “It’s great for presents, great for Christmas, great for Father’s Day and your festive events,” he says. “They’ve got kitchenware, they’ve got candles, they’ve got everything eco you might be looking for. The list goes on.” Chan says South Perth has something for everyone. “You can pretty much get everything here,” she says. “The area has a really nice feel. Like you’re in a little village.” Travel as local as you like it with Quest Apartment Hotels.The feeling of relief was immense as 58-year-old Michele Brown returned home from the vaccine centre. Her husband, Terry, 61, had taken time off from his job as a supervisor at a heavy machinery factory to drive her to her second Covid-19 vaccination at a Gateshead community centre. In the car, Michele told her partner of 40 years that she felt like a weight had been lifted off her shoulders. “She said: ‘At least we’ve got that done,’” Terry remembers. “‘We’ll be OK.’” It was 28 April 2021. Michele, who had rheumatoid arthritis, an underactive thyroid and diabetes, had spent the last year and a half shielding indoors, on government advice. She was careful. She had a Covid station set up on the breakfast counter: lateral flow tests, bottles of antibacterial gel and disposable face masks. When family came to visit, a mask-wearing Michele would banish them to the furthest corner of the living room. “We couldn’t kiss her,” remembers her daughter, Kim Brown, 41, who lives in Durham. “She would say: ‘You might have the coronies! I don’t want no coronies. You’re not giving me that crap.’” After her vaccinations, Michele relaxed a tiny bit. She let her family visit more often, and stopped wearing a mask indoors when they did. But she still wasn’t going out much: her rheumatoid arthritis made even brief excursions exhausting. Most of the time, Michele stayed home, chatting to Kim on the phone, watching TV and ordering endless packages online. By the time they arrived she rarely had a clue what was in them. When the news came on, Michele would sigh. “She’d see the numbers go up,” says Kim, “and say: ‘Those poor people. Those poor families.’” Michele’s family are mystified as to how she caught Covid – unless one of her rare visitors brought it into the house, or maybe it was when she went for a doctor’s appointment. It doesn’t really matter. When Michele became infected, it wrecked her body with brutal efficiency. Unknown to her, her immune system had been suppressed, most likely by the drugs she took to manage her arthritis, so her body had failed to mount a good response to the Covid-19 vaccine. In other words, the vaccine hadn’t worked for her. “I never heard anything like ‘immunocompromised’,” says Terry, bewildered and distraught. “We never did.” *** Michele was born in 1962, in the village of Stannington, Northumberland, the eldest of seven children. Her parents split up when she was an infant. Her father eventually won custody of Michele, but at her request, left her with her grandmother Manuel, who raised her. “She had a difficult childhood,” says Kim. “She swore her kids wouldn’t have the same childhood. And we didn’t. We had everything we wanted. Love. Affection. We didn’t want for anything.” Terry lived on the same cul-de-sac as Michele and Nana Manuel. It was the sort of street where everyone knew each other. The boys would play football and the girls would watch. Everything took place outdoors. He remembers the first time he noticed her romantically. She was 17, sitting on a wall outside her grandmother’s house. Dressed casually. No makeup, jeans. Terry was coming back from the pub. He noticed how lovely she was becoming. He tried to talk to her, but Manuel came out and shooed him away. They kept noticing each other in the pub. Eventually, Michele’s friend Brenda pushed them together. “She said: ‘Isn’t it about time you two went on a proper date?’” Terry recalls. “I thought, why would Michele want to date me? I was punching well above my weight.” Their first date was in February 1982; by March, they were a couple. Michele had already given birth to Kim by this point, although Kim’s father was not in the picture. (Michele and Terry had a son, Terence James, in 1988.) Back then, Michele was outgoing and carefree. She worked the cloakroom in a Newcastle nightclub with her best friend, Sid, but spent most of her time on the dancefloor instead. She dressed like a New Romantic and got her aunt to customise clothes she picked up in Oxfam. Her entire life, she loved music, even wearing headphones as she fell asleep. Her tastes were eclectic – everything from Slipknot to George Michael. “She had such a thing for George Michael,” says Kim. “We’d tell her he was gay, and she’d say: ‘So what! I’ll convert him.’” Michele worked in a factory, as a cleaner, and at a warehouse. She was clever, but unfulfilled. “If she’d applied herself when she was younger, she could have had a good career,” says Terry. “She was frustrated.” Michele was superb at general knowledge; people would sometimes call her, when they were on pub quizzes, to cheat. She also loved animals. Once, after visiting a zoo, she wrote the management a letter complaining that the cages were too small. In later life, she became obsessed with watching a family of gorillas in a Japanese zoo on YouTube. When Terry came home from work, she’d talk about what the gorillas were up to. Her health began to fail in her late 20s. She was diagnosed first with leukopenia, meaning that she had a low white blood cell count, and then with rheumatoid arthritis and diabetes. Because Terry was at work throughout the pandemic, as a key worker, Michele was sometimes lonely; she’d call Kim in the middle of the day and stay on the phone for four or five hours at a time. They were more like best friends than mother and daughter. “We’d talk about everything,” says Kim. “Stuff you talk to your friends about. She was dead funny.” Despite her health issues, Michele was the fierce, uncompromising matriarch of the family. “She was the gaffer,” says Kim. “Everything went through her.” Sometimes she could be blunt. “She had a short temper,” Kim says. “Everything was black and white. You couldn’t explain things to her. If she got a bee in her bonnet about something you’d have to wait until she calmed down.” But Michele had tremendous instincts, especially about people. “I used to ask her: ‘Have you studied black magic?’” says Terry. “She was really good at picking up on people. I’d always say to her: ‘Michele, you should give people a chance.’ And she’d say no, and further down the line she’d usually be proved right. It would fascinate me, how she knew that.” It is hard for Kim to accept that her mother – a woman with such vitality and life force – is dead. “She had such a strong character,” she says. “Her not being there, I can’t understand.” A few weeks after Michele died, Kim called her mobile. “It was only when the number didn’t connect,” Kim says, “that my heart sank, and I realised.” *** In England alone, the Covid-19 vaccine is estimated to have prevented up to 24.1m infections and 126,800 deaths. Two doses of the Pfizer or Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine are respectively 96% and 92% effective against hospitalisation with the Delta variant. (The effectiveness of the vaccines in protecting against the Omicron variant is not yet known.) But although the Covid-19 vaccine is safe and highly effective, it cannot work on everyone. For some immunocompromised people, their bodies will not mount a good immune response to the vaccination, meaning they fail to produce the antibodies that should circulate in their blood and recognise the Covid-19 virus if they later become infected. For these people, life in post-lockdown Britain is full of risk and trepidation: they are not protected from Covid-19 by the immunity a vaccination would provide, and nor are they able to avoid the pandemic entirely, given that tens of thousands of new infections are being reported every single day. People may be immunosuppressed for one of three reasons. First, they have a genetic condition that means they have a primary problem with their immune system. Second, because they are afflicted with a disease that causes their immune system to be underpowered. Third, because they are taking medication to treat an underlying condition that suppresses their immune system. Michele most likely fitted into this final category. The medication she took to manage her arthritis, rituximab, is a known immunosuppressant. (She was taking other medicines to treat mental health problems and diabetes, but none of these are known to have the same effect.) “When you have rheumatoid arthritis,” explains the rheumatologist Dr Zachary Wallace of Massachusetts general hospital, “your immune system is basically overreacting. It’s recognising things that it shouldn’t think of as a danger, like its own joints, as a danger, and it is attacking them. That’s why we use medicines to suppress that process. But when we do that, the immune system doesn’t work as well at attacking viruses and other infections.” Wallace has been monitoring breakthrough infections in fully vaccinated patients with autoimmune conditions since early 2021. “People who receive rituximab appear to be particularly at risk,” he says. (Roche, which markets rituximab in Europe as MabThera, declined to comment.) In the UK, a research team led by Prof Iain McInnes of Glasgow University has been examining the efficacy of Covid-19 vaccination in people with compromised immune systems. Initial findings from the Octave study said that about 11% of immunocompromised people failed to generate any antibodies to Covid-19 vaccination, and a further 29% generated a suboptimal antibody response, meaning they failed to produce the same level of antibodies a healthy person would generate in response to vaccination. The study specifically identified rituximab as an immunosupressant. But Michele had no idea about any of this. She had never heard about immunosuppressant drugs or what impact they could have on Covid-19 vaccination. In late March 2021, the Department of Health and Social Care wrote to her, telling her that shielding would be paused from 1 April due to the fact that virus infection rates were low and nine out of 10 clinically extremely vulnerable people had been vaccinated. Although the letter stated that “no vaccine is 100% effective”, there was no mention made of the fact that immunocompromised people specifically might not be protected by the vaccine, and should consider extra measures to keep themselves safe. “There are some people,” says Vicky Foxcroft, the Labour MP for Lewisham Deptford and shadow minister for disabled people, “who were very aware that the vaccines might not work, and very scared. But for a lot of others, the comms from the government has been: everything is fine. Crack on. Do what you were doing.” Foxcroft is herself immunocompromised; like Michele, she has rheumatoid arthritis, and she has been advocating for immunocompromised people throughout the pandemic. “We’ve been an afterthought,” she says. “Probably because we’re only a small part of the population, and we’re inconvenient. But it’s still not acceptable.” Foxcroft tells me that she often hears from immunocompromised people who are being forced back to work by their employers. Although the administrations in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are currently encouraging employees to work from home where possible, that advice was cancelled in England on 19 July and has yet to be reinstated, despite the spread of the Omicron variant. “I’d like to see the guidance changed for employers,” Foxcroft says, “so that people are able to work from home if necessary.” To make matter worse, when shielding was paused on 1 April, immunocompromised people and others in vulnerable groups lost the financial support that helped them to remain at home. Foxcroft herself does not feel safe in the workplace. “I wish people would wear their masks in parliament,” she says. “But I try not to think about it. Because how else would I do my job?” *** Michele became ill on 6 July. She fainted on the way to the toilet and Terry had to carry her to bed. He called an ambulance but the wait time was four hours, and when the paramedics finally arrived and checked Michele over they said she was fine. The following day, Michele was confused. She kept trying to drink from a bottle of water without taking the lid off. Terry called for an ambulance, but they told him it would be a five-hour wait. He tried to drive Michele to the hospital himself, but she refused to get in the car – Michele notoriously hated hospitals and would often escape from them if forcibly admitted. By 9 July, Michele had stopped making sense. Terry asked her how she felt and she looked through him wordlessly. She couldn’t remember her date of birth. Terry called 111 and asked for an ambulance, and was told that it would take two hours. When the paramedics finally arrived they asked Michele who Terry was. “She just stared at me blankly,” he remembers. After she was admitted, a doctor from the Queen Elizabeth hospital in Gateshead called Terry. He told him that Michele was seriously ill and asked if doctors should attempt to resuscitate her if her heart or breathing stopped. He also told Terry that Michele had Covid. “I didn’t for one minute think she would die,” says Terry. “She was double vaccinated. As far as I was concerned she was poorly but not seriously ill.” Later, doctors told Terry that they had tested Michele, and found that she didn’t have any antibodies from the vaccine. “Freedom Day” – 19 July – came and went for the Brown family in a fug of grief. Michele was by now in intensive care. Terry wasn’t allowed in, due to the Covid visitor restrictions. He begged them to let him visit. “I said, ‘We’ve had freedom day. Thousands of people at Wembley, cheering the England football team on. And you’re saying I can’t sit with my wife, who is dying?’” Kim spoke to her mother on the phone, right before they put her on a ventilator. It was a disturbing phone call. Michele told Kim that she felt awful, and she was tired. Kim got the sense that she didn’t want to hang up. She could hear her mother struggling to breathe, and coughing. “I just knew,” Kim says. “I knew what was coming.” Doctors placed Michele on a ventilator, and dialysis, but it was no use. She died on 29 July. The hospital let the family visit Michele at the end. “It was horrific,” says Kim. “I held her hand, and I was kissing it. But I knew that she was gone.” The family decided to turn off Michele’s ventilator. “She’d been through enough,” says Kim. “She was bruised to bits, from where they took blood from her. We let her slip off.” The hardest thing for Terry was not being able to see Michele after he left the hospital. “It was a closed coffin because of Covid. That killed me.” He thought he would be able to see his wife again, to say goodbye. *** Stories of people who died of breakthrough infections – when a person becomes infected with Covid-19 after being vaccinated – are routine in online anti-vaxx or anti-lockdown communities. “Fully vaccinated man dies of Covid-19”, reads one post shared on an anti-vaxx Facebook group with 31,000 members. “The fully vaccinated die of Covid!” reads another post on a Facebook group with 6,500 members. “Will the mainstream media start recognising the facts of Covid vaccines – they are lethal?” When the vaccinated former US secretary of state Colin Powell died with Covid-19 last October, anti-vaxxers and vaccine-sceptics heralded his death as proof that the vaccine is ineffective. “Colin Powell died from Covid and he was fully vaccinated,” read one typical post. “So what’s the point of the vaccine?” (Powell had myeloma, a blood cancer that put him at greater risk from the virus.) “This narrative comes up again and again,” says Pippa Allen-Kinross of the factchecking organisation Full Fact, which has been examining online misinformation throughout the pandemic. “It’s really difficult, because we know the vaccine is not 100% effective. But we do know that it’s really effective, and makes a huge difference.” In reality, when 4.3 billion people worldwide have received a dose of the Covid vaccine, breakthrough infections are to be expected. In the period 2 January to 2 July 2021, 640 fully vaccinated people died of breakthrough infections in England, out of 51,281 deaths. Of those 640 deaths, 84 (13%) were in immunocompromised people. Unvaccinated people are currently estimated to be 32 times more likely to die of Covid-19 than fully vaccinated people, although experts have warned that there is uncertainty in this headline figure. “Deaths in vaccinated people have repeatedly been used to back up claims that the vaccines don’t work,” says the statistician Prof David Spiegelhalter of Cambridge University. “But when most vulnerable people have been vaccinated, and the vaccine is less than perfect, then it is inevitable that there will be deaths in vaccinated people, and indeed they have formed the majority of Covid deaths for months. This is basic maths.” He uses the example of seatbelts. “Most car occupants who die in crashes are wearing seatbelts, because nearly everyone is wearing a seat belt and they don’t provide full protection. This does not mean that seatbelts ‘don’t work’ – it just means they reduce risk.” Part of the problem, says Allen-Kinross, is that government data is so easy to misinterpret. “It’s very easy for people to use this data in a misleading way, to suggest that vaccines don’t work at all.” She uses the example of the Joe Rogan Experience podcast, which is one of the most-listened to podcasts in the US. On 12 October 2021, Rogan hosted American journalist Alex Berenson, who stated – incorrectly – that “people who are vaccinated with two doses are more likely to be infected with Sars-CoV-2 than people who are not vaccinated”. Full Fact subsequently debunked Berenson’s claims. But given that Rogan’s podcast has an estimated audience of 11 million an episode, these efforts, while a laudable endeavour, are likely to be seen by only a tiny percentage of the people who received the earlier misinformation. “This bad information,” says Allen-Kinross, “really ruins lives.” *** At the Brown home in Gateshead, everything is unchanged. Michele’s dressing gown still hangs on the back of the bedroom door. There are bottles of antibacterial gel on the worktop. “The whole house is Michele,” Terry says. “It’s her home. It will always be her home, as long as I’m breathing.” He is racked with guilt. “Why did I let this happen?” he asks. “I didn’t protect her.” Terry wishes he had known that her vaccinations didn’t work. “I keep thinking,” Terry says, through choked sobs, “that if I’d been aware, we’d have stayed in our bubble. We wouldn’t have allowed anyone to visit. We’d have stuck to the same regime we had at the start. That’s what I’m finding difficult. Because we’d done everything we were supposed to do. The vaccines were to us like a lifeboat in choppy seas.” There are probably other families in the same situation as Terry and Michele: unaware that the vaccines they rely on to keep them safe may, in fact, be ineffective. “Very often people don’t know how their medicines may affect them,” says Lara Wong of Clinically Vulnerable Families UK. “They don’t realise, which means they may not be taking all the steps they possibly can to protect themselves.” In September, the Department of Health and Social Care wrote to people on the shielding list, to inform them that shielding had officially ended. It tells the Guardian: “We announced an end to the shielding programme based on the success of the Covid-19 vaccination programme in reducing serious illness and death from Covid-19 and the emergence of proven treatments.” The letter to shielders advised: “If you are immunosuppressed and have any concerns about what this means for you, then please raise this with your specialist at your next routine appointment.” “I haven’t seen my specialist for months,” says Foxcroft, pointing out that there is an enormous post-pandemic backlog of non-urgent NHS care. “It’s impossible to get an appointment. And even if you do get advised to shield, there’s no government support available for shielders. So what do they do? Do they lose their job? What’s the score?” For immunocompromised people who are aware that their vaccines may not work, or work less well – life in a post-unlocking UK is full of anxiety and trepidation. “People say: ‘Why don’t they just hide away?’” says Wong. “But what they don’t realise is that a lot of the people have been. They’ve been at home for the last two years. If infection rates were lower, they could have a life as well. When we protect the most vulnerable, we protect everyone.” Booster jabs have gone some way to allaying their concerns: the initial findings from the Octave study, published in August 2021, were used to inform the government’s decision to offer at-risk groups, including immunocompromised people, booster vaccines in September. McInnes’s research team is now working on the Octave Duo study, to determine the effectiveness of booster vaccines in immunocompromised people. “The preliminary data,” says McInnes, “shows that a significant proportion of people are benefiting from a third inoculation, and we think it’s a good idea to further roll out this programme.” Last week, in response to Omicron, the government announced plans to offer severely immunosuppressed people a fourth dose of the vaccine as a booster. But Wong points out that many immunocompromised people will have children attending school. Until the advent of the Omicron variant in late November, the government did not ask pupils to wear masks in English schools. Even now, it is only strongly advised in communal areas, and the bubble system has been scrapped. Some parents have been threatened with prosecution for pulling their children out of school when case numbers are high. This month, Clinically Vulnerable Families UK wrote to the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, urging him to permit remote education for the children of clinically vulnerable households, rather than mandate such children return to in-school education. “There are light-touch measures we could put into place that would make things safer for everyone,” Wong says. “Hepa air filters in school, to clean the air; mask wearing to be strongly encouraged.” Some immunocompromised people have called for antibody testing to be routinely offered to those who request it, to see if the vaccine has been effective. “The problem is,” says Wallace, “these tests are difficult to interpret, because we don’t have all the information about what an adequate level of antibodies is yet.” Monoclonal antibody treatments, which are laboratory-made antibodies to help a person fight infection, may also be effective in treating people with low immunity. Wallace also urges his immunocompromised patients to “be cautious, wear masks in public, and avoid densely populated places that don’t have good ventilation. Only socialise with people they know are vaccinated and feeling well.” These immunocompromised people seem doomed to continue to live a half-life for the foreseeable future. And with the Omicron variant spreading throughout the UK, it seems likely that the wider public will be forced into the anxious wariness that has become the norm for immunocompromised people for nearly two years. They watch, and they wait, while the families of the 145,000 people who have died with Covid-19 in the UK mourn. And they pray they won’t be next.David Thewlis, speaking by Zoom from his home in the Berkshire village of Sunningdale, has set his screen at a jaunty angle. His manner is equable, nerdy, eager to please. Nothing like what you’d expect, in other words – unless you had watched Landscapers, a new four-part TV drama in which Thewlis stars opposite Olivia Colman. Perhaps he’s one of those actors who doesn’t de-role until he’s on to the next character. Landscapers is true crime, in so far as the protagonists are Susan and Christopher Edwards, the so-called Mansfield Murderers convicted in 2014 of killing Susan’s parents and burying them in the garden 15 years before. Yet it is absolutely nothing like true crime. It jumps through time and genre, smashes the fourth wall then puts it back together as a jail cell. It is vividly experimental yet recalls the golden age of British TV, specifically Dennis Potter and his dreamlike, restless theatricality. “I didn’t think of that while we were making it,” says Thewlis. “But when I saw it, I thought of The Singing Detective – which I was in!” He and Colman – whose husband, Ed Sinclair, wrote the Sky series – give such devastating, heart-wrenching performances as these lovelorn Nottinghamshire killers that you can’t help feeling for them. This (spoiler warning) is all the more surprising given their crimes: they didn’t just shoot Susan’s parents, they robbed their bank accounts and forged their signatures to get more money still. Then, bizarrely, they blew much of the cash on Hollywood memorabilia, including £20,000 on a signed photograph of Frank Sinatra. Despite amassing a total of £245,000, when they gave themselves up from their home in France, the couple had just one euro left. “In the end,” says Thewlis, “what we’re asking the audience to decide is not whether they’re guilty, because they clearly are, but whether they deserve sympathy.” It’s very hard, on the bare bones of the events, to see how this sympathy could be generated, yet both Thewlis and Colman, with the sheer range of expressions on their desperate faces, demand the most human response. It’s as far from being a murder procedural as it could be, and much more like a love story: two damaged, fragile people finding dark sanctuary in one another, told from the moment of their exquisitely awkward first date. “There were no attempts made to either cast younger actors or put dots over our faces for CGI,” says Thewlis. “We just put wigs on. I thought, ‘Really, is that all you’re going to do?’ I’ll never see 30 again.” Thewlis is actually 58 and has no problem with getting older. “You’re not so vain for a start,” he says, “and you play things a little bit grotesque. I’m never concerned with making myself look good.” While Colman has done plenty of romantic parts, this is the most intense performance of love I’ve ever seen from Thewlis, as if all the hard edges that defined his early career have been chipped off. “Softened?” he says. “What, in older age?” No, I say, that’s not what I meant. He recalls Bertolucci’s Besieged. “I’m quite romantic in that,” he says. “I maybe used to take myself too seriously. I thought I was something I wasn’t. But I think I’m much closer to myself now, in all respects.” It’s almost 30 years since Thewlis’s seminal performance in Naked, Mike Leigh’s recently reissued masterpiece. Verbose, sexually violent, feckless and self-indulgent, his antihero Johnny sparked a lot of discussion about representations of misogyny. Were they intended to titillate and, if so, did this make them misogynistic? But, surprisingly, that wasn’t the main critical focus of the film at the time. “When I was doing press for Naked,” says Thewlis, “that was never put to me as an actor. Violence against women just wasn’t what we talked about. Now, how could you not talk about it? Violence against women – and unreported violence against women – is such a talking point. We want to discuss misogyny. We want to discuss the fact that members of our government don’t even know the meaning of the word. I found the film much tougher to watch this time than I did 25 years ago.” He never thought of it as his breakthrough role, though. It wasn’t even his first Leigh film – and he was eight years into an already successful, if quite different, acting career. “I did a sitcom that went to two seasons, playing David Jason’s son in A Bit of a Do. I thought I was headed for light entertainment. I was the star of this show. My parents were so proud of me. I thought this was the dream. No one else I knew was getting work.” Thewlis was born in Blackpool, where his parents ran a shop. He went to Guildhall school of music and drama in London and was cast pretty solidly from graduation on. This was a time when there “wasn’t nearly enough work around for young actors. I remember going to the movies and seeing Tim Roth on a big screen and thinking, ‘Wow, that would be incredible.’ It was unimaginable to me.” He’s smiling as he describes how carefree his sitcom years were. Leigh’s film-making process is, famously, improvised and collaborative. So perhaps audiences assumed Thewlis poured his own burning misanthropy into Naked, but that performance was actually based on someone real: “A person I knew, who was certainly guilty of sexual aggression, who’d been ostracised by my group of friends.” Two things came out of Naked. Leigh was “bit of a mentor and changed my way of looking at acting. He opened up parts of me. From then on, I rarely got cast in comedy.” Secondly, after all the critical acclaim, he got noticed by Hollywood. “The first part I took was Black Beauty. I wasn’t sure what I was doing. I didn’t know if it was a very interesting part, but I thought, ‘It’s a studio film.’ It’ll get me away from being typecast as this sociopathic rapist. If you’re a guy who’s lovely to a horse, people are going to see you differently.” That was in 1994 and ever since, he says, his career has divided into two paths. “I get cast as either extremely awful, terrible and cruel – or extremely good and saintly. In Kingdom of Heaven, I’m adorable.” Some projects weren’t as satisfying as others, which would include “big Hollywood things for the money like The Island of Dr Moreau”. But he has largely hopped from one delightful experience to another, particularly recently: the Fargo TV series and Charlie Kaufman’s 2020 psychological thriller I’m Thinking of Ending Things. “I’m working with people I’d always wanted to work with, doing the kind of films I’d always wanted to do.” His second novel, Shooting Martha, was published this year. Classifiable, loosely, as showbiz satire, it felt a bit disillusioned with the industry, but that wasn’t it at all, he says. “This character Betty becomes lost in an improvised character. She immersed herself so deeply she didn’t know who she was. So it was more about my experience on Naked – something cathartic from decades ago was coming out.” As he was writing it, he read it aloud to his wife, Hermine Poitou. “She’d criticise it and suggest things. I never felt like I was isolated.” Poitou, he says, is a retired ringmistress from a flea circus. I have no idea whether that’s true or a joke. And I didn’t ask, because I felt like even if he told me, I still wouldn’t know. He has a daughter, Gracie, from his previous relationship with Anna Friel. His first novel, The Late Hector Kipling, lampooned the art world and was well received. It came out in 2007, bang in the middle of the Harry Potter years. He played Remus Lupin, a half-blood werewolf, in five of the movies. Thewlis remembers the films principally for the company. “Maggie Smith, Michael Gambon, John Hurt and Alan Rickman. To become friends with Michael Gambon, to work with him every day, was extraordinary. And what better way to spend your life than hanging out on night shoots with Julie Walters?” He’s not so sociable these days. “I don’t go out so much,” he says. “I’m quite private. Going to work is my social life. Especially on British film sets. There’s a lot of wonderful humour around.” He pauses and adds with a smile: “You can’t go on set and be a dickhead.” • Landscapers is on Sky Atlantic.We have been asked to write about the future, the afterlife of the pandemic, but the future can never be told. This at least was the view of the economist John Maynard Keynes, who was commissioned to edit a series of essays for the Guardian in 1921, as the world was rebuilding after the first world war. The future is “fluctuating, vague and uncertain”, he wrote later, at a time when the mass unemployment of the 1930s had upended all confidence, the first stage on a road to international disaster that could, and could not, be foreseen. “The senses in which I am using the term [uncertain],” he said, “is that in which the prospect of a European war is uncertain, or the price of copper and the rate of interest 20 years hence, or the obsolescence of a new invention, or the position of private wealth-owners in the social system in 1970. About these matters there is no scientific basis on which to form any calculable probability whatever. We simply do not know.” This may always be the case, but the pandemic has brought this truth so brutally into our lives that it threatens to crush the best hopes of the heart, which always look beyond the present. We are being robbed of the illusion that we can predict what will happen in the space of a second, a minute, an hour or a day. From one moment to the next, the pandemic seems to turn and point its finger at anyone, even at those who believed they were safely immune. The distribution of the virus and vaccination programme in different countries has been cruelly unequal, but as long as Covid remains a global presence, waves of increasing severity will be possible anywhere and at any moment in time. The most deadly pandemic of the 20th century, the Spanish flu at the end of the first world war, went through wave after wave and lasted for nearly four years. Across the world, people are desperate to feel they have turned a corner, that an end is in sight, only to be faced with a future that seems to be retreating like a vanishing horizon, a shadow, a blur. Nobody knows, with any degree of confidence, what will happen next. Anyone claiming to do so is a fraud. At such a time, only so much faith can be placed even in the governments who have shown the surest touch in dealing with the pandemic. Anyone living under regimes whose acts have felt measured and thoughtful has watched with dismay the death-dealing denials of national leaders from India to Brazil. No country is exempt, which is just one reason why the monopoly of vaccinations by the privileged countries is so manifestly self-defeating. If the wretched of the earth are not protected, then no one is. An ethical principle – one that, in an ideal world, should always apply – is pushing to the fore, taking on an unmistakable if ghostly shape. Nobody can save themselves, certainly not for ever, at the cost of anybody else. In the UK, we legitimately rail against an incompetent government whose repeated refusal to take measures called for by its scientific advisers has given us one of the highest Covid death tolls of the western world. It is guilty of negligence, but of also violating the unspoken contract between government and governed, by leaving the people alone with their fear. Though officially denied, the policy at the outset of the pandemic and reviewed this summer, seems to have been “herd immunity”. If the idea has been so disturbing, it is not just because it runs the risk of a virus run rampant and mutating into vaccine-resistant variants, or because of the sinister undercover calculations of the acceptable level of the dead that it entails. Perhaps even more distressing, the avalanche of deaths that it appeared to sanction reminds us of the reality that death can happen at any time and eventually comes for us all. “Let the bodies pile high,” words allegedly spoken (though officially denied) by Boris Johnson, have lingered in the atmosphere and leave any vestiges of safety in shreds. A stalled economy, whose serious consequences must indeed be recognised, is – or so we were officially told – more alarming than mass deaths. Sigmund Freud once stated that no one believes in their own death. In the unconscious, there is a blank space where knowledge of this one sure thing about our futures should be. If the pandemic has changed life for ever, it might therefore be because that inability to countenance death – which may seem to be the condition of daily sanity – has been revealed for the delusion it always is. To be human, in modern western cultures at least, is to push the knowledge of death away for as long as we can. “There used to be no house,” the Marxist critic Walter Benjamin wrote in his 1936 essay The Storyteller, “hardly a room, in which someone had not once died.” In modern life, on the other hand, he argued, dying had been pushed beyond the perceptual realm of the living, although his diagnosis did not of course include the destitute nations or anticipate the impending war. In the midst of a pandemic, death cannot be exiled to the outskirts of existence. Instead, it is an unremitting presence that seems to trail from room to room. One of the as yet unanswered questions of the present moment is how soon the vaccine rollout, among the privileged nations, will allow hospitals to return once and for all to curing and caring for life rather than preparing for death, so that doctors and nurses will no longer be faced with the inhuman choice between cancer and Covid. “Not today,” one palliative care nurse found herself saying in the midst of the first wave, to patients cut off from their loved ones, the terror visible in their eyes, when they asked her if they were going to die. “Not today” – she did not even pretend to know more. * * * What on earth, we might then ask, does the future consist of once the awareness of death passes a certain threshold and breaks into our waking dreams? What, then, is the psychic time we are living? How can we prepare – can we prepare – for what is to come? If the uncertainty strikes at the core of inner life, it also has a political dimension. Every claim for justice relies on belief in a possible future, even when – or rather especially when – we feel the planet might be facing its demise. This is all the more visibly the case since the pandemic has allowed the bruises of racial, sexual and economic inequality in the modern world to rise mercilessly to the surface of our social arrangements for everyone, unavoidably, to see. The misery of impoverished peoples, black men gunned down by police on the streets, women trapped in their homes during lockdown, assaulted and murdered by their partners – all these realities, each with its history of racial and sexual violence, are pressing harder on public consciousness, as they move from the sidelines on to the front page. The psychological terrain is starting to shift. Alongside the terror, and at least partly in response, a renewed form of boldness, itself relying on longstanding traditions of protest, has entered the stage – a new claim on the future, we might say. One by one, people are calling out the systemic forms of discrimination that are so often passed off as the norm. People will no longer accept denials that the problem exists, such as the UK government-commissioned Sewell report, published in March, which rejected the fact of institutional racism; or tolerate the more deeply entrenched hatreds, as expressed in the visceral rage and threats against the marchers of Black Lives Matter; or leave unchallenged the studied indifference towards injustice that makes people turn aside and casually assume that this is just how the world is and always will be. Meanwhile, it becomes more and more obvious that endless growth and accumulation of wealth involves an exploitation of humans and resources that is destroying the planet. First, in the pandemic, caused by the virus crossing the barrier between humans and other animals, which many scientists believe was caused by interference in the food chain. This in itself is a consequence of large-scale industrial farming and the wildlife trade, which are boosting the production of deadly pathogens. Second, in the bodies of people in flight from war zones, washing up on the shores of the so-called “developed” nations. Then, in the droughts, floods, wildfires, superstorms, heatwaves, earthquakes and hurricanes, under pressure of climate disaster, as if life on the planet had already reached the end of days. “We were terrified of this new disease,” said Maheshi Ramasami, senior clinical researcher on the Oxford AstraZeneca team, who recently described their slow realisation of what they were facing. “There was one moment when somebody said to me, ‘Is this what the end of the world feels like?’” Today, everything is telling us that we cannot go on making all the bad decisions that have been made in the name of progress. Being driven – working harder and harder, making more and more money – is not a virtue or some kind of ethical principle to adhere to, but a sure sign of greed, panic and decay. Shooting yourself into outer space, as Richard Branson and Jeff Bezos have raced against each other to do, is a narcissistic sideshow put on by obscenely wealthy men. That they are men is surely key (the last gasp of the phallus and all that). The sky is no limit. “Expansion is everything,” wrote Cecil Rhodes, mining magnate and prime minister of the Cape Colony from 1890 to 1896, “I would annex the planets if I could.” Rhodes advised the British government that the export of instruments of violence to Africa in order to secure their investments was a holy duty. He also passed laws to drive black people off their land, limiting the areas where they could then settle. The laws he put in place are considered by many historians to have provided a foundation for what later became apartheid. Rhodes’ statue at the University of Cape Town was brought down by student protests in one of the most resonant political actions of the times, but the one outside Oriel College in Oxford is still standing. Either way, the organising principle and fantasy – colonising the universe to infinity – endures. “We know there is life on Mars,” the associate administrator of Nasa’s Science Mission stated in 2015, “because we put it there.” The process is known as “forward contamination” – you destroy at exactly the same moment that you make something grow. Last March, one of Elon Musk’s SpaceX ships crashed back to earth in Texas. “We’ve got a lot of land with nobody around, so if it blows up, it’s cool,” he is reported to have observed a few years previously. The explosion scattered debris over the fragile ecosystem of state and federally protected lands in the Lower Rio Grande valley, a national wildlife refuge that is home to vulnerable species. It is surely no coincidence that such Faustian pacts are being struck when the fragility of life on earth has never been more glaring. These intrepid space explorers remind me of the stinking rich individuals who try to barter with the boatman on their way to the island of the dead in Philip Pullman’s The Amber Spyglass. Bezos is said to be pouring millions into Altos Labs, a Silicon Valley gene reprogramming company searching for the secrets of eternal life. They think their money will save them, while the bodies of the less privileged crumble and fail (the sums already spent on these space extravaganzas would pay for vaccines across the world for everyone). This much seems clear. If we want to prepare for a better, fairer, life – if we want to prepare for any kind of future at all – we must slow the pace and change our relationship to time. * * * So what happens if we enter the realm of psychic time, the inner world of the unconscious where the mind, which we can never fully know or master, constantly flickers back and forth between the different moments of a partly remembered, partly repressed life? This is a vision of human subjectivity that completely scuppers any idea of progress as a forward march through time. The British psychoanalyst DW Winnicott, writing in 1949, described a patient who had to go looking for a piece of their past in the future, something they could barely envisage in the present, and which, when it first happened, had been too painful for them to fully live or even contemplate. Seen in this light, the relentless drive to push ourselves on and on, as if our lives depended on it – killing us, more likely – reveals itself as a doomed effort to bypass inner pain. The first hysterical patient in the history of psychoanalysis – analysed by Freud’s colleague Josef Breuer – fell ill as she sat nursing her dying father, overwhelmed by an inadmissible combination of resentment and sorrow. Her anger at the suffocating restrictions of her life was a feeling that, as a young Viennese daughter, she could not allow herself, at least consciously, to entertain. Even without a pandemic, it is rare for such agonising ambivalence towards those we love and lose to be spoken. There is a limit to how much we can psychically tolerate. This remains the fundamental insight of psychoanalysis, never more needed than today. When Boris Johnson slipped under cover of night to visit the memorial wall along the Thames, avoiding daytime mourners, an act generally seen as an insult to all those whom the wall is designed to commemorate; or when he blustered and refused for 18 months to meet the bereaved families of people who have died of Covid-19, he was refusing public accountability, while at the same time making a statement, no doubt unintentionally, about what he could not bear to countenance. (He has now met and assured them that there will be a public inquiry, for which, somewhat unpromisingly, he will take personal charge himself.) He was also revealing the gulf between official life and the inward life of the mind. Grief brings time shuddering to a halt. As beautifully rendered by poet Denise Riley after the death of her son, it is time lived without its flow. When you are grieving, there is nothing else to do but grieve, as the mind battles against a knowledge that no one ever wishes to own. Even the term “the bereaved” is misleading, as it suggests a group apart, and something over and done with, as if you can neatly place to one side and sign off on something that feels, for the one afflicted, like an interminable process (which must feel interminable, at least to begin with, if it is ever to be processed at all). Seen in this light, Johnson’s “boosterism”, his boyish insouciance, appears as a psychological project in itself. What must be avoided at all cost is any glimmer of anguish. Anything can and must be managed. Everything is going to be all right – a mantra of which the irreality has never been more glaring. All that matters is the endlessly deferred promise of good times ahead. Hence too, I would suggest, the evasions and obfuscations on everything from climate breakdown, to “levelling up”, to social care – for none of which there appears to be anything sufficiently ambitious or well-resourced to be dignified with the word “plan”. The same goes for the fiasco of “freedom day” on 19 July this year, when most remaining pandemic restrictions were lifted in the UK, a day people in England were exhorted to celebrate. For many in the UK and across a tensely watching world, it felt instead like an occasion for dread. “Needless suffering”, “disastrous myopia” is how observers from New York to the capitals of Europe have described UK government recklessness as case numbers have steadily risen close to their highest levels since then. Each time, the same pattern. The political reality of the moment is ignored by subduing the difficult forms of mental life that would be needed in order to face it. In one of his most famous statements, Freud described the hysterical patient as suffering “mainly from reminiscences”. From that moment on, psychoanalytic thought has committed itself to understanding how flight from the past freezes people in endlessly repeating time, robbing them of any chance for a life that might be lived with a modicum of freedom. You have to look back, however agonising, even if it goes against all your deepest impulses, if you are to have the slightest hope of getting to a new stage. This, too, has become more obviously true as people are crossing over from the space of intimacy and privately stored memories to tell their stories in the public domain. When women step up – and it is mainly if not exclusively women – to recount harrowing tales of sexual abuse from bygone years, it is part of a bid to claim the past as the only way of allowing a future to emerge no longer blocked by violent memory. During lockdown, psychoanalysts reported a flood of untold memories from their patients, as if the physical distance and reduced intimacy of the virtual session, combined with the sheer urgency of the moment, were finally giving them the courage to speak. * * * One glance at today’s culture wars will confirm how central this type of reckoning is to our ability to understand the political urgencies of the present. What is causing the most trouble, and provoking the strongest rebuttals and hatred, is the fearlessness with which the damaged, disadvantaged and dispossessed are calling up the legacy of the past as their passage to a viable future. Their resolve to combat historic and entrenched injustice is surely exemplary. Most vocal of all has been the anger unleashed by the project to bring down the statues of imperial magnates – beginning with Rhodes – or to acknowledge that colonial Britain was involved in the slave trade at all. At the time of abolition, British slavers were bought off by the government with compensation worth $17bn. Those funds have massively increased over hundreds of years, leaving the next generations to enjoy levels of prosperity that – not surprisingly and even in the face of incontrovertible scholarship and evidence – they have been reluctant to accept was sourced in ill-gotten gains. When The Legacies of British Slavery, the University College London database charting this history, first opened in 2016, within days it was flooded in almost equal measure by those wishing to know the truth of the past and those wishing no less fervently to deny it. “My terror of forgetting,” wrote the Jewish scholar, Yosef Hayim Yerushalmi, “is greater than my terror of having too much to remember.” He was writing in the 80s, at a very different moment, when it was a subject of public debate as to whether Klaus Barbie, the Nazi war criminal, should be put on trial. A friend had sent Yerushalmi a poll from Le Monde newspaper, which had asked its participants whether the word “forgetting” or the word “justice” best summed up their attitude to the events of the war and the occupation of France. Is it possible, Yerushalmi asks, that the opposite of forgetting is not memory, but justice? My point here has been to answer “both”, that they are in fact inseparable. There can be no struggle for justice without a vision of the future, so long as we do not lose sight of the worst of the past. We all need to become the historians of our public and private worlds. One place to begin would be to make room for the complex legacies of the human mind, without the need to push reckoning aside. Past wrongs would not be subject to denial, as if our personal or national identities depended on a pseudo-innocence that absolves us of all crimes. Let the insights of the analytic couch percolate into our public and political lives and, no less crucially, the other way round (we need to acknowledge the weight of historical affliction on our dreams). In my ideal scenario, social trauma and injustice would not be seen as belonging to another universe from our most wayward fears and desires. Instead, they would both find their place at the negotiating table, as we tentatively begin to draw the outlines of a better world. Meanwhile, taking responsibility for failure in relation to the pandemic would help: the cry for redress, for official investigations, or simply for public acknowledgment of the avoidable disaster that millions have been living, from the UK to India to Brazil. Though none of this will bring back the thousands who should not have died. In psychoanalytic thought, failure and fragility are a crucial part of who we are (only by knowing this can we make the best of our lives). Failure, too, has the strongest political resonance today, as many of us now anxiously wait to see if the idea will be allowed, in any meaningful or lasting way, to enter the collective political mind. Will the collapse of the western powers in Afghanistan be a gamechanger? Or, despite widespread agreement that we have been witnessing a catastrophic failure of policy, will any such recognition turn out to be a fleeting gesture, no more than a pause in the preparations for endless war? Squabbling over whether the US is a “big” or “super” power – according to the UK defence minister, only a country willing to exert global force has a right to the second epithet – is hardly reassuring. So, how will the pandemic be lived when it is no longer – as we can only hope – at the forefront of people’s consciously lived lives? How will it be remembered? Will it be a tale of vaccine triumph, with no mention of the murderous injustice of unequal global distribution; a story of government negligence and accountability; or an acceptance of the ongoing grief for the dead? Responding to a suggestion to make the memorial wall permanent, the artist Rachel Whiteread suggested it should be “left just to be and then gradually disappear. To have its quietness.” You cannot, she stated, memorialise something that is still going on; a more permanent memorial will need distance and time. When we reach that point, the challenge will be to resist the temptation to brush everything under the carpet, as if the best hope for the future were to go back to normal and blithely continue with matters as they were before: push death aside, treat swaths of the Earth’s inhabitants as dispensable, drive the planet to its end. On the other hand, a world that makes room for memory and justice would be something else. There is still everything to play for. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.UK hospitals have cancelled at least 13,000 operations over the last two months as they struggle to cope with record demand for NHS care and people sick with Covid-19. Figures collected by A&amp;E doctors showed that 13,061 planned surgeries had to be called off during October and November because of shortages of beds and staff. However, the cancellations occurred at just 40 of the several hundred NHS hospitals across the four home nations, so those 13,061 are likely to be a major underestimate of the scale of the problem. Dr Adrian Boyle, a vice-president of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine (RCEM), which published the data, said the cancellations represented “a stark warning for the months ahead”. He also warned that A&amp;E units across the NHS are “verging on crisis” because of their growing inability to provide timely care to the increasing numbers of patients seeking help. “Urgent and emergency care is verging on crisis and it is impacting and derailing elective care, meaning surgery for patients with serious conditions is delayed,” he added. A combination of record demand and hospitals’ difficulties in discharging patients who are medically fit to leave is causing what A&amp;E doctors call “poor patient flow” and “exit block”, when A&amp;Es cannot treat and admit patients quickly enough because there are too few beds for them. “These blockages cause ambulance handover delays, crowding [in A&amp;E] and corridor care,” added Boyle. The findings are contained in a new report from the RCEM’s “winter flow project”, which uses key data from 40 unnamed hospitals to show the pressures that the NHS comes under every winter. Even before the Omicron variant of Covid emerged two weeks ago Prof Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer, had warned that this winter “is going to be exceptionally difficult for the NHS” because of the persistently high number of people getting infected with coronavirus. Amanda Pritchard, the chief executive of NHS England, told health service bosses last month that “the science suggests [it] is going to be tough for a while”, because of the growing strain on all services, which is compounded by the service in England having almost 100,000 vacancies. The RCEM recently estimated that thousands of patients a year die – in ambulances outside hospitals, in hospital after admission or in their own homes – as a direct result of overcrowding in A&amp;E and the sheer number of ambulance crews tied up outside. “It is very alarming that more than 13,000 planned operations were cancelled in the past two months alone,” said Prof Neil Mortensen, the president of the Royal College of Surgeons of England. “This means thousands of patients who had prepared themselves for vital hip, knee and other types of planned surgery were left waiting in limbo for their treatment. NHS staff are working flat out. But, as this report shows, there simply are not enough hospital beds to meet the huge demands we are seeing in the wake of the pandemic.” He added: “The NHS is staffed by world-leading doctors and nurses. They cannot care for patients properly with a bed base the size of a postage stamp. The British Medical Association, Royal College of Nursing and the NHS Confederation have all warned in recent weeks that the service’s increasing fragility is putting patient safety at risk. The cancellations will affect the size of the backlog of people waiting for non-urgent care in a hospital in England, which last month reached a record 5.83 million. “It is not good enough for thousands of people in need of operations to have them cancelled, forcing them to wait longer, often in pain and discomfort,” said Wes Streeting, Labour’s new shadow health and social care secretary. “Waiting lists are already at record levels, yet the government has no plan to address the chronic shortages in GPs, doctors, nurses and social care staff. The emergence and growing threat posed by Omicron last week forced NHS England and the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) to postpone publication of their “elective recovery plan”, detailing plans to tackle the backlog. The RCEM’s report also found that: The percentage of people spending at least 12 hours in A&amp;E is double what it was this time last year. Only 62% of those attending A&amp;E are seen within four hours – it should be 95%. Long stays in hospital are rising despite the pressure to discharge patients. DHSC has been approached for comment.The auction houses Sotheby’s and Bonhams are facing a call to withdraw two antiquities from sale in London today from an archaeologist who raised “serious suspicions” that the items came from illicit excavations. Lot 68 in the Sotheby’s sale is a pair of decorative Etruscan bronze attachments, dating from circa early fifth century BC, expected to fetch between £50,000 and £70,000. Lot 83 in the Bonhams sale is a Sardinian bronze boat-shaped lamp, circa eighth century BC, estimated between £2,000 and £3,000. Prof Christos Tsirogiannis, a leading archaeologist, said the auction houses would not have offered for sale these antiquities if they had made adequate checks with the relevant authorities about whether they were taken illegally from their country of origin. Bonhams and Sotheby’s disputed this. Bonhams said the items were not unlawfully obtained or illegally exported to the best of its knowledge. Sotheby’s said it was a “legitimate market participant” and called on Tsirogiannis to share the information he holds. Tsirogiannis said he has photographic evidence which shows the antiquities were at one time owned by discredited dealers linked to the illicit trade. The photos are among tens of thousands of images and other archival documents given to him by Italian prosecution authorities after their seizure in police raids because his academic research focuses on antiquities and trafficking networks, Tsirogiannis told the Guardian. That material includes the archives of Gianfranco Becchina, who was convicted in 2011 of illegally dealing in antiquities, and of the British antiquities dealer Robin Symes, who served a jail sentence in 2005 for disregarding court orders over the sale of a £3m Egyptian statue and whose explanation was described by the judge as “a calculated deception”. In 2016, Italian and Swiss police recovered marble statues and other treasures stolen from Italy that were allegedly stored by Symes at the Geneva Freeport in Switzerland, Italy’s culture ministry said at the time. The provenance or history given by Sotheby’s for lot 68 goes no further back than 1978. It mentions that its New York sale room sold the same items in 2010. Tsirogiannis claimed: “The same objects I have in the Symes archive. I have two images: one colour, one black and white.” He claimed he also has images of the Bonhams lamp in the Becchina archive. “One of those images … has the date [1993], the price [60,000 Swiss francs], the exact dimensions that Bonhams is giving,” Tsirogiannis added. A former senior field archaeologist at the University of Cambridge, Tsirogiannis is now an associate professor at the institute of advanced studies at the University of Aarhus in Denmark. Over 15 years, he says, he has identified more than 1,550 looted artefacts within auction houses, commercial galleries, private collections and museums. He helps to secure the repatriation of antiquities by alerting Interpol and other authorities. Of the two London auctions today, he claimed, if he is right, that: “It shows no one is checking with the authorities … It’s amazing … This was unacceptable even in the 1970s. It’s shocking that it’s still happening in 2021.” A Bonhams spokesperson said: “To the best of our knowledge, the items we accept for sale … are legitimately on the market and have not been unlawfully obtained or illegally exported from their country of origin. We work as closely as possible with all the relevant authorities.” A Sotheby’s spokesperson said: “Sotheby’s and its fellow legitimate market participants have been asking for years that Tsirogiannis make his ‘archives’ available to us, but those materials remain totally inaccessible to all of us … The Symes archives contain numerous photos of objects that are and have been legitimately held by collectors and museums for decades.” Tsirogiannis has argued that, if the auctioneers had made sufficient checks with the relevant authorities, which he claims have the same images, they would not need access to his archives.Boris Johnson should set up a new cross-government initiative on reaching net-zero emissions, and subject all government policies to tests to ensure they are compatible with the climate target, businesses, unions and green campaigners have said. Ministers should review current policies in the next few months and use the result to present a new national plan on the climate crisis before the next UN climate meeting in November 2022, the leaders urged. The UK retains the presidency of the UN climate talks until then, having hosted the Cop26 climate summit last month. In a letter to the prime minister and Rishi Sunak, the chancellor of the exchequer, the chiefs of the CBI, the TUC and several of the UK’s leading environmental groups urged the government to examine how industry could be supported to reduce greenhouse gas emissions further, and to give greater powers and funding to local authorities to help them cut emissions in transport and housing. Consumers must be given the right incentives, and “just transition” plans are needed to help workers in high-carbon industries retrain for low-carbon jobs, the letter said. Tony Danker, the director general of the CBI, who signed the letter, said: “The UK presidency played a crucial role in securing progress at Cop26 through the Glasgow climate pact. “But that was the starting pistol, not the finish line. The UK government must build on this momentum, focusing on accelerated action and implementation of our ambitious domestic climate goals. “This will require alignment of all government departments and unprecedented collaboration with businesses, who are ready with the investment and innovation to make commitments a reality.” At Cop26, governments around the world came forward with national plans – known as nationally determined contributions (NDCs) – to reduce carbon emissions in the next decade. But the NDCs submitted would result in an estimated 2.4C of heating, far more than the 1.5C temperature limit that was the aim of the summit. For that reason, governments also agreed to return to the negotiating table next year – three years sooner than required under the 2015 Paris climate agreement – to overhaul their NDCs. There are already signs that this will be difficult, however, as some countries – including the US, EU members and Australia – have already indicated they think their NDCs do not need revision. The UK is widely acknowledged as having one of the world’s most stringent NDCs, but several analyses have shown the government has not yet backed up the targets with the policies and measures needed to achieve them. The Guardian revealed a rift before Cop26 between the prime minister and the chancellor over reaching net zero, with the Treasury blocking many green measures that would cut emissions, and espousing policies – from new oil and gas licensing, fuel duty freezes and train fare rises to cutting overseas aid – that would keep emissions high. The signatories of the letter, which was sent to both, hope that the government will show a united front on “building back better” from the Covid-19 pandemic. Another signatory, Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the TUC, which represents the majority of trade unions, said: “Our call for a significant increase in public investment in green tech and industry will safeguard jobs in Britain’s industrial heartlands. “And it will help create good-quality new jobs across the UK too. It’s where the levelling-up agenda and our net-zero targets meet – an opportunity to put Britain on a path to greater regional equality and prosperity for working people.” The UK should also ensure that poor countries are given help to reach net zero, with funding from development banks and private sector investors, according to the letter, seen by the Guardian. Ministers should better prepare the country for the impacts of extreme weather, and the UK must be a leader itself and encourage other nations to play their part in the rapid reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, the letter said. The letter was also signed by Colin Matthews and Peter Simpson, co-chairs of the UK Corporate Leaders Group, which is convened by the Prince of Wales; Tanya Steele, chief executive of the conservation charity WWF UK; Shaun Spiers, executive director of the Green Alliance; and Shane Tomlinson, acting head of E3G, a green thinktank. It was also sent to Alok Sharma, the cabinet minister who acted as president of Cop26. A government spokesperson said: “The UK is a world leader on tackling climate change, having decarbonised faster than any other G7 country over the past few decades. The UK’s 2030 NDC is also one of the most ambitious in the world. “We know we need action to match this ambition, which is why our Net Zero Strategy sets out specific, detailed measures we will take to transition to a low carbon economy, including helping businesses and consumers to move to clean and more secure, homegrown power, supporting hundreds of thousands of well-paid jobs and leveraging up to £90bn of private investment by 2030.”A coalition of women’s rights campaigners have voiced their disappointment and frustration after the Law Commission decided to reject a proposal to make misogyny a hate crime. The commission, an independent body that recommends legal changes for England and Wales, launched a consultation but concluded that the move would not solve the “real problem” of hostility or prejudice directed against women because of their sex or gender. Instead, in a report published on Tuesday, it recommends that the government consider introducing a specific offence to tackle public sexual harassment, which it claims would be more effective. It also proposes extending the existing offence of stirring up hatred to doing so on the grounds of sex and gender, saying this would help tackle “the growing threat of ‘incel’ [involuntary celibate] ideology, and its potential to lead to serious criminal offending”. But a statement by 20 leading women’s rights and hate crime organisations and campaigners including the Fawcett Society, Citizens UK, Stella Creasy MP, Rights of Women and the former constable of Nottinghamshire police, Sue Fish, said the Law Commission had failed to address “widespread concerns about lack of action by the criminal justice system” and vowed to keep fighting. They said: “The commission’s review is too narrow and doesn’t recognise the value of including misogyny to enable recording of incidents, which are currently invisible. By not joining together hate crime legislation, it especially ignores the experiences of women from minority communities who experience hatred based on multiple factors yet all too often are let down by the criminal justice system because they do not fit their tick boxes. “This report must not be used by the government to kick action on violence against women and girls into the long grass and instead should support proposals for legislation now, including urgently rolling out the recording of misogynist crimes to all police forces. Women and girls have waited too long to be equally protected and will continue to fight for this.” The commission suggested sex or gender should become a protected characteristic for the purpose of hate crime – alongside race, religion, trans identity, sexual orientation and disability – in September last year, opening the idea up to consultation. It followed a successful pilot scheme in Nottinghamshire. In the intervening months, there has been increased focus on hostility routinely directed at women, including the murder of the sisters Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman. In the wake of the kidnap, rape and murder of Sarah Everard by a serving Met police officer, hundreds of women shared their experiences of feeling unsafe walking home. But in October Boris Johnson rejected the idea that misogyny should be a hate crime, saying, “If you simply widen the scope of what you ask the police to do, you’ll just increase the problem.” The justice secretary, Dominic Raab, also dismissed the suggestion while appearing confused about the meaning of misogyny, suggesting it could apply to the abuse of women or men. In a summary of its report, the Law Commission said: “We recognise that many people may disagree with our conclusion and find it difficult to understand given the prevalence of sex- and gender-based violence and abuse. We have made our recommendations in this regard on the strength of the evidence and policy considerations before us. While attractive on the surface, we do not believe that making misogyny a hate crime will provide tangible results in the way that many campaigners have suggested.” The commission said adding sex or gender to hate crime laws, thereby creating new aggravated offences, would be unlikely to capture much public sexual harassment as it would still struggle to meet thresholds for prosecution. It also said it could add complexity to rape and domestic abuse prosecutions, making it more difficult to secure convictions and create unhelpful “hierarchies of victims”. Anna Birley, an organiser at Reclaim These Streets, which organised the Clapham Common vigil for Everard before it was banned by police, said women deserved “full and equal protection”, and making misogyny a hate crime “crucially … allows police to identify problem areas and perpetrators and intervene to prevent serious violence and abuse taking place”. After Everard’s murder, the government ordered police forces to collect data on crimes apparently motivated by hostility towards women, but the National Police Chiefs’ Council has said it is still awaiting Home Office guidance about how the recording should be done. The attempt to challenge incel culture comes after Jake Davison shot dead five people in Plymouth in August, before killing himself, having previously used incel forums and referenced the movement in online posts. The Home Office said it would respond to the Law Commission’s recommendations in due course. • This article was amended on 9 December 2021 to make it clear that the Law Commission’s remit covers England and Wales.A wise tax plan silently vanished last week. The chancellor was due to narrow a notorious tax loophole for the wealthy by raising capital gains tax. Now, in a quiet reverse ferret, he won’t. You might think any chancellor in these harsh times would collect what they could, and that this policy would be voter friendly, raising large sums from a few of the richest. But it would no doubt displease Tory donors and the influencers who will choose their next leader. Besieged by urgent spending pleas, Rishi Sunak can’t pretend he doesn’t see the arid social landscape after a decade of depredation. One fragile sector after another teeters towards public scandal. Will a report on the murder of six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes expose the brutal cuts in child protection? An ambitious man eager to move next door to No 10 must surely fear the NHS buckling under current strains. But no, it seems not. Other political calculations come first. The chancellor is abandoning the chance to raise as much as £14bn a year by reforming capital gains tax, according to his own Office for Tax Simplification, the outfit set up by George Osborne to iron out anomalies and inefficiencies. Sunak asked the OTS to report on raising the tax from its current 20% to 25%. That would catch some of the sleight of hand that allows high earners with personal service companies or private equity magnates to disguise their annual income as a capital gain to avoid far steeper income tax rates. They usually do that by taking pay in company stock, not cash, which cuts their tax rate from 45% to 20%. That’s how a hedge fund manager once notoriously boasted in 2007 that he paid less tax than his cleaner. The OTS duly reported the facts, and its top estimate found the Treasury would gain a significant £14bn from raising capital gains tax. But last month the chancellor slipped out a response that stamped on the whole idea. Undertaxed, unearned wealth is soaring, but Sunak’s preferred choice is to raise National Insurance from everyone else. Capital gains trebled to £63bn in the eight years before the pandemic: Arun Advani of Warwick University reports the rise of “super gainers” who declare more than £1m a year of their income as a capital gain. Now consider this: last week the ONS reported the assets of the rich skyrocketed even faster during the pandemic. The Resolution Foundation warns that the pandemic has widened wealth gaps “with profound consequences for social mobility and future income inequality”. Those already on high salaries saw the value of their property, pensions and bank deposits soar. Sunak should be copying the one good reform that Nigel Lawson enforced as chancellor in 1988, when he equalised tax rates on all types of income, rightly declaring in the Commons: “There is little economic difference between income and capital gains.” Taxing all income at the same rate removed any incentive to disguise earnings as profits. Forget levelling up under a chancellor who is deliberately increasing tax injustice. Last week Sunak let the Times know he would be cutting taxes, not raising them. His “retail” offer ahead of the next election will be a 2p cut to income tax, but as ever, those in higher bands benefit most. The cut would cost the Treasury an estimated £12bn. Meanwhile he is piling on extra bonanzas, with plans to scrap the top 45% rate altogether and cut inheritance tax. Not surprisingly, the Institute for Fiscal Studies has responded brusquely: the income tax cut would be “indefensible”, said its director, Paul Johnson, as it “discriminates in favour of the wealthy”. These are monstrous sums for the state to forgo while failing to keep basic services afloat in the NHS, social care, schools, skills and transport, let alone progressing to net zero emissions. Will he say where his axe will fall to pay for these tax cuts? Michael Gove’s white paper on levelling up has been postponed until the new year, amid a reported dispute over the chancellor’s decision to allocate only a paltry £4.8bn over three years for all levelling-up projects. Many have compared that with the £2tn it cost to level up East and West Germany – which only took them 85% of the way. Labour’s shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, did say she would tax wealth more fairly, but without revealing a plan or responding to Sunak’s capital gains retreat. She mentioned a windfall on Covid profiteers, so she could adopt the proposals in Tax Justice UK’s report about the six companies that made £16bn in excess pandemic profits. Some easy wins might include scrapping business asset disposal relief and reforming council tax and inheritance tax, according to Helen Miller, the deputy director of the IFS. Another move could be removing the VAT zero rate on food, which is an additional bonus for high spenders. This may sound regressive, but Miller says it would yield so much that it would be easy to compensate all lower earners and make them better off. A small fortune could be saved from the gigantic hidden welfare state that the well-off benefit from, such as pension tax relief, ISAs, charitable relief for private health and education and a host of other perks. These are waiting to be stripped away by any Labour chancellor brave enough to do so. Sunak may have only one thought: how to prove himself a small-state anti-taxer to win the backing of the hardline Tory party selectorate. Maybe he’s right that cash in the pocket buys most votes. But he risks a pyrrhic victory if the price of seducing a small and unrepresentative rightwing clique is to lose the next election due to public repugnance at levelling down everything, everywhere. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistThe first Airbus A340 landed in Antarctica recently using an immense 10,000ft runway carved out of ice, designed to take tourist flights each carrying up to 380 passengers. Increasing numbers of visitors are threatening the fragile Antarctic environment. Antarctica is largely isolated by the Southern Ocean, with the strongest ocean current on Earth, fierce surface winds, icy air and cold seas. Unique life forms have evolved to cope with the frigid climate. But as the global climate heats, so much of the continent is changing. The Antarctic peninsula is one of the fastest heating regions of the world, and glaciers are melting and exposing bare ground. Newly exposed grounds have begun to be colonised by invasive species as visitors unwittingly bring in foreign seeds, spores and microbes on their clothes and equipment. One particularly aggressive invader is the annual meadowgrass, widespread in many parts of the world, which has colonised ice-free areas left behind by retreating glaciers in Antarctica. Foreign wildlife has also become established, including 11 invertebrate species, such as springtails, mites, a midge and an earthworm. These are all worrying signs of rapid changes in Antarctica, the world’s largest remaining wilderness. • This article was amended on 8 December 2021 to include a link to research by Dr Dana Bergstrom whose work is one of the author’s references.Landscapers 9pm, Sky Atlantic Olivia Colman and David Thewlis are perfectly cast as seemingly ordinary, if ever so slightly creepy, Susan and Christopher Edwards – who are also two killers on the run. Based on a murky true story, this four-part dark comedy picks up in France, where Christopher calls his stepmother to confess there are two bodies buried in the garden of their old house back in the UK. As police dig up the remains, the Edwards – now penniless and haunted – board a train to St Pancras unaware of what’s waiting for them. Hollie Richardson Amazing Hotels: Life Beyond the Lobby 8pm, BBC Two Another adventure through hospitality for the likable Monica Galetti and her opposite number in every respect, Giles Coren. They are at Reid’s Palace hotel in Madeira, the major claim to fame of which is that Winston Churchill wrote his memoirs on one of its delightful balconies. A December dash of vicarious travel and sunshine. Phil Harrison Impeachment: American Crime Story 9pm, BBC Two As Ryan Murphy’s flashy dramatisation of the biggest sex scandal of the 1990s accelerates into the home straight, Monica Lewinsky (Beanie Feldstein) is pressured to surrender key evidence while Bill Clinton (Clive Owen) attempts to ride out the judicial storm. With scrutiny at fever pitch, will Hillary (Edie Falco) stand by her man? Graeme Virtue The Cult of Conspiracy: QAnon 9pm, Channel 4 What happens when a fringe conspiracy theorist movement suddenly breaks into the mainstream? Ben Zand digs deep into QAnon – the group associated with Covid-19 misinformation and last year’s fatal storming of the Capitol in Washington DC – to try to gain an understanding of what sets people on such a path. HR Insecure 9pm, Sky Comedy Issa, Molly, Kelli and Tiffany do something they haven’t done for a while – hang out together. And fans know what cracking telly that makes. Instead of heading out for dinner, they slip into their PJs, get high and have a night of deep and meaningfuls (oh, and Kelli slides into Daniel Kaluuya’s DMs). HR What We Do in the Shadows 9.55pm, BBC Two The effects budget gets a proper leeching this week. Nandor (Kayvan Novak) and Nadja (Natasia Demetriou) have one job: keep the fearsomely hungry Sire in his cell, lest bloody chaos reign. They fail, leading to a messy denouement in a hardware store. Jack Seale Live sport Champions League football RB Leipzig v Man City 5pm, BT Sport 2. AC Milan v Liverpool is from 7pm.As the beginning of 2021 marked almost a full year of the pandemic, lockdowns and social distancing, many of us were experiencing some sort of impact on our mental health. So when Arlo Parks released her debut album, Collapsed in Sunbeams, in January, she found herself chiming with universal concerns. Addressing issues that had been triggered or exacerbated by Covid stresses and lives stuck inside four walls, be they unrequited desire, sexuality issues, poor body image, prejudice, betrayal or depression, Parks emerged as an empathic, comforting voice. Articulating listeners’ anxieties has always been central to pop but few have managed it in such an authentic, genuine and timely way. Almost half a century after David Bowie threw a lifeline to a confused generation with Rock’n’Roll Suicide’s “Oh no love, you’re not alone”, Parks offered a concerned hand to the Covid-19 cohort with her song Hope: “We all have scars / I know it’s hard / You’re not alone like you think you are.” Throughout Collapsed in Sunbeams, Park’s conversational delivery – the natural staccato of a native Londoner – is crucial. Often, she’s not singing so much as talking intimately, as a close friend or confidante might. Over the course of a dozen songs, Parks dips into her own teenage diaries (when she was a “Black kid who couldn’t dance for shit”) to turn both confessor and counsellor. In Hurt, she simultaneously describes addiction – via the character of Charlie – while alluding to a more universal numbness brought on by trauma: “Wouldn’t it be lovely to feel somethin’ for once?” Black Dog, like Nick Drake’s similarly titled song Black Eyed Dog, is a stunning portrait of depression through the experience of a young goth or emo (as Parks herself once was): “I’d lick the grief right off your lips / You do your eyes like Robert Smith / Sometimes it seems like you won’t survive this / And honestly it’s terrifying” she sings, urging that she would “do anything to get you out your room”. Super Sad Generation (which saw her lumbered with the presumably unwelcome tag “voice of a generation”) is an effective snapshot of casual youthful degradation: “Start doin’ ketamine on weekends / Gettin’ wasted at the station / And tryna keep our friends from death.” In other hands – perhaps those of one of the emo bands she used to love – such words could have been screamed or yelled while the music itself was fraught with tension. However, Parks never resorts to obvious tropes. What makes Collapsed in Sunbeams so effective is that the music is the striking inverse of her themes – light, airy, her voice vulnerable and childlike. The songs themselves are delicately but cleverly constructed, with ear-worm choruses and generous hooks; soulful, folky tones, gentle R&amp;B and jazzy drumming; a shimmering sea of balm-like sound beneath which lurk those lyrical depth charges. Her language mingles the plainspoken and the poetic. “The turquoise in my ring matches the deep blue cramp of everything,” this fan of Sylvia Plath and Virginia Woolf sings on the opening, title track. Just as vivid are the “strawberry cheeks” of rage, the elusive “amethyst kiss” of unrequited love, or Green Eyes’ stark experience of homophobia: “Felt their eyes judgin’ our love and beggin’ for blood.” Collapsed in Sunbeams reached No 3 in the charts, and earned Parks a Brit award and the prestigious Mercury prize. Her delightful debut epitomises 2021. It captures all the bleakness and confusion of the Covid-19 era but her songs crystallise the hope, positivity, togetherness and humanity that will see us through it: “Making rainbows out of something painful”, as she sings on Portra 400.Olivia Colman gives a powerhouse turn in The Lost Daughter, prickly and combustible as Leda Caruso, a middle-aged languages professor on a working holiday in Greece. In flight from her past, possibly from herself, she stares at the sea as though it’s done her a great wrong and eats alone at the bar, repelling anyone who draws close. She haunts the resort like a ghost while other ghosts are haunting her. In an excellent directing debut, Maggie Gyllenhaal turns Elena Ferrante’s 2008 source novel into humid, sensual cinema. This is Colman’s stage and her tragedy; you can’t take your eyes off her for a second. Leda can’t seem to relax into her tranquil island break: she’s disturbed by the unruly, faintly criminal family from Queens that rents the enormous pink villa just up the coastline. Nina (Dakota Johnson), the brood’s volatile young mother, mislays her infant daughter on the beach. The daughter, in turn, has mislaid her favourite doll. Leda immediately collects them both: she returns the child right away but, prompted by some repressed maternal memory, keeps the doll for herself. Leda will explain that she has two girls of her own; Martha and Bianca, now both in their 20s. But even here one wonders whether the woman is being entirely straight with us. Her social armour keeps coming loose. Her warm professional front is ripped by capricious cold snaps. She’s solicitous one second; downright spiteful the next. In flashbacks we see her (played by Jessie Buckley) struggling to stay afloat, one eye on the kids and the other on the exit door. Work is much better. The Lost Daughter wrong-footed me and took a different, more nuanced direction; one that is just as rewarding in its way. Gyllenhaal’s delicious drama might seem like a storm in a teacup. But what a cup, and what a storm. • This article was amended on 7 January 2022. In an earlier version the character of Martha was misnamed as “Marsha”.Billy Connolly said he has learned to hypnotise his hand to stop shaking due to Parkinson’s disease, but lamented not being able to write by hand due to the condition that has forced him to retire from live standup comedy. Speaking during an interview with the Radio Times, Connolly said he treated his illness the way he used to deal with hecklers at his comedy shows. When he starts to shake, he stops what he’s doing and faces it down. “I’ve learned to hypnotise my hand,” he says. “I glare at it and it kinda quivers.” The 79-year-old comedian added that it reminded him of his old schoolteachers who could quell any situation by simply pointing at him. “I just stare at it, and eventually it stops. It’s quite a good trick. We love it.” Connolly rose to fame in the 1970s, spurred on by a now infamous appearance on Michael Parkinson’s flagship chatshow on the BBC. He was a prolific actor, starring in 40 movies, including a Bafta-nominated performance in Mrs Brown. In 2013, he revealed he was being treated for the early stages of Parkinson’s disease. He lives in Florida with his wife, the writer Pamela Stephenson Connolly. During the interview, he said he never tried to cover up his illness but was “pissed off with it”. He said it had stolen many of the things he loved doing. “I loved writing letters, but now my writing is illegible. My collection of fountain pens and ink is redundant. It’s a pain in the bum.” He said the high points of his life had been around bringing up his children, a son and a daughter by his first marriage, and three daughters with Stephenson. Connolly has previously said that his condition was “getting worse” but that he still enjoyed filming television programmes. When he picked up a lifetime achievement award at the Edinburgh TV festival, the comedian said he was approaching the condition in the same way he had always approached filming: “I hardly prepare. I turn up unprepared and everything’s a new challenge. “The challenges lately have been medical. They’re getting worse,” he said. “You’ll notice I’ve been holding my left hand – it’s starting to jump around. I have to weigh it up and see how bad it gets.” Connolly made light of the condition in a recorded interview with his wife: “On the last tour I used to say to the audience: ‘Good evening, symptom spotters’.”Labor frontbencher Tanya Plibersek says liberal democracies can and must face uncomfortable truths because an honest reckoning with the past “separates us from totalitarians – people who want to erase uncomfortable memories from public life”. The shadow education minister used a speech in Sydney on Tuesday night to liken a persistent critique of the national curriculum, spearheaded by the federal education minister, Alan Tudge, to an authoritarian-style deleting of the past. Tudge, who has spent months campaigning against elements of the proposed new curriculum, says he doesn’t want students to leave school with “a hatred” of their country. The minister has argued Anzac Day should be “presented as the most sacred of all days in Australia” rather than “contested”. Referencing the proposed year 9 curriculum, Tudge has argued “instead of Anzac Day being presented as the most sacred of all days in Australia, where we stop, we reflect, we commemorate the 100,000 people who have died for our freedoms … it’s presented as a contested idea”. Giving the Colin Tatz memorial oration at New South Wales parliament, Plibersek argued honest history is the hallmark of free societies, and the foundation of all moral progress. She argued liberal democrats and supporters of a free and open society “stand and fall by our commitment to truth”. “It’s one of the things that separate us from totalitarians – people who want to erase uncomfortable memories from public life,” she will say. Plibersek said she is “an optimistic person by nature – and a patriot who loves her country deeply – but how can we study the bravery of Gallipoli without also admitting the British command got it wrong?” Examining the truth of the Gallipoli landing as a “massively risky gamble – and a mistaken one in hindsight” would not detract from the courage and sacrifice of Australian forces. “If anything, the full truth adds weight to their tragedy and courage,” Plibersek said. “When we study history, it’s not just victory or triumph that we teach as bravery; it’s also resistance and even defeat.” History, she argued, is fundamentally a quest for truth and, without the full truth, the endeavour is propaganda rather than scholarship. “If you pull one thread from the tapestry because you don’t like it, the whole picture falls apart. “How could you teach the history of China without the Long March or the Cultural Revolution or Tiananmen Square? How could you teach the history of the United States without slavery or the Civil War or the freedom rides? “How could you teach the history of ancient Rome without the brutality and slaughter that won its Empire – and which paid for all its art, poetry, trade, architecture, and political glory?” Plibersek argued an honest history doesn’t always result in condemnation, or mean that citizens of nations “give up our faith in redemption or forgiveness”. She noted that some of the greatest civilisations on earth have chequered histories, and they prospered because they are prepared to learn the lessons of the past. Plibersek acknowledged the rendering of past events is complicated, because no one has perfect knowledge. Sources can be patchy and “sometimes the bridge of time and culture is too long to cross”. She said while there would always be arguments about past events and about points of emphasis, subjectivity becomes problematic when education ministers, like Tudge, seek to make and impose choices on Australian students. Plibersek argued Tudge wanted the curriculum to reflect his own politics rather than a search for truth, and to “import the ridiculous American history wars into Australian classrooms”, which she says amounts a weaponisation of the curriculum. “No serious athlete, or business leader, or scientist thinks they can ignore their past performance and still become better,” the shadow education minister said on Tuesday night. “They do the opposite. “They probe; they analyse; they look for points of weakness – they’re hungry for the truth, because that’s what helps them improve”.One of the more striking constellations of the southern hemisphere’s sky, the Southern Cross, can claim a new accolade – its bright blue giant Beta Crucis star has been revealed as a heavy-weight champion. An international team of scientists have discovered that Beta Crucis, also known as Mimosa, is 14.5 times heavier than Earth’s sun and is just 11m years old, making it the heaviest of the thousands of stars to have their age determined by astroseismology. To put that in perspective, Earth’s sun is thought to be roughly 4.5bn years old and the mass of more than 330,000 Earths. The Southern Cross has long been used for navigation due to its visibility throughout the year in southern skies and is a significant symbol of nationhood for many countries, featuring on the flags of New Zealand, Australia, Papua New Guinea, Samoa and Brazil. It is known by at least eight different names in Māori and its symbolism is subject to multiple interpretations, including an anchor, a sky canoe and a hole through which storm winds escape. The team of scientists, led by Dr Daniel Cotton from the Australian National University and Monterey Institute for Research in Astronomy in the US, cracked the star’s age and mass by combining asteroseismology, the study of a star’s regular movements, with polarimetry, the measurement of the orientation of light waves. “I wanted to investigate an old idea,” Cotton said. “It was predicted in 1979 that polarimetry had the potential to measure the interiors of massive stars, but it’s not been possible until now.” Asteroseismology relies on seismic waves bouncing around the interior of a star and producing measurable changes in its light. Probing the interiors of heavy stars that will later explode as supernovae has traditionally been difficult. The study relied on three different types of measurements of its light. The first is using space-based measurements of light intensity from two of Nasa’s satellites, Tess and Wire. The second uses 13 years of ground-based high-resolution spectroscopy, which is the study of the absorption and emission of light and other radiation by matter, from the European Southern Observatory. Finally, it used ground-based polarimetry gathered from Siding Spring Observatory and Western Sydney University’s Penrith Observatory. Prof Conny Aerts of KU Leuven in Belgium said: “While these stars are the most productive chemical factories of our galaxy, they are so far the least analysed asteroseismically, given the degree of difficulty of such studies. The heroic efforts by the Australian polarimetrists are to be admired.” “This polarimetric study of Mimosa opens a new avenue for asteroseismology of bright massive stars.” The authors said the findings, published in Nature Astronomy, will provide new detail on how stars live and die, and how they affect the Galaxy’s chemical evolution.The Cook Islands has spent recent days in a state of panic. On Friday, the tiny Pacific country, one of the few countries to avoid any Covid cases throughout the pandemic, announced its first case: a 10-year-old boy who arrived on a flight from Auckland to Rarotonga, the main island in the country. “I was honestly going to quit my job and stay home when I found out it was a positive case. I was shocked and scared at the same time,” said Ake Vailoa, who works as a shopkeeper for a small store on the edge of Rarotonga’s main town. People scrambled, considered closing stores and businesses, worried about the implications for a tourism industry that is on the cusp of reopening and for the health system. And then, on Sunday, officials announced the case was historical. While the boy had returned two “weak positive” Covid-19 tests while in managed quarantine after arriving in Rarotonga on Friday, his final test came back negative, and he was deemed not to be infectious. The country is still considered Covid-free. Secretary of health, Bob Williams, said testing for Covid-19 can be complex. “It is not always as simple as ‘positive or negative’.” After the two weak positive results, Williams said they took the approach of assuming the boy was positive until they got information saying otherwise. “Today’s negative results is that information. It means we did not detect any virus in the mucus sample we took from the boy. This is good news. We are fortunate that our entry protocols detected this possible case, and we have followed our protocols reaching this satisfactory result. But it also emphasises the need to remain vigilant.” The Cook Islands has gone almost two years Covid-free, with islanders able to go about life with pre-pandemic freedoms. The tourism-dependent country has shut its borders to international travel, with devastating economic implications, but has kept the raging pandemic at bay and now has vaccinated more than 96% of its adult population. But the alarm over this historical case raised concerns about how the Cook Islands will cope when borders reopen and international travel resumes as planned in mid-January. An attempt at a travel bubble with New Zealand earlier this year, which saw tourists briefly return to the Cook Islands, was halted just weeks later after New Zealand began reporting cases of Delta. Caleb Tatuava, co-owner of the newly opened Soul Cafe and Barbershop said that for him and his staff it was also a bit of a big scare. “For a little bit there we thought that the borders opening up to New Zealand in January would be extended and we would then take a loss from that. Once it came out on the news that it was a weak case, things were suddenly all good.” Mindey Berret works in tourism and hospitality and said when she heard news of the case she wondered whether reopening the country to international travel was the right decision. “Hearing the news you realise that there could have been potential for the borders to remain closed for longer and for there to be community spread. I started asking things like ‘Is the hospital and health ministry prepared?’ I realised the industry that I’m a part of, which is tourism, would probably be negatively and adversely impacted.” However, she expressed her gratitude to the government’s proactiveness and how they assembled quickly, not hiding anything from the public.Top story: ‘Direct trade-off’ put animals before people Good morning, Warren Murray with the news of the moment. Tens of thousands of Afghans received no UK help to get out following the fall of Kabul because of turmoil and confusion in the Foreign Office (FCDO), a former diplomat-turned-whistleblower has said. Raphael Marshall said it led to “people being left to die at the hands of the Taliban”. It is likely his evidence and launch of a still-unpublished internal inquiry contributed to the decision to move out the then foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, to a new cabinet role. Marshall was involved at the height of the August crisis after the fall of Kabul to the Taliban. He has quit the department and, in testimony to the foreign affairs select committee published today, reveals the extent of the chaos he witnessed. Marshall claims Raab refused to make immediate decisions about evacuations and some of those requiring the minister’s consent never reached the airport. The whistleblower reveals the uproar inside the Ministry of Defence when Boris Johnson ordered an Afghan animal charity to be given priority for evacuation – “a direct trade-off between transporting Nowzad’s animals and evacuating British nationals and Afghan evacuees”. In his testimony, Marshall estimates between 75,000 and 150,000 people (including dependants) applied for evacuation under the special case scheme, and that fewer than 5% received help. “At the height of the crisis on the afternoon of Saturday 21 August, I was the only person monitoring and processing emails in the Afghan special cases inbox.” A source close to Raab said: “We evacuated over 500 special cases, including journalists, women’s rights activists and extremely vulnerable individuals … The major practical challenge to evacuation was verifying identity and securing safe passage to the airport, not the speed of decision making. At all times, the team’s focus was on saving lives.” A UK government spokesperson said staff including 1,000 from the FCDO “worked tirelessly to evacuate more than 15,000 people from Afghanistan within a fortnight … Regrettably we were not able to evacuate all those we wanted to, but … since the end of the operation we have helped more than 3,000 individuals leave Afghanistan.” * * * Party political matter – Dominic Cummings has said it would be “very unwise for No 10 to lie” about social events that allegedly took place during lockdown last Christmas, after the prime minister’s spokesman insisted that “there was not a party”. Cummings alleged that some political journalists were “also at parties in No 10 flat”, so were “trying to bury” the story. Separately, it has emerged that at least 46 PPE deals were awarded to firms put in a special “VIP lane” by Conservative ministers, MPs and officials during the Covid pandemic before a formal due diligence process was put in place. Moving on to the medical science of Covid: a first dose of the AstraZeneca vaccine with a second dose of either Moderna or Novavax results in far higher levels of neutralising antibodies and T-cells compared with two doses of AstraZeneca, a study has found. Fresh Covid-19 restrictions come into force today: international arrivals must take a Covid test a maximum of 48 hours before setting out for the UK. The red list is being extended to Nigeria after South Africa and others 10 days ago – all citizens returning from these places must enter mandatory hotel quarantine. Our live blog has further developments. * * * ‘To de-escalate now would be a loss’ – The US has said it would commit troops in response to a Russian invasion of Ukraine, as well as taking punitive economic steps. Joe Biden is also expected to tell Vladimir Putin in talks today that the US will not rule out future Ukrainian membership of Nato. With Russian troops massing near the borders, the crisis is at its worst since 2015 when Moscow staged a large-scale incursion into Ukraine. Fyodor Lukyanov, a Russian foreign policy analyst, said he did not believe an offensive was imminent but “any kind of military alignment between Ukraine and the west … That is seen here as absolutely unacceptable”. An agreement for further talks on European security could be viewed as a success in Moscow, he said. But pressure is also growing on the Kremlin to walk away with a concrete win or risk seeing its threats disregarded in the future. “Just to de-escalate for nothing now would be a loss,” said Michael Kofman from the CNA security thinktank. * * * Misogyny as hate crime rejected – A coalition of women’s rights campaigners have voiced their disappointment and frustration after the Law Commission rejected making misogyny a hate crime. The commission concluded it would not solve the “real problem” of hostility or prejudice directed against women because of their sex or gender. Instead it recommends the government consider introducing a specific offence to tackle public sexual harassment, which it claims would be more effective. It proposes extending the existing offence of stirring up hatred to doing so on the grounds of sex and gender, saying this would help tackle “the growing threat of ‘incel’ [involuntary celibate] ideology, and its potential to lead to serious criminal offending”. Twenty leading women’s rights and hate crime organisations said they would keep fighting for the anti-misogyny law. The Home Office said it would respond to the Law Commission’s recommendations in due course. * * * ‘Pain in the bum’ – Billy Connolly says he has learned to hypnotise his hand to stop shaking due to Parkinson’s disease. Speaking during an interview with the Radio Times, Connolly said he treated his illness the way he used to deal with hecklers at his comedy shows: by facing it down. “I glare at it and it kinda quivers … It’s quite a good trick. We love it.” He said he never tried to cover up his illness but was “pissed off with it” for stealing many of the things he loved doing. “I loved writing letters, but now my writing is illegible. My collection of fountain pens and ink is redundant. It’s a pain in the bum.” Today in Focus podcast: Do we need ‘a more open MI6’? Britain’s overseas spy agency MI6 needs to become “more open, in order to stay secret” according to its new head, Richard Moore. Dan Sabbagh looks at what that might mean. Lunchtime read: Life in a time of death Modern society has largely exiled death to the outskirts of existence, but Covid-19 has forced us all to confront it. Our relationship to the planet, each other and time itself can never be the same again, writes Jacqueline Rose. Sport Goodison Park erupted not in protest but joy. The plan was to walk out in the 27th minute to mark 27 years without a trophy come the end of the season and years of mismanagement under Farhad Moshiri. Some heeded the call, though most rose to their feet and roared their team on. Everton repaid the backing in stunning style against Arsenal. Chesterfield, one of four non-league clubs left in the FA Cup, have been handed a lucrative third-round tie at the European champions, Chelsea. How the Guardian ranked the 100 best female footballers in the world 2021: leading coaches, former players and journalists from the women’s game are among the 86 judges for this year’s list. Haseeb Hameed could be key if England are to cope with lack of Ashes preparation, writes Mark Ramprakash. But the vibe from the England camp was that it was all part of the plan after confirmation of Jimmy Anderson’s absence from Wednesday’s Ashes opener at the Gabba began being interpreted locally as a major blow to their campaign. Anderson is “fit to play” said an England spokesperson, talking down the suggestion of a calf injury. The Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, has said he fears the Formula One world championship title fight between Lewis Hamilton and Max Verstappen could be decided by a crash between the two drivers. A global investigative network intended to tackle sexual abuse across all sports is due to be established by Fifa and a United Nations agency next year in the wake of the scandals in Afghanistan and Haiti revealed by the Guardian. The White House confirmed the United States will stage a diplomatic boycott of the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing, in the latest move that will further widen the rift in an already strained relationship. Business The Bank of England’s monetary policy chief has said inflation is likely to soar “comfortably” above 5% next spring when the energy regulator Ofgem raises a price cap affecting millions of households. Upward pressure on prices also looks set to continue with Tesco facing a “stock shortage” after the threat of strike action by workers at distribution centres. The UK economy may be overheating but China has announced measures including more liquidity from banks to stop its system going the other way. The news boosted shares in Asia overnight but the FTSE100 looks flat this morning. The pound is buying $1.324 and €1.168. The papers The Guardian leads with that Kabul crisis whistleblower story. Also on the front: “‘Sham trial’: Aung San Suu Kyi jailed in Myanmar”. There has been outcry and uprising as the ousted leader was sentenced to two years in detention after her show-trial on charges that no one outside the junta views as credible. Despite the generals arresting thousands, including the country’s elected leaders, and unleashing terror across the country, opposition to the junta remains widespread. The Daily Mail focuses on the Kabul story as well: “Afghans killed as Whitehall worked from home”. The Times leads with “Omicron cases in UK double every two days” – we have a story on how testing results may not be giving the full picture, because not all Covid tests determine which variant is involved. The Telegraph gives the Afghanistan story a front-page slot, while its lead is “Booster rollout at a standstill”. The i says “UK ministers bullish about no Plan B as Omicron starts to spread in community”. The Mirror has “Government ‘cover-up’ led to Grenfell” – it suggests cladding hazards were known about under the Cameron government. The Express says “Bank of England warns price rises will bite even harder” – its deputy governor, Ben Broadbent, is quoted saying that in the spring inflation will rise “comfortably” above 5% which seems an unfortunate choice of words. “SEC probes Trump’s ‘non-woke’ group as blank-cheque fears rise” – the Financial Times leads with an enticing story. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.Voters in New South Wales remain sympathetic to Gladys Berejiklian despite the former premier having to front the state’s anti-corruption commission to answer serious questions, according to the latest Guardian Essential poll. Respondents in the survey of 1,094 voters were asked whether or not they agreed with Scott Morrison’s repeated criticism of the state’s Independent Commission Against Corruption (Icac). The prime minister has characterised the NSW Icac as a “kangaroo court” and claimed Berejiklian had been hounded out of office. Voters are split nationally about Morrison’s interventions, with 34% in agreement, 31% disagreeing with his comments, and 36% neither agreeing nor disagreeing. Outside NSW, a number of voters are on the fence about the fracas. But among the NSW cohort of Guardian Essential respondents, voter sentiment in the current survey broke Berejiklian’s way – with 42% of respondents agreeing with Morrison’s contention, 29% disagreeing and 29% neither agreeing nor disagreeing – a result that helps explain the current positioning. The current Icac investigation is serious enough to have triggered Berejiklian’s resignation. But Morrison wants to draft the former premier to run in the seat of Warringah at the next federal election. Warringah is traditionally a Liberal stronghold, but independent Zali Steggall won the seat from Tony Abbott in 2019. The major parties are now in campaign mode, and Warringah is a targeted seat for the Liberals. On Monday, Morrison told reporters Berejiklian would be “very welcome” if she chose to run. When it was put to him that Berejiklian was being investigated over whether or not she turned a blind eye to suspected corruption and breached her own ministerial standards, Morrison replied: “I don’t agree.” “There is no suggestion of criminal conduct by Gladys Berejiklian – none whatsoever,” he said. The former premier resigned voluntarily in September after Icac revealed it was investigating whether she broke the law by failing to report a reasonable suspicion of corruption on the part of her ex-lover, the former Wagga Wagga MP Daryl Maguire. At the time, Berejiklian expressed frustration over the timing of her departure, but told reporters she had “no option but to resign the office of premier”. She has denied any wrongdoing or that she had reason to suspectMaguire and Icac is yet to hand down its findings. The prime minister has faced significant criticism both inside and outside politics over his full frontal attack on the Icac, but Morrison has doubled down several times since. His assault intensified over the past fortnight as he came under significant pressure over his failure to introduce a bill establishing a federal anti-corruption body promised by the Coalition three years ago. As well as testing voter sentiment on Berejiklian, Morrison and Icac, Guardian Essential poll respondents were also asked a number of questions about the Omicron variant, health regulations, and trust in institutions. Asked how governments and health authorities should respond to the new Covid strain, almost half the sample (49%) thought it would be prudent to wait for more information, although 34% of respondents said Australia should impose tougher health restrictions proactively. Only 16% or respondents favoured no change in current settings. The Omicron variant has sparked renewed debate about whether the developed world has done enough to vaccinate populations in poorer countries. A majority of Guardian Essential respondents (75%) agreed with the proposition: “until there are high vaccination rates in all countries, Australia will always be at risk of Covid-19 variants and outbreaks”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Voters were split about whether it was Australia’s responsibility to assist low-income countries to control the spread of the virus, with 40% saying we have done enough in assisting with vaccination programs and 34% saying it was not Australia’s responsibility to assist suppression efforts in low income countries. However, 42% said we should send some vaccines to developing countries even if that slowed the rollout of the booster shot program in Australia. While there has been significant focus on the minority of Australians who oppose elements of the domestic public health response, the Guardian Essential data suggests people remain on board with vaccinations and tools like lockdowns to control the spread of infections. A majority of respondents (61%) believe it should be compulsory for adults to be vaccinated unless they have a medical exemption. When this statement was put to voters: “Governments should never impose lockdowns, no matter how great the threat of new Covid-19 variants or the effectiveness of vaccines against them” only 28% of the sample agreed, and 48% disagreed. With restrictions easing ahead of the summer break, there is strong support for a regime of testing and quarantine for unvaccinated travellers. A majority (74%) believe unvaccinated people should be required to have a Covid test before travelling, while 68% say unvaccinated people should have to quarantine for a period before interstate travel. A smaller majority (55%) say unvaccinated Australians should have to cover the costs of their hospital care should they become ill. Voters were also asked questions about trust. The responses suggest voters trust the information they get from governments more than information they see on social media platforms (43% trust government while 19% trust the platforms). The government just beats the mainstream media (40%) but voters trust scientific bodies most of all (67%). The data suggests Australians are open to a stronger regulatory regime for the digital platforms and that people are worried about how Facebook, Google and others use their private information. A majority (75%) also hold the platforms responsible if misinformation is circulating on their sites.England could head into the Gabba Test with their famous new-ball pairing of Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad kept on ice after naming a matchday squad also featuring Ollie Pope in the final batting spot ahead of Jonny Bairstow. After earlier confirmation that Anderson is now being primed for the second Test in Adelaide, Joe Root’s tourists whittled down their options to a 12-man group which does include Broad, but with a final decision still to be made over playing spinner Jack Leach or opting for a five-strong seam attack. A green-tinged pitch and a possible rain-interrupted game has had England pondering the latter, which would see Chris Woakes at No 8 before a combination of Ollie Robinson, Mark Wood and Broad. With Ben Stokes the all-rounder but making a comeback from a four-month break – and a lack of warm-up overs a concern for all seamers – this would share the load too. But even with Wood’s extra pace offering a point of difference and the chance to return fire against Australia’s lower order, it would mean the hosts still facing a diet of right-arm seam and Joe Root’s (admittedly useful) part-time off-breaks. Leach is the specialist alternative here but the slow left-armer was ignored all summer due to the absence of Stokes. His four Ashes Tests in 2019, however, returned 12 wickets at an average of 25, and if picked it may be that Broad is forced to wait to win his 150th Test cap given Robinson’s rise in 2021. This scenario would make it the first Test in five years (Dhaka 2016) that England have had neither Anderson nor Broad in their bowling attack, the pair having taken the field together 124 times since their decorated partnership first came together in Wellington back in 2008. Anderson was officially ruled out of the Ashes opener on Tuesday morning but with a team spokesperson insisting the 39-year-old was not injured, merely being readied for the potential swinging conditions of the pink ball Test in Adelaide. England’s record wicket-taker is essentially behind the other seamers in terms of physical preparation, with a calf niggle at the start of the trip delaying his bowling work for two weeks. This week he has been reportedly bowling at full pelt in the Gabba nets this week but, with memories of his 2019 home Ashes ruined by a calf tear after only four overs, caution has still prevailed. Root has spoken of doing things differently to previous failed Ashes tours and, though cagey over his final XI, an all-pace attack that retains Broad would still qualify as such. It was also the approach which helped England to a comeback 2020 series win over South Africa in Johannesburg, where the less helpful Kookaburra ball is similarly used. One certainty is that Bairstow is dropped. The Yorkshireman began the tour as favourite to take the No 6 berth – he was due to play September’s abandoned Old Trafford Test against India ahead of Pope – but two failures in his solitary warm-up match after a late arrival from the T20 World Cup have changed the thinking. Pope in fact top-scored for England in their last Test match with a defiant 81 during the 157-run defeat to India at the Oval. Nine years younger than Bairstow and with a first-class average of 53, the Surrey man is viewed as the coming man in English cricket even if one yet to fully transfer his clear talents to the top level. The right-hander’s 20 Test caps to date have featured just one century to date but this did come overseas to set up victory, an unbeaten 135 in Port Elizabeth in early 2020 against a South African attack that featured Vernon Philander, Kagiso Rabada and Anrich Nortje. England 12-man squad for the first Ashes Test: Joe Root (c), Stuart Broad, Rory Burns, Jos Buttler (wkt), Haseeb Hameed, Jack Leach, Dawid Malan, Ollie Pope, Ollie Robinson, Ben Stokes, Chris Woakes, Mark Wood.A booster dose could be necessary to keep your green Covid-19 vaccination tick in the future, the health department secretary Brendan Murphy says. Booster shots are being rolled out across Australia amid warnings that immunisation from the initial vaccinations wanes with time. The federal government distinguishes these “booster” doses from the third vaccine dose some immunocompromised people need to get a standard level of protection. In a Senate select committee inquiry into the government’s handling of the Covid pandemic on Tuesday, Labor senator Katy Gallagher asked what would constitute “fully vaccinated” in the future. Murphy said, for now, any third dose would be recorded and those with two doses would retain their tick – but that could change. He said the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) has so far “felt there’s not sufficient evidence to say that someone who’s had two doses needs a third to maintain their fully vaccinated status”. “So at the moment we’re regarding everyone with two doses as fully vaccinated,” he said. “If in the future the data suggests that immunity from the primary course wanes so much that people do really need a third dose, that could change.” Much of Tuesday’s hearing was taken up with discussing misinformation being spread about Covid, the vaccines, and the extension of the rollout to children. It also heard that there were now 37 cases of the Omicron variant in Australia. The chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, has confirmed only 10 of those cases were associated with overseas travel. None of them had a severe illness or had been hospitalised, he said, except for one child who was under observation. There were “no definite signals” that Omicron is more severe than other variants, Kelly said. He also said that, as the pandemic continues and new variants emerge, they would run out of Greek alphabet letters to name them after, and would turn to stars and constellations instead. In June the World Health Organization started the naming convention with the Greek alphabet to avoid stigmatising countries in which variants were found. There are still nine letters left. Lt Gen John Frewen, the head of Australia’s vaccine rollout, said there would be no issues with supply when it came to booster shots as more people become eligible for them – six months after their second dose. He also defended a wastage rate increase, with 4.32% of vaccines now being wasted compared to 1.2% earlier in the rollout. Frewen said that was often because when vaccines were scarce doctors would wait until they had enough patients before opening a multi-dose vial, whereas now they would open them for anyone who wanted one, and the remainder then has to be discarded. He said there was still a vaccination gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians of about 15%. That gap varies between states and communities but overall Indigenous Australians are disproportionately forced to live with Covid, a Guardian Australia investigation found.‘Are you suggesting,” said Oliver, the owner of Grey Gables, “that Kathy isn’t doing her job properly?” If I may interject, Oliver, that is very much what we have all been thinking for rather a long time. Kathy Perks, supposedly the general manager of the country house hotel, has not been heard to speak since 2015 – not even when an explosion hit the kitchens last year almost carrying off the unfortunate Linda, Blake and Freddie Pargetter. So prolonged and weird is her silence, I can only suppose she’s actually dead and haunting the corridors like the ghastly bloodstained apparitions in Stanley Kubrick’s The Shining (probably accompanied by the terrifying shade of Caroline Bone). In fact the whole of Grey Gables has a sinister, Overlook Hotel vibe, or the Midlands version thereof. As Mia Grundy said, “the ballroom’s not exactly cosy, is it?” I bet the dining room is one of those awful tomb-like places with high-backed chairs, starched and folded napkins and no conversation. Ian Craig’s main courses probably come out under domes; no wonder Les Soeurs Heureuses is the go-to for fine dining these days. I had hopes that the Grundys’ proposed vow-renewal bash in the ballroom would finish the work the explosion started, trashing the entire place so entirely – with the help of Baggy, Snatch and a few barrels of home-brew – that the whole thing would have to be sold, refurbished and hauled out of the 1980s. As Mia so rightly put it, “That place is so … retro.” Sadly, the ballroom is safe for now, since the Grundys relocated their ceremony to the cider shed. The only casualty of the affair in the event was the vicar, Alan, cruelly videoed by that monkey George Grundy while pissed in the back of the village limousine. Adam, thank god, has finally stopped his endless whinging now that he’s not trying to run the family farm. He’s as happy as anything toiling in Tony and Pat’s organic fields without a care in the world, a one-man answer to the Brexit agricultural labour crisis. In other cheering news, Chelsea Horrobin has become a cross between Gok Wan, the village psychotherapist, and the Christmas fairy. When she’s not giving Lynda Snell a fabulous new haircut (20 years off her, ready for her MBE investiture at Windsor Castle), she’s coaxing Blake into allowing the scales to fall off his eyes in relation to Philip Moss, his evil ex-slavemaster, whom he’s finally conceded was not such a very kind man, after all. The triumph of the Horrobins is almost complete, now that her mum Tracy is practically the Queen of Ambridge and the Aldridges have been so terribly reduced. The Borsetshire class struggle continues.“I’ve never seen you looking so middle-aged,” my mother said, with a kind of wonderment, an unspoken, “If you’re this age, what does that make me?” I was less offended than you’d think. Her eyesight is absolutely appalling: she can only tell the difference between the cat and the kettle when one is miaowing. Whatever it was about me that was screaming “middle years”, it was more likely to be that I smelled of garlic and Parma Violets than that my jawline was disintegrating and I’d taken on a fading skin tone. Even though both of those things may or may not be true – depending on the lighting. Nevertheless, at a party later the same day, I found the time to complain about her, and a friend said, “Well, it must be quite weird, when your kids hit 50,” and I said, “But I haven’t hit 50”. And I didn’t even particularly mind that, since we were at a 51st birthday, and I guess it’s fair to assume that everybody at one of those will have met the milestone. Still, on the phone the next day, I was moved to complain to a whole other person. How come C thinks I’m 50? We’ve known each other for at least 20 years, and been ageing at the same rate that entire time. What did she think I’d done, hit fast forward? “Well,” he said, “You’re 50-adjacent.” “Absolutely no way. 50-adjacent is 49. AND I’M 48. WHAT’S THE POINT OF EVEN HAVING NUMBERS, T, IF 48 IS THE SAME AS 49?” So now it’s day three since the original detonation, and I’m complaining to person four about T, and his post-maths, which may as well be post-truth worldview, and person four circles back to the original remark and says, “I’m younger than you, and I think it’s fair to say we’re both middle-aged. We’ve neither of us got more life ahead of us than behind.” Never think to dull an insult by repeating it to someone else. You just create a domino effect, an insult pile-up. It’s better to just suck it up. This is some quality middle-aged wisdom for you. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistWith wifi more important than ever for keeping your home working and your online entertainment up and running, it may be time to banish those irritating “not-spots” and make your broadband work everywhere in your home with a router upgrade. Now that most new devices, from laptops and phones to TVs and streaming boxes, support wifi 6, I put several of the latest mid-range “mesh” routers to the test to see which ones deliver. These mesh systems work by replacing your current wifi. One of the units connects via a cable to the current router from your internet service provider (ISP), and then connects wirelessly to other units dotted about your home to blanket it with strong wifi. Dual or tri-band? There are two main types of mesh routers. Cheaper “dual-band” systems connect to each other using the same frequencies they use for your phones, computers and other devices. In testing, dual-band wifi 6 mesh systems provided good coverage but not meaningfully increased speeds across the home compared with older, cheaper wifi 5 equivalents. I would recommend spending less on older wifi 5 kit rather than the new dual-band wifi 6 systems if your broadband speed is less than 200Mbps. The more expensive “tri-band” systems connect to each other using a separate band of wifi frequencies to the ones they use to connect your devices to the internet, and they can provide considerably faster speeds across the home. If your broadband speed is above 200Mbps, here are three of the best tri-band wifi 6 mesh systems available. Each were tested with 400Mbps broadband with more than 50 devices connected, including an Apple MacBook Air, iPhone 13 Pro and Samsung Galaxy S21 Ultra with wifi 6, and a Microsoft Xbox Series X and Amazon Fire HD 10 Plus tablet with wifi 5, each used for testing speed and range. Best for speed and coverage Linksys Velop MX4200 RRP: £399 – deals from £300-£350 (two pack) The tall, white towers of the Linksys Velop do two things better than any other tested: high signal strength over long range and high speed from every satellite. The mid-range MX4200 version with three nodes thoroughly blanketed the house and provided a reliable signal at about 25 metres away from the house at the end of the garden – something none of the others managed. Everything remained stable under high load, with multiple devices streaming and downloading simultaneously, while speed and latency were consistent across the home. Wifi 6 speeds matched those using ethernet on the main unit, and ping times were kept below 12ms – only 3ms slower than via cable - and dropped by only a few megabits at the extremities of the house, which was extremely impressive. Speeds for wifi 5 devices were equally good, holding consistently within 100Mbps of wifi 6 devices all over the house. The Linksys Wifi app on a phone handles setting up the system and can then be used to remotely manage your network while you’re away. The app is a bit slow and doesn’t display the wifi version or speed of connected devices. More advanced settings require accessing the web interface of the system through a browser, too. Each unit is identical, with three gigabit ethernet sockets and a USB3.0 port in addition to the socket for your ISP’s router. Velop covers most of the features that are table-stakes for routers, including a guest access option, port forwarding, speed testing, firewalls, automatic updates, device or video-call prioritisation for slower connections and other bits. It does not have a VPN built in for connecting to your home network while you are away, though. Parental controls allow you to pause internet access manually or on a schedule and block specific sites on a device-by-device basis. Velop is also Apple HomeKit-enabled for improved security for some smart home devices. Runners up Netgear Orbi RBK753 RRP: £629.99 – deals from £450-£550 (three pack) Netgear’s mid-range Orbi system came a close second to the Linksys, providing really fast wifi 6 speeds and low latency from the main unit, with only slightly slower speeds at the extremities of the house. Its wifi 5 performance was slightly worse than the Linksys, while its range was shorter, failing to provide a useable connection at the end of the garden. It struggled to put signal through concrete block walls, too. The main unit has three gigabit ethernet ports and a socket for your modem, while the satellite units just have two ethernet ports. The network remained stable under heavy usage, but struggled to migrate laptops between the Orbi units as they were moved between rooms, requiring manually disconnecting and reconnecting to wifi to get the best connection. The Orbi app was simple for setting up the system. It has a few more features than the Velop, such as a network map of your connected devices, but is slow and lacks wifi version and speed information for each device. The browser-based web interface has advanced settings, including a built-in VPN, which lets you connect to your home network remotely – handy both for privacy when on public wifi and using devices such as smart CCTV cameras when away. Basic parental controls include manual pausing of the internet and blocking certain sites, but for more options Netgear charges £6.99 a month for “smart parental controls”, which includes time limits, scheduling, website history and device usage tracking, content filters and a few other bits. Standard firewall security is free, but Netgear also sells an annual £85 “Armor” subscription, which is a proactive security solution from the cybersecurity company Bitdefender that helps stop viruses and other threats. I found it irritating, flagging my attempts to configure smart speakers and other devices as threats and blocking them. Eero 6 Pro RRP: £599 – deals from £419 (three pack) Amazon’s Eero 6 Pro is one of the most simple tri-band wifi 6 mesh systems to set up, with the option to login with an Amazon account. But wifi 6 speeds were the slowest of the group test, losing 10% compared with using ethernet on the main unit and dropping off significantly when connecting at the extremities of the house. Wifi 5 performance was also disappointing by comparison. Each unit is the same, but they only have two gigabit ethernet ports each, one of which needs to be used to connect to your modem on the main unit. Coverage within the house was good, but the Eero struggled with concrete block walls and had much shorter range into the garden compared to the others. I also had annoying issues with Sonos speakers and a Sky Q set-top box, which required replacing a faulty Eero and software updates to fix. The Eero system caused interference for Xbox wireless audio through headphones connected to the joypad, too. There is no advanced interface for controlling the Eero, but the app is the best for the basics. That includes the ability to group connected devices into “profiles” so you can pause the internet manually or on a schedule per profile and see how much bandwidth they are using. But parental controls – some of the best in the business – for filtering content, sites and services require the £2.99 a month Eero Secure subscription, which also includes data consumption history, virus and ad-blocking, and a few other things. The Eero also includes a built-in Zigbee smart home hub for direct connection of some devices to Amazon’s Alexa, without third-party hubs, and supports the upcoming Thread smart home standard.“All the goodness and the heroisms will rise up again, then be cut down again and rise up,” John Steinbeck wrote to a friend in 1941, just before the US entered the second world war. “It isn’t that the evil thing wins – it never will – but that it doesn’t die.” Growing up, I was always interested in politics, politics was the reason I had to leave Sudan at the age of 11. At school, we weren’t allowed to study or discuss it, and it was the same at home.For years, I lay in bed and listened to my father and his friends as they argued about politics and sang traditional songs during their weekend whisky rituals. They watched a new Arabic news channel, Al Jazeera, which aired from Qatar. All the journalism my father consumed about Sudan was from the London-based weekly opposition newspaper, Al Khartoum. The only time he turned on our dial-up internet was to visit Sudanese Online. At the time, I never understood how Sudanese activists and political figures, like my diplomat father, who cared deeply about the country and had fought for their principles for so long, suddenly submissively stepped back. Or worse, why they sheltered their children from the issues. I always wondered, “So who are you fighting for then?” In my adult life, opposing former president Omar al-Bashir’s authoritarianism and corruption became a personal battle for me, more so with every year I spent outside Sudan. It took shape slowly, until a few years before the Arab spring it peaked with the publication of my political cartoons on social media. I blogged, tweeted and posted, knowing that, although working in exile gave me a level of freedom unavailable to dissidents at home, I also risked everything through being unflinching in my criticism. This last decade since the Arab spring has been a political rollercoaster. It was an honour to see my work shared by protesters all over the world – and be recognised by the BBC and the New York Times. I’ve published two books and had exhibitions around the world, been detained in two different countries, and wanted in my own. Like many fellow activists, I’ve experienced the effects of despair and burnout. Deep into the long winter that has followed the quashed Arab spring, and just as I was ready to give in to my despair, a second wave ofrebellion has hit Sudan. Bashir’s bloody 30-year rule ended, finally, in a revolution led by women, artists and unions. This uprising on the streets of Sudan was matched with huge support from members of the diaspora, exiled by Bashir’s regime. Returning in the wake of the uprising was an extraordinary experience. For the first time in a decade, I entered Sudan without expecting arrest. I tried to explain to my children how the people had won and collectively overcome this evil man who ruled Sudan; that although he dressed like a policeman, he was a criminal. In the past rocky two years , Sudan has seen an influx of families who left three decades ago – people trying to regain what was lost. But it seems the counter-revolutionaries remain strong – determined to prevent democracy. Even with international support limited to Egypt, Saudi and the UAE, the October coup against the transitional government has been a huge defeat for those working towards a free Sudan. At 41, I hoped my children could experience Sudan as home. But it’s hard to keep hoping it will be safe in Sudan to continue my activism and work as a political cartoonist anytime soon. Now, I understand how my father and his friends felt. In a country that has had six coups since independence in 1956, I can understand the instinct to protect children from instability, uncertainty and tragedy. I spend most nights on WhatsApp sending frustrated voice messages about the situation. All my friends and I talk about is news about Sudan. I find myself trying to shield my children from the (mostly bad) news. How do I explain that our army is killing young men and women? How do I explain that bad men in police uniforms are back again? That evil has returned so fast? In the end I did not need to. My eldest daughter used her screen time to read posts and watch videos about Sudan. Early one Friday morning I awoke to a mini anti-coup protest with her and her younger siblings waving flags and shouting slogans in our living room. With guidance and citizen journalism, these younger generations are far more action-oriented than we used to be. What we achieved in a decade will take them less time. As authoritarianism evolves, humans discover new ways to gain their freedoms. If my young children can stage a protest in their living room, despite my best efforts to shelter them from the news, imagine what’s going on inside Sudan right now. Khalid Albaih is a Sudanese artist and cartoonist living in Qatar. His work can be found on Instagram @khalidalbaihThe barman at Fiere Margriet places a bottle of strong, dark ale in front of me. “Gouden Carolus,” he says. “Brewed 15 miles away”. A cold night has fallen over the city outside, but the low-lit pub is warm and woozy. Hops are strung along the walls; a stuffed fox looks out from the window. “This pub,” continues the barman, stroking his beard, “has been here since fourteen-hundred-and …” he pauses for a while “… something.” History is elastic in the small Flemish city of Leuven, which is currently hosting BANG!, a citywide festival dedicated to the big bang. Back in the soupiest mists of time – or, strictly, before time was time – a convulsion of baffling quantum forces resulted in the birth of the galaxy. About 13.8 billion years later, in 1931, a cheery Belgian in specs and dog collar came up with a concept to explain it. Albert Einstein initially dismissed the idea, then later backtracked. The Belgian in question was Georges Lemaître – Catholic priest, father of the big bang theory, and resident of Leuven. The city’s name remains relatively unfamiliar despite this cosmic claim to fame, and the fact it’s home to one of Europe’s top universities. Indeed, the place is perhaps best known for being the home of lager leviathan Stella Artois – the HQ is on the edge of town – so when I get off the train on a sunny November afternoon to find bikes bumping over the cobbles and Renaissance facades above the chocolate shops, it’s a pleasant revelation. Fifty-thousand students are here during term time, giving parts of town the feel of a scarf-wrapped, waffle-scented, Dutch-speaking Oxbridge. “We should have been the national capital, really,” smiles guide Jan van Coillie, a retired linguistics professor and champion of all things Leuven (well, not all things: he doesn’t like Stella). “Leuven and Brussels were both once part of the Duchy of Brabant – a state in the Holy Roman Empire – and at the time we were the larger settlement, but in the 13th century, the dukes decided to base themselves down the road in Brussels.” Leuven, however, recovered from the snub, prospering from both the medieval cloth trade and the 1425 opening of its university – where Lemaître himself would later study and teach. Jan and I are talking beneath the ludicrously ornate town hall, a gothic fantasy of lacy stonework and fairytale turrets, where 235 statues gaze out from the facade (the total was 236 until last year, when reviled monarch Leopold II was removed). “The building survived both world wars almost unscathed,” says Jan. “They say it’s guarded by angels.” For visitors, the town hall and the adjacent 15th-century St Peter’s Church – which wasn’t so lucky in the wars, but still looks a picture today – mark the heart of a compact city. It takes seven minutes for me to pedal from the church doors to the shaggy, cow-browsed meadows on the outskirts. Locals on sit-up-and-beg bikes rumble down college-lined streets. Helmets are a rarity (“we don’t really like them,” I’m told plainly), as are high-rises. Even the hip cafes – and there are plenty – have a small-town, homemade-cake vibe. So while Eurostar’s Brussels Midi terminal might be under 30 minutes away by rail, any sense of a metropolis feels enjoyably distant. Leuven’s associations with Lemaître are being feted through BANG!, the Big Bang City festival, until the end of January. As well as a series of ambitious exhibitions, there’s a number of one-off events, from orchestral performances to temporary art installations. I visit two of the exhibitions. Both are excellent. The first is at art gallery M Leuven, where a through-the-ages selection of art focuses on humankind’s origins; the second is at the University Library, where the emphasis of To The Edge of Time is on science and cosmology. Among much else, it includes Lemaître’s fascinating views on why his findings were compatible with the Bible’s version of creation (“if the theory of relativity had been necessary to salvation,” he wrote, “it would have been revealed to St Paul or Moses”). Festival aside, Leuven is an absorbing destination in its own right. The University Library is a case in point. I climb its 240ft bell tower and look out across the rooftops and steeples to the flat Flemish countryside beyond. The vast library, with its wonderfully woody reading room, is essentially a war memorial. Burned down by German first world war forces – destroying 300,000 books in the process, including hundreds of priceless early manuscripts – it was rebuilt in whole thanks to American funds. A giant statue of a sword-wielding Virgin Mary stands outside, her foot crushing a German eagle. A five-minute cycle away is a slice of history even more stirring. The Unesco-listed Groot Begijnhof was a middle-ages beguinage, a convent-like community for widows and religious women, and its tight web of cobbled alleys, narrow bridges and red-brick gables can today be wandered at will. On a quiet morning it feels like stepping into an old masters painting, and I’m back again that night for a meal in the classy hush of the Faculty Club, formerly the beguinage’s infirmary but today all modish lighting, delicate aubergine dishes and heady wines. The Groot Begijnhof’s residences now accommodate professors and international students. Many of the city’s undergraduates, however, gravitate each evening to a very different landmark, the Oude Markt, a terrace-filled square billed as Europe’s longest bar. I find it an impressive sight, particularly considering that most of the buildings rising above the Stella Artois umbrellas have been reconstructed since wartime destruction. Plaques bearing the date 1914 stud the square. The tipples are undoubtedly better elsewhere, though: try the taps of craft bar Malz, the drinks list of sourdough pizza joint Baracca or the brewery of the newly reopened Park Abbey on the city outskirts, the monastic confines of which have produced a dedicated beer for the BANG! festivities. An abbey creating a galactic brew provides a neat summation of Leuven, being somewhere between deeply traditional and expansively open-minded. “This is a small city,” I’m told back in Fiere Margriet, as fleets of bikes trundle past in the night. “But it has a lot of soul.” • The trip was provided by the Leuven tourist board. For listings and details of BANG! The Big Bang City festival visit bangfestivalleuven.be. Eurostar travels from St Pancras to Brussels Midi up to five times daily (from £57pp; eurostar.com). Leuven is under 30 minutes by rail from Brussels Midi. The four-star Martin’s Klooster Hotel occupies a former monastery, with rooms from €75.50pp (£63.50pp), including BANG! exhibition entry. For current rules about visiting Belgium visit gov.uk • This article was amended on 7 December 2021. The University Library was burned down by German forces during the first world war, rather than the second world war. It also fell victim to German shelling in 1940.People in counties that voted for Donald Trump are nearly three times more likely to die from Covid-19 than those who live in counties that voted for Joe Biden, according to a new study by National Public Radio. NPR examined deaths per 100,000 people in about 3,000 counties across the US since May 2021. According to NPR, 1 May was chosen as the start date as it is roughly the time when vaccines became universally available to adults. The study found that areas that voted for Trump by at least 60% in November 2020 had death rates 2.7 times higher than counties that voted heavily for Biden. The study also found that counties that voted for Trump by an even higher percentage had lower vaccination rates and higher Covid-19 death rates. Charles Gaba, an independent analyst who helped review NPR’s methodology, said that in October, the reddest 10th of the country saw death rates six times higher than the bluest 10th. “Those numbers have dropped slightly in recent weeks,” he said. “It’s back down to 5.5 times higher.” Hawaii, Nebraska and Alaska were excluded from the study because they either do not report election results by county or do not report county-level vaccine data. The study only examined the geographic locations of Covid-related deaths. The political views of each person remain unknown. Nevertheless, according to NPR, “the strength of the association, combined with polling information about vaccination, strongly suggests that Republicans are being disproportionately affected”. People in rural Republican areas, and white Republicans in general, tend to be more resistant to getting vaccinated. According to the latest data from the Kaiser Family Fund, the rate of Republican Covid vaccination has plateaued at 59%, while 91% of Democrats have been vaccinated. Republicans have been found to be more likely to believe misinformation about Covid and vaccines. According to KFF, 94% of Republicans think one or more false statements about Covid and vaccines might be true, and 46% believe four or more statements might be true. Only 14% of Democrats believe four or more false statements about the virus. The most widely believed false statement is that the government is exaggerating the number of Covid deaths. According to Johns Hopkins University, more than 788,000 people have died of Covid in the US. Numerous Republican governors have dismissed concerns about low vaccination rates and pushed for ending public health measures such as mask wearing and social distancing in favor of reopening businesses. “We’ve seen lower levels of personal worry among Republicans who remain unvaccinated,” Liz Hamel, vice-president of public opinion and survey research at KFF, told NPR. “That’s a real contrast with what we saw in communities of color, where there was a high level of worry about getting sick.”I asked to switch broadband/phone provider from Sky to Plusnet with the changeover due at the end of September. More than six weeks on, not only has this not happened, but I have lost my broadband connection. At the start, Plusnet did not send the router before the switch. Sky had advised me that if there were any problems, it would continue to provide my broadband until they were sorted out. But Plusnet told Sky that the broadband was up and running, when it obviously wasn’t. I have spent hours either on the phone or messaging Plusnet but am no further forward. Each update seems to take four working days, which is very slow. Being without the internet is very frustrating. I have switched providers before without any problem at all, but I am now wondering if it is quicker to cancel and revert to Sky. SK, Dorchester Your case isn’t a great advert for switching supplier, but after a bit of a wait, we have got you reconnected – eight weeks after it was supposed to happen. Plusnet told you the delays were due to Openreach. A call to the BT press office – BT owns Plusnet – got things moving. The company has apologised for the delay. For some unknown reason Plusnet is not part of Ofcom’s automatic compensation scheme that offers customers £5-£8 for every day they are without service, depending on the cause. The company has offered you £300 compensation, which is worth £260, once your extra data charges are accounted for. Other (potential) customers will want to take note that Plusnet is not part of the scheme which has been signed up to by all the other big providers. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsNearly two-thirds of London rape victims who drop their complaint do so within a month of going to police, with the proportion tripling in two years, according to a report. Claire Waxman, London’s independent victims’ commissioner, revealed research warning that victims, predominately women, are being belittled and deterred from pursuing justice. Among those who allege rape or sexual assault to police, 65% dropped out, up 7% compared with the last survey covering the capital two years ago. Of those, there has been a huge rise in complainants dropping out quickly: 64% withdrew their support for an investigation within 30 days, up from 18% two years ago. Waxman said reasons could include their treatment by police and fears about “digital strip searching”, which required victims to divulge all their mobile phone data but has since been scrapped. The report says: “These early withdrawal numbers should prompt us to consider how police are handling victim/survivor interactions, as the victim/survivor may have only really dealt with police officers during this time.” Some victims were given the impression their phones were likely to have to be handed over and scoured while that was not the case, it was suggested. Waxman said officers outlining to victims what it took to pursue a rape conviction was putting them off. “They are painting such a bleak picture to the victims, they are deterring them, whether they meant to or not,” she said. One victim said their phone was taken and “is still waiting to be downloaded, after 14 months in the lab. My rapist is on [a diving] holiday.” Another said their phone was requested when they reported a historical child sexual abuse allegation from 33 years ago. Another female victim quoted in the study said: “Reporting to the police was the biggest mistake I have ever made. They didn’t believe me, they belittled me, questioned my lifestyle and minimised my experiences.” Waxman said myths about victims were causing the crisis and that rape had “effectively been decriminalised”. A 2019 previous report by Waxman found just 3% of rape cases in London reached trial. That fell further to just 1% in 2021. She said victims were having their character pulled apart, with their sexual history, social services records and mental health records examined, while suspects were becoming emboldened. Another big issue was police and prosecutors seeing any small inconsistency in a victim’s account as reason to stop an investigation and wrongly thinking victims were lying, Waxman said. This is despite academic research showing trauma can lead to inconsistencies. She said: “I have spoken to victims/survivors who have had police officers directly suggest that they probably did consent and now regretted it, hence their report of rape. If the underlying assumption of the system is that rape victims/survivors are likely lying, then we are not giving the victim/survivor a fair chance at justice and are setting them up to fail.” Commander Melanie Dales, the Metropolitan police lead on public protection, said the force was investing millions more in digital forensics. “We understand that rape and serious sexual assault are incredibly distressing and impact victims deeply and we also fully recognise that there is much more we must do to drive the improvements to the criminal justice outcomes they deserve to see,” she said.There is an “acute risk” that Scotland will miss its targets to heavily cut carbon emissions because government policies are too vague and weak, an influential advisory body has warned. The Climate Change Committee, which advises all the UK’s governments on climate policies, said the Scottish government was currently unable to prove how it would hit its ambitious promise to cut CO2 emissions by 75% by the end of the decade. In an unusually critical statement, Lord Deben, the CCC’s chair, said “the credibility of the Scottish climate framework is in jeopardy.” His challenge comes after Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, staked her government’s reputation on a partnership deal with the Scottish Green party in August which commits them to tougher policies on combating climate heating. Sturgeon also enjoyed significant media coverage during the Cop26 global climate summit in Glasgow last month, meeting influential figures such as Greta Thunberg, the US climate envoy John Kerry and UN secretary-general António Guterres in the margins of the event. Deben said Sturgeon’s government had the most ambitious and far-reaching pledges of any in the UK, including cutting car mileage by 20% by 2030, decarbonising heating in 1m homes and hitting net zero by 2045 – five years earlier than the UK target. Those included policies agreed with the Greens in August. But despite these “laudable” ambitions, the strategies and policies needed to hit them were absent, Deben said. And without that evidence, his committee may not be able to properly assess Scottish government progress in future. “Clarity and transparency on policy, supported with detail on how these policies will be delivered, has been lacking,” Deben said. “My committee cannot assess future progress without this vital assurance. “[The] risks to meeting the 2030 interim emissions target are now acute; ambition must increase in those areas where rapid changes are still feasible, or where it is possible to lock in lower emissions after the pandemic.” The CCC said the devolved government needed far more detailed strategies on cutting meat and dairy consumption, but had not yet tackled that sufficiently. There was also an urgent need for a low-carbon strategy for farming, to replace the common agricultural policy. Peatland restoration, to protect some of the world’s largest carbon stores, had to occur “at a significantly higher rate”, it said. And as yet there was no explicit goal of cutting aviation emissions or reducing flying, despite the deal with Greens. The CCC’s annual reporting to the Scottish parliament, published on Tuesday, said the challenge of achieving such deep cuts was particularly acute because the easiest task – decarbonising energy production – had been largely completed. Scotland now met much of its electricity needs from renewables, but was running short of time to decarbonise the rest of the economy – a far tougher task. Sturgeon’s government had also missed its annual CO2 reductions targets so far by a large margin, making it far harder to hit the 2030 target, the CCC added. “It has taken 30 years to halve Scottish territorial emissions; they must halve again in a decade to meet the legislated 2030 target,” the committee said. “Although a broad set of policies and proposals have been announced, there is still relatively little detail on exactly how committed public funding will be spent and how emissions will be reduced in practice.” Michael Matheson, the Scottish cabinet secretary for net zero, said the government would set out clear commitments to address the climate crisis in its annual budget later this week and was “resolutely focused” on delivering those policies. He said ministers welcomed the CCC report, adding: “I agree entirely with the committee’s key finding that the focus now, both for us in Scotland and for countries around the world, must be on the delivery of the policies to drive transformational emissions reductions across all areas of the economy.”The Morrison government is considering citing Covid restrictions as a reason for officials to stay away from the Beijing Winter Olympics, as calls grow for Australia to follow the US in a diplomatic boycott. Guardian Australia understands while an announcement could be made soon, the government is unlikely to take as strong a position as the Biden administration, which blasted China over “ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity”. The Australian government was still considering the language to be used, with suggestions that it may not be presented as a boycott. Instead, it is weighing up saying officials will not go because Covid restrictions meant they would mostly be confined to their hotel rooms. The New Zealand government said on Tuesday it would not send diplomatic representatives at a ministerial level to the Winter Olympics, citing “a range of factors but mostly to do with Covid”. The Australian government has been watching closely the actions of the US when it comes to a diplomatic boycott, and was always considered likely to coordinate any action rather than taking steps on its own. The UK and Canada are considering their positions. Australia’s minister for sport, Richard Colbeck, said on Tuesday: “A decision on commonwealth representation at the Beijing Winter Olympics is yet to be made.” The Liberal party senator Eric Abetz, who chairs the foreign affairs, defence and trade committee, said it was “essential that Australia follow suit and take a strong stand against the Chinese communist dictatorship’s litany of human rights abuses”. The Biden administration announced on Monday that it would not send any diplomatic or official representation to the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics and Paralympic Games. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, cited China’s “ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity in Xinjiang and other human rights abuses”. Abetz applauded the White House’s use of the term genocide, adding that “far too often countries are unwilling to call out such horrendous human rights abuses against the Uyghur population”. But the US decision drew a furious reaction from the Chinese government, which flatly denies crimes against humanity in Xinjiang, and dismissed Washington’s boycott as “posturing and political manipulation”. At the daily press conference in Beijing on Monday, the Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian, said it should be “athletes, instead of politicians clamouring for boycott, that should be in the spotlight”. The deputy leader of the Nationals, David Littleproud, said the Australian government respected the Biden administration’s move “but we will make our own” decision. “That’ll be a decision for cabinet as we move forward and obviously national security committee will make those determinations, and I understand that those conversations are happening,” he said. Asked about the Morrison government confirming it was considering a diplomatic boycott, Zhao said: “In fact, no one would care about whether these people come or not, and it has no impact whatsoever on the Olympics to be successfully held by Beijing.” The independent South Australian senator Rex Patrick also urged the government to announce no Australian ministers, senior officials or diplomats would attend the Games. “It would be morally wrong for the Australian government to extend any measure of official endorsement to the Chinese communist regime which has committed and continues to commit gross violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms,” Patrick said. The Greens also backed the calls for a diplomatic boycott. The party’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Janet Rice, said the Australian government “must ensure no government ministers or senior officials attend the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics”. She also urged Australian companies “not to sponsor the event until the Chinese government allows access to independent human rights observers”. Rice said the Greens condemned the Chinese government over “the brutal mass detention, torture and cultural genocide of the Uyghur people, the blatant attacks on democratic freedoms in Hong Kong, and the decades long oppression of Tibetans”. “The absolute bottom line that the international community should be insisting upon is for the Chinese government to immediately allow full and unfettered access for independent international human rights observers to assess the extent of their oppressive practices,” she said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Labor renewed its earlier calls for the government to work with the opposition to come to an agreed bipartisan position. “Australia should make their decision in the national interest and preferably, in a bipartisan way,” Labor senator Katy Gallagher said. China’s acting ambassador to Australia, Wang Xining, said last month a boycott would hurt “the image of Australia as a very sporty nation”, adding: “To politicise a sport is a dumb move.” Chinese officials deny crimes against humanity against the Uyghur minority in the western Xinjiang region, blaming “anti-China entities” for the allegations. But the UN high commissioner for human rights, Michelle Bachelet, has complained of a lack of progress in obtaining “meaningful” access to the region so she can investigate the situation.China’s politburo has signalled measures to kickstart the faltering economy as the crisis gripping the country’s debt-laden property sector continued to blight prospects for growth. President Xi Jinping’s senior leadership committee rubber-stamped a plan from the central bank on Monday for more targeted lending to businesses and outlined support for the housing market. The People’s Bank of China (PBOC) said it would cut the reserves most banks must hold by 0.5 percentage points, releasing another 1.2tn yuan ($188bn) into the economy, the central bank said in a statement. Leaders had also agreed to “promote the construction of affordable housing, support the commercial housing market and better meet the reasonable housing needs of buyers”, Xinhua state news agency said. Attendees at the Monday meeting chaired by Xi said the housing moves would “promote the healthy development and virtuous cycle of the real estate industry”, according to Xinhua. Despite the positive read-out from the politburo meeting, the country’s second-biggest property developer, Evergrande, was inching ever nearer to what could be the biggest failure in Chinese corporate history. It needed to pay $82.5m in bond repayments by midnight New York time on Monday in order to avoid an automatic default. But some bondholders did not receive coupon payments by the deadline, four people with knowledge of the matter told Reuters on Tuesday. Although Evergrande has faced three similar deadlines on offshore bonds since October and made each one at the last minute, it was less clear that it was going to make the payments this time. A statement from the company on Monday evening said that in the light of its financial problems it was forming a risk management committee to “mitigate and eliminate future risks”. The statement helped stabilise its shares on Tuesday after dropping 20% in the previous session. It followed a weekend statement from the company said it might not be able to repay some of its $300bn debts. A default would trigger cross-defaults on all the company’s about $19bn of dollar bonds in international capital markets and put Evergrande at risk of becoming China’s biggest-ever defaulter, which would ripple through the property sector and beyond, further rattling global investor confidence. But most analysts now expect to have to undergo a significant restructuring to spread its debts throughout the economy. Investors are also concerned about a potential default by Kaisa Group Holdings Ltd, which faces a $400m bond maturity on Tuesday. After Evergrande, it owes the most to foreign bondholders, with debts of $12bn. Another Chinese developer, Sunshine 100 China Holdings, said on Sunday that it had missed a deadline to repay $179m in principal and interest payments on a 10.5% bond. China’s economy is not growing as quickly as expected as it faces headwinds from a disrupted global economy, continued Covid outbreaks and the slowing housing market – once a key driver of growth but which is now seeing a string of defaults. In October, the IMF lowered its forecasts for China’s growth to 5.6% in 2022, which is huge by the standards of developed nations but modest by recent Chinese standards. The IMF’s managing director, Kristalina Georgieva, said on Monday that China has an important part to play in the global economy as it recovers from Covid-19, but its growth was slowing. “China achieved a truly remarkable recovery, but its growth momentum has been slowing notably. As China is a vital engine for global growth, taking strong actions to support high-quality growth will help not only China, but the world,” Georgieva said. Analysts at UBS said Monday’s policy announcements were a “clear signal” of monetary easing but others were less sure and noted that the PBOC insisted that monetary policy would remain prudent. Julian Evans-Pritchard, China economist at Capital Economics, said the move was an “opening of the fiscal taps, not a flood”, and that “this easing will cushion but not stop growth from slowing”. However, he predicted that the PBOC would have to cut its main interest rate before long. “As economic activity continues to weaken and the PBOC becomes more serious about lowering corporate financing costs we think it will have to take further action, including policy rate cuts.” Bill Bishop, a respected China expert and author of the Sinocism newsletter, said Xinhua reports about the politburo meeting had received “a lot of attention” but he did not believe it was a significant easing. “I do not think that is a fundamental shift,” he wrote in his latest newsletter. “Policymakers are dealing with some significant problems in the property markets including – but far from limited to – Evergrande, and they do not want to crater the industry. Can they calibrate and avoid disaster? We are going to find out.”Joe Biden goes into Tuesday’s virtual summit with Vladimir Putin, after days of close consultation with European allies on a joint response to an invasion of Ukraine, armed with a wide range of punitive measures at his disposal. There would be increased military support for Kyiv and a bolstering of Nato’s eastern flank, but the primary focus would be on sanctions. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said they would include “high-impact economic measures that we’ve refrained from taking in the past”. “I think Biden will lay out in considerable detail what sanctions the US will undertake,” said Anders Åslund, adjunct professor at the center for Eurasian, Russian and east European studies at Georgetown University. “There are very many tools that they have available.” Edward Fishman, non-resident senior fellow at the Atlantic Council, said: “There is much room left for ratcheting up economic pressure against Moscow, should the Biden administration opt to do so. “Current sanctions against Russia are light-touch; if Iran sanctions are a 10 out of 10 in intensity, today’s Russia sanctions are perhaps a two or a three,” Fishman said. “Not a single major state-owned Russian company is under full-blocking sanctions.” The menu of possibilities for economic measures is extensive. The bond market In April, the US issued a ban on US financial institutions buying new issues of Russian government bonds, which had negligible effect. Washington could go much further and sanction the secondary market in Russian bonds, where they are resold and packaged with other investments. Nord Stream 2 The gas pipeline from Russia to northern Europe has been completed, but it has not been certified for use by the German energy regulator. Members of the new German government coalition have expressed scepticism about the project, and it is possible it would be cancelled altogether in the event of a Russian invasion of Ukraine. Sanctions on Russian corporations and banks “The Biden administration could impose full-blocking sanctions on large Russian banks, energy companies, or defense firms … or impose sweeping prohibitions on investment and provision of services to conventional Russian oil projects,” Fishman said. Two possible financial targets are the huge VTB Bank, and Gazprombank. Sanctions on oligarchs and their families The US treasury has been hesitant to impose sanctions on Russian oligarchs, after measures taken against Oleg Deripaska had an impact on the activities of his aluminum company, Rusal, in Ireland, causing a major rift with Dublin. In the wake of an invasion, Congress is likely to add more Putin-friendly oligarchs to a blacklist to be appended to the defence budget. Family members of Putin’s circle could also be more extensively targeted. Swift The biggest stick in Biden’s arsenal is the threat to have Russia excluded from the global electronic payment system, Swift, based in Belgium. It was one of the most crippling measures used against Iran, and would make Russia a pariah in international finance. Åslund described the weapon as “the sledge hammer”, possibly to be used as a last resort.China has reacted angrily to the US government’s diplomatic boycott of next year’s Winter Olympics, as more countries said they would consider joining the protest over Beijing’s human rights record and New Zealand announced it would not send representatives to the Games. Chinese officials dismissed Washington’s boycott as a “political posturing and manipulation” and tried to discredit the decision by claiming that US diplomats had not even been invited to Beijing in the first place. “The US should stop politicising sports, and stop disrupting and undermining the Beijing Winter Olympics, lest it should affect bilateral dialogue and cooperation in important areas and international and regional issues,” foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian warned. The White House confirmed on Monday that it would not send any official or diplomatic representatives to the Winter Games and Paralympics in February, “given the PRC’s [People’s Republic of China’s] ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity in Xinjiang and other human rights abuses”. “The athletes on Team USA have our full support,” said White House press secretary Jen Psaki. “We will be behind them 100% as we cheer them on from home. We will not be contributing to the fanfare of the Games.” On Tuesday, New Zealand’s deputy prime minister, Grant Robertson, confirmed the country would not send diplomatic representatives at a ministerial level. Robertson cited Covid-19 as the primary reason “but we’ve made clear to China on numerous occasions our concerns about human rights issues”, he said. The UK, Canada, and Australia have said they were considering their positions. Last week, Lithuania, which is facing trade and diplomatic hostilities from China over its growing relationship with Taiwan, announced neither its president nor ministers would attend the Games. Chinese officials responded to the US announcement with outrage and also pre-emptive dismissal. Liu Xiaoming, the former Chinese ambassador to the UK, said the Olympics were “not a stage for political posturing and manipulation”. “US politicians keep hyping a ‘diplomatic boycott’ without even being invited to the Games. This wishful thinking and pure grandstanding is aimed at political manipulation,” he said. “It is a grave travesty of the spirit of the Olympic Charter, a blatant political provocation and a serious affront to the 1.4 billion Chinese people. It will only make the Chinese people and the world see clearly US politicians’ anti-China nature and hypocrisy.” Liu’s tweets mirrored the language of several other Chinese officials before and after the announcement. China’s embassy in Washington dismissed the boycott as “a pretentious act” and a “political manipulation”. Earlier on Monday, Zhao accused Washington of “hyping a ‘diplomatic boycott’ without even being invited to the Games”, and threatened unspecified “resolute countermeasures” if a boycott was announced. Asked by journalists what Beijing’s countermeasures would be in response to Washington’s decision on Tuesday, Zhao said: “The US will pay a price for its erroneous actions. You may wait and see.” Law professor Margaret Lewis, a China specialist at Seton Hall law, said the boycott raised questions about how broadcasters like NBC will respond to China’s presentation of itself, particularly at the opening and closing ceremonies. Lewis pointed at Psaki’s statement on the US not “contributing to the fanfare” of the Games. “This is the key here – how the US will express that enthusiastic support for the athletes and not detract from their moment of Olympic glory, while also taking a strong principled stance on human rights,” she said. “It’s a doable task but it’s a hard line to walk.” A US boycott had the support of senior legislators including Republican Mitt Romney and the Democrat Speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi. Boycott calls have intensified in recent months, as dozens of world governments mull how to respond to Beijing’s continued crackdown on ethnic minorities in China, its intervention on Hong Kong, and other human rights issues. Demands have further escalated over the case of Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai, who was not seen for almost three weeks after posting to social media an accusation of sexual assault against Chinese former vice-premier. She was later shown on state media to be in Beijing, but there remain widespread concerns about her wellbeing and level of freedom. Rights groups welcomed the US announcement and called for other governments to follow suit. Mark Clifford, the president of the UK-based advocacy group Committee for Freedom in Hong Kong, said global leaders had been “shown the way” by the US. “Work with the US and Lithuania and take up the only morally justifiable course of action by implementing diplomatic boycotts of the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing – or accept that you are endorsing some of the most horrific abuses inflicted upon a population by their own government in modern times,” he said. The last time the US staged an Olympics boycott was the 1980 Moscow games, alongside 64 other countries and territories in response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan the previous year.The Morrison government’s authority over its own members has been challenged with Nationals MP George Christensen and Liberal senator Alex Antic fronting far-right US online programs to criticise Australia’s Covid response. On Tuesday, the acting Nationals leader, David Littleproud, counselled and condemned Christensen over his comments on American conspiracy theorist Alex Jones’s online show InfoWars, aspects of which Scott Morrison also condemned. But as colleagues rounded on Christensen for encouraging people to protest outside Australian embassies against the loss of freedom during the coronavirus pandemic, Antic appeared from hotel quarantine on former Trump advisor Steve Bannon’s War Room: Pandemic. Antic accused state governments of a “drift into authoritarianism”, arguing that an “unelected health bureaucracy” had sent him to what was essentially a “detention facility”. “We need to drain the billabong in this country … it’s as simple as that.” Antic was taken into hotel quarantine on Thursday evening for 14 days, which is a requirement for unvaccinated travellers. That called into question assurances Morrison had given the public that the senator was “double dose vaccinated”. In the 35-minute InfoWars video, which Christensen shared with his followers on Monday, the Nationals MP laughed as Jones compared Australia’s Covid-19 quarantine facilities with Auschwitz because they both had “big fences”. “The rest of the free world, please stand with us, please support us, and every time we see people out there protesting, whether it be in front of an embassy or elsewhere, protesting for our rights in Australia, it really does embolden the patriots, the people who are for freedom in our country to stand up,” Christensen said. In a statement, Morrison on Tuesday afternoon said: “I denounce the comments in the strongest possible terms.” “The Holocaust was an evil abomination. Respect for the victims requires that it never be referenced in such a trivial and insensitive manner,” the prime minister said. Christensen, who announced in April he will retire at the 2022 election, is a growing problem for the Coalition. The MP crossed the floor on government legislation in the final sitting fortnight of parliament and called for civil disobedience in response to vaccine mandates. The Nationals leader, Barnaby Joyce, has previously said he won’t demand Christensen desist from contradicting public health advice about the effectiveness of masks and lockdowns because the Coalition governs with a “thin margin” and if you “start prodding the bear, you’re going to make the situation worse”. But on Tuesday the acting leader, Littleproud, said: “I condemn his comments and I think it was an error of judgment for him to go on that program.” “We want to work constructively with George, but know that there are limits and there are boundaries that we as federal politicians have to adhere to. “He is a respected member of the party room, and we want to have a conversation with him about respecting the party room back.” Littleproud later confirmed he’d spoken to Christensen “about his judgment on going on the show” and said the MP agreed with “some of my comments”. “He understands both my position and the views of the party room.” The former Nationals leader, Michael McCormack, told ABC TV that Christensen’s comments were “reprehensible”, “needed to be called out” and were “embarrassing” to the Nationals. McCormack said instead of saying how Australia had “protected lives and livelihoods” during the pandemic, Christensen “chose to condemn our country, he chose to rubbish our country on the world stage, and for that I think he should be condemned”. “[Embassy staff] need all the protection, all the safeguards they can get, they don’t need an MP encouraging people who aren’t even Australians, protesting up the front of those embassies.” McCormack said Joyce “needs to call this out as soon as he is able to”. Joyce, who is in London, subsequently posted on Twitter: “I have contacted him [Christensen] twice in the night to affirm that any parallel of domestic policy with the abomination which was the holocaust requires an immediate rebuke.” “I have asked Mr Christensen to be far more aware of any platform he speaks on and to ask himself of the history of those platforms and if participation on it is wise,” Joyce wrote. Nationals MP Darren Chester also weighed in to distance himself from “conspiracy theories, lack of respect and ill-informed comments”. In November, Jones was found liable for damages in lawsuits brought by parents of children killed in the Sandy Hook elementary school shooting, over Jones’s claim the massacre was a hoax. In a 2019 court deposition, Jones described his conspiracy thinking as a kind of mental disorder, blaming his false statements about the massacre on “psychosis”. Joyce, who is in the UK, initially responded to the controversy through a spokesperson stating: “A conversation has been had with Mr Christensen. While the deputy prime minister doesn’t agree with the comments made, Mr Christensen has the right to say what he believes.” On Tuesday, Labor MP Andrew Leigh called on Morrison to condemn Christensen’s comments. Leigh later slammed Joyce for his muted response, accusing him of being unable “to really recognise he’s the deputy prime minister”. “Once you’re playing footsies with Alex Jones, one of the great conspiracy theorists of the age, you’ve really got to worry about what George Christensen is doing,” he said. “You can be sure if it was somebody on the left of politics, Scott Morrison would be out there quick as a flash having a go at them, saying that they ought to be denounced. “But when it’s George Christensen … people like that seem to get a free pass from the prime minister.” In November, when Labor urged Morrison to directly condemn Christensen, the prime minister replied that he condemned “any encouragement, any encouragement whatsoever by any person in any place regarding acts of civil disobedience”. In July, Morrison defended Christensen for his anti-lockdown activism in Queensland, stating Australians have “free speech” and can attend rallies where public health orders allow. Later on Tuesday, Christensen wrote on his Telegram channel that the criticism had been “fake news”, “political elitist handwringing” and “such hyperventilation”.Traditional owners say they will keep fighting to stop a nuclear waste dump planned for South Australia. Late last month, the federal government confirmed a facility will be built at Napandee, 24km from Kimba, and it is beginning the regulatory and design processes. However, the Barngarla people say they’ve been excluded from consultation and will now lodge an application for a judicial review of the entire project. The first hearing is expected to be in March – the month the SA election is due and the federal election could be held. That could then be appealed and the case could end up in the high court, and in a different political context. Plans to build a nuclear waste facility in South Australia have been thwarted for more than two decades. After a series of governments, inquiries, and a state royal commission, one was meant to be operational in 2020. Now it is planned for 2030. Barngarla Determination Aboriginal Corporation chair Jason Bilney said if they win the legal challenge, it opens the way for the government to nominate other sites. “They didn’t include us from the start,” he said. “What we’ve always hoped for and fought for is to stop the nuclear waste dump because it should never be built on Napandee. It didn’t have our support,” he said. A ballot of ratepayers found more than 60% supported the facility. The traditional owners say they were excluded because they do not live in the council area. They held a separate ballot, in which they unanimously rejected the proposal. Bilney said if you added those two ballots together, the support would have been less than half. “This [judicial review] will delay it,” he said. “Everyone has the right to question this government and the processes they go through.” Bilney also said the site was just a “Band-Aid solution” and echoed conservationists who are pushing for the low and intermediate level waste to be stored at the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation’s facility at Lucas Heights. Ansto says a purpose-built facility is crucial, and in line with international best practice. Resources minister Keith Pitt said the facility would be a “critically important piece of national infrastructure” because “it’s now estimated that every Australian will benefit from nuclear medicine during their lifetime, either through diagnosis or treatment”. Pitt said the government remained “fully committed” to the project and would continue to engage with the community, with the timeline determined by regulatory processes. “It’s anticipated the facility will begin receiving waste after 2030,” he said. The Australian Conservation Foundation said it was a “long way from a done deal”. “This plan will face scrutiny in the federal court, but it also needs to face the court of public opinion. The government needs to give Australians, particularly South Australians and the Barngarla people, a genuine say about this plan and its inter-generational risks and impacts,” campaigner Dave Sweeney, said.What do you do when your family has deep ties to the oil and gas industry, yet all agree that burning fossil fuels is accelerating the climate crisis? For one family, the fossil fuel industry’s role in stoking the climate emergency is more than just a dinner table debate. It’s their legacy. Andy and Wendy met in the 70s while working as engineers for Exxon. They spent decades working in oil and gas while raising their children. Now retired, Andy and Wendy drove from their home in Washington state to spend the holidays with their son, James, and their daughter, Liz, who has two young sons with her husband, Dara. The family sat down with the Guardian the day before Thanksgiving to discuss how the three generations view the climate crisis and how the family reckons with their fossil fuel connection. Participants include: Andy, 65, retired engineer, Wendy, 62, retired engineer Liz, 33, environmental safety manager Dara, 35, Liz’s husband and engineer James, 31, IT consultant Andy and Wendy, you met while working at Mobile? Andy: In those days, we were doing synthetic fuels. We were trying to address the energy crisis by making new kinds of fuels. And Wendy and I met in that group. After the merger with Exxon, they moved us from New Jersey down to Texas, there was a big group of us that made that move. That forms certain bonds. In that group, was global warming even part of the conversation? Wendy: We talked more about air quality and what was happening from burning fossil fuels. There’s so much pollution in Houston that sometimes the kids’ sports were canceled because of air quality. So we talked more about the downside of fossil fuels around air quality than global warming. We bought a Prius in 2004, right when Priuses came out, and drove it to Exxon every day. There was this whole conversation with all of our co-workers about driving a Prius. Andy: Colleagues were giving me the eyeball. They just didn’t understand why anyone would ever do such a thing. Liz and James, do you remember when you first became aware of what your parents did for work? Liz: In the 90s there were a lot of Bring Your Kids to Work days. And so I used to go with my dad into work when he worked at Mobile. But it wasn’t until high school that I really understood what the oil and gas industry is and how it impacts people. James: For me, it was a byproduct of us moving around. Because of the merger with Exxon Mobil, we relocated a couple times so people would ask me, oh, are your parents in the military? And I had to say, no, they’re oil and gas. Did you guys feel uncomfortable when you were younger telling people your parents worked in fossil fuels? Liz: I don’t remember feeling a sense of shame then. But I felt a very strong pull when I was in college to go into a career where I could reverse the effects of climate change. I studied environmental science at the University of Washington. And it was also in college that I learned about how long Exxon had known about climate change and had covered it up. I felt strongly that I don’t want to purchase Exxon gas. James: I was in high school at the time of the BP spill, the Deepwater Horizon, and so being in Bellingham, which is such a liberal area, obviously a lot of my peers were very upset about it. I was upset about it. But at the same time, my mom was working for BP. [To Wendy] You were wanting to defend your company. And so there were a lot of words said: this could have happened to anyone, there was a significant amount of risk getting taken in the Gulf at the time, a lot of companies were cutting corners. But, you know, you still have to hold people responsible for the choices that they make. Liz: I was deeply disturbed by the incident, more so than maybe anyone else in the family. What really aggrieved me was the fact that people are still continuing to fill up their cars with gas every day. And maybe they’re boycotting BP gas, but by continuing to consume, people are contributing to the problem. And so there’s this awful hypocrisy in that after each of these incidents. We can all play the blame game and yet there hasn’t been any shift away from consuming gasoline and diesel. Andy: I wouldn’t say there’s not been any shift. Liz: Maybe. Slow and gradual. Andy: Right, right not fast enough for where we want. Wendy, you worked for BP when that spill happened. Can you speak a little bit about that? Wendy: It really affected me. The environmental part, of course, but the safety part in terms of the loss of life of colleagues. I mean, I started tearing up hearing the kids talking about it right now. It was a total moral reckoning. It became apparent that the fossil fuel industry is wrong on so many levels. I realized I lost my way. I started in synthetic fuels and the path led to conventional oil and gas. But at that point, I was so far along in the industry. I had two kids in college, so I asked myself ‘what can I do within this industry to do something impactful and valuable?’ That’s why I accepted a safety project in Alaska. What are the family conversations about fossil fuels like at the dinner table? Dara: What I like about the conversations that we have with Andy and Wendy: I think we hold them accountable. Your generation, you guys got us in this mess and they admit that. I mean, I don’t think you guys disagree. Liz: I remember the first time that I picked my own electricity provider and there was a 100% renewable option and I was so excited about it. The first thing I did was call my dad and say, Dad, tell me you’re purchasing 100% renewable power. Then a year later, we started with a garden and I bought a big composting bin for the back yard. And calling Dad, hey Dad, you guys are composting, right? Liz, it’s hard to imagine you came to this career in environmental protection accidentally, that it’s unconnected from your parents’ career choices. Going into college, I just knew I wanted to do the opposite [of my parents]. I wanted to do everything that I could to deter climate change. And I spent the first 11 years of my career working in the oil and gas industry and in the environment, health and safety field, and there’s a lot of opportunities to talk about sustainability within that framework. But my personal experience is, you can be as loud as you want but unless you have buy-in from the top, it’s not going to happen. There are plenty of energy companies out there who see environmental social governance reporting as the latest way to pacify shareholders without driving real change. Andy and Wendy, what comes up hearing Liz say that she wanted to do the opposite of what you had done, career-wise? Andy: Liz, we can feel her passion and she does push us. And that’s a positive influence. We’re feeling the push. That’s our way of saying we’re not stuck in the blame game. That’s very complicated. But no matter what, that’s all in the past. Liz and Dara, your kids are three and five. How has the arrival of this newest generation changed things? Wendy: When we sit down to Thanksgiving dinner, we’re having stuffed acorn squash, the vegan version. The climate for us is a big part of our plant-based eating. So, you know, we’ll have that conversation with the boys around why there’s not a turkey on the table. Liz: The previous generation, the way people talked about race was in coded and polite ways. And now we talk openly about racism and Black Lives Matter. It’s the same thing to me with climate change. We’re not beating around the bush. We have books for our kids about climate change. And when we tell them bedtime stories, it’s about climate change. We want them to understand it and name it and talk to their friends about it. Dara: I think Liz and I disagree a little bit. When I do night-time stories about climate change with the five-year-old, it opens up a can of worms of questions on why did this happen? Who did it? I don’t know if it’s necessarily healthy for him to know all of that information. And sometimes I don’t even have the answers. This story is published as part of Covering Climate Now, a global collaboration of news outlets strengthening coverage of the climate storyHundreds of cases of the new Omicron Covid-19 variant have now been confirmed in the UK and experts have called for a renewed focus on vaccination rates. As of 4 December, just over eight in 10 people aged 12 or older UK-wide had received two doses of a coronavirus vaccine, according to data from the UK Health Security Agency, while 89% had received a first dose. This means about 6 million eligible people may still be unvaccinated, based on ONS population figures as opposed to counts of GP records. So who are they? Young people Detailed age breakdowns for England and Scotland reveal it is largely young people who are not yet fully vaccinated. About 60% of under-40s in both nations have received two doses, compared with over 90% of those aged 40 or over. About a third of English 18-24-year-olds have not yet been double-jabbed, falling to 30% of those aged 25 to 29. The government dashboard does not provide an age breakdown for Wales or Northern Ireland. Scotland has been more successful in giving the vaccine to young people, according to Guardian analysis. Just under two-thirds of those aged 18 or under in Scotland have received a first dose, compared with 53% in England. Dr Kit Yates, a senior lecturer at the University of Bath, said: “For young adults, the reasons behind the lower uptake may more be due to messaging than to accessibility. The government chose to remove all restrictions on 19 July before everyone in the country had been offered the opportunity to be jabbed. The message that sends is that it is not important for young people to be vaccinated, so it’s unsurprising to see the lower uptake rates in these younger age groups. “Rather than encouraging young people to get the jab by emphasising the benefits of vaccination to the individuals themselves, government ministers like Michael Gove have decried young people who have not had the jab as selfish. “In contrast to other countries, England has not instated vaccine passes for entry into nightclubs and other venues. Such measures have been credited with improving vaccine take-up in younger people in countries like France.” Older people However, there are still big disparities in vaccination uptake at a local level, even among older age groups. In some local authorities, virtually all adults aged 60-plus have received two doses of a vaccine. However, in Westminster, only 68% of the 60-plus population are fully vaccinated, the lowest in the country. The other areas with the lowest vaccination rates are also in the capital: in Camden, Tower Hamlets and Kensington and Chelsea, at least a fifth of those in the 60-plus age group have not yet received a second dose. London has consistently lagged behind other regions in terms of vaccination coverage. In some parts of the city, highly mobile populations and large numbers of second homes may mean vaccination figures look worse than they really are; however, problems with reaching marginalised groups are also a factor. Black and Asian people Vaccination rates also vary by ethnicity, with disparities again visible even among older age groups. A fifth of black people aged 80 or older remain unvaccinated, the highest proportion of any ethnic group, according to data from OpenSAFELY using records from GP practices. By contrast, virtually all white people aged 80 or older have been vaccinated, while about 10% of south Asian people in the same age group have not yet been jabbed. An official report published last week found that poor vaccine coverage was a cause of severe Covid in some black and Asian groups, despite programmes to improve underwhelming vaccine uptake. Booster jabs The UK is pinning its hopes on the swift deployment of booster jabs to deal with the threat posed by the Omicron variant, and the government is aiming for half a million jabs a day. The latest data shows that 60% of the UK’s population aged 40 or over has received a third coronavirus vaccination, with younger age groups expected to be called in coming weeks. Again, the local authorities with the lowest booster vaccination rates are in London: just 36% of Tower Hamlets residents have received a third vaccination, while the rate in Westminster and Newham was about four in 10.It is the Ashes series that flirted with postponement but, barring unexpected late hiccups or early rain, the world’s highest ranked bowler and batsman, Pat Cummins and Joe Root, will lead their teams out to a packed Gabba on Wednesday morning to begin the latest chapter in Test cricket’s most storied rivalry. “There’s Test cricket and then there’s Ashes cricket,” Root proclaimed, among the wave of pre-series interviews in which he and Cummins, the nascent home captain, have featured during a buildup period of little actual cricket. While Australia’s recent T20 World Cup victory overseas did not penetrate the zeitgeist, their public have woken up for the old enemy’s arrival and the longest format’s return after a year of remarkable patience. Both captains have smiled in the main, Root comfortably engaging with the notion that a tenure of 56 Tests and an English record 27 wins will now be defined by the next six weeks. Six sublime centuries and 1,455 runs this year mean the 30‑year‑old could seldom have wished for better personal form attempting this moonshot in a country of past demons. Come the fifth Test in the 2013-14 whitewash Root was dropped the one and only time as Mitchell Johnson vaporised a whole era and four years later he spent the last rites of his side’s schooling laid out in the SCG dressing room with an awful gastro bug. At least his stomach was spared the big hands on the podium that read 4-0. Those results meant that when England named their squad in October there was little optimism to be found among followers, even if India did come from behind to triumph on Australian soil this year and broke a 32-year unbeaten record at the Gabba in the process. Perhaps this scepticism remains the case for many. Yet a succession of events has seemingly nudged England’s prospects up a touch, be it Ben Stokes announcing a return, the La Niña weather system that could assist Root’s predominantly fast‑medium attack when playing in the east, or the Tim Paine “sexting” scandal that forced Australia into a late change of captain. Confirmation on Monday that England will not face the bouncier clay soil of Perth in the fifth Test but rather an alternative venue and a possible second pink-ball day-night match, adds to this sense of a clear underdog getting further breaks. More will be needed, not least for a side described by the returning Gabba crowd favourite Stuart Broad as “the worst prepared in the modern era” in terms of their warm-up cricket. If there is one lament shared on both sides of the Ashes divide it is that Jofra Archer is absent with an elbow injury. There will be no repeat of the searing spells witnessed during the drawn 2019 series in which Australia overcame their Stokes-inflicted Headingley meltdown and retained the urn they again defend. Nevertheless Root should be able to unleash Mark Wood’s 90mph-plus pace for the first time in Australia, albeit selectively to maximise his impact. Having Stokes back is arguably the greatest plus: Root looked lost without the talismanic vice-captain alongside him four years ago to an extent that Ricky Ponting dubbed him a “little boy” and a nerve was struck. This void was created by the Bristol street fight eight weeks before the tour and something on which Australia’s players then capitalised at the Gabba. Details of a “headbutt” by Jonny Bairstow on Cameron Bancroft in a Perth bar upon England’s arrival were teased over the stump mic in Brisbane but also kept deliberately vague thereafter to generate a distracting media storm. Nathan Lyon also spoke of “ending careers” before that 10‑wicket victory. But, in this post-sandpaper era, and with both the Paine affair and the Yorkshire racism scandal still raw, the phoney war has been practically non‑existent so far. Instead we have two sides who should, with luck, look to let performances do the talking in the image of their respective captains (even if shared hotels all tour could yet lead to familiarity breeding a degree of contempt). Root versus Cummins certainly looks the most enticing of encounters, a rare chance to see two Ashes captains in direct contest on the field. Cummins has had Root’s number seven times in their 10 previous encounters by relentlessly targeting a fourth‑stump line with the odd full straight one. But then never before has the Yorkshireman’s bat looked so thick and glowing as it has done in 2021. Of course it may well be that Steve Smith follows another year starved of the format that consumes his world and now unloads his latest landslide of runs to settle matters. Like the virus that has stalked the logistics of this tour for months, thoughts of outright elimination here are futile. But suppression of the vice-captain’s output, such as India achieved when keeping him to a mortal average of 44, and things could open up for the tourists. Not that Australia are a one-man batting lineup, a charge levelled at England all year given Root has scored 976 more runs than the next best, Rory Burns. David Warner, with confidence back after the T20 World Cup win, is a different beast at home from the one emasculated by Broad and the Dukes ball two years ago, while the Smith-acolyte Marnus Labuschagne also averages 72 in Australia. The attack that England will initially deploy was a source of speculation two days out. While Australia boldly named their XI on Sunday, and now have a fourth seamer in the hulking all-rounder Cameron Green, Root and Chris Silverwood were still staring at the pitch and forecast trying to decide theirs. And, though Stokes now offers a route into the side for Jack Leach’s left-arm spin, a desire not to overburden the all-rounder after four months out, and a possible rain-affected match, may yet lead to a five-man pace attack. Either way, Jimmy Anderson, 39 and needing further preparation time, is to be kept on ice until the more swing-friendly pink ball second Test next week. Broad, Ollie Robinson and Chris Woakes (if not two plus Leach) will be trying to emulate the Indian attack that triumphed in Australia 12 months ago, with Wood picked to transcend the older ball and bounce out the lower order. When it is their time to bat, all four know they will get the same treatment however. Australia’s attack, one in which the immaculate Josh Hazlewood and the mercurial Mitchell Starc are down to share the new ball initially, will be able to charge all series with baying crowds fully behind them. Where once Ashes newcomers such as Haseeb Hameed and Ollie Pope might draw comfort from a strong English presence in the stands – so, too, the bowlers when the Kookaburra ball goes flat – they will have only a smattering of expat support because of the pandemic. A Queensland border that will stay as impenetrable as its State of Origin team’s front row until next week also means swaths of media personnel from both countries will start the series watching from afar. Fingers are now crossed that the South Australian government does not boomerang its recent reopening and prevent those based in Victoria and New South Wales from attending the second Test in Adelaide. Root acknowledged how unusual this all was 48 hours before the all-important toss. But when the first ball comes fizzing down at Australia’s traditional Ashes stronghold, familiar feelings should come flooding back. Will a familiar result follow? As has always been the case since the two countries first met on a cricket field in 1877, the beauty is in finding out.For more than two decades, Texan civil engineer Rasmy Hassouna was a contractor for the city of Houston. Hassouna has consulted the city on soil volatility in the nearby Gulf of Mexico – a much needed service to evaluate the structural stability of houses and other buildings. He was gearing up to renew his government contract when a particular legal clause caught his eye: a provision that effectively banned his company, A&amp;R Engineering and Testing, Inc, from ever protesting against the nation of Israel or its products so long as his company was a partner with the city of Houston. For Hassouna – a 59-year-old proud Palestinian American – it was a huge shock. “I came here and thought I was a free man. It’s not anybody’s business what I do or what I say, as long as I’m not harming anybody,” he told the Guardian. “Were you lying all this time? If I don’t want to buy anything at WalMart, who are you to tell me not to shop at WalMart? Why do I have to pledge allegiance to a foreign country?” But Hassouna’s reaction did not stop at anger. He took action, launching a case that is challenging the Texas law and – by example – similar provisions that have spread all over the US that seek to stop government contractors from boycotting Israel and can be found in more than 25 US states. Along with the Arkansas Times newspaper, A&amp;R Engineering and Testing Inc is now one of only two companies fighting this kind of law in the nation. Hassouna’s case – which was filed on his behalf by the Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR) – will be heard in federal court on Tuesday and is based on the idea that such laws violate free speech. If ruled unconstitutional, the 2019 ban on boycotting Israel will be illegal in the state of Texas. But Hassouna’s decision to sue is not without a price. It could cost him a substantial amount of his yearly revenue, his lawyer said. “They weren’t counting on Rasmy Hassouna from Gaza, whose family has suffered so greatly. He believes that Americans have the right to boycott whatever entity, foreign or domestic, that they want to. That’s what he’s doing – putting his money where his mouth is,” said Gadeir Abbas, a senior litigation attorney for CAIR who is representing Hassouna. Hassouna first set foot on American soil in 1988. Like many immigrants, Hassouna’s first experience of the US was New York’s JFK airport. However, his final destination was the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, the university at which he planned to study civil engineering. “Regardless how long it was going to take or how hard I had to work, I was going to keep aiming toward my goal,” he said. As a Palestinian under Israeli occupation, Hassouna had no claim to citizenship, so he had to get permission from Israeli officials in order to leave his home in Gaza, an area described by humanitarian organizations and politicians as an open-air prison. “For almost two months every day, I left the house and I took a cab to the center of Gaza city. I gave [Israeli officials] my government application, my ID. I went to the gate and waited from 7 in the morning until 5 in the evening. You’re looking at the month of June and July in the sun, just standing there.” After two months Hassouna finally secured clearance to travel to the United States for his university studies. Since Palestine is not recognized as a country, he was not issued a passport, but rather an Israeli travel document that stumped customs agents at every step of the journey. When the time came for Hassouna to leave for the US, his neighborhood in Gaza was placed under a curfew. This meant that he had to escape under the cover of night if he was to make his flight. He recalled walking five miles behind his father, luggage in tow, to his cousin’s house, an area just outside the designated curfew zone. That was the last time he saw his father, who died before they could meet again. Hassouna’s college experience was not unlike that of most American students. He recalled living with three roommates and surviving off the modest stipend from his teaching assistant position. After graduating, Hassouna moved to Houston, Texas, in August 1992. Though he had a comprehensive background in his field, Hassouna’s early career was uncertain and tumultuous. He worked odd jobs at a Stop N Go gas station and convenience store before becoming a technician. “Back then, I would work 11-7 at the convenience store and 8-5 at the company. One of my students [from South Dakota] was my supervisor, making three or four times what I was making. She used to come and ask me for advice.” Finally, he was hired for an engineering position at another company with a starting pay of $24,000 – what he described as half of what most engineers were making at the time. Hassouna has come a long way since then. Along the way, he got married and had two now-teenage sons. His mother died a few years after his father, but due to travel and visa restrictions for Gaza, Hassouna was unable to see her or attend the funeral. In 2005, Hassouna became an American citizen. His place of birth listed on his certificate of citizenship read ‘Israel,’ a statement with which he took issue. “I went to the lady who was giving the certificates away and told her I didn’t want Israel on my certificate. She told me to go to the immigration center and that they would take care of it. I explained to them that my place of birth was not Israel, it was the Gaza Strip in Palestine. They told me ‘Palestine was not in the system.’” Hassouna handed the certificate back to the immigration official and asked them to return his green card to him, explaining he would rather not be a citizen than be designated as Israeli by birth. After much deliberation, the immigration office conceded and mailed him a new certificate with his place of birth listed as ‘Gaza Strip’. In 1999, he and his friend Alfred started their own company, A&amp;R (Alfred and Rasmy) Engineering. Together, they secured contract work for the city of Houston. Some 25 years later, Alfred has sold his share in the company to Hassouna, who is now the sole owner. Now, Hassouna’s loyalty to his homeland is being tested. After reading the most recent city contract, he wrote a letter to the city asking them to remove the Israel boycott ban clause from the contract, arguing that it was his constitutional right to choose that his company boycott Israel if he so desired. City officials said it was out of their hands. Now it is in the hands of a judge. If things don’t go Hassouna’s way, he said he is more than prepared to suffer the financial consequences. “I want to stay working with the city and any other government entity. The thing is, I want to do it with my freedom intact and my dignity intact,” he said. • This article was amended on 9 December 2021 to clarify in the text and subheading that the Texan legal provision concerned applies only to companies, not individuals.“Football is a private sector business and has flourished that way. Enforcing a philosophy akin to Maoist collective agriculturalism (which students of The Great Leap Forward will know culminated in the greatest famine in history) will not make the English game fairer, it will kill the competition which is its very lifeblood.” – Angus Kinnear, Leeds United chief executive, on the government’s fan-led review of football governance. MINUTES OF THE 9TH NATIONAL CONGRESS OF THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY, APRIL 1964, BEIJING (translation) Chairman Mao Zedong Comrades, allow me to say a few words. I address you at a moment of great victory. Our skies are brightly lit. The imperialist European Super League is heading for total collapse, the capitalist roaders have been defeated and socialism is advancing to worldwide triumph. But still greater victories must yet be won. Our class enemies – the bourgeoisie, the revisionists, Florentino Pérez – remain resolute, and dream of seizing back power. Nothing less than an uninterrupted proletarian revolution is required. With this in mind I cede the floor to Comrade Tracey Crouch who will inform you of the decisions we have taken on behalf of the people. [Lively reaction in the hall.] Comrade Crouch I fully endorse the speech given by Chairman Mao. Our country has enjoyed plentiful harvests for many years running, and with courageous leadership we may curb the selfish urges of the landlord classes and ensure that the bounty of our fields is available for all. Greater centralism is vital. It is necessary for a non-subjective committee to adjudicate on the appropriate distribution of grain and other resources: not in a vengeful or violent manner but with the ultimate security and prosperity of the people foremost in its thinking … Comrade Brady of West Ham province, you wish the floor? Comrade Brady Heartfelt thanks, Comrade Crouch. My central point is this: it is the enterprise and genius of individual provinces that has made ours the greatest country in the world. Under the wise oversight of Comrade Moyes, whom we appointed as cadre not once but twice, production is at record levels. We must be allowed to continue our good work, unencumbered by unnecessary bureaucracy and regulation. Comrade Crouch Thank you for your contribution, Comrade Brady. And allow me to offer my personal congratulations on West Ham province finally achieving full capacity at its state‑built grain silo. However, I note that your province has also been needlessly extravagant and wasteful over the years, importing Mexican and Brazilian grain at great cost to your own peasants. A modest and simple levy on such expenditure would fund investment in local agriculture, which over a long period will benefit us all. Comrade Purslow of Aston Villa province, you wish to speak. Comrade Purslow Comrade Crouch, I protest these policies in the strongest terms. This is right‑deviationist thinking of the highest order. Are the larger provinces simply to hand over their hard‑won grain and steel to the smaller provinces, who through their sloth and profligacy have allowed their own people to starve? Allow me to point out, too, that the premier tier of provinces already provides ample restitution to the lower classes in the form of loans and transient labour. Comrade Crouch Comrade Purslow: when your harvest failed a few years ago, and you were consigned to the second rank of provinces under the admirable Comrade Bruce, did you not also draw from the central grain reserve, in order that your people would not suffer famine? All we ask is that a mere fraction of the grain and steel you now so impressively produce be set aside to provide for the greater wealth of the nation. Is this such an intolerable sacrifice? Did you really need to spend £30m on Leon Bailey? Has he even played for you yet? Comrade Purslow Comrade Bailey remains an integral part of our provincial strategy. Comrade Crouch He’s started four league games. Comrade Purslow He’s had a tight thigh. Comrade Crouch Comrade Purslow, please sit down. Comrade Neville, Secretary of the Central Commission for Propaganda, please advise on appropriate disciplinary action. Comrade Neville I will never call for a fellow comrade to be purged. Comrade Crouch So be it. Allow me to take this opportunity to restate the principles of this People-Led Report on Party Governance. Some will argue that our decisions do not go far enough. Some will argue that they leave the dominant imperialist structures in place. However, I will point out that the work of building a socialist revolution is necessarily complex and we are still in its earliest phases. I must also note that those who have spoken out most vehemently against our proposals are not the biggest provinces but those of the middle ranks, who potentially have most to gain from a reorganisation of our party structures. Do they not wish to challenge and surpass the industrial production of their brothers and sisters in London and Manchester? Have they grown fat and complacent during the years of plenty? I can but speculate. With these words, I commend the above policies to the Congress. All Long live the great proletarian revolution! Long live the great, glorious and correct Communist Party of China! Long live our great leader Chairman Mao! Long live! Chairman Mao All right. Let’s break for lunch.When the Covid-19 pandemic began, people working in the trauma field knew the psychological toll would be colossal. In the spring of 2020, I began interviewing professionals about the mental health fallout of the pandemic, specifically its impact on frontline medical staff. During the first wave, two in every five intensive care staff in England reported symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder. That work continued for almost a year, during which time a second wave hit and the initial traumas were exacerbated. But it wasn’t only frontline workers who were experiencing trauma symptoms: Covid has posed perhaps the biggest threat to mental health in England since the second world war. Now, at the tail end of 2021, the pandemic is still not over. The NHS forecasts that nationally, there will be 230,000 new cases of PTSD as a result of Covid-19. It is not only social care and medical staff who will be affected. Those who lost loved ones, and those who have been very ill or hospitalised (35% of Covid-19 patients who were put on a ventilator go on to experience extensive symptoms of PTSD) may also suffer. Then there are those living with the effects of domestic and sexual abuse, which may have worsened due to lockdown, and children and young people whose lives changed immeasurably due to our shift to a state of emergency. I imagine that some women whose birthing experiences were marked by the pandemic will also be experiencing symptoms. Unfortunately, the current system is still not fully equipped to deal with this explosion in trauma cases. The Royal College of Psychiatrists says the NHS is already facing the biggest backlog in its history of those waiting for mental health help. As of September, 1.6 million people were waiting for treatment, and the college says that more funds than those committed to by the government are desperately needed, including for extra psychiatry training places. Record numbers of children and young people – almost double pre-pandemic levels in the months leading up to September – are seeking access to mental health services, while a report by Buttle UK warns that a generation of children, especially those on low incomes, faces years of trauma and mental health problems as a result of Covid-19. Although PTSD is still very much associated with veterans in the minds of the public, there does seem to be a broader comprehension of the condition and its symptoms than there was before the pandemic. It is not a mental health condition that made headlines much in pre-pandemic times, and media coverage has no doubt made people more aware of its existence. The “trauma bible” The Body Keeps the Score, by Bessel van der Kolk, has been a regular feature in the bestseller charts, and new books and memoirs are being commissioned by publishers. Among younger people, trauma memes and tweets proliferate, and there appears to be less stigma in talking about what PTSD actually entails, with terms such as “trigger” and “depersonalisation” or “derealisation” becoming more commonly used. Unfortunately some of these words, especially trigger, have also become co-opted as part of a culture war which paints those who experience “triggering” as being oversensitive. The ignorant response to Labour MP Nadia Whittome taking time off work due to post-traumatic stress earlier this year, which included comments that she couldn’t have PTSD because she hadn’t been in a war, shows how much work still needs to be done. While it’s positive to see increased discussion of this issue, more in-depth and empathic media exposure would be beneficial, including firsthand accounts of the disorder. What use is knowing the terminology if it isn’t underpinned by an understanding of what having PTSD actually feels like? So many sufferers I have spoken to only began to realise that what they had was a real, treatable mental health condition when they read about others’ experiences or heard them speak. A trauma sufferer may experience the symptoms of depersonalisation – a dreamlike, detached state of being outside yourself and floating through life at a distance from it – without realising that this might have anything to do with the traumatic events that they lived through. Or they might be having horrific nightmares which, on the surface, share little in terms of content with what happened to them. Anthologies such as Trauma, which was published by Dodo Ink last year and to which I contributed, show how diverse and multifaceted a mental health condition PTSD can be. As ever with mental health, greater awareness can only be a good thing, but it must also be underpinned by real structural support and change. What good is it if, after finally recognising that her symptoms might be PTSD and that effective treatments are available, a patient then spends months and months languishing on a waiting list? With PTSD, early support is absolutely key to your chances of recovery, and yet the system is facing an unprecedented backlog. The saddest thing about all this is that PTSD is eminently treatable, but the longer the pandemic goes on and the longer people are kept waiting, the more difficult it will become to do so. Volunteer therapists were used to plug the gaps in services, but they need to make a living. One of the things I heard about most in my reporting is how further Covid waves have compounded the initial trauma to result in, for some, complex or type two PTSD. That is usually seen in war veterans and victims of child abuse – people who have been exposed to repeated, sustained traumas. It is more difficult to treat and has poorer outcomes. The explosion of post-traumatic stress disorder is a medical emergency, and a further strain on our creaking services. Without proper action and investment, it is a national mental health crisis in the making. Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett is a Guardian columnistA woman with cerebral palsy was sexually assaulted in a public park after her disability accommodation provider refused to let her meet her date in her own home, the disability royal commission has heard. Kicking off a seven-day session on Tuesday, the inquiry will examine the issues of violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation in disability services through the case study of two disability group homes run by an NDIS provider. It is also exploring the right of people with disabilities to have sexual relationships, and the need for NDIS providers to safely facilitate this. The inquiry heard evidence from Sophie, the pseudonym given to a 34-year-old woman who lives with cerebral palsy, epilepsy, a mild to moderate intellectual disability and left hemiplegia, which means she is paralysed on that side. Sophie, in her twenties when she was assaulted, said she was treated like a child by Life Without Barriers staff, which she “hated”. At one home she was not allowed to have a key to the property, and at a second house, in Lismore, staff would enter her room without knocking. She was also banned from having male visitors after 6pm and couldn’t be alone with a male guest with the door closed. This included a man who she’d formed a committed relationship with – and who became her fiance – after they met at a day program. Asked how she felt that her fiance, who lived in Ballina, was not allowed to stay the night because it would be a “hindrance”, Sophie said she felt hurt. “I’m an adult. I’m not a kid,” she told the inquiry. Sophie sent a written complaint to Life Without Barriers, but did not receive a response, she said. After that relationship broke down, Sophie told the inquiry she began online dating and had one casual sexual experience, which she enjoyed. In September 2017, she went on a date with a man she met online. The man took her for a takeaway dinner, and then to an isolated park, where he sexually assaulted her, the hearing was told. Sophie was in hospital for three days. The attacker was eventually charged, convicted and imprisoned, the inquiry heard. Counsel assisting the commission, Patrick Griffin SC, said he would not “invite the commission to make any finding that sexual assault in this case was caused by [Life Without Barriers]”. “However, it remains important to assess whether [Life Without Barriers’s] response to Sophie’s desire to have an intimate relationship was appropriate to facilitate her goals of intimacy [and] whether the response frustrated those goals,” he said. The inquiry heard Sophie had wanted the man to visit her at home where she “felt most comfortable”, or “on her own turf”, as she put it. “However, the rules [imposed by Life Without Barriers] required her to leave home if she wanted to date, or even spend time with a person after 6pm,” Griffin said. In the aftermath, Sophie said her support workers became “cold”, declining to talk with her and reducing the amount of support they provided. Sophie’s parents, known to the inquiry as Greg and Michelle, were angry Sophie had been allowed to go on the date with the man. The inquiry was told the man, who arrived at 9pm, had expressed surprise to be picking Sophie up from a disability group home. Greg said this should have been a trigger for staff to intervene, at least by inviting the man inside for a further conversation. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning However, they also acknowledged Sophie’s right to have sexual relationships. Greg and Michelle also questioned Life Without Barriers’s response. They said the organisation did not provide counselling, though Sophie received some counselling support through the director of public prosecutions. In a meeting with a Life Without Barriers manager, Michelle said she was told “Sophie had put the other residents at risk” and that staff were “too frightened to do night shift because they didn’t know if anybody would turn up”. “And as a result they had to pay for security cameras around the house,” Michelle said. “That was their only conversation they had about the sexual assault.” Griffin said the royal commission would probe the response of the provider’s leadership and managers, rather than individual support workers, throughout the later hearings. Life Without Barriers is expected to be called as a witness during this week’s hearings. Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467; Kids helpline 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636Senior health officials have rejected claims made by Gerard Rennick that Covid-19 vaccinations amount to “experimenting” on children after the Liberal senator questioned the safety of the vaccine for children aged five to 11 in a Senate inquiry. It comes after Rennick posted anti-vaccine content on Facebook making similar claims. At a fiery hearing on Tuesday, the head of the Therapeutic Goods Administration, John Skerritt, rejected suggestions it was “nothing much” for children to catch Covid-19 and warned that misinformation was hindering its work. The chair of the Senate Covid-19 committee, Labor’s Katy Gallagher, urged Rennick to “talk to a few parents whose children have struggled to breathe with Covid”, suggesting he “give [her] a call” – in reference to her daughter’s struggle with the illness. On Sunday the TGA gave provisional approval for a one-third dose of Pfizer’s Covid-19 vaccine to be used in children aged five to 11, who will be added to the rollout from 10 January after a recommendation from the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation. Rennick, who has extensively shared accounts of alleged vaccine adverse events on Facebook that he admits he can’t be sure are “100% accurate”, responded on his page that the TGA approval was “completely irresponsible”. He claimed there were “serious concerns” about the sample size of clinical trials, citing an essay by a doctor of political economy with two years of statistical training who does not have expertise in epidemiology or vaccines. On Tuesday the chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, reiterated that Pfizer is “worthwhile, safe and effective” for children aged five to 11. Kelly said that Australian authorities had received “very reassuring” results from the US Centre for Disease Control, after 5m doses had been administered to children in that age group in the US. These resulted in “vaccine side effects, which generally are very minor and not unexpected”, he said. Kelly said the most concerning side effect was myocarditis or pericarditis, inflammation of the heart or the surrounding of the heart. These were an “extremely rare event” in children – with just four cases after 5m doses had been administered – but had been “amplified … by the misinformation campaign” online, he said. He noted there had been 22,000 Covid cases this year in children aged five to 11 and although “only a very small number” have been hospitalised (1.4%) it was “not a trivial infection”. Kelly cited disruption to children’s schooling and transmission by children with Covid to others. Skerritt added that one in 3,000 children develop multi-system inflammatory syndrome, which is “quite serious and lasts many months”. “I reject the assertion that it’s nothing much for kids and doesn’t matter if they catch [Covid],” Skerritt said. Dr Christopher Blyth, a paediatric infectious disease expert on Atagi, accepted that the “risk benefit” calculation is different in children because Covid tends to be less severe. He accepted that 1,500 sample size for children in clinical trials was “low”, but said there was now a large dataset that would inform its advice. “Do I have significant safety concerns? No I do not,” he said, adding that Atagi would continue to monitor results closely. Both Skerritt and Blyth rejected Rennick’s suggestion this amounted to “experimenting” on children. “That is not an experiment, that is using data to inform the rollout of a program,” Blyth said of using international data from the US. “We don’t have the capacity to wait for seven years for data in the setting of a pandemic.” Skerritt rejected Rennick’s claim it takes seven to 10 years for full clinical trials of other drugs, and said the duration of two-and-a-half months for children’s Covid vaccines was “not all that different” from normal timeframes. Rennick challenged witnesses about alleged unrecorded adverse events. Skerritt replied that the TGA only accepted such reports if experts agreed that evidence establishes on the balance of probabilities that the vaccine had in fact caused the side-effect because there is “no other likely cause”. “If there isn’t cause and effect, it’s not a side-effect of the vaccine,” he said. Gallagher told Rennick it was “not becoming of a member of the government to run the lines you’ve been running in this hearing”. “You’ve got responsibilities you’re not observing,” she said. Rennick replied that he was “merely putting forward the views” of those who had reported adverse events and “don’t want their children vaccinated”. The Australian Medical Association vice-president, Chris Moy, told Guardian Australia that Rennick’s surveys of adverse events were “as far away from science as possible” because they “force one answer he wants”. He said Rennick sought to “portray himself as a Robin Hood figure while inciting distrust and fear … against the scientists and health professionals who have done so much to protect Australia”. “It’s not a fair fight because the vaccines that have been successful protecting us can’t stand up for themselves, the people would never know [that without it they would have got sick].” Rennick told Guardian Australia he does not intend to stop social media advocacy on adverse events and rejected the label of misinformation. “These are people’s stories and [the charge of misinformation is] an insult to those people,” he said. “It’s medical gaslighting of people who are having trouble getting their adverse events recognised. “I’m not going to deny children having Covid is a bad thing … but don’t belittle others whose children have had adverse events.” On Facebook, Rennick said he “definitely won’t be supporting any government legislation” until the approval for children was reversed. “The government has crossed the rubicon.”And with that, we’ll wrap up the blog today. Here’s everything that went down today: The Victorian ombudsman handed down her finding on the Victorian Covid-19 border permit system, describing it as “unjust” and “inhumane”. Thousands of teachers were on strike in NSW today, with the education minister calling it “incredibly disingenuous”. Various political figures reacted to Nationals MP George Christensen’s appearance on rightwing conspiracy theorist Alex Jones’s InfoWars, including Tanya Plibersek who said his comments were “borderline treasonous”. The Reserve Bank of Australia left the cash rate at record low 0.1%. Australia is under pressure after US announced diplomatic boycott of Beijing Winter Olympics. Three new cases of Covid-19 linked to the Omicron variant were detected in the ACT. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said she would not shut the border again, saying it is open for good. NSW recorded 260 new cases and two deaths, Victoria recorded 1,185 new cases and seven deaths, Queensland recorded one new case. Australia has joined the US in calling for the release of Myanmar’s deposed democratically elected leader Aung San Suu Kyi, who has been sentenced to at least two years in detention. The Victorian pandemic powers bill which sparked weeks of protests in Melbourne officially became law. So the federal government is considering citing Covid restrictions as a reason for officials to stay away from the Beijing Winter Olympics. Guardian Australia understands while an announcement could be made soon, the government is unlikely to take as strong a position as the Biden administration, which blasted China over “ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity”. The Australian government was still considering the language to be used, with suggestions that it may not be presented as a boycott. Instead, it is weighing up saying officials will not go because Covid restrictions meant they would mostly be confined to their hotel rooms. You can read more from Daniel Hurst’s yarn at the link below: Operation Covid Shield coordinator Lieut Gen John Frewen fronted a Senate Covid-19 Committee, telling them Australia may look to donate vaccines, and is delaying some imports because current doses are due to expire. Frewen said Australia was looking at donating Pfizer and Moderna to Pacific and South East Asia: We’re still doing management to make sure that doses that are nearing expiry are being used first. We are working to donate if that’s appropriate. We have also delayed some deliveries of mRNA vaccines from overseas to make sure that we haven’t gotten vaccines here that the clock has started ticking on for expiry as well. When every dose was precious, we were making sure that no vial was opened until we had enough people. Now we are saying if you have got a person who needs to be vaccinated they should open a vial ... That means sometimes a vial is being open when they’ve only got one walk in, and then they might not get any more walk-ins for the rest of the day. So you waste nine of the 10 doses. South Korea’s president, Moon Jae-in, will arrive in Australia this weekend for a visit to elevate the status of the relationship between the two countries. There had been speculation that Moon’s visit may be called off as South Korea responds to cases of the Omicron variant, but Scott Morrison issued a statement this evening saying it will go ahead. Moon is due to arrive on Sunday and leave on Wednesday. Morrison said: I am pleased to announce His Excellency Mr Moon Jae-in, President of the Republic of Korea, and Her Excellency Mrs Kim Jung-sook, First Lady of the Republic of Korea, will visit Australia from 12 to 15 December. The Republic of Korea is one of our closest partners in the region, and 2021 marks the 60th anniversary of diplomatic relations between our countries. Our bilateral relationship continues to grow, underpinned by trade, shared values, common regional strategic interests and a commitment to an open, inclusive and prosperous Indo-Pacific region. During President Moon’s visit we will formally elevate the relationship to a Comprehensive Strategic Partnership, reflecting the depth and breadth of our cooperation and people-to-people links, and common aspirations to work even more closely together in our region. The visit has been approved by the ACT and NSW health authorities. A number of risk mitigations will be enforced to ensure the visit is COVID safe, including regular COVID-19 testing and mask wearing. All members of the delegation are fully vaccinated and must submit a negative COVID-19 test 72 hours prior to arrival in Australia. I look forward to welcoming President Moon and the First Lady to Australia. So earlier today, Katy Gallagher told Liberal senator Gerard Rennick to speak with parents whose children struggled to breathe with Covid during a Senate committee on Covid-19. Gallagher’s 14-year-old daughter became sick after contracting Covid-19 earlier this year. Rennick has posted claims from other people about alleged vaccine side-effects on Facebook that he admits may not be “100% accurate”. You can watch the interaction below: A different type of health alert has been issued by ACT Health, warning residents not to touch, pick or eat any wild mushrooms. Acting chief health officer Dr Vanessa Johnston has warned that death cap mushrooms had been spotted in Canberra, likely spurred by the wet weather, and warned against picking or eating any wild mushrooms. We would normally not expect to see death cap mushrooms in the ACT until March or April, but an early growing season is not unheard of with sightings occurring in January this year. As the name suggests, death cap mushrooms can be deadly.” All parts of the mushroom are poisonous and cooking them does not make them safe to eat. The mushrooms usually grow around established oak trees, but can be found anywhere. There have been four deaths associated with death cap mushrooms since 2002. Earlier today Guardian Australia asked Scott Morrison’s office for comment about George Christensen’s appearance on InfoWars with Alex Jones – and encouragement of protests outside Australian embassies. The prime minister responded: I denounce the comments in the strongest possible terms. The Holocaust was an evil abomination. Respect for the victims requires that it never be referenced in such a trivial and insensitive manner. The statement appears to condemn Jones for comparing Australian quarantine to Auschwitz and, possibly, Christensen for laughing along, but not his other contributions to the program. Shadow minister for education and women, Tanya Plibersek is on the ABC’s Afternoon Briefing and was asked her thoughts on George Christensen’s appearance on InfoWars, and did not mince her words. Plibersek said Christensen’s appearance, where he encouraged people to protest at Australian embassys, was “borderline treasonous”: It is gobsmacking. George Christensen is a repeat offender in this sort of behaviour. I think what he is doing is borderline treasonous. It is really extraordinary that an elected member of the Australian parliament should be urging citizens of foreign countries to protest against Australia in this way. I think it is up to the prime minister to pull him into line. It is beyond me why Scott Morrison is not prepared to do that. George Christensen and Craig Kelly and others like them, they used taxpayer-funded communications budgets to spread misinformation and this information to stoke division in our community. To date, our prime minister hasn’t pulled them into line. It is a real failure of his leadership. The NSW Labor leader has hit out at the state’s education minister for her comments earlier today on the teachers’ strike. Labor’s Chris Minns accused education minister Sarah Mitchell of being “inflammatory”, after she called the NSW Teachers Federation an “obstructionist protection racket.” Minns said he was concerned the language used by Mitchell would inflame the ongoing industrial dispute: The emphasis here should not be on throwing mud, it should be on trying to fix this complicated situation. I wonder whether the minister is in fact inflaming the situation and antagonising it, rather than solving. At the end of the day, we were hopeful that 11th hour consultation and negotiations with the unions would stop industrial action in NSW. That doesn’t seem to be the case. Good afternoon all, Mostafa Rachwani back again, with a quick thanks to Caitlin Cassidy for holding the blog down. Much going on, so let’s dive in. With that, I will hand the baton back to Mostafa Rachwani. Before I go, nobody asked, but I’m team Tasmania or the ACT for the fifth Ashes test. Former Nationals leader Michael McCormack is up on Afternoon Briefing responding to his colleague George Christensen’s appearance on right wing conspiracy theorist Alex Jones’s InfoWars. Christensen, among other things, laughed when Jones compared Australia’s Covid quarantine to an Auschwitz concentration camp during the program. McCormack said he watched all 36 minutes of the show, a 36 minutes he would “never get back”: I watched the 36 minute show, 36 minutes of my life I won’t get back, and very much George could be speaking about all the great things happening in Australia today, he could be telling American viewers about the fact that we have saved lives and projected livelihoods through this global pandemic, but no, he chose to condemn our country, he chose to rubbish our country on the world stage, and for that I think he should be condemned. More from Glass on the investigation into the Victorian government’s border scheme. She emphasises she was not critiquing the scheme itself, but the manner in which it was applied, particularly as case numbers in Victoria continued to rise: I didn’t examine every single application, and I couldn’t say whether all of those should have been approved, whether they were legitimate. So I am not suggesting that every decision made by the department was unfair, and I think it is really important that I acknowledge what a fraught environment the department was working in. Trying to deal with a global health crisis. But the examples we saw in this investigation, the people who spoke to us, the complaints we received, just suggested a lack of compassion, you know, a lack of acknowledgement that some people needed to cross the border and needed to have their individual circumstances taken into account. It seemed that the department was putting much more resources into stopping people getting home, than helping them cross the border safely. Ombudsman Deborah Glass is appearing on ABC Afternoon Briefing, discussing her damning report on the Victorian government’s border exemption scheme. An investigation into the scheme found only 8% of applications were granted between July and September: What we saw was a lot of people whose applications didn’t get through to approval at all. We saw a lot of people stranded across the border, because in this bureaucratic merry-go-round where they were asked to supply reams of paperwork which was wholly impractical, people who had to nominate a travel date, but when the travel date passed because the application wasn’t processed in time, found their applications had expired. The list is endless. The angst and the distress that this caused to so many was palpable. Greens leader Adam Bandt has addressed questions over the party’s balance of power in the lead-up to the election. Labor has ruled out strengthening its 2030 climate target if it is forced to negotiate with other parties to form a minority government. Its current targets would reduce emissions by 43% by 2030, which the Greens have argued is too low. Bandt says the Greens don’t want to block Labor’s climate policy, but “improve and pass it”. Labor says they’ll keep the same amount of coal in the system as the Liberals, but that’s not something to be proud of, it’s a recipe for climate collapse. Labor’s plan needs fixing, because it doesn’t shut coal-fired power stations, won’t reduce coal and gas exports and backs the Betaloo methane gas bomb. We’re not about blocking Labor’s climate legislation, we’ll improve and pass it. Likewise, Labor should not let their idea of the perfect be the enemy of the good. The reality is Labor’s climate target is not based on the science. Labor doesn’t want to phase out coal-fired power stations and don’t want to address the pollution from coal and gas exports. I know Labor says their climate policy is a take it or leave it thing, but I think you can file that under ‘things politicians say during an election campaign’. If the people elect a range of voices to parliament, the next government will have to respect that. People are sick of this kind of macho ‘it’s my way or the highway’ politics, especially with something as important as climate. I think Labor’s attitude will turn people off. There is a lot of agreement between us and Labor on renewables ... but there’s more work to do on coal and gas. An update from the protests in New South Wales, where public teachers and principals have been rallying in the Sydney CBD. Those who remain on the streets are braver than I as it’s now bucketing down. The Teachers Federation Union has been calling for more competitive salaries, more sustainable workloads and greater job security. They want a pay increase up to 7.5% a year to reverse the decline in teachers’ wages compared with other professions. There’s just been a potentially significant development in the case against Bernard Collaery. Collaery has been fighting an attempt by the attorney general Michaelia Cash to introduce new secret evidence to attempt to convince the court to hold part of his trial behind closed doors. You might remember that in October, Collaery had a major win in the Australian Capital Territory court of appeal, which overturned secrecy orders hiding significant elements of his case from the public. But lawyers for Cash are now attempting to put fresh evidence, which Collaery cannot see, before a judge to justify the secrecy, saying that the national security situation has changed significantly in the more than 12 months that the court of appeal took to deliver its judgment. Collaery’s lawyers opposed the move, saying it was hugely unfair and would create a never-ending “vortex” of delay and secrecy. Justice David Mossop has just ruled that the government cannot update its evidence or add new evidence in the way that it had desired. But Mossop said the government can, if it wishes, make a new application under the National Security Information (NSI) Act to hide parts of the trial, which would take account of the changed national security circumstances. Collaery is facing trial for his alleged role in revealing an Australian intelligence operation that bugged the offices of the Timor-Leste government during 2004 oil and gas negotiations. He and his client Witness K, a former spy, helped Timor-Leste mount a case before the international courts on behalf of Timor-Leste. Two cases are linked to the Norwood cluster and two arrived from interstate. Residents from a Melbourne aged care home struck by Covid appeared malnourished, dehydrated and “barely conscious” after being transferred to a hospital, an inquest has been told and AAP’s Gus McCubbing reports. Outbreak managers replaced the entire St Basil’s Home for the Aged staff with an emergency workforce on 22 July last year, during Melbourne’s second wave. Within hours of the handover, inexperienced nursing staff were struggling to care for the mostly Greek-speaking residents, who had already missed meals and medicine. The inquest into the Covid deaths of 45 St Basil’s residents and another five residents who likely died of neglect has heard evidence from Victoria Atkinson, who handled the intake of 10 residents evacuated from the Fawkner facility to Bellbird Private Hospital on 25 July. Atkinson said the Blackburn South hospital was converted into a Covid ward within six hours, having only been told St Basil’s residents would arrive the day before. Bellbird staff had to try to learn Greek after St Basil’s residents arrived without identification or medical history. Atkinson: The majority of the patients were soiled on arrival and had pressure injuries and appeared malnourished and dehydrated. Patients were deeply unconscious, had low oxygen level sand were unrousable. There was evidence of poor hygiene care. None were transported with oxygen supplementation. All required intravenous fluids for a number of days. St Basil’s recorded its first Covid case on 9 July before staff were replaced by a commonwealth-sourced surge workforce on 22 July. In other news, it’s heartening to discover Jim Chalmers’ life is full of deeply rewarding, fridge-worthy memories: AFP said police had been investigating Foster for more than six months and his eventual arrest was subject to “a whole heap of things and information”. Queensland police will now seek to extradite him to the state where he will be subject to judicial proceedings. In Canberra, the Australian federal police (AFP) are providing an update on the arrest of wanted fugitive Peter Foster. The 59-year-old man was arrested at a house near Gisborne in the Macedon Ranges and is currently being assessed at the Royal Melbourne Hospital for a medical condition. AFP said he was living “comfortably” at his location: Mr Foster was arrested on the Queensland arrest warrant following his failure to appear in court in May this year, in relation to an allegation of a $2 million fraud. Since that time, the AFP has been working with the police service in trying to locate and apprehend Mr Foster. During the execution of the warrant today, Mr Foster ... disclosed a medical condition and he was subsequently converted to the Royal Melbourne Hospital where he is currently being assessed for his medical condition. The AFP will work tirelessly to apprehend organised criminals of this kind and this should serve as a warning to all criminals that there is nowhere to hide. Read Ben Butler’s story here: Stood-down Collingwood Football Club player Jordan De Goey will appear by video-link on Thursday morning after he was charged with assault in New York in late October. De Goey has been suspended indefinitely from training or playing with the club since the incident. He said he would “vigorously deny” the charges. It’s beginning to feel a bit like groundhog day over here on the east coast: And with that I will be taking a short break from the blog, but leaving you in the capable hands of Caitlin Cassidy. As expected the Reserve Bank of Australia has left its cash rate target at the record-low 0.1% annual rate that it has sat at since November 2020, when the central bank slashed borrowing costs to aid the pandemic-hit economy. The general comments remain upbeat about the revival of economic activity as lockdowns related to the Delta Covid strain end. Philip Lowe, the RBA governor, said in a statement: Household consumption is rebounding strongly and the outlook for business investment has improved. The emergence of the Omicron strain is a new source of uncertainty, but it is not expected to derail the recovery. The economy is expected to return to its pre-Delta path in the first half of 2022. Commentators will note that the language remains one of patience in terms of lifting the interest rate, should inflation gather pace. Lowe doesn’t expect that to happen soon. “While inflation has picked up, it remains low in underlying terms. Inflation pressures are also less than they are in many other countries, not least because of the only modest wages growth in Australia,” he said. “The Board will not increase the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target range.” The bank has put a 2024 time stamp on that, with a proviso of 2023 if there was an inflation surge. Markets, though, have predicted a mid-2022 starting point for official rates to start rising. One other notable point: the RBA is sticking with plans to keep buying $4bn worth of government debt each week until at least mid-February. There had been some expectation that it might stop sooner. By them, the RBA will be the proud owner of $350bn (yes, billion) in federal, state and territory debt. What happens to that in the future will be interesting. Anyway, short of some unforeseen calamity, the RBA board won’t meet again until February 1. Genomic sequencing is underway to determine if an overseas arrival in hotel quarantine in Victoria has been infected with the Omicron variant. The traveller, who is fully vaccinated, arrived from the Netherlands via Abu Dhabi and has been in hotel quarantine since arriving on 3 December. They had returned a negative PCR test initially, but subsequently tested positive with the finding of S gene dropout, indicative of the new variant. The traveller has not been in the community since arriving, with the source of the infection still under investigations. Health authorities say all other passengers on the flight will be assessed and tested. The deputy leader of the Nationals, David Littleproud, says “conversations are happening” within the Australian government about whether to follow the US in a diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics. Littleproud, the agriculture minister, addressed reporters in Canberra today and left the impression that a decision was not about to be announced. He said the Australian government respected the Biden administration’s decision “but we will make our own” decision: “That’ll be a decision for cabinet as we move forward and obviously National Security Committee will make those determinations, and I understand that those conversations are happening. But obviously I can’t make any comment beyond that and I’ll leave that obviously to the prime minister and the foreign minister.” Asked about calls from within the government to follow suit, Littleproud said there would be “divergent views” but backbenchers were not privy to information before the cabinet and its national security committee. “So it’s important that we let that decision process take place while our National Security Committee get to that determination, and I’m sure the prime minister will make a determination with that committee in due course.” Earlier today the minister for sport, Richard Colbeck, reaffirmed the government’s holding line: “A decision on commonwealth representation at the Beijing Winter Olympics is yet to be made.” The ABC is reporting that WA Police have dropped a fraud charge against a nurse in Perth, who was accused of falsely recording giving a teenager the Covid vaccine. Police prosecutors reportedly dropped the charges at the Perth Magistrates Court today, although no reason was given. We’ll bring you more as it comes to light, but you can read on the last update on the story from last month in the link below: A survey by the Red Cross has found women and younger people are feeling lonelier going into the holiday season. The survey of 1,000 people found 36 % of 18- to 29-year-olds citing border closures as a concern, more than any other age group, and with 44% of that group experiencing loneliness compared to 33 per cent of all respondents. The survey also found a similar percentage were feeling lonelier leading into the holiday season. Forty per cent of women reported loneliness compared with 26% of men. Red Cross volunteering director Penny Harrison told the AAP the results weren’t a shock considering the year of lockdowns we’ve experienced. It’s also apparent that younger people are worried about possible border closures keeping them from family and friends. Pick up the phone and reconnect with someone you haven’t spoken to this year or check in on a neighbour who lives alone. Good afternoon, Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon. A quick thanks to Elias Visontay and Matilda Boseley for their stellar work earlier today. There is still much to get through, so let’s dive in. With that, I’ll pass you over to my colleague Mostafa Rachwani who will take you through the next part of the day. Northern Territory chief minister Michael Gunner is providing a Covid update, after announcing a local toddler had tested positive on Monday. Gunner said “for the positive local case we announced yesterday, there have been 30 close contacts identified across three households in Katherine East”. Seven of those close contacts, in addition to the positive case announced yesterday, have been transferred to the Howard Springs centre for national resilience. Gunner reiterated that positive wastewater detections of Covid mean “it is very likely there are more cases in that area”. Meanwhile, the community of Lajamanu will come out of lockdown later today and move to lesser restrictions. Katherine – which has had restrictions for more than a month – is set to come out of lockout tomorrow, however a final decision on that is still to be made. In case you missed it earlier today, the latest Guardian Essential poll has found that voters in New South Wales remain sympathetic to Gladys Berejiklian despite the former premier having to front the state’s anti-corruption commission to answer serious questions. My colleague Katharine Murphy has filed this report on what voters in NSW think of Berejiklian, and of Scott Morrison’s repeated criticism of the state’s Independent Commission Against Corruption (Icac). Thousands of New South Wales public school teachers have rallied at NSW parliament as part of a campaign of statewide industrial action to push for better pay and conditions. Teachers from Sydney, Newcastle, Wollongong and the Blue Mountains gathered at Hyde Park in Sydney’s city centre on Tuesday, before marching to parliament. Many of those on strike were wearing red T-shirts and carrying placards supporting the NSW Teachers Federation, which organised the action that closed almost 400 state schools for 24 hours. The teachers say the government has failed to address unsustainable workloads, uncompetitive salaries and staff shortages. They want a pay increase up to 7.5% a year to reverse the decline in teachers’ wages compared with other professions. A man who allegedly pointed a gun at a university security guard has been arrested in Melbourne, reports AAP. Police were called to Swinburne University’s Croydon campus, in Melbourne’s eastern suburbs, just before 10.30am on Tuesday. Specialist police along with uniformed officers quickly responded and cordoned off the area, arresting the man shortly after. With that, I shall hand you over to the fantastic Elias Visontay who will guide you through the afternoon of news. See you tomorrow, love you, bye! There are now 37 cases of Omicron in Australia, chief medical officer Paul Kelly has confirmed – and only 10 of those are associated with overseas travel. Kelly has provided an update to a senate select committee inquiry into the Australian government’s response to the Covid pandemic. He also said that, as the pandemic continues and new variants emerge, they would run out of Greek alphabet letters to name them after, and would turn to stars and constellations instead. A man has been arrested in Melbourne after allegedly pointing a firearm at the security staff of an educational campus in eastern Melbourne. Here is what the police have said so far: Police were called following reports a man pointed a firearm at a security staff member on the Norton Road campus shortly before 10.30am. Specialist police along with uniformed officers quickly responded and cordoned off the area arresting the man shortly after. The man was arrested without incident, no one was injured and police are not searching for anyone else in relation to the incident. Anyone who witnessed the incident is urged to call Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000. It looks as if states will have a formal avenue to continue jostling for the right to host the fifth Ashes Test after the venue was put out to tender overnight. Less than a day after Cricket Australia confirmed it was pulling the plug on holding the series finale at Perth’s Optus Stadium due to the strict Covid-19 border policies imposed in Western Australia, the ABC is reporting tender documents have been sent out to all state and territory cricket associations as well as governments and venues. Hobart, Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane and Canberra have all expressed a willingness to host the match, scheduled to start on 14 January. Hobart was considered the marginal favourite ahead of Melbourne, though Bellerive Oval has a limited capacity compared with larger venues such as the MCG, SCG, Adelaide Oval and the Gabba. One of the main criteria is reportedly the capacity to host a day-night Test, which could mean a second pink-ball Test this series – the second Test at Adelaide Oval will also be played under lights. That would presumably provide some compensation for broadcasters, who would have drawn a larger evening audience for the Perth Test given the time difference with the east coast. CA said on Monday that extensive talks with the WA government and WA Cricket had failed to ensure the series finale against England could be played as planned at Optus Stadium. This is from about 45 minutes ago, I’m hearing crowds have since begun to disperse, but a fair turnout at the NSW strike protests today. Qantas expects to operate at 115% of its pre-Covid capacity by April, with a summer of increased airline competition and relaxed border rules set to see lower airfare prices for Australians. Speaking at the Centre for Aviation (CAPA) summit in Sydney on Tuesday, Qantas chief executive Alan Joyce explained the airline’s “approach with capacity is not to make money like we did pre-Covid”, and that instead the company would prioritise returning its fleet to the air and getting its staff – many of who remain stood-down – back to work. Joyce also revealed that Qantas had seen a “surge” in bookings in the 24 hours since the Queensland government announced it would bring forward key border rule relaxations this month. Joyce was also asked about the airline’s sustainability and emissions plans given the aviation industry’s high-polluting business model. While Joyce said airlines still needed to respond to consumer demand to fly, he announced the airline would begin purchasing sustainable aviation fuel before Christmas this year. The signal of cheaper fares comes as the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission released its annual Airline Competition report on Tuesday, which predicts “millions of Australians are set to benefit from increased competition and cheaper airfares on Australia’s busiest routes”. The ACCC notes the high level of competition between Qantas, Jetstar, Virgin and Rex, and the entrance of a new budget carrier – Bonza – next year, as well as reopened state borders, will lead to cheaper fares. Thousands of Victorians were unjustly and inhumanely denied a Covid19 border exemption to return home to farewell dying loved ones, attend medical appointments, care for sick family members or start jobs, reports AAP. That is the finding of an investigation by the Victorian ombudsman into the Department of Health’s NSW border exemption scheme. Ombudsman Deborah Glass said the decision to shut the border to Covid-stricken Sydney and others parts of NSW in July left thousands stranded and unable to get an exemption. Of 33,252 applications from 9 July to 14 September, when the probe was launched, only 8% were granted. In all, the watchdog received 315 complaints including from stranded souls paying double rent with no job, internet-less caravanning pensioners who were asked for documents they did not have, and a farmer afraid of having to destroy her animals when she could not get home. Glass did not criticise the border closure call, finding it was lawful and needed to protect people in the face of a public health emergency. But she hit out at the narrow use of discretion, lack of reasons for refusals and delegation of decision-making. She wrote in the report released on Tuesday: The overwhelming majority of applications did not get to a decision maker at all, and the guidance did not change even as case numbers in Victoria grew and the risks evolved... The consequences of that were vast, and unfair, for many thousands of people stuck across the border. Despite scaling up its exemption team from 20 staff in July to 285 by early September, those responsible for categorising and prioritising applications were expected to complete 50 per hour or one every 30 seconds. Ms Glass said people felt caught up in a “bureaucratic nightmare”. NSW secretary for the Transport Workers Union, Richard Olsen, has spoken at the strike protests in the Sydney CBD. These bus drivers have been relentless over the past few years throughout all the pandemic in ensuring that all essential workers get to and from work. Risking not only their own lives but their families to ensure that everyone who needs transport gets transport to and from where they need to go. We stand in solidarity with all the bus drivers in region three to ensure that they can get what they deserve to, they have worked under an inferior enterprise agreement, not an industry-standard agreement but an inferior agreement for the past three years. That has been out of its nominal term for well over six months, yet the company is still not prepared to meet. And they are certainly not putting anything on the table for the bus drivers to consider. Moving forward as a reasonable industry agreement, we call on transit system to immediately put an offer on the table and [if they fail] to do so we call on the state government to intervene, after all they are the economic employer we must stand up and we must take this fight on. We cannot allow a company like this to pocket the thousands, hundreds of thousands of dollars that the state government has paid them. It should have already been in the pockets of these bus drivers. We cannot allow the company to get away with that nor the state government. A gunman has died in hospital after being shot by police following a six-hour siege in Brisbane’s south, reports AAP. The standoff began on Monday around 1.20pm at a business on Compton Road at Stretton after officers responded to reports of a disturbance. But the situation escalated and police negotiators were called in at around 3pm after surrounding businesses were evacuated and an exclusion zone set up. Five members of the public had been locked inside the business in a room separate from the man. Queensland Police said in a statement on Tuesday: It will be alleged about 7.30pm, the man raised his firearm at police and was shot. The 48-year-old Woodridge man was taken to hospital in a critical condition but later died. The five members of the public were assessed by paramedics and gave statements to police. No one else was injured. The Queensland Police Ethical Standards Command is investigating, with the assistance of the Crime and Corruption Commission. In case anyone was wondering what was going on in South Australia, basically, the premier is just simping over Zac Efron, and honestly, same. A neat summary of the federal politics news this morning. Three new cases of Covid-19 linked to the Omicron variant have been detected in the ACT, reports AAP’s Andrew Brown. It takes the number of Omicron cases in the national capital to five. Of the new cases, two are household close contacts, while the third is a casual contact. The new Omicron infections were first identified as being a positive case several days ago, but genomic testing had only just been completed confirming they were linked to the new variant. It comes as three additional cases were detected in Canberra in the 24 hours to 8pm on Tuesday, but none of those infections were linked to Omicron. The daily case number is one of the lowest single-day figures in the ACT since Canberra was forced into lockdown in August. Here is what the Greens have to say about the NSW teacher’s strike today: Viagra could be a useful treatment against Alzheimer’s disease, according to a US study. Alzheimer’s disease, the most common form of age-related dementia, affects hundreds of millions of people worldwide. Despite mounting numbers of cases, however, there is currently no effective treatment. Using a large gene-mapping network, researchers at the Cleveland Clinic integrated genetic and other data to determine which of more than 1,600 Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs could be an effective treatment for Alzheimer’s disease. They gave higher scores to drugs that target both amyloid and tau – two hallmarks of Alzheimer’s – compared with drugs that targeted just one or the other. You can read the full report below: It’s that first Tuesday in the month, and that means the Reserve Bank of Australia’s board meets to announce its cash rates decision. Well, the board members do take a break over summer (unless there’s a financial meltdown, or its opposite, a meltup?) and so won’t be back to torment us until early February. (Checks calendar: 1 February, in fact.) Anyway, today’s decision won’t change the official rate at its record 0.1%. The cash rate target was cut in November 2020 and the focus of pundits will be any signs of when the RBA might lift that rate. So far, the bank has been keen to stress its patience about not lifting the cash rate until inflation is firmly within it 2%-3% a year range, and talked about 2024 as the aim. Surging global inflation has possibly pulled that back to 2023. Also of interest (so to speak) will be comments about whether the RBA is going to stop buying up government debt before its planned binge winds up in February. By then, the RBA will be the proud owner of about 40% of government debt, which it will one day have decide what to do with. In the meantime, most economic indicators are showing consumers are cashed up and ready to spend, and that job ads are on the rise. An ANZ Roy Morgan Consumer Confidence report out this morning showed that confidence added another 1.4% in the past week, while inflationary expectations remain steady on a four-week rolling average. A factoid of the day is also from the ANZ. It notes how household consumption as a proportion of the economy has dived to about 51% down from 55% before the pandemic. With $200bn plus in extra savings and job security looking better by the day (Omicron, permitting), that low ratio is set for a big rebound, most economists think, which could end up surprising the RBA in a way that won’t be great for interest rates. Seems like household consumption peaked at about 56.5% in 2011, perhaps when the carbon price introduction was offset by income support. Federal Labor frontbencher Andrew Leigh has slammed National leader Barnaby Joyce’s muted response to MP George Christensen appearing on far-right commentator Alex Jones’ web show. A spokesperson for Joyce, who is currently overseas, said that “while the deputy prime minister doesn’t agree with the comments made, Mr Christensen has the right to say what he believes”. Leigh: Once you’re playing footsies with Alex Jones, one of the great conspiracy theorists of the age, you’ve really got to worry about what George Christensen is doing. And Barnaby Joyce still seems to have an inability to really recognise he’s the deputy prime minister. He said after the Glasgow meetings that the Nationals hadn’t signed up to net zero by 2050, as though they’re not in Coalition with the government. And now he’s often in Britain, on some private enterprise. I think Australians just want him to do his day job, to focus on the needs of Australians, the pressures households are facing and the importance of tackling climate change... You can be sure if it was somebody on the left of politics, Scott Morrison would be out there quick as a flash having a go at them, saying that they ought to be denounced. But when it’s George Christensen or it’s Craig Kelly, people like that seem to get a free pass from the prime minister. In case it wasn’t clear from the posts on the Queensland health minister’s presser before, the sunshine state has recorded one new case of Covid-19. The person is on the Gold Coast and linked to existing cases, recently travelled to NSW and deputy chief medical officer Peter Aitken says they may well be the source of the cluster. As expected the controversial Victorian pandemic powers bill which sparked weeks of protests in Melbourne has officially passed through parliament and has become law. Ten News is reporting that premier Daniel Andrews is likely to declare a pandemic under the new act, ahead of the current state of emergence expiring next week. D’ath says Queensland will extend the criminal offence of spitting, coughing or sneezing on essential workers deliberately to include all workers at businesses which require patrons to be vaccinated. There is another thing that we are going to do to support workers and businesses as well. In April last year we extended the offence of spitting, coughing or sneezing deliberately on people or threatening to do so, we extended that to retail workers because we know they saw appalling behaviour while they tried to just get on with doing their job and serving the community. Because these workers and every one of the businesses that we are mandating the vaccination are doing their job to keep you safe and to ensure people are vaccinated, we want to protect them from this sort of behaviour. We will be extending this offence to protect all workers in all businesses that are bound by this public health directive. That means if you behave in this way, then you can see an on the spot fine of $1,378.50 or, if your offence is such that the police choose to take you to court, it could be a $13,785 fine or up to six months imprisonment. There’s other offences that are already covered under the criminal code as well but we believe it’s important to send a very clear message that these workers are here to do their job, to serve you, to make sure you enjoy your experience at these wonderful venues but we have a responsibility to protect them as well. The Queensland health minister is out about today to officially announce which businesses will only be allowed to serve vaccinated patrons from 17 December, after the state’s border opens next week. As we have announced previously, those sites are vulnerable settings, aged care, hospitals, prisons, disability services, the staff must be vaccinated and all visitors must be fully vaccinated to enter those sites and I am saying visitors. Not patients to hospitals. Hospitality venues, hotels, pubs, clubs, taverns, bars, restaurants, cafes will all be required to have their staff vaccinated by 17 December and also patrons have to be vaccinated to enter those sites. Indoor entertainment venues, night clubs, indoor live music venues, karaoke bars, concerts, theatres, cinemas, outdoor entertainment activities such as reef excursions, sports stadiums, theme parks and festivals where they are ticketed events, folk, arts and music festivals, weddings. You can have a wedding and have unvaccinated people attend but the cap is 20 people at that wedding, otherwise if it is vaccinated only then there is no limit to those attending the weddings. Queensland government-owned galleries, libraries and museums as well. When it comes to other settings – so essential services, supermarkets, retail stores, public transport places of worship and funerals, the normal Covid Safe plans, density restrictions apply and unvaccinated as well as vaccinated people can attend those. I have been asked why public transport? This is essential. People need to be go able to go to doctors’ appointments and travel to work. It is important that everyone is entitled to access public transport but if you are on public transport and it is very crowded, we recommend that you wear a mask or you do try to social distance. Queensland’s health minister, Yevette D’ath says the number of exposure sites on the Gold Coast is likely to grow as authorities try to bring the cluster under control. I can advise that in relation to the Gold Coast cluster, one of those individuals we advised worked at a private aged care facility. The good news is 89 tests have come back and they have all been negative. Wonderful news for the residents and staff at that aged care facility. Some people may have noticed, and I should say there is likely to be more exposure sites on the Gold Coast going up as we interview this gentleman. She also explained the reason for Cairns Airport’s recently listing: We did put the Cairns Airport up as an exposure site. That is because we had an overseas traveller who had travelled through New South Wales, was eligible to come up and fly into Cairns and then to quarantine but they have since tested positive. People on that flight and at the airport are being asked to have a look at the date and times and follow the advice of the public health unit in relation to any testing or any quarantine requirements. Unions representing New South Wales teachers and public transport workers are blaming the state government for a series of strikes taking place this week. Thousands of commuters will have to make other travel plans as bus and train drivers take industrial action. The strikes began on Monday with inner-west Sydney bus drivers walking off the job as part of an ongoing dispute over pay equality. On Tuesday bus drivers in the city’s south-west are also striking, before the two groups stage a coordinated walkout for two hours during the Friday afternoon peak. You can read the full report below: So you might have been following the controversy this morning involving outgoing Nationals MP George Christensen appearing on US far-right commentator Alex Jones’ web series, where he urged viewers to protest outside Australian embassies. Acting Nationals leader David Littleproud condemned the appearance and has just tweeted to confirm he has spoken to Christensen and the MP “both [Littleproud’s] position and the views of the party room”. Littleproud spoke to ABC earlier this morning, expressing disapproval over the appearance. I have to say, we as a National party have to condemn – we respect his right for freedom of speech. But with that comes a responsibility... We want to work constructively with George, but know that there are limits and there are boundaries that we as federal politicians have to adhere to. He is a respected member of the party room, and we want to have a conversation with him about respecting the party room back. Reporter: Speaking to a number of parents since the decision was made about the strike going ahead, some weeks ago, the majority of parents have said they are supportive of teachers going on strike today, they’re supportive of parents having an increase in their pay to improve the staff shortage. What would you say to that? Mitchell: Well, I know many parents who are incredibly frustrated by this disruption today, that are making tough choices about not being able to go to work with their children can’t be at school. I think the reality is that as a government we have our wages policy, we have a 2.5% pay increase on the table, it’s the maximum that we can offer under that wages policy, which means each and every teacher across New South Wales would get a pay rise with that approach. No one is arguing that teachers [don’t] work hard. We know they do an incredible job. We want to offer the pay rise they’re able to. We want to have an adult conversation with the union in the IRC. What I get really frustrated about is there are measures and mechanisms in place where that can happen. The strike action today is unnecessary. It serves no purpose, other than to disrupt families right across New South Wales and ultimately it’s our children and their education that will suffer from these actions and it’s incredibly disappointing. NSW education minister Sarah Mitchell: Today across New South Wales we’re seeing over 350 schools closed. So students who need to be at school, those who have really challenging family circumstances, aren’t able to be at school today because of this action taken by the union. In a single day, the union has caused more disruption to our public education system than we’ve seen due to Covid throughout the entirety of this term. We remain willing to negotiate. We are still at the table when it comes to our 2.5% pay rise. We’re working through those issues in the IRC. That’s where these matters should be debated and discussed and ruled on, not through industrial action. I’m disappointed and I’m frustrated on behalf of parents, the hundreds of thousands of parents impacted by this decision today, the parents who can’t go to work today because their children can’t go to school. It’s incredibly unfair, it’s incredibly disingenuous from the union and now is the time to put the interests of our students first. We need to make sure our kids are in the classroom, each and every day, but particularly this year, when we’ve seen what is arguably the most disrupted year in education in our history. Speaking of the teacher strike, here is what the New South Wales education minister, Sarah Mitchell, had to say about it this morning. Spoiler alert, she is not happy, labelling the industrial action as “incredibly unfair”, and “incredibly disingenuous from the union”: I’m very disappointed by the decision that’s been made by 200 odd union officials today to take this industrial action and it does a real disservice to our hard-working teaching profession. It’s pitting teachers, families, and students against each other and I think it’s incredibly frustrating that the union has decided to take this approach. We are negotiating in good faith the current teachers award. We have a 2.5% offering on the table and we never left the negotiating table. We want to have these discussions with the union through the industrial relations commission. That is the place where the negotiation should be occurring. We should not be seeing strike action today. The industrial relations commission has ruled this strike action illegal. It’s really important that we support our schools and our school communities and we do everything we can to minimise the disruption when it comes to our students. I’m very grateful that hundreds of schools are remaining operational today, that great teaching and learning is taking place in the classroom. But I also don’t want to dismiss the disruption that the union is causing. Crowds are on the move in the Sydney CBD as part of the major teacher strike. The Victorian ombudsman has handed down her finding on the Victorian Covid-19 border permit system, describing it as ‘unjust’ and ‘inhumane’. She stated that the result was some of the most questionable decisions she’s seen in her seven years in the role. The narrow exercise of discretion under the border exemption scheme resulted in unjust outcomes and recommended the Government publicly acknowledge the distress caused to affected people... People complained to the Ombudsman after being refused exemptions to travel to Victoria to farewell loved ones at funerals, attend vital medical appointments, care for sick family members, return home to care for animals, or to start jobs... Some found themselves facing effective homelessness because they lived in Victoria and could not return I’ll bring you more on this soon, but the Victorian Ombudsman has some choice words on the Victorian permit system. The Australian government says it hasn’t decided yet whether to send commonwealth officials to the Beijing Winter Olympics. The United States announced overnight it would not send any government officials to the Games in protest over human rights abuses. The Australian government has been watching closely the actions of the US, and it has always been believed it would coordinate any action rather than taking unilateral steps. A number of Australian politicians – including government backbenchers and also from outside the Coalition – want the Australian government to now follow suit. We asked the sports minister, Richard Colbeck, for an update on the government’s position, now the US has confirmed it would proceed with a diplomatic boycott. Colbeck continues to hold to the position that it’s all yet to be decided. He said this morning: A decision on commonwealth representation at the Beijing Winter Olympics is yet to be made. Women were doing 21 hours more unpaid work than men a week and experiencing higher levels of psychological distress in the year before the pandemic, a new report has found. The annual Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (Hilda) survey is a nationally representative study involving interviews with 17,500 people in 9,500 households. This year’s report, released on Tuesday and compiled by the University of Melbourne’s Melbourne Institute, covers data from 2019, before the massive social and economic upheaval caused by Covid-19. While household incomes were rising again after years of stagnation, the national snapshot shows poverty was also increasing, and two groups that would be hit hard by the pandemic were already disadvantaged. You can read the full report from Stephanie Convery and Luke Henriques-Gomes below: Here is that chat with Palaszczuk I mentioned earlier. Pixar and Queensland Bureau of Meteorology collab? Two birds worth $30,000 each have been stolen in a burglary at a home in Melbourne’s south east, with police on the hunt for the thieves, reports AAP. The valuable scarlet macaws, named Bubba and Pippa, were stolen late last month after the burglars broke into Frankston home through the front door while the owner wasn’t there. They belonged to her late father and have a highly sentimental value, police said. Both birds have their flight feathers clipped and anyone with information on their whereabouts is urged to contact Crime Stoppers. Labor will extend an olive branch to religious communities through a faith and climate summit on Thursday, Kristina Keneally has revealed. The ALP’s deputy leader in the Senate announced the outreach effort in a webinar with the Christian lobby group FamilyVoice on Monday evening, in which she also expressed support for every school to require all staff to “live out and profess” its values. Labor is yet to decide its final position on the religious discrimination bill, pending two parliamentary inquiries to run over summer and report back by 4 February. Keneally’s comments are noteworthy because overriding state laws with more limited religious exemptions to discrimination law, such as Victoria’s legislation, is one of the key reasons LGBT advocates have urged Labor to block the bill. You can read the full report below: Australia is likely to face growing calls to join a diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics, after the United States announced overnight it would not send any government officials to the Games in protest over human rights abuses. Guardian Australia has previously reported the Australian government was watching closely the actions of the US, and that it would likely coordinate any action rather than taking unilateral steps. Even if senior Australian officials shunned the event, it was unclear if and when this would openly be announced. We are chasing a response from the Australian government today, but the Liberal party senator Eric Abetz has been on ABC radio this morning calling on his government to follow the US move. The independent South Australian senator Rex Patrick also issued a statement this morning urging the Australian government to announce no Australian ministers, senior officials or diplomats would attend the Beijing Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games. Patrick said: This is an important action by the US, especially as the Biden administration’s announcement directly refers to the Chinese government’s ‘ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity in Xinjiang and other human rights abuses’ ... It would be morally wrong for the Australian government to extend any measure of official endorsement to the Chinese Communist regime which has committed and continues to commit gross violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms. Yesterday, at the daily press conference in Beijing, the Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian, responded to Scott Morrison’s comment that Australia was considering a potential diplomatic boycott. Zhao said the Games were “a grand gathering of global winter sports athletes and fans, rather than a platform for certain politicians’ political stunts”. He said it should be “athletes, instead of politicians clamouring for boycott, that should be in the spotlight”: Politicians calling for boycott are doing so for their own political interests and posturing. In fact, no one would care about whether these people come or not, and it has no impact whatsoever on the Olympics to be successfully held by Beijing. Hmmmm, OK, well scratch that, because just 10 minutes later, Palaszczuk has told the Today Show that she “hopes” the border won’t close again. Host: Can you guarantee that this is the end of border closures? Are you open now for good? Palaszczuk: We hope so. We have been open to most of the states and territories except for NSW, Victoria and the ACT. We are very confident that our tourism industry, that is exactly the extra injection that they need. It will be great for jobs. I know that everyone is looking forward to welcoming family and friends home who they haven’t seen for a long, long time. A lot of people out there, and grandparents, have been saying to me they will be seeing their grandchildren for the very first time. It will be a very special time of the year. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk told ABC that once the Queensland border is open, it’s open for good. On an unrelated note, I might just duck off and look at flight prices for the Whitsundays. We are not shutting the border. We believe that we have the right measures in place and we have the high rate of vaccination. It is completely different to a year or two years ago when people didn’t have the vaccination rates as well as they have today. I want everyone to have a good Christmas and I hope we get to see you in our beautiful state soon. Okay, let’s chat about the Queensland border. Long story short, it’s opening next Monday, with the state set to reach 80% double vaccination sometime this week. The premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk is out and about this morning sharing the good news. She told ABC News Breakfast that the Queensland regional hospital system was prepared for the potential influx of cases. Everyone is prepared, just as in New South Wales and Victoria. We now have to live with the virus and we have heard from our acting chief health officer yesterday that there will be cases. We have to prepare for that. It will be a different mind set for Queenslanders because we’re used to hearing zero, zero, time and time again. People haven’t seen their families for some months, if not years and Christmas is a time for families to reunite. I have spoken to grandparents who will see their grandchildren for the very first time. That will be very memorable. This is the right thing to do, as Australia opens up. We have to be mindful that we are in a pandemic and there’s many Queenslanders that have gone about their jobs, people have gone to school. We haven’t had the long lock downs that you’ve experienced in Melbourne and Sydney and we want to keep it that way. I never thought we would get to a situation where we have, coming into opening up for a pandemic, 80% double dose. This is a very high vaccination rate. We are the 90% first dose. We want that additional protection to make sure people get the test on day five. A suspected shark attack on Victoria’s Bellarine Peninsula has left two teens in hospital and shut a beach, reports Callum Godde from AAP. Emergency services were called to Ocean Grove, south east of Geelong, just after 7pm on Monday. Ocean Grove Surf Life Saving Club said the teens were injured by a shark and VicEmergency issued a warning for the shark sighting close to shore. Off-duty lifesavers and bystanders came to the aid of the teenage boy and girl before they were treated by paramedics and taken to hospital. Salvation Army officer Peter Hobbs wrote on social media that he was out for a paddle when the pair were attacked while in the water nearby. We could see them splashing but didn’t know what was happening... We didn’t see the shark, just the splash, but we heard the cries and our family mobilised. The girl suffered lower body injuries and the boy minor injuries, Ambulance Victoria said. Both are in a stable condition. Ocean Grove main beach remains closed. Life Saving Victoria said in a statement: Lifesavers have erected a beach closure sign, and we ask people to avoid the area until further notice... It’s important to remember sharks are a normal part of the marine environment and attacks like tonight’s are rare, so you should be alert but not alarmed. Australia has joined the US in calling for the release of Myanmar’s deposed democratically elected leader Aung San Suu Kyi, who has been sentenced to at least two years in detention, reports AAP. A Department of foreign affairs spokesperson said: The sentencing of Aung San Suu Kyi is deeply concerning... Australia continues to call for the release of all those arbitrarily detained in Myanmar, and for a return to the path of democratic transition as soon as possible. Australia has been a longstanding supporter of Myanmar and its democratic transition. A court in military-ruled Myanmar sentenced Suu Kyi to four years in detention on Monday on charges of incitement and breaching coronavirus restrictions. State television later said the sentence had been reduced to two years in a partial pardon. The US has branded her conviction and sentence as an affront to democracy and justice and demanded the immediate release of the Nobel laureate and other elected officials detained in a February 1 coup. United Nations human rights chief Michelle Bachelet also denounced the sentence and called for her immediate release. The conviction of the State Counsellor following a sham trial in secretive proceedings before a military-controlled court is nothing but politically motivated... The military is attempting to instrumentalise the courts to remove all political opposition. In February, Myanmar’s military generals seized power and detained Ms Suu Kyi along with officials from her National League for Democracy party, which won an election in November 2020. Myanmar president Win Myint has been sentenced to four years’ detention, Myanmar’s state-run broadcaster MRTV reported. He and Suu Kyi will reportedly serve their sentences where they are currently being detained, the location of which has not been disclosed. Voters in New South Wales remain sympathetic to Gladys Berejiklian despite the former premier having to front the state’s anti-corruption commission to answer serious questions, according to the latest Guardian Essential poll. Respondents in the survey of 1,094 voters were asked whether or not they agreed with Scott Morrison’s repeated criticism of the state’s Independent Commission Against Corruption (Icac). The prime minister has characterised the NSW Icac as a “kangaroo court” and claimed Berejiklian had been hounded out of office. Voters are split nationally about Morrison’s interventions, with 34% in agreement, 31% disagreeing with his comments, and 36% neither agreeing nor disagreeing. Outside NSW, a number of voters are on the fence about the fracas. You can read the full report below: Now, as you might remember, the talk of the town is that the former NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, could run for the federal seat of Warringah. But Chris Bowen says he doesn’t think she could win against the popular incumbent MP Zali Steggall. I mean, I think if the Liberal Party wants to choose Gladys Berejiklian, that’s a matter for them. I mean, it was an important principle for Gladys Berejiklian, apparently to resign as premier because she was being investigated by the ICAC. But apparently, it’s not [for federal politics]. I think it would show the lack of regard for standards in public life by Scott Morrison. I mean, this is a prime minister who turns a blind eye to poor behaviour and now he is actively providing a character reference for somebody who is under investigation by the ICAC and actively promoting them... I’m not here to make predictions although if you asked me if I suspect Zali Steggall would be quite comfortable running against Gladys Berejiklian. We’ll have a great candidate as well for Warringah, but I’m not here to pretend to you that we are the favourites. But I suspect that Zali Steggall will be very happy campaigning against Gladys Berejiklian. Shadow minister for climate change and energy Chris Bowen is speaking now to ABC radio to talk up Labor’s new climate change policy: We said we will seek to legislate that target as well as our commitment to net zero by 2050 because that is best practice internationally and provides businesses with the certainty they crave. Legal experts have labelled Scott Morrison’s latest attacks on the New South Wales corruption watchdog “disgraceful” and “stupid”, as the Liberal party ramps up efforts to have Gladys Berejiklian contest the federal seat of Warringah. On Monday, the prime minister doubled down on his previous comments in parliament last week when he called the Independent Commission Against Corruption a “kangaroo court,” and accused it of trying to “publicly humiliate” the former NSW premier. “Gladys was put in a position of actually having to stand down and there was no findings of anything,” Morrison said on Monday, in advance of any possible findings by Icac. Berejiklian resigned voluntarily in September, in line with her own ruling that an MP who is a substantial subject of an investigation must stand aside. You can read the full report below: Good morning, everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley here with you on the blog today and we start off our day, once again, with large-scale strikes in NSW. This time it’s not just public transport workers but public school teachers and principals as well. (So if you have to read the blog posts in the ad breaks of Paw Patrol, I understand.) They have accused the government of failing to address unsustainable workloads, uncompetitive salaries and staff shortages. NSW Teachers Federation president Angelo Gavrielatos said yesterday: The NSW government is concerned about children missing out for one day, but we are concerned about children missing out every day because there simply aren’t enough teachers. Teachers’ say that workloads are “unmanageable” and a wage cap means their salaries didn’t “reflect the skills or responsibilities they have”. They want a pay increase up to 7.5% a year to “begin to reverse the decline in teachers’ wages compared to other professions”. This comes after transport strikes began yesterday, with bus drivers in Sydney’s inner west walking off the job in protest of a two-tier wage system that has some workers earning less than others for doing the same job. This industrial action will continue today with drivers from the city’s south-west going on strike, before drivers from both regions stop work for two hours during the Friday afternoon peak. Train drivers are also refusing to operate foreign-made trains that run about three-quarters of the services. Well, I guess this situation at least solves the problem of how public school students are going to get to campus! OK, without further delay why don’t we jump right into the day? (I suggest reading the blog to your kids in lieu of their formal education.)UK house prices grew at the fastest pace in 15 years over the past three months, with the average home valued at £20,000 more than this time last year, according to Halifax. Prices rose by 3.4% in the quarter to the end of November, which is the highest quarterly rate since late 2006 and brought the average price of a home to a record of £272,992. A shortage of properties on the market, a strong jobs market and competitive mortgage rates were all propping up prices, the lender said. House prices rose for a fifth month by 1% in November and were 8.2% higher than the same time last year, when the average property cost 252,235. Both the monthly gain and the annual growth rate were the same increases as in October. Wales remained the UK nation with the fastest house price growth, with annual inflation of 14.8% taking the average price of a home to more than £200,000 for the first time. Northern Ireland also continued to record double-digit annual growth, of 10%, and a typical property cost £169,348. In Scotland, the average price of £191,140 is the most expensive on record, as values rose 8.5% year on year. In London, annual house price inflation lagged at 1.1% last month, up slightly from October, but the average price of £521,129 is still much higher than the rest of the country. Russell Galley, the managing director at Halifax, said: “The performance of the market continues to be underpinned by a shortage of available properties, a strong labour market and keen competition among mortgage providers keeping rates close to historic lows. Those taking their first step on to the property ladder are also playing an important role in driving activity, with annual house price inflation for first-time buyers at 9.1% compared with 8.8% for home movers.” Flats are leading with double-digit annual price inflation of 10.8% while detached properties went up 6.6% in price year on year. This suggests the “race for space” is becoming less prominent than it was earlier in the Covid-19 pandemic, when a shift to working from home prompted many people to seek out bigger properties in leafier locations. The overall number of house sales has fallen back since the end of the stamp duty holiday and reached a nine-year low in October, according to data from HM Revenue and Customs. “Looking ahead, there is now greater uncertainty than has been the case for quite some time, with interest rates expected to rise to guard against further increases in inflation,” Galley said. “Economic confidence may be also be dented by the emergence of the new Omicron virus variant, though it remains far too early to speculate on any long-term impact, given insufficient data at this stage, not to mention the resilience the housing market has already shown in challenging circumstances.” He expects house price growth to ease next year, as household budgets come under greater pressure, from soaring energy bills and food prices. The Bank of England’s monetary policy chief, Ben Broadbent, has said inflation is likely to soar “comfortably” above 5% next spring when the energy regulator, Ofgem, raises a price cap affecting millions of households.No team have conceded more League Two goals than Scunthorpe this season and their worrying slide to the bottom of the Football League has been punctuated by some PR own goals too. They have banned the local paper, the Scunthorpe Telegraph, over its refusal to pay for access and in April the transfer of the stadium to another company owned by the chairman, Peter Swann, caused alarm among a disillusioned fan base, amid dwindling crowds. Then there are the accusations of nepotism, with Swann’s son Will tasked with leading player recruitment. Swann responded promptly to questions from the Guardian, explaining each decision. Scunthorpe flirted with a return to the Championship as recently as three years ago when they reached the League One play-offs for a second successive season. Ivan Toney was on loan, Charlie Goode – also now at Brentford – was there and Conor Townsend, now of West Brom, was excelling in defence. Duane Holmes and Murray Wallace were mainstays, both now Championship regulars. Many supporters look back with bewilderment on the sacking of Graham Alexander when the club were fifth with seven games to play. Scunthorpe were relegated the following season, during which they had three managers. There is, at least, a tinge more optimism than a few weeks ago. Keith Hill, who replaced the sacked Neil Cox at the start of November, has made Scunthorpe harder to beat – he has lost one of his four matches – and will target a first victory on Tuesday at Stevenage which could hoist them out of the relegation zone. Hill twice won promotion from the division at Rochdale and must find a successful formula. Scunthorpe have won two of their past 34 matches in all competitions and limped over the finish line last season. There are some encouraging noises from the boardroom. The return of Simon Elliott, a respected former director who used to stand on the terraces as a supporter, as a non-executive director is regarded in some quarters as a masterstroke, and Swann, who conceded he needed to “interact better”, has reopened the lines of communication with shareholders and stakeholders. There are plans to add a fan-elected director. “It’s obvious my focus on the club has alienated some supporters and it was good to have honest and at times straightforward discussions … I apologise if you are one of those supporters I have let down,” Swann said in October. Swann, the owner of the Sands music venue in Blackpool, cannot be criticised for a lack of trying. He has invested more than £20m since taking ownership in 2013. Upon relegation to the fourth tier the club, he says, adopted a “breakeven model”. Swann, who has about a 90% stake, maintains he would welcome prospective buyers with “open arms”. “Not long ago you could probably get promoted out of League One on a few million [pounds],” Swann said. “That now is clearly very difficult, as you can see with the clubs sitting in that division. To survive in the Championship, let alone just getting there is virtually impossible to achieve unless you throw tens of millions at it and that is a risk a small club like Scunthorpe should not be taking, especially in these challenging times.” Swann says he takes full responsibility for the club’s position and business decisions, including cutting ties with the local paper after “they withdrew cash support for the access to the club, players and managers”. The club has a financial agreement with the local radio station and felt the paper should “pay something and not just offer advertising pages as recompense for that access”. The Iron Trust, supported by Elliott, is negotiating a deal that, Swann says, “should enable the paper to access games”. The transfer of the stadium and training facility to Swann’s company Coolsilk Property and Investment irked supporters. Swann says it was to help attract investors for the land adjacent to Glanford Park and create additional revenue streams, and that he has committed to returning the assets to the club. “To obtain finance for the development we have separated the football club on paper, so there is no risk to the stadium or the club and it is a more appealing project for investors, especially because of the risk involved in football,” he said. “On completion of the various projects the club will still have the ownership of its stadium and be in a far better position than when I picked the club up and settled the debt the club had accumulated, as it fell from the Championship into League Two.” The club is under a transfer embargo pertaining to a loan from the EFL, which limits spending to 50% of turnover, within the budget set at the start of the season. Cox said appointing one of Swann’s sons, Will, a former football agent, as chief scout last year was his call. “Each time a new manager comes to a club he decides who his number two, coach and scouts are going to be; I do not influence any of those decisions,” Swann said. “He [Cox] had known William for several years, so although uncomfortable for me at the time I had confidence and no problem with his choices.” Swann said sacking the Scunthorpe-born Cox and making Hill the club’s eighth manager in three years was done “to give us the best chance of league survival and I have full confidence in Keith to do that job.”The estate of George Orwell has approved a feminist retelling of Nineteen Eighty-Four, which reimagines the story from the perspective of Winston Smith’s lover Julia. Opening with one of literature’s most famous lines – “It was a bright cold day in April, and the clocks were striking thirteen” – Orwell’s 1949 novel is set in a dystopian future where Great Britain, known as Airstrip One, is part of the totalitarian state of Oceania. Big Brother rules supreme and the Thought Police stamp out any individual thinking. Winston Smith works at The Ministry of Truth, rewriting history to suit Big Brother’s narrative. He starts a forbidden affair with Julia – who works on the novel-writing machines in the Fiction Department - until both are captured and sent for re-education via Room 101. In Julia by Sandra Newman, the incidents of Nineteen Eighty-Four are seen through the woman’s eyes. “It was the man from Records who began it, him all unknowing in his prim, grim way, his above-it-all oldthink way. He was the one Syme called ‘Old Misery’,” writes Newman. “Comrade Smith was his right name, though ‘Comrade’ never suited him somehow. Of course, if you felt foolish calling someone ‘Comrade’, far better not to speak to them at all.” Publisher Granta said that Julia understands the world of Oceania “far better than Winston and is essentially happy with her life”. As Orwell puts it in Nineteen Eighty-Four, “in some ways she was far more acute than Winston, and far less susceptible to Party propaganda … She also stirred a sort of envy in him by telling him that during the Two Minutes Hate her great difficulty was to avoid bursting out laughing. But she only questioned the teachings of the Party when they in some way touched upon her own life. Often she was ready to accept the official mythology, simply because the difference between truth and falsehood did not seem important to her.” “She has known no other world and, until she meets Winston, never imagined one. She’s opportunistic, believing in nothing and caring not at all about politics. She routinely breaks the rules but also collaborates with the regime whenever necessary. She’s an ideal citizen of Oceania,” said Granta. “But when one day, finding herself walking toward Winston Smith in a long corridor, she impulsively hands him a note – a potentially suicidal gesture – she comes to realise that she’s losing her grip and can no longer safely navigate her world.” Orwell’s estate said it had been “looking for some time” for an author to tell the story of Smith’s lover, and that Newman, who has previously been longlisted for the Women’s prize and shortlisted for the Guardian first book award, “proved to be the perfect fit”. Granta added that “Richard Blair, Orwell’s son, has been consulted and approves of the project”. “Two of the unanswered questions in Orwell’s novel are what Julia sees in Winston, and how she has navigated her way through the party hierarchy. Sandra gets under the skin of Big Brother’s world in a completely convincing way which is both true to the original but also gives a dramatically different narrative to stand alongside the original,” said the estate’s literary executor Bill Hamilton. “The millions of readers who have been brought up with Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four will find this a provocative and satisfying companion.” Julia will be published after Granta releases Newman’s new novel The Men – in which every single person with a Y chromosome vanishes from the world – next June. It is the latest in a series of feminist retellings of classic stories, from Natalie Haynes’s reimagining of the Trojan war A Thousand Ships, and Pat Barker’s The Silence of the Girls, a version of the Iliad from the perspective of Briseis, to Maggie O’Farrell’s Hamnet, which centres on the life of Shakespeare’s wife, and Jeet Thayil’s Names of the Women, which tells the stories of 15 women whose lives overlapped with Jesus.Barça: The Inside Story of the World’s Greatest Football Club Simon Kuper (Short) The rise of Barcelona over the last four decades was one of the glories of modern sport. Wonderful playing allied to a philosophy that saw the club as something more than just a sports team within Catalan life and culture. But what happens when the philosophy is lost? When the virtuous circle of a seemingly endless supply of great players from its youth system, ensuring vast amounts of money to buy in whatever other talent was needed, is broken? Through perceptive portraits of key personnel such as Johan Cruyff, Pep Guardiola and Lionel Messi, Kuper’s account of the club’s rise, and its recent precipitous decline into debt and underperformance, will interest both business theorists and football fans. All In Billie Jean King (Viking) King’s story would have been remarkable if it had been solely about tennis. But her record-breaking accumulation of grand slams was just one byproduct of her supreme facility for the game. Starting with an objection to the different ways boys and girls were treated at junior tournaments in 1950s Los Angeles, King’s determination to ensure fair recognition, and later fair reward, for her talent and effort, would place her at the heart of campaigns for equality both on and off court, from parity of prize money to women’s and gay rights. As she sums it up in this blistering autobiography: “Even if you’re not a born activist, life can damn sure make you one.” Revolutions: How Women Changed the World on Two Wheels Hannah Ross (W&amp;N) A high cadence spin through the history of female cycling that is comprehensive despite its concision. Ross pedals from late Victorian aristocratic ladies encountering new freedoms of movement to today’s racers building a modern professional sport. Along the way are political cycling clubs, astonishing feats of long-distance endurance and exploration, explicit and implicit feminism, and women just wanting to get from one place to another. Ross asks why transport, exercise, competition or simple fun should, so depressingly often, have been shot through with varying degrees of opposition and struggle. Why We Kneel, How We Rise Michael Holding (Simon &amp; Schuster) This is the book that emerged from the emotional impromptu monologue former cricketer Michael Holding delivered on Black Lives Matter, taking the knee and racism more generally while rain stopped play at a Test match he was commentating on in July 2020. His heartfelt speech, the first time he had publicly opened up on such issues, immediately prompted other black sports stars to contact him and offer support and solidarity. Here he combines his own experiences of racism on and off the pitch with a wider analysis, some hidden histories of black athletes and revelatory testimony from Naomi Osaka, Thierry Henry, Usain Bolt, Hope Powell and Michael Johnson. Too Many Reasons to Live Rob Burrow (Macmillan) At 5ft 5in “on tiptoes”, and weighing barely 10 stone, Rob Burrow was ostensibly too small to make it at the highest level in rugby league. But as scrum-half for Leeds Rhinos, England and Great Britain he went on to become one of the most successful players of his era. In December 2019, aged just 37 and shortly after retiring, Burrow was diagnosed with motor neurone disease and given just a few years to live. This account of his career and illness is told with the help of his family, especially his wife Lindsey, and former colleagues. It brings to bear all the traits he deployed in his against-the-odds career – courage, resolve, intelligence and self-awareness – but is also a moving exposition of kindness, devotion, gratitude and love. • Browse all the featured books and save up to 15% at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Dominic Raab has rebuffed a number of charges from a whistleblower who claimed there was an incompetent and chaotic response to the fall of Kabul, saying he would make no apology for asking officials to resubmit urgent appeals for help from Afghans in a different spreadsheet format. The chair of the foreign affairs select committee, Tom Tugendhat, said the testimony from the former Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office staff member Raphael Marshall was shocking and meant there were serious questions for the FCDO to answer. “This is an individual, 25 years old, who states that at various points he was completely on his own dealing with a huge casework of incoming emails and phone calls, in a Foreign Office that was effectively a Mary Celeste at the time of national emergency,” Tugendhat told Radio 4’s Today programme. “Now if that’s true, that’s really concerning.” Raab, now deputy prime minister and justice secretary but then foreign secretary, was on holiday as the Taliban took Kabul, as was the permanent secretary, Sir Philip Barton. Marshall, who had three years’ experience, has quit the department and submitted testimony to the select committee. At one point at the height of the crisis, he says he was the only person working on the evacuation desk, and was having to make life-and-death decisions on individuals to be evacuated on the basis of entirely haphazard criteria. He has claimed Raab showed a misunderstanding of the process and the desperate position at Kabul airport by delaying several emergency evacuation referrals. Raab said it was inaccurate to describe the system as dysfunctional. He said: “Well over 1,000 Foreign Office staff were working often night and day on rota system … as well as the troops on the ground in Afghanistan under incredible operational pressures. I would point to the fact that in just two weeks, 15,000 people were evacuated. “I don’t think in living memory we’ve seen an operation on that scale and certainly in relation to this one, no other country bar the United States evacuated more.” He said that the testimony was “inaccurate” and that desk officials were not making decisions. “There’s difference in processing and deciding. So I’m afraid I don’t accept that characterisation,” he said. “All of the pressures were on the ground in Afghanistan, and they were twofold. We had a large number of undocumented people coming forward. The verification for undocumented applicants was one of the big challenges. The second one was getting people to the airport.” Raab said it was a “reasonably swift turnaround” for it to take several hours to make decisions. Marshall said Raab had requested better formatted evidence. “It is hard to explain why he reserved the decision for himself but failed to make it immediately,” Marshall says. “I make no apology for saying I needed the clear facts for each case presented precisely so that we can make swift decisions,” Raab told Today. “You can’t just have emails coming through and examining them one by one, they need to be plated, the key facts drawn out and, of course, they need to be verified, which is why what London was doing was inextricably linked with the challenges of gleaning information on the ground with the Taliban takeover.” In his testimony, Marshall estimates between 75,000 and 150,000 people (including dependants) applied for evacuation under the special case scheme. The vast majority of these applicants feared their lives were at risk as a result of their connection to the UK and the west and were therefore eligible for evacuation. In a 39-page statement to MPs on the foreign affairs select committee, Marshall estimates fewer than 5% received help.Don Wetzel traveled all the way to the US capital from Montana last month to meet with politicians and to take in a Washington Football Team home game. As he moved through the crowd outside FedEx Field, he could not help but notice that more than half the fans were wearing something with the team’s former logo. That logo, the profile of a Native American trimmed with a circle of life and two eagle feathers, was especially familiar to Don Wetzel because his late father, Walter S “Blackie” Wetzel, had designed it 50 years ago, then gave it to Jack Kent Cooke, the team’s owner. The logo stayed on Washington’s helmets until last year, when the team’s racist nickname was ditched. “He called [the logo] his Most Beautiful Chief,” Don Wetzel tells the Guardian. Blackie Wetzel was a Blackfeet tribal chairman and, for a time, the president of the National Congress of American Indians, an influential position in which he worked toward securing housing and job training for Native Americans. The logo was a composite of portraits of a Blackfeet chief named White Calf (who was marketed to wealthy tourists of Glacier National Park as Two Guns White Calf). Blackie considered the logo a sort of “unification symbol” among Native Americans. “But with the logo gone, that is kind of gone, too,” Wetzel says. So Wetzel, who is 73 and gets around with the help of a prosthetic leg, headed east to ask for the logo back from the team. It is unclear whether Washington own the copyright to the logo. Wetzel wanted to make sure he can repurpose the logo so that it becomes the face of the Blackie Wetzel Warrior Society, which hopes to raise public awareness for missing and murdered Indigenous women as well as other social inequities on reservations. “We’re going to be able to bring up other big issues in Indian country,” Wetzel says. He and his caregiver, Marie Schell, said they met briefly with team officials, but “they kept interrupting us.” He became upset and the meeting ended without any agreement being reached. He has not heard back from the team, but he is not surprised. A 2016 meeting with the team about the logo had also gone nowhere. It is believed Washington are keen to reach an agreement with the family but any such settlement will take time. Nevertheless, when asked to gauge his chances of getting the logo back, Wetzel says, “I think they’re good because this is an issue of social injustice,” adding, “It’s more of a moral battle than a legal battle.” As with many stories that include some sort of folklore, the tale of the logo has a lot of hazy areas. For one thing, contrary to popular belief, Wetzel says, the logo was not a copy of the profile found on an old Buffalo nickel. Plus, the logo has hardly disappeared. The Washington Football Team does not sell any merchandise on the NFL Shop website with the old logo, but a casual search on eBay turns up hundreds of such items, most of which are labeled with the team’s old nickname. Wetzel says his father, who died in 2003 at the age of 88, was never bothered by the team’s nickname itself, because it was regarded for many years as something that saluted Native Americans. Besides, Blackie liked the team. The logo was his focal point: he thought an accurate portrait was more evocative than the “R” logo then on the team’s helmets. Much to the surprise of the Wetzel family, who received no warning from the team, the new logo showed up on Washington’s helmets in 1972. All the family say they received in return was merchandise. The logo stayed with Washington for 48 seasons, which included the franchise’s glory years, a decade that included three Super Bowl victories. Since Dan Snyder became the owner in 1999, however, the team has made the playoffs just six times, winning two postseason games. The team’s old nickname was a simmering controversy for most of the half-century that the logo was pasted on the team’s helmets, but a change suddenly appeared imminent in 2014, when the US Patent and Trademark Office stripped the team of six trademark registrations because the nickname was disparaging to a “substantial” number of Native Americans. According to a July 2014 report in the Washington Post, Don Wetzel was invited by the team to its Virginia offices and shown a statue of the logo that he was told usually sat in Snyder’s office. An inscription read that Blackie Wetzel will forever be a part of the team’s family, “because of his work in getting this logo put on the helmets.” Don was touched. But he said the team has “kind of stonewalled us” when he has asked if the family could get the logo back to benefit Native Americans. In 2016, three years before he was fired as the club president, Bruce Allen promised the Wetzels to engage Snyder about the logo, but Don says, “Nothing ever came of that, either.” The family was honored at FedEx Field in 2018, but now Wetzel says, “I think they’re trying to erase Blackie from the logo. I really believe that.” He has received some help from Tom Lang, a former Rutgers quarterback and tight end. Lang learned about the logo story from Wetzel, an outstanding former basketball player and coach, after Lang moved into a house across the street in Helena earlier this year and they started talking about sports. Wetzel’s latest push has yet to gain much media traction outside Montana. “It’s time to bring it over to the eastern seaboard,” Lang tells the Guardian. Lang considers it tragic that, when it comes down to it, the Washington Football Team is not a “family” as much as it is a corporation, but he says, “My optimism lies in people learning about the story.” Lang adds: “This is a big vision, and will need a lot of people and financial support to make it happen. But communities here in Montana need this type of support, and the time is now. Don sees the logo as the driving force behind making this vision possible.” Wetzel was able to meet in Washington with Steve Daines, the Republican US senator from Montana and tell him about his plan for the logo. If the Wetzels do ever get the logo back, Don also plans to share it with the Pro Football Hall of Fame. Washington won the game he attended last month, but the stadium was only a little more than half-full, and, as Wetzel says, “I didn’t feel the atmosphere. When I went back in 2016, the crowd was into it. I don’t think they have an identity yet.” Just because Blackie Wetzel’s logo won’t be part of the new identity, whatever it will be, his son has not stopped his crusade. In fact, Wetzel is even more determined to get it, and not just for the logo. “I want the respect and honor back for Blackie and his family,” he says. The Washington Football Team declined to comment for this article.When Patsy Stevenson was arrested on the night of 13 March, at the vigil on Clapham Common for Sarah Everard, it was hard to believe what was happening: at the precise moment in which public faith in the police force most needed restoring, after the murder of Everard at the hands of a serving police officer, Wayne Couzens, video footage showed a young woman in the dark being pushed forcibly to the ground by officers and handcuffed. The manner of Stevenson’s arrest was condemned by politicians across parties – with the home secretary, Priti Patel, setting up an inquiry. On social media, the commentary was toxically mixed: Stevenson received abuse and death threats at the same time as being praised for speaking up with dignity, courage and transparency. When she appears on Zoom, she looks pale, composed and serious-minded beneath her eyecatching red hair (was it this that made the police mistake this ordinary 28-year-old woman for a firebrand?). She is in a London flat with her dog, Lexy, who pops up on screen supportively beside her. Reports of her arrest focused on Stevenson’s terror when the police pinned her down, but what was going through her mind? “I was thinking: ‘Oh my God, I’m going to get kicked out of uni… I’ll never get a job.’” She is now repeating (“because of what happened”) a foundation year at Royal Holloway, University of London, studying physics. She goes on: “I’d never been in trouble with the police before. But my main thought was: this is what they’ve all been talking about. I used to think there was no smoke without fire.” I suggest that before we talk about anything else, she needs to see off her Twitter critics. Why did she attend the gathering, given the Covid situation and given that Everard’s parents had advised people to stay away? Stevenson explains it was an intense time personally: “A lot of people say I shouldn’t bring it back to a man… but my uncle passed away a week before the vigil.” She had looked after him, in Brighton, during his last days. She gestures towards his ashes on a shelf in her flat, beside his “Women’s Rights” badge. He had been homeless and she loved him: “He had nothing to give but would help anyone in any way he could.” Grief was the spur to “show support” of others. Many felt similarly and the vigil was lent extra respectability by the attendance of the Duchess of Cambridge. “A lot of women were angry at being told we couldn’t mourn the death of a woman.” The Covid rules were “sparse and broad”, she recalls before making her most important point: “Protesting is a human right.” For this reason, she is taking legal action against the Met. “When I’m able to tell it [her story is sub judice], people will be shocked. If they knew what really happened, Cressida Dick would be out in a heartbeat.” She laments Dick’s lack of accountability and Patel’s failure to follow through: “Priti Patel says she is starting an inquiry but nothing has happened.” There has been a repellent postscript to Stevenson’s ordeal. She has been “liked” on Tinder by more than 50 policemen. She shows me, on her phone, an image of a uniformed police officer with the accompanying text: “Yes, I do have cuffs and a baton and no, they are not pink and fluffy.” She believes these advances on the dating site were “for intimidation purposes” and knows they are from bona fide officers (Tinder Gold gives access to this information). Since her arrest, she has had mixed treatment from the police. She appealed to them after a “particularly extreme” death threat. But when she read out the threat to a female police officer, including the line, “You hijacked the vigil and that’s why I am going to…” the officer said: “Well… did you hijack it?” She says “I didn’t – but even if I had, that doesn’t warrant a death threat.” Stevenson had never planned to be arrested. She had never been an activist (before now). Nor is it her aim to indiscriminately damn the police. She was visited by a “very kind” male police officer who installed extra security. Her parents, who live in Southend where she grew up, “have supported me the whole time, bless them”. Does she wish the arrest had not happened? “There have been times I’ve wanted to say: ‘I’m done.’” She has bad dreams. She admits her mental health has suffered. At times, it is hard not to feel like a victim. “But it’s lit a fire within me. I’ve met so many amazing people and human rights activists. I’m starting a podcast with another woman arrested at the vigil. I have a platform and I hope, if I can use it for good so that more women are heard, that will suffice.”Here is an intelligent and civilised film from Norway with two outstanding actors; directed by Maria Sødahl, it’s about love, grief and intimacy and it is conceived at a high creative standard. Yet for me it never quite ignites with the real passion or the real anger that it seems to be gesturing towards. Andrea Bræin Hovig plays Anja, a successful fortysomething choreographer with an international career, in a relationship with Tomas, played by Stellan Skarsgård, and together they have a large and loving stepfamily. The previous Christmas, Anja had been given the all-clear from lung cancer, but one year on it has grimly returned with a metastasis in her brain; she has to have surgery but with a poor prognosis. Yet agonisingly, the amount of hope that Anja is given seems to vary with differing doctors. She is told to emphasise this statistically negligible sliver of hope when speaking to her children, but this could simply be encouraging everyone to indulge in magical thinking about the whole thing. And now Tomas says he wants to marry Anja before the operation. Should she take comfort and hope from that? Or is this planned wedding closer to a bizarre funeral ceremony, a gesture that actually underscores Tomas’s solemn belief that she is going to die, and his infuriating reluctance to marry her before that? This is a valuably intended study of two people who, despite their large family, have been utterly dedicated to their respective careers and have perhaps neglected their emotional lives: and yet there is something, for me, unrevealing about the drama, and almost sentimental about the final moments. But Hovig and Skarsgård are both very good. • Hope is released on 10 December in cinemas.The full publication of a key judgment in the trial of Bernard Collaery would prejudice Australia’s national security and must not be allowed, the federal government has told the high court. Prior to October, significant parts of Collaery’s trial were to be shrouded in secrecy after some of Australia’s most senior intelligence and foreign affairs officials convinced a court of the risk an open hearing posed to national security. Collaery later won a major victory in the Australian Capital Territory court of appeal, which lifted the previous secrecy orders and declared the importance of open justice in, among other things, deterring political prosecutions. A summary of its decision was published. The court of appeal’s full judgment, however, has never been seen by the public, because the commonwealth intervened to demand it be redacted. When the court’s chief justice, Helen Murrell, refused to do so, lawyers for the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, took the remarkable step of seeking the high court’s intervention. In its application to the high court, obtained by the Human Rights Law Centre senior lawyer Kieran Pender and seen by Guardian Australia, the government argues allowing the public to see the unredacted judgment would “prejudice national security”. “The result is that, unless special leave is granted and the Redaction judgment is overturned, information the disclosure of which is likely to prejudice national security will be made public,” the document says. The government acknowledges that open justice is of “undoubted importance”. But it said that national security must be given the greatest weight when deciding what information can be disclosed to the public through the National Security Information (NSI) Act, which governs how courts handle sensitive information. The courts are still deciding precisely how much of Collaery’s trial will be held in open court. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning It is still possible that the ACT supreme court will decide to conduct parts of it in a closed court, if it is convinced by secret evidence, which not even Collaery has seen, from heads of Australian intelligence agencies, and the departments of foreign affairs and home affairs. The Commonwealth argues that publishing the unredacted judgment would compromise that ongoing process, by putting information into the public domain before the issue has been fully concluded in the ACT supreme court. “Chief Justice Murrell assessed it to be ‘particularly important that the public has unadulterated access to the core parts of the court of appeal’s reasoning’,” the government told the high court. “However, the redactions sought by the attorney general were designed simply to preserve the position until final [NSI Act] orders were made. The redactions could then have been revisited in light of those orders.” The high court fight will be championed by solicitor general Stephen Donaghue, QC. It’s not the only front on which the government and Collaery are fighting over secrecy. Last week, the attorney general attempted to convince the ACT supreme court to let it produce new evidence about the potential risks to national security that would justify holding parts of the trial behind closed doors. The new evidence would take into account the changed national security and international relations environment, which could warrant holding parts of the trial in secret. Collaery would also not have been able to see that evidence. His lawyers argued against allowing the government to “update” its evidence on the national security risks, saying it would be hugely unfair and create a perpetual vortex of delay. Justice David Mossop on Tuesday denied the government the opportunity to add new evidence. But he left the door open for the government to make a new application under the NSI Act to keep parts of the Collaery trial secret. Collaery is facing trial for his alleged role in revealing an Australian intelligence operation that bugged the offices of the Timor-Leste government during 2004 oil and gas negotiations. He and his client Witness K, a former spy, helped Timor-Leste mount a case before the international courts on behalf of Timor-Leste.An American hedge-fund billionaire has surrendered 180 looted and illegally smuggled antiquities valued at $70m and been handed an unprecedented lifetime ban on acquiring other relics as part of an agreement with the Manhattan district attorney’s office. Michael Steinhardt, one of the world’s largest collectors of ancient art, “displayed a rapacious appetite for plundered artefacts”, the district attorney Cyrus Vance Jr said on Monday. The lifetime ban marks the dramatic culmination of an international investigation that began officially in 2017. The DA’s office said its inquiry found “compelling evidence” that the antiquities were stolen from 11 countries, and that at least 171 passed through traffickers before being bought by Steinhardt. The seized pieces lacked verifiable provenance prior to appearing on the international art market, the office said, adding that it had executed 17 judicially ordered search warrants and conducted joint investigations with law-enforcement authorities in Bulgaria, Egypt, Greece, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Syria, and Turkey. Steinhardt, who had been chairman of the board of Wisdom Tree Investments before retiring in 2019, denied criminal wrongdoing in resolving the matter, which ended a grand jury investigation into him. Vance said: “For decades, Michael Steinhardt displayed a rapacious appetite for plundered artefacts without concern for the legality of his actions, the legitimacy of the pieces he bought and sold or the grievous cultural damage he wrought across the globe. “His pursuit of ‘new’ additions to showcase and sell knew no geographic or moral boundaries, as reflected in the sprawling underworld of antiquities traffickers, crime bosses, money launderers and tomb raiders he relied upon to expand his collection.” Vance noted that the antiquities would be returned to their rightful owners rather than be held as evidence for the years necessary to complete a grand-jury indictment and trial. “This resolution also enables my office to shield the identity of the many witnesses here and abroad whose names would be released at any trial, to protect the integrity of parallel investigations in each of the 11 countries with whom we are conducting joint investigations,” he said. Under the terms of the agreement, Steinhardt has surrendered The Stag’s Head Rhyton, a spectacular ceremonial vessel in the form of a stag’s head, which dates to 400BCE and appeared without provenance on the market following looting in Milas, Turkey. It is valued at $3.5m. Other treasures include the Ercolano Fresco, which depicts an infant Hercules strangling a snake sent by Hera to slay him, which had been purchased from convicted antiquities traffickers for $650,000 in 1995, the year it had been looted from a Roman villa in the ruins of Herculaneum, near modern Naples. Today, it has been valued at $1m. Over 15 years, Prof Christos Tsirogiannis, a leading archaeologist, has identified more than 1,550 looted artefacts within auction houses, commercial galleries, private collections and museums. A former senior field archaeologist at the University of Cambridge, he is now an associate professor at the institute of advanced studies at the University of Aarhus in Denmark, and helps to secure the repatriation of antiquities by alerting Interpol and other authorities. He told the Guardian: “Many of the dozens of antiquities that I identified in the Steinhardt collection – using the photographic archives confiscated from convicted dealers and traffickers – appeared first in the ‘most reputable’ top dealers and auction houses in the world. “I first alerted the DA’s office in New York on the Steinhardt case in November 2014, when I identified an extremely rare prehistoric Sardinian idol, valued at $800,000-$1.2m, put on auction by Steinhardt at Christie’s in New York. I found an image of the same idol, broken in pieces, in the archive confiscated from the notorious and convicted antiquities dealer Giacomo Medici. The object was withdrawn and repatriated to Italy … This case led gradually to the raids on Steinhardt’s office and houses with the results we see today.” In a statement, Steinhardt’s lawyers said: “Mr Steinhardt is pleased that the district attorney’s years-long investigation has concluded without any charges, and that items wrongfully taken by others will be returned to their native countries.” Christie’s declined to comment.West Ham’s hopes of finishing in the top four have suffered another blow after scans revealed that Kurt Zouma suffered a serious hamstring injury during last Saturday’s victory over Chelsea. David Moyes is facing a defensive crisis after losing both of his first-choice centre-backs to injury. Zouma is set for a lengthy spell on the sidelines after damaging a hamstring tendon and Angelo Ogbonna is out for the rest of the season after sustaining a knee injury during West Ham’s win over Liverpool last month. Zouma, who has been excellent since his £29.8m switch from Chelsea last summer, is expected to be out for six to 12 weeks. His absence will increase the need for Moyes to sign a centre-back in January. Craig Dawson and Issa Diop are the only fit centre-backs in West Ham’s squad. West Ham, who are fourth in the Premier League, are longtime admirers of Burnley’s James Tarkowski. The centre-back is out of contract at the end of the season but Burnley are reluctant to sell in January. Sean Dyche hopes Tarkowski will see out the season and help his side avoid relegation. It remains to be seen whether West Ham are prepared to meet Burnley’s £20m asking price for a player available for free in the summer. That could lead them to shift their focus but it is understood that any attempt to sign Manchester City’s Nathan Aké is unlikely to be successful. A West Ham statement said: “West Ham United can confirm that Kurt Zouma sustained a hamstring tendon injury during Saturday’s Premier League victory against Chelsea. A scan on Monday revealed the damage and the 27-year-old French international defender has already started his recovery programme at Rush Green under the supervision of the medical team.” West Ham are without the left-back Ben Johnson for up to a month with hamstring injury, although Aaron Cresswell is close to returning from a back injury. West Ham are also hunting for reinforcements in attack. They have targeted Manchester United’s Jesse Lingard, who is out of contract next summer.Ten years ago, Andrew Lansley’s health and social care bill to reorganise the NHS in England faced enormous opposition. The current health and care bill, which has its second reading in the House of Lords today, has received far less attention. But it is no less significant. The new bill will continue the dismantling of the NHS, this time by adopting more features from the US health system. For anyone who cares about the NHS, this should set off alarm bells. The proposals mean that for the first time since 1948, parliament will not determine to whom NHS services must be provided. The bill removes the requirement for emergency services to be provided for everybody present in an area. No explanation has been given for getting rid of it. Over the past three decades the funding, planning and provision of health services have become disconnected from each other and from people living in local areas. The bill takes this further. It gives a single budget pot to 42 new integrated care boards (ICBs) to commission most health services. These won’t serve all people living in a local area, but a “group of people” who can be drawn from anywhere in England. The group will be allocated to the ICB under rules made by NHS England, without parliamentary process. Each ICB will have “core responsibility” for its group of people. This new concept closely resembles the US definition of a health maintenance organisation (HMO). In the US, contrary to popular perception, the government funds most healthcare, much of it through private health companies such as HMOs and other “managed care organisations”. These are responsible only for providing limited free services to a group of people who enrol as their “members”, not a local population. They provide a core or basic package of care paid for under a health plan. Additional services are paid for through more insurance or user charges. US private health companies such as Centene (Operose) and UnitedHealth (Optum Health) offer publicly funded health plans in the US, and already operate in the NHS. After a takeover earlier this year, Centene became one of the largest primary care providers in England, with 58 practices and more than 500,000 patients. Within weeks of the deal, Samantha Jones, the CEO of Centene in the UK, had resigned and was appointed Boris Johnson’s health adviser. UnitedHealth has received a range of NHS contracts for more than a decade, and in 2019 Optum was one of two companies awarded a four-year prescribing support contract up to £100m. The chief executive of NHS England was until recently Simon Stevens, the former vice-president of UnitedHealth. Stevens became a peer this year, and the bill is his brainchild. After a weasel-worded amendment from the government, which failed to rule out private companies sitting on the ICBs or their committees, the new bill will still allow these multinationals, together with private health insurance companies such as Bupa and Spire, to join the ICBs. These ICBs will decide how the budget should be distributed. Still, despite the focus on ICBs, much of the real power and decision-making will lie with four groups that already exist but are not mentioned in the bill: provider collaboratives, place-based partnerships, primary care networks, and companies accredited to the Health System Support Framework. Provider collaboratives are groups of public and private providers that NHS England has said will be responsible for designing services. ICBs will be able to delegate their functions to them. The bill also proposes that commissioning contracts can include “discretions … in relation to anything to be provided under” the contracts. In practice this will allow providers to decide what, where and how services will be provided. So much for our so-called rights under the NHS constitution. More than 40 collaboratives are listed on the NHS England website, including several private companies such as Cygnet, Priory and Elysium. There are echoes here again of the US. In the byzantine US healthcare system, private insurance companies sell health plans to individuals, some of whom may be eligible for public funding. The private insurance companies enter contracts with a limited number of providers to buy services for their plan members, known as “provider networks”. An ICB will be able to operate similarly, with similar effects, for its group of people. The Northern Care Alliance is already reported to be doing this. In effect, this leaves the principle of a universal and comprehensive NHS in tatters. And let’s not forget the many private companies already accredited to the health system support framework, including Atos, Capita, Operose, Deloitte, Ernst &amp; Young, McKinsey, PWC, Serco and Optum. The bill says nothing about these, but they will be providing population health management, digital and other support services. In other words, the private sector will be present at every level of the health service. These changes and more build on three decades of incremental chipping away by successive governments at the founding principles of the NHS as a universal and comprehensive service based on public funding, accountability and ownership. In the wake of the pandemic, the public is being softened up to expect fewer NHS-funded services and to be pushed into paying for them. Already, the NHS-partnered patient access website for GP appointments, repeat prescriptions and “discovering local health services” is reportedly offering mostly private healthcare with lists of tests and treatments to be paid for. This bill will help ease the way for more private funding and provision of health services. MPs and local authorities will have little influence over the decisions of ICBs, as ICBs will not be established to meet the needs of the local population. Provider collaboratives will be even freer to make their own decisions. Yet the handing over of power to non-statutory groups has received less scrutiny than one would expect from MPs in the Commons. The spin that ICBs will deliver “integration and innovation” has been swallowed by too many. This bill cannot be defeated by MPs, and it is highly unlikely it will be defeated in the Lords. The government’s Commons majority is too large and there are too many MPs and peers with interests in the private health sector. But there’s still time for the public to realise what’s happening. Anyone who believes that health services must be publicly funded and provided should oppose this bill. Allyson Pollock is clinical professor of public health at Newcastle University and author of NHS plc: the Privatisation of Our Health Care; Peter Roderick is a principal research associate at the Population Health Sciences Institute, Newcastle UniversityThe UK government may be about to approve the use of a controversial bee-killing pesticide, wildlife groups fear. Sources inside the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) say that, after pressure from the sugar beet industry, an emergency authorisation of the neonicotinoid Cruiser SB is likely to be announced in the coming weeks. The pesticide, which is lethal to bees and other insects, is prohibited under European Union law except in extreme circumstances. The insecticides act by binding strongly to receptors in the central nervous system of insects, causing overstimulation of their nerve cells, paralysis and death. The sugar beet industry says it needs the pesticide to protect seeds from a disease called virus yellows, which reduces yield and sugar content. In 2017, Michael Gove, the then environment secretary, welcomed the EU ban, and promised that “unless the scientific evidence changes, the government will maintain these increased restrictions post-Brexit”. Campaigners claim that if the authorisation does go ahead, it could be in breach of the recently passed Environment Act. Joan Edwards, the director of policy and public affairs at the Wildlife Trusts, said: “Less than a month after the government passed its flagship Environment Act, legally committing to halt the decline of species, it would be unthinkable that they are even considering betraying that promise by authorising the use of an environmentally devastating chemical against the advice of the government’s Health and Safety Executive and the Expert Committee on Pesticides.” The pesticide in question, otherwise known as thiamethoxam, is considered especially dangerous to wildlife as it leaches into the soil, where it stays for long periods of time and can be absorbed by other plants, some of which are important to pollinators. These plants can then kill the insects that feed on them. Edwards said: “The Wildlife Trusts oppose the authorisation of thiamethoxam because it has a devastating effect on wildlife. When a seed dressing of the neonicotinoid pesticide is applied to sugar beet crop only 5% of the pesticide goes where it is targeted, in the crop. The rest ends up accumulating in the soil, from where it can be absorbed by the roots of wildflowers and hedgerow plants, or can leach into rivers and streams where it could harm over 3,800 invertebrate species, which spend at least part of their life cycle in freshwater.” The RSPB senior policy officer Stephanie Morren said: “Bees are one of our best-loved group of insects. Without them our farming system would collapse. “We are in a nature and climate emergency, and with farming accounting for 75% of the land in England we cannot reverse nature’s decline without the support of our farmers. But highly toxic pesticides like neonicotinoids have no place in a sustainable farming system. “Questions must be raised about how approving even temporary use of these chemicals and endangering our declining bee populations is in any way consistent with halting wildlife decline. Instead, farmers must be supported to reduce our reliance on these harmful chemicals.” A Defra spokesperson confirmed the department had received an application for the emergency authorisation of Cruiser SB, containing thiamethoxam, which was being assessed. Earlier this year, the government was forced into a U-turn over plans to approve the use of the pesticide after outcry from environmental groups.The head of the Ofsted schools inspectorate has said England risks a repeat of cases such as Arthur Labinjo-Hughes, the six-year-old abused and murdered in his own home last year, if schools and social services are disrupted by future lockdowns. Asked if further school closures could result in similar cases, Amanda Spielman said: “Yes, schools closing clearly has had some significant risks for children around the reduction in quality of education but we know that there is a minority of children who sadly are safer in school than out of it. “And we have to recognise that by closing schools we make that minority less safe.” The chief inspector of schools also criticised the “hokey-cokey education” that children have endured during the pandemic, saying that nearly every child in England suffered as a result, including vulnerable children who “disappeared from teachers’ line of sight”. Launching Ofsted’s annual report for 2020-21, Spielman wrote: “Almost all children felt the impact of Covid-19 and the resulting restrictions to some extent. Many of the youngest children had their development and progress hampered, with some even regressing … In primary and secondary schools, children struggled with a hokey-cokey education: in the classroom, at home, separated in bubbles, isolating alone.” Ofsted’s report claims that the loss of education, disrupted routine, and lack of activities “led some children to develop physical and mental health problems. Loneliness, boredom and misery became endemic among the young.” It found that pressures on council care placements have grown during the pandemic, with long waiting lists and children being placed far from their families or in unregistered homes, as some children “became involved in criminal activity, including gang violence, and were at risk of child sexual exploitation”. Spielman would not be drawn on the number of children who have been made more vulnerable by the pandemic lockdowns, or on the length of time that will be needed for the education system in England to repair the damage. “In various surveys and testing programmes that have been done so far we’ve seen some encouraging signs. But I think we’ve also seen that it’s the children at the lower end of the spectrum, the ones who are the lower achievers, are the ones who’ve learned least through periods of remote learning and enclosed schools. “So it’s it’s very important that we stay very clearly focused on the ones who will need help, and who won’t simply recover through schools doing what they always do so well,” Spielman said. She said the suspension of Ofsted’s inspection visits for long periods since March 2020 had hampered its ability to investigate the workings of educational settings, including within prisons, or other social care. Prisoners were found to be unable to leave their cells to learn or take part in classes. “Many lost motivation and floundered, especially those with learning difficulties, low levels of education or limited English,” the report states. In response to criticism that Ofsted’s inspections are disrupting schools still affected by Covid, Spielman said the inspectors were sympathetic and that more than three-quarters of schools’ requests for an inspection deferral have been granted, especially at those with high levels of staff absence. Post-visit surveys collected by Ofsted found that 90% of schools said that the inspection would help them to improve, while complaints were running at levels similar to pre-pandemic inspections. “All the feedback that we collect says that our aim this term, to make sure that we genuinely take account of the Covid challenges for school, are landing about where they should,” Spielman said. But Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said Ofsted needed to recognise that inspections remained disruptive for many schools. “We have asked the inspectorate to allow inspections to be deferred upon request to a later date, and while it has slightly softened its criteria for deferrals, it has not gone far enough in this respect,” Barton said.Good morning. Devin Nunes, the California congressman and close ally of Donald Trump, has announced he will be leaving the US House of Representatives next month to join Trump’s new social media venture. The Republican, who represents a rural California district, wrote a letter to constituents on Monday, saying wanted to pursue a “new opportunity to fight for the most important issues I believe in”. Shortly afterwards, Trump Media &amp; Technology Group announced Nunes would become the company’s chief executive in January. In a statement, Nunes said: “The time has come to reopen the internet and allow for the free flow of ideas and expression without censorship.” Who is Devin Nunes? The 48-year-old has served as a congressman since 2003 and became known as one of Trump’s staunchest defenders in the House during his first impeachment. Meanwhile, Wall Street’s top financial regulators are investigating Trump’s $1.25bn deal to float his new social media venture on the stock market, a filing showed on Monday. Latest Emmett Till murder investigation ends without charges The US Department of Justice is ending its latest investigation into the death of Emmett Till, a Black teenager who was brutally abducted, tortured and killed in 1955, without filing any charges after failing to prove that a key witness lied. Till’s family expressed disappointment that there will continue to be no accountability for the infamous lynching. “Today is a day we will never forget,” Till’s cousin the Rev Wheeler Parker said during a news conference in Chicago. “For 66 years we have suffered pain … I suffered tremendously.” The DoJ reopened the investigation after a 2017 book quoted Carolyn Bryant Donham, a white woman, as saying she lied about Till whistling and making sexual advances toward her. But the investigation ended without charges against Donham, who told the FBI that she had never recanted her accusations. What did the DoJ say? In a news release on Monday, it said there was “insufficient evidence to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that she lied to the FBI”. Why was the case so infamous? Till’s murder galvanized the civil rights movement after Till’s mother insisted on an open casket and Jet magazine published photos of his brutalized body. China attacks US diplomatic boycott of Winter Games as ‘travesty’ of Olympic spirit China has reacted angrily to the US government’s diplomatic boycott of next year’s Winter Olympics, as more countries said they would consider joining the protest over Beijing’s human rights record. Chinese officials dismissed Washington’s boycott as a “posturing and political manipulation” and tried to discredit the decision by claiming that US diplomats had not even been invited to Beijing in the first place. The White House confirmed on Monday that it would not send any official or diplomatic representatives due to “ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity”. “The athletes on Team USA have our full support,” said the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki. “We will be behind them 100% as we cheer them on from home. We will not be contributing to the fanfare of the Games.” Have any other countries chosen to do the same? New Zealand said it would not send diplomatic representatives at a ministerial level but cited Covid-19 as the primary reason, adding that officials have made clear their concerns about human rights issues. Any others? The UK, Canada, and Australia have said they were considering their positions. Last week, Lithuania announced neither its president nor ministers would attend the Games. In other news … Joe Biden is taking part in a virtual summit today with Vladimir Putin, after days of close consultation with European allies on a joint response to an invasion of Ukraine and armed with a wide range of punitive measures at his disposal. The chief executive of a US mortgage company has drawn criticism after he reportedly fired 900 employees on a Zoom call. “I come to you with not great news,” Vishal Garg, CEO of Better.com, is heard saying in footage of the call which was widely circulated on social media. Since early October, residents of Carson, California, have been sickened by a noxious smell coming from the Dominguez Channel that has been likened to “a rotten egg” or “the stench of death”. Now, officials have pinpointed a cause: a fire at a warehouse that stored beauty and wellness products. US immigration judges are embroiled in a tense dispute with Joe Biden over their battle to restore union rights taken away from them under the Trump administration. The head of the federal immigration judges’ union has accused the Biden administration of “doubling down” on its predecessor’s efforts. Stat of the day: People in counties that voted for Trump nearly three times more likely to die from Covid People in counties that voted Trump are more likely to die from Covid-19, than those who live in counties that voted for Biden, according to a study by National Public Radio. NPR examined deaths per 100,000 people in about 3,000 counties across the US since May 2021. According to NPR, 1 May was chosen as the start date as it is roughly the time when vaccines became universally available to adults. The study found that areas that voted for Trump by at least 60% in November 2020 had death rates 2.7 times higher than counties that voted heavily for Biden. Don’t miss this: children of big oil employees discuss climate crisis with their parents What do you do when your family has deep ties to the oil and gas industry, yet all agree that burning fossil fuels is accelerating the climate crisis? For one family, the fossil fuel industry’s role in stoking the climate emergency is more than just a dinner table debate. It’s their legacy. Andy and Wendy, who met in the 1970s while working as engineers for Exxon, sit down with their children, James and Liz, the day before Thanksgiving to discuss the climate crisis and how the family reckons with their fossil fuel connection. … or this: A Native American designed Washington’s logo. Now his family want it back Last year, when the Washington football team ditched their racist nickname, they also ditched their logo, the profile of a Native American. It was designed by Walter S “Blackie” Wetzel and now Walter’s son Don Wetzel wants it back, but it is unclear whether Washington own the copyright. Wetzel wants to repurpose the logo so that it becomes the face of the Blackie Wetzel Warrior Society, which hopes to raise public awareness for missing and murdered Indigenous women, but Washington is yet to agree. “It’s more of a moral battle than a legal battle,” Don said. Climate check: All coral reefs in western Indian Ocean ‘at high risk of collapse in next 50 years’ All coral reefs in the western Indian Ocean are at high risk of collapse in the next 50 years due to global heating and overfishing, according to an assessment. From Seychelles to the Delagoa region off the coast of Mozambique and South Africa, the reef systems are at risk of becoming functionally extinct by the 2070s, with a huge loss of biodiversity, and threatening the livelihoods and food sources for hundreds of thousands of people. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last Thing: Street name honour for unloved ‘castle lady’ dismays Belgian village Cities around the world have been inspired by the #MeToo movement to rename their streets after women. But in the Flemish village of Moorsele, which is happy to honour Marie Curie with Marie Curiestraat, there is despair over Marie Cornilliestraat. Named after Marie Cornillie, who was a landowner known as the “castle lady of Moorsele”. She lived there between 1793 and 1867 but the people of the village have a long memory. They say she was no role model but a haughty figure who loved her dog more than the locals and had a tendency to urinate in the street.A whistleblower at the UK Foreign Office has revealed that thousands of emails from people in Afghanistan related to requests for evacuation were left unread. Raphael Marshall, a former desk officer, estimated that up to 150,000 people applied for evacuation, but that fewer than 5% of those got any assistance. We would like to hear from those in Afghanistan who got in touch with the Foreign Office to request evacuation. Do you feel you should be in the UK? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below, anonymously if you wish, or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. Please note that while we’d like to hear from you, your security is most important. We recognise it may not always be safe or appropriate to record or share your experiences – so please think about this when considering whether to get in touch with the Guardian. IP addresses will be recorded on a third party webserver, so for true anonymity use our SecureDrop service, however anything submitted on the form below will be encrypted and confidential if you wish to continue. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.A senior academic who claimed she was sacked because her bosses could not tolerate her “naturally loud” voice and passionate teaching style has won her case for unfair dismissal. Dr Annette Plaut, who had worked as a physicist at Exeter University for 30 years, was described as a “Marmite character” during the tribunal, valued by many but considered “overbearing” by others. The university argued during the tribunal that she was dismissed over the way she dealt with two PhD students, but Plaut claimed she was the victim of race and sex discrimination. In its judgment, the tribunal said: “The race discrimination claim is based on her eastern European Jewish heritage, which she says gives her inherent characteristics (in the way she interacts with people) which she says were the reasons for the way she dealt with her students. “She says that as a woman she was discriminated against as physics has long been male-dominated, and she says that a man would not have been treated so. The university says that Dr Plaut’s behaviour warranted dismissal, and that race and sex had nothing to do with it.” Plaut was the first woman in the department and claimed she had long struggled against unconscious bias, the tribunal heard. She said her heritage meant that she was naturally loud, her body language was demonstrative and her conversational style was naturally argumentative. She compared this to people of Mediterranean heritage. Plaut claimed that she became loud when she became excited or engaged in a topic, and as she was passionate about physics that often happened. She told her students that was how she was, and they should not take offence. The university said it was much more balanced in gender terms than when Plaut joined. There was great diversity in the academic staff, many of whom had Mediterranean backgrounds, and Plaut’s assertion that she was treated unfairly because of “similar interpersonal characteristics” was incorrect. It said she was perceived to shout at students and colleagues and none of this was to do with her being female or Jewish. The tribunal concluded: “Senior management had decided that Dr Plaut would not be tolerated further. The good things she had done over the years were given no weight.” The tribunal ruled Plaut was unfairly dismissed and claims of victimisation and harassment in respect of her suspension on 11 April 2019 succeeded. The tribunal did not find that claims of race discrimination and sex discrimination were made out, except for one, that of harassment by suspending her for making a comment at her return to work meeting on 3 April 2019. A University of Exeter spokesperson said: “We believe there are inaccuracies in this judgment and will be appealing the decision to the employment appeals tribunal.”Let’s face it: our chances of staying under a 2C increase in global temperature are not looking good. If we continue business as usual, the world is on track to heat up by 3C at least by the end of this century. At current global emissions rates, the carbon budget that we have left if we are to stay under 1.5C will be depleted in six years. The paradox is that, globally, popular support for climate action has never been so strong. According to a recent United Nations poll, the vast majority of people around the world sees climate change as a global emergency. So, what have we got wrong so far? There is a fundamental problem in contemporary discussion of climate policy: it rarely acknowledges inequality. Poorer households, which are low CO2 emitters, rightly anticipate that climate policies will limit their purchasing power. In return, policymakers fear a political backlash should they demand faster climate action. The problem with this vicious circle is that it has lost us a lot of time. The good news is that we can end it. Let’s first look at the facts: 10% of the world’s population are responsible for about half of all greenhouse gas emissions, while the bottom half of the world contributes just 12% of all emissions. This is not simply a rich versus poor countries divide: there are huge emitters in poor countries, and low emitters in rich countries. Consider the US, for instance. Every year, the poorest 50% of the US population emit about 10 tonnes of CO2 per person, while the richest 10% emit 75 tonnes per person. That is a gap of more than seven to one. Similarly, in Europe, the poorest half emits about five tonnes per person, while the richest 10% emit about 30 tonnes – a gap of six to one. (You can now view this data on the World Inequality Database.) Where do these large inequalities come from? The rich emit more carbon through the goods and services they buy, as well as from the investments they make. Low-income groups emit carbon when they use their cars or heat their homes, but their indirect emissions – that is, the emissions from the stuff they buy and the investments they make – are significantly lower than those of the rich. The poorest half of the population barely owns any wealth, meaning that it has little or no responsibility for emissions associated with investment decisions. Why do these inequalities matter? After all, shouldn’t we all reduce our emissions? Yes, we should, but obviously some groups will have to make a greater effort than others. Intuitively, we might think here of the big emitters, the rich, right? True, and also poorer people have less capacity to decarbonize their consumption. It follows that the rich should contribute the most to curbing emissions, and the poor be given the capacity to cope with the transition to 1.5C or 2C. Unfortunately, this is not what is happening – if anything, what is happening is closer to the opposite. It was evident in France in 2018, when the government raised carbon taxes in a way that hit rural, low-income households particularly hard, without much affecting the consumption habits and investment portfolios of the well-off. Many families had no way to reduce their energy consumption. They had no option but to drive their cars to go to work and to pay the higher carbon tax. At the same time, the aviation fuel used by the rich to fly from Paris to the French Riviera was exempted from the tax change. Reactions to this unequal treatment eventually led to the reform being abandoned. These politics of climate action, which demand no significant effort from the rich yet hurt the poor, are not specific to any one country. Fears of job losses in certain industries are regularly used by business groups as an argument to slow climate policies. Countries have announced plans to cut their emissions significantly by 2030 and most have established plans to reach net-zero somewhere around 2050. Let’s focus on the first milestone, the 2030 emission reduction target: according to my recent study, as expressed in per capita terms, the poorest half of the population in the US and most European countries have already reached or almost reached the target. This is not the case at all for the middle classes and the wealthy, who are well above – that is to say, behind – the target. One way to reduce carbon inequalities is to establish individual carbon rights, similar to the schemes that some countries use to manage scarce environmental resources such as water. Such an approach would inevitably raise technical and information issues, but it is a strategy that deserves attention. There are many ways to reduce the overall emissions of a country, but the bottom line is that anything but a strictly egalitarian strategy inevitably means demanding greater climate mitigation effort from those who are already at the target level, and less from those who are well above it; this is basic arithmetic. Arguably, any deviation from an egalitarian strategy would justify serious redistribution from the wealthy to the worse off to compensate the latter. Many countries will continue to impose carbon and energy taxes on consumption in the years to come. In these contexts, it is important that we learn from previous experiences. The French example shows what not to do. In contrast, British Columbia’s implementation of a carbon tax in 2008 was a success – even though the Canadian province relies heavily on oil and gas – because a large share of the resulting tax revenues goes to compensate low- and middle-income consumers via direct cash payments. In Indonesia, the ending of fossil fuel subsidies a few years ago meant extra resources for government but also higher energy prices for low-income families. Initially highly contested, the reform was accepted when the government decided to use the revenue to fund a universal health insurance and support to the poorest. To accelerate the energy transition, we must also think outside the box. Consider, for example, a progressive tax on wealth, with a pollution top-up. This would accelerate the shift out of fossil fuels by making access to capital more expensive for the fossil fuel industries. It would also generate potentially large revenues for governments that they could invest in green industries and innovation. Such taxes would be politically easier to pass than a standard carbon tax, since they target a fraction of the population, not the majority. At the world level, a modest wealth tax on multimillionaires with a pollution top-up could generate 1.7% of global income. This could fund the bulk of extra investments required every year to meet climate mitigation efforts. Whatever the path chosen by societies to accelerate the transition – and there are many potential paths – it’s time for us to acknowledge there can be no deep decarbonization without profound redistribution of income and wealth. Lucas Chancel is co-director of the World Inequality Lab, an affiliate professor at Sciences Po, and the author of Unsustainable Inequalities: Social Justice and the EnvironmentThere are two schools of thought out there – and probably always will be. The first is that the Gallagher Premiership, English rugby’s flagship competition, is the toughest league in the world. The second, most often heard across the Irish Sea, is that saying something loudly and often enough does not automatically make it true, particularly when Leinster put out their best available side. It is one of those tail-chasing arguments that rarely produces a definitive conclusion, even at this time of the year. Does it really mean, if Leinster were to smash a severely diluted Bath in the Heineken Champions Cup this Saturday, that the English are all lame ducks? Or vice versa if Munster, currently ensnared in Covid’s web, cannot conquer Wasps in Coventry? As representative samples go, neither feels massively scientific. Even Leicester’s trip to Bordeaux, pitting the Premiership’s pacesetters against the Top 14 leaders, will offer only a fleeting snapshot rather than a full widescreen picture. Better to wait, maybe, until the French side have to make the return trip to Welford Road. Or until the semi-finalists are known. Unless you take the view that the Six Nations is, ultimately, the only true guide. It depends, as ever, on your personal vantage point. Regardless of any looming French/Irish takeover, however, there is little doubt several Premiership sides are on the up. It might not be instantly apparent across Europe this season – although the Challenge Cup might be a different story – but the opening tranche of league fixtures has seen a distinct shift with Leicester, Gloucester and London Irish all performing appreciably better than last season. Harlequins, Exeter and Saracens, meanwhile, have all won a domestic title within the past three seasons and remain hungry for more. Northampton, Newcastle, Sale, Wasps and, latterly, Worcester have all had their encouraging moments. Even Bristol and Bath, presently doing it tough, have well funded squads and will regroup at some stage. Recently, in round nine, there was only one home win among the six weekend fixtures. A sign of the dog-eat-dog times? At its best the Premiership can claim to be relentlessly competitive, with talented players from home and abroad, rousing backdrops and some smart new emerging coaches. Just as crucially, though, it appears to be a league in which standards are rising virtually across the board. The Covid lockdown seems to have prompted several people to stop, take stock and re-boot themselves. No one who saw Gloucester pick off Bristol on Friday, for example, could fail to notice their steady improvement under George Skivington’s beady eye. In terms of organisation, aggression at the breakdown, defence and collective understanding, the Cherry &amp; Whites are clearly on an upward trajectory. Chris Harris’s try was a prime example, with the timing and placement of his centre partner Mark Atkinson’s exquisite left-footed grubber little short of perfect. London Irish do not yet ooze consistency from every pore but, in addition to winning at Exeter and Harlequins this season and drawing at Saracens, they have scored 40 tries, four more than any other team. The past weekend also underlined that, when it matters, the Tigers and the Chiefs have the forward muscle and determination to withstand high-class visitors, with London’s two international-scattered teams both sent packing having registered one try between them. Some have suggested these were not pretty contests to watch but since when was rugby meant to resemble an old-school beauty pageant? To these eyes both were highly absorbing, rugged games of rugby in difficult conditions, full of spirit and passion if not bucketfuls of tries. They also looked and felt – relevantly to this discussion – like properly big games. How often do the Welsh regions play domestic fixtures in front of packed stands with the same crackle of genuine electricity in the air? This is important because it is the key to professional club rugby, wherever it is played. Ugly or beautiful, dry or wet, hot or cold, full or empty, the occasion absolutely has to matter. If few outside the two teams or towns involved are greatly bothered, even the best of games will not spread rugby’s gospel. The Six Nations clearly matters hugely, which is why so many millions of people watch it. To date the United Rugby Championship, still in its infancy, has yet to deliver that unmissable quality. There is, inevitably, a caveat. While there may be encouraging signs of a broader Premiership base of potential winners, it is too early to make sweeping assumptions. How much will interest hold up at English clubs in the lower reaches of the table this spring with no relegation and little except pride at stake if the top eight Champions Cup qualifying slots are all but filled? Good for player development, in some cases, but the lack of jeopardy clearly has its downsides. With the play-offs not until June and Bath staying up regardless, certain international players may end up featuring even less for their clubs than they do already. Which potentially makes the whole league less easy to market despite the rising try counts. Not to mention even less meaningful at the bottom end. Progress? There remain, as ever, two sharply contrasting schools of thought. • This is an extract from our rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.The US activist investor Elliott Management has ratcheted up the pressure on the UK firm SSE, with a public attack on the company’s energy transition strategy and a call for two new independent directors. The FTSE 100 company has rejected the idea from the New York-based hedge fund – which has built a stake in SSE in recent months – that it should spin off its renewables arm. On Tuesday, it issued a further swift rebuff of Elliott’s demands. Last month SSE announced a £12.5bn plan to increase investment across its renewable energy and electricity networks businesses over the next five years. It will fund this by selling a 25% stake in its electricity networks division and cutting the dividend. By the end of the decade, the company plans to run a quarter of the UK’s offshore windfarms, alongside its electricity grid networks in the north of Scotland and parts of England, and its planned fleet of flexible “low carbon” power plants. However, in a letter addressed to the SSE chairman, Sir John Manzoni, Elliott said the firm’s investment strategy lacked ambition and called on the company to provide a detailed and credible plan “to address investor concerns around SSE’s corporate governance, its ability to fund its growth in the long term, and its persistent undervaluation”. The hedge fund attacked the underperformance of the company and its share price during the eight years it has been run by Alistair Phillips-Davies as chief executive. It is Elliot’s latest public campaign for change at a FTSE 100 company, after it started demanding a management shake-up and other major changes at the drugmaker GSK in the summer. Run by Paul Singer, the hedge fund is known for its aggressive corporate and political battles, and chased the Argentinian government for debts for more than decade. Describing itself as a top five shareholder in SSE, Elliott said it believed that its portfolio of networks and renewables assets was worth £21 a share, and argued that a listing of the renewables arm would have unlocked £5bn of value. It criticised the “opaque review process” that resulted in a “lacklustre plan”. Elliott said SSE should explore other strategic initiatives, including a “more ambitious disposal” of its networks business and a partial listing or partial disposal of the renewables division; appoint two new directors with renewables experience; and create a strategic review committee made up of independent board members. The hedge fund said SSE “must act expeditiously to restore investor confidence, lest the impairment in shareholder value become permanent”. The SSE share price was little changed on Tuesday at £16.34. Phillips-Davies defended the company’s investment plan and rejected Elliott’s criticism. He said SSE had conducted a “rigorous” review including input from shareholders, and said the plan was “the optimal pathway to accelerate clean growth, lead the energy transition and create value for all stakeholders”. “We’ve continued to have constructive and supportive discussions with our major shareholders and stakeholders about the plan, which was also backed by Moody’s who reaffirmed SSE’s Baa1 rating and upgraded their outlook to stable on the strength of the plan,” the SSE chief executive said. “Separation risks valuable growth options across the clean energy value chain, would jeopardise our ability to finance and deliver the major infrastructure the UK needs to create jobs and achieve net zero, and would lose shared skills that benefit the group.”The Champions Cup has been rocked by the coronavirus pandemic before the opening round of fixtures this weekend with Scarlets forfeiting their match and Cardiff preparing to field a “misfit” team including semi-professionals as Covid-19 once again blights Europe’s elite competition. Scarlets announced on Tuesday they would not consider any of the 32 players in quarantine until Friday for their fixture at Bristol 24 hours later and as a result that they are unable to field a team, thereby handing the Bears a 28-0 win. Cardiff, meanwhile, have insisted their match against the defending champions, Toulouse, will go ahead but with 42 players and staff in quarantine. The Champions Cup is set to get off to a farcical start. Last season, five matches were called off and two entire rounds were cancelled due to the pandemic and while this weekend’s disruption is as a result of United Rugby Championship teams being caught in South Africa when tighter border controls were introduced, Champions Cup organisers will be braced for further upheaval as the Omicron variant takes hold in Europe. English teams competing abroad – both Harlequins and Leicester begin their campaigns in France – already face stricter testing procedures after the government’s updated guidelines were introduced on Tuesday morning. The Six Nations organisers will be closely watching, too, with the variant potentially threatening best-laid plans for next year’s competition. Scarlets found themselves in an invidious position with organisers insisting that postponing Saturday’s match was not possible, leaving the Welsh side with only 14 available players. They explored emergency loans from Ospreys and Dragons but ultimately took the decision that forfeiting was the only viable option. “It is a decision we haven’t taken lightly,” said the Scarlets executive chairman, Simon Muderack. “Ultimately the welfare of our players has to be our priority and following discussions with our staff it was felt that there was too much risk to ask the players currently in quarantine to play a game of this magnitude and intensity just a day after coming out of quarantine.” Cardiff, however, will press on and field academy players as well as semi-pros against Toulouse but can call on the Wales internationals Josh Adams, Ellis Jenkins and Tomos Williams. “We have a slightly misfit group coming together,” said the academy manager, Gruff Rees, who has assumed temporary charge with Dai Young in quarantine. “There is less pressure in some ways, but we’ve got that responsibility that whoever is on the field we are representing a great rugby club in a great competition.” Meanwhile, South Africa’s World Cup winning fly-half, Handré Pollard, has confirmed he turned down more lucrative offers to join Leicester next season. Pollard’s arrival at Welford Road as George Ford’s replacement was confirmed on Tuesday with the 27-year-old revealing: “There are bigger deals on the table, but I’ve made this decision to work with Steve [Borthwick] and to be a part of an unreal, great club at Leicester Tigers which has such a great history.”Harriet Harman, Labour’s former deputy leader, has said she will step down at the next election after around 40 years in parliament. The mother of the house – the title given to the female MP with the longest continuous service – said she felt she could move on from the Commons with renewed faith in her party’s future. Harman, 71, the MP for Camberwell and Peckham, was first elected in 1982. In an email to constituents, she said: “I feel I can leave the House of Commons now confident that Labour is gaining strength under the leadership of Keir Starmer and the new team he has appointed. “It has been an overwhelming honour to be member of parliament representing and working for the people of Camberwell and Peckham for nearly 40 years.” Harman served as acting Labour leader in 2015 and deputy leader from 2007 to 2015. Under Tony Blair, she was secretary of state for social security and the first minister for women, and has held numerous other cabinet and shadow cabinet positions. She said she had fought 10 general elections, served under seven prime ministers and eight Labour leaders. She said she had “entered the Commons as one of only 11 Labour women MPs in a parliament that was 97% men. Now there are 104 Labour women and across all parties women MPs are a ‘critical mass’.” But she said there “remains much more to be done till women genuinely share political power with men on equal terms and until women in this country are equal. I will leave the House of Commons with my feminism, my belief in Labour and my enthusiasm for politics undimmed.” In her email, Harman said she remained extremely proud of the achievements of the Labour government, citing the national minimum wage, Sure Start centres, the Equality Act and investment in education and the NHS. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said Harman had “paved the way for future generations”. “Harriet, your commitment to Labour and Camberwell and Peckham for almost 40 years is phenomenal,” he said. “A champion for women and social justice – you’ve paved the way for future generations. “It’s been a privilege to work with you, I look forward to continuing to do so for a while yet.” Ed Miliband, who led the party with Harman as his deputy between 2010 and 2015, described her as “a feminist, fighter, conviction politician”. “Harriet taught me so much as my first political boss and was a brilliant deputy,” he said. “She has achieved so much and will be sorely missed from the House of Commons.” The shadow culture secretary, Lucy Powell, said Harman had been a “trailblazer for women”. “She’s incredibly effective, very loyal, fierce, formidable and very kind. She taught me so much,” she said. Two other long-serving Labour MPs, Barry Sheerman and Dame Margaret Hodge, have also announced their plans to stand down at the next general election. The party is understood to have asked MPs to inform them if they intend to step down, so it can begin to make preparations for new candidates.My poop deck is on fire. I am taking on water below decks and some guy is screaming he is going to kill me. I am panicking, randomly picking up wooden planks, cannon balls, accordions and coconuts, trying to stave off inevitable death in the middle of a thunderstorm. All of this to get closer to my 17-year-old son. Where once my boy Charlie used to cuddle me during the scary bits in Toy Story, now he watches violent anime on his phone instead. He has swapped our 2010s Call of Duty split-screen co-op adventures for fragging friends on Overwatch. Instead of sharing real life with me, he has spent the last three years in the virtual pirate world of Sea of Thieves. What do online pirates offer that I don’t? Grog? Shanties? Pillaging? I can’t pillage at my age. Not with my knees. Right now my son’s hands are temporarily separated from the controller by a video game ban: where 90s Dominik leapt on to Right to Reply, Points of View and Newsnight to say that video games were a good influence on kids, dad Dominik stops his son playing if his grades drop below 80%. So I take the opportunity to play the game myself. There is an 8.47gb upgrade before I can play, one of my modern-day gaming hates. If games keep upgrading and expanding like this, then at some point they will trigger the heat death of the universe. I am also treated to the now-commonplace interminable loading screen: I appreciate we are mourning Sir Clive Sinclair, but making games take as long to load as they did from a cassette in 1981 is a tribute too far. At least it uses the Unreal Engine, eh? You know where you are with the Unreal Engine, because it seems that every single game in the world uses it. I opened a tin of beans the other day that used the Unreal Engine. I’m sure it’s responsible for Squid Game. A lifetime later, a burst of music and seagull sound effects herald the beginning of some actual play. During the tutorial, a ghost Pirate Lord makes me eat a banana. As first pirate actions go, this is a little underwhelming. I am offered a standalone adventure called A Pirate’s Life, which is a misleading title because you begin as a fully formed adult pirate. That’s not a life. I want the pirate birth, pirate school, pirate university. I want to experience that moment two eyepatches collide for that first sweet pirate kiss. But the actual adventure is exactly the same repetitive push/pull/jump stuff I played in the original Tomb Raider. I grimly realise that if I wanted a real challenge, I would have to play… online. My first mission involved sailing to an island to fight some skeletons, dig up some treasure and take it to Reaper Island. Except I didn’t, because a bunch of other players in a brigantine destroyed my solo swashbuckling self in seconds. I re-spawned and they were still there. And they killed me again. I re-re-spawned. And they killed me again. Yes. It’s your classic online gaming version of Sartre’s Huis Clos, with online gaming confirming his famous proclamation that hell was other people. “Charlie, do these guys get any extra gold or experience for this?” I asked my son, having lifted his ban so he can backseat game for me. “None whatsoever,” he replies. “So why do it?” “It’s like teabagging you in CoD, Dad.” One time, I encountered another player in the afterlife portal that you tediously and pointlessly visit before re-spawning. He stood in front of me, fished out his bucket and made a scooping movement. “What’s this guy doing, son?” I asked. “He is scooping up your tears, Dad,” he smirked. I yanked the lead from the back of the Xbox. “Nice work, Dad. Bringing out the old Fifa Special Trick Moves again?” I kept searching for something rewarding but the more I played, the more I realised it has hidden shallows rather than hidden depths. Most of it involves slowly sailing across the sea, with no fast travel option, because it strives to be realistic. OK. Maybe this WAS what a pirate’s life was like. Bursts of uncontrollable violent excitement in between lengthy periods of boring sailing. Eventually I turn to my son and say, “Sorry. This game is rubbish.” “Oh, I know Dad. It’s pretty bad.” I am slightly confused. “So why do you keep playing it?” “Because I have a ship with my friends. We have a laugh and do sea shanties and stuff.” And then I realise. Sea of Thieves isn’t about pirates, or thrilling action, it’s about engaging with other humans. And I realise that this was what we had just done: father and teenager, sharing stuff once again. I felt mildly euphoric. “Son,” I say, eyes moist, “do you want to form a crew on a new ship?” “Sorry, Dad,” he said. “I’m off to KFC to meet my mates.” And there he left me, on the deserted island of dadhood.Early in the pandemic it was the blunt tools of past centuries that saved the most lives. Until Proven Safe, by Geoff Manaugh and Nicola Twilley (Picador), dives into the crudely effective and widely abused strategy of quarantine, the separation of those feared to be sick from those deemed healthy. The authors trace formal quarantine back to 14th-century Dubrovnik where, in response to the Black Death, visitors were ordered to spend a month in a nearby town or on an islet before entering the city. The strategy caught on elsewhere but, despite keeping disease at bay, discrimination, inconvenience and miserable conditions hardly encouraged compliance. In one spectacular failure, a plague-infested ship evaded Sicilian quarantine and left 16,000 dead on the island. Examples range from the Apollo astronauts (quarantined in case they carried lunar germs) and the Covid pandemic to efforts to prevent a “chocpocalypse” by protecting the cacao plant. With emerging diseases on the rise, quarantine is back for good, the authors warn, and it must be radically overhauled. From the moment coronavirus took hold in China, the race was on to make a vaccine. That researchers designed, manufactured, trialled and received approval for jabs in a record 12 months is extraordinary. In Vaxxers (Hodder &amp; Stoughton), two key members of the Oxford Vaccine Group, Prof Sarah Gilbert and Dr Catherine Green, describe the gruelling effort behind that feat. The science is clear, as is the intense pressure the team was under, undoubtedly exacerbated by media scrutiny This is not the only Covid vaccine story: the tale of how mRNA shots came to be is arguably more compelling. But Oxford set out to make a “vaccine for the world” and put profit aside to achieve the goal. In an episode of history short on heroes, there is no need to look further.and controversies over the vaccine’s effectiveness, rare serious adverse events and how it would be distributed. If the advent of Covid vaccines marked a high point for modern medicine, the story of OxyContin, a powerful and highly addictive painkiller, marks an unforgivable low. In Empire of Pain (Picador), Patrick Radden Keefe, a staff writer on the New Yorker, chronicles the Sackler dynasty, two branches of the family who came together to get behind Purdue Pharma’s blockbuster drug. The pills helped fuel a deadly wave of drug use across the US in an opioid epidemic that has killed more than half a million people. The Sacklers who took over Purdue knew their drug was more potent than morphine, but exploited the fact that physicians thought otherwise. The book reeks with wrongdoing, shameful behaviour and corruption that runs deep into the US healthcare system. Profits from OxyContin helped bankroll Sackler philanthropy, helpfully linking the family name with high culture and scientific advancement. Hence the Sackler library at the University of Oxford and the Sackler Institute at King’s College London. At one Sackler hearing, Jim Cooper, a congressman from Tennessee, said: “Watching you testify makes my blood boil. I’m not sure that I’m aware of any family in America that’s more evil than yours.” It might be considered a red flag when a scientist wakes with a racing heart after a pig-faced Hitler enters their dream wanting a primer on the “uses” of their discovery. The nightmare struck Prof Jennifer Doudna, a Berkeley biochemist, in 2014 amid a patent row over Crispr, the gene-editing technology she helped develop. In The Code Breaker (Simon &amp; Schuster), Walter Isaacson tells Doudna’s story. Isaacson is an accomplished biographer and the result is clear, insightful and even funny. Doudna and her collaborators, notably Prof Emmanuelle Charpentier, with whom she shared the 2020 Nobel prize, believe Crispr will save lives by curing genetic disease. But as Doudna mulled her nightmare, she also realised the near-countless ways it could be abused. Our clever attempts to bend nature to our will have an uncanny knack of backfiring. In Under a White Sky (Bodley Head), Elizabeth Kolbert, the Pulitzer prize-winning author of The Sixth Extinction, provides a tour of such calamities. She starts on the Chicago River, once so thick with human excrement and other delights that it was said a chicken could cross without getting its feet wet. The river drained into Lake Michigan, the city’s source of drinking water, so engineers reversed the flow, sending the waste towards St Louis. The move “upended the hydrology of roughly two-thirds of the United States”, Kolbert finds. Later, Asian carp were introduced to feast on weeds that snagged boat propellers, but the invasive species are a threat to the ecosystem and must now be contained by electrifying the river. The book’s title comes from proposals to combat global heating by spraying hundreds of thousands of tonnes of particles into the atmosphere. What could possibly go wrong? For one, if the spraying stopped, the world would suffer rapid heating called “termination shock”. Most disturbing of all is Kolbert’s conclusion that, despite the risks, technological fixes could become our only hope. One of the most intriguing and provocative books of the year is The Sleeping Beauties: And Other Stories of Mystery Illness by Dr Suzanne O’Sullivan (Picador). In Sweden, hundreds of children from refugee families fall into coma-like states for months or years at a time. In New York state, seizures become contagious among schoolchildren. Meanwhile Nicaraguan communities report tremors, convulsions and disturbing hallucinations of a figure in a hat who comes to take them away. O’Sullivan, a neurologist, delves into the cases and describes how “biopsychosocial” and “functional neurological” disorders may not appear on MRI scans but are no less real or serious for their absence. She finds that social narratives often play a crucial role in the spread of such illnesses – and in their treatment, too. Efforts to understand consciousness face a daunting question. Appropriately named “the hard problem”, it asks why we should have a rich inner life – why is there something it feels like to be you? It is not clear that science has the answer, but in Being You: A New Science of Consciousness (Faber), Prof Anil Seth, director of the University of Sussex Sackler Centre for Consciousness Science (see above) offers an approach that may get us most of the way there. By focusing on what he calls “the real problem”, modern science can unravel why patterns of brain activity produce particular experiences and not others. It is a brilliant and profound book that explains how our perception of the world, ourselves included, is a “controlled hallucination”: the brain’s best guess of what’s out there, constructed as much from the inside out as the outside in. Carlo Rovelli, a professor of quantum gravity, takes on another kind of mystery in Helgoland (Allen Lane). The book is named after the North Sea rock where in 1925 the young Werner Heisenberg inched open the door to the quantum realm with calculations that left him reeling. This is not the story of Heisenberg, however. It is Rovelli’s take on how physicists have strayed off course in thinking about the quantum world. He is no fan, for example, of the many worlds theory, where reality cleaves to accommodate all possible futures. He pushes instead his “relational interpretation”, where objects are defined by whatever they interact with. This conjures a bewildering world. “We must abandon something that seemed most natural to us,” he writes: “the simple idea of a world made of things.” • Browse all the featured books and save up to 15% at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.A clip towards the end of this respectful documentary shows Barack Obama revealing that his role-model heroes were Muhammad Ali and Arthur Ashe. Surely, Ashe had to be the bigger influence: the only black man ever to have won Wimbledon was a famously someone with a thoughtful, non-strident personality whom the white tennis establishment found to be highly acceptable. Ashe himself, though sympathetic to the new black radicalism of the 1960s was, in terms of style, entirely apart from it, and this film recounts his stoicism at enduring the occasional “Uncle Tom” jibe. Perhaps this was crystallised by his decision to ignore the boycotts against apartheid South Africa and play there as a way of accelerating integration, despite the fact that he was for a long time refused a visa precisely because of his fulminations against apartheid. This strategy had a non-Hollywood ending: he lost in the singles final there in 1973 to his old rival Jimmy Connors. Later, Nelson Mandela embraced Ashe in public and called him “my brother”. A whole documentary (or maybe a feature film) could be made about the culture-clash duel between Ashe and Connors, the bad boy of tennis who refused to play for his country in the Davis Cup, and then sued Ashe for calling him unpatriotic. But Connors’ rock’n’roll antics were something that only a white man could afford; Ashe grew up knowing that he had to stick to the rules more than others, in a world where the white authorities would be looking for any excuse to exclude him. Later, Ashe faced a tragic catastrophe: he contracted HIV through infected blood in the course of a heart operation, and so became a respected campaigner for Aids education and awareness, a new purpose he took up with characteristic dignity and humility – though, typically, his style was far from that of radical movements such as Act Up. The issues involved here might have been discussed a little more extensively and the provenance and context of the TV interview archive material could have been labelled more clearly. But this is a decent film. Citizen Ashe is in cinemas from 10 December.The price of a Christmas dinner is more than 3% higher than last year, led by an increase in the price of frozen turkey, traditional puddings and sprouts. The total cost of 10 key items for a family of four nudged up 3.4% to £27.48 as rising prices of some of the most expensive ingredients in the festive blow-out offset a fall in the price of basic vegetables including potatoes, carrots and parsnips and of cranberry sauce, analysts at Kantar found. The price of frozen turkey is up 7% year on year, according to Kantar, as processors battle with increased labour and feed costs, while the price of Christmas puddings, sprouts and cauliflower increased 5% and gravy granules 3%. The price of carrots is down 13%, potatoes 5% and parsnips 6%, while cranberry sauce is 3% cheaper than in 2020. Despite fears of a rise in drinks prices, the survey found that sparkling wine cost the same on average as last year. Fraser McKevitt, the head of retail and consumer insight at Kantar, said the increase in the cost of a Christmas dinner closely echoed that of grocery prices as a whole in the four weeks to 28 November, with inflation hitting 3.2%, the highest level since June last year. Overall inflation was driven by price rises in savoury snacks, crisps and cat food. However, McKevitt said consumers had yet to adapt their habits to deal with higher prices. “Habits we’d expect to see shift, like swapping branded products for own label or seeking out promotions, haven’t altered just yet,” he said. Instead, families are looking to treat themselves with the supermarkets’ premium own-label ranges, such as Tesco Finest and Asda Extra Special, the fastest-growing ranges in store. Overall, however, spending in supermarkets and local convenience stores is down almost 4% on last year. Every chain experienced a drop in sales, according to Kantar, compared with last year’s lockdowns across the UK when restaurants, cafes, pubs and many workplaces were closed. Independent convenience stores were the biggest losers, with sales down more than 10%, while Iceland and Morrisons were the worst-performing of the big chains, with sales down 7.1%. Aldi and Lidl were the top performers with sales down just 1.1%, helping Lidl overtake the Co-op to become the UK’s sixth largest supermarket for the second time. It previously briefly moved ahead of the Co-op a year ago. More than £6 of every £100 spent in British grocery stores goes to Lidl. McKevitt said he expected to see a shift in behaviour in the coming week as news of the Omicron Covid-19 variant emerged. Online grocery sales fell by 12.5% in the month to 28 November as shoppers returned to stores after last year’s high street lockdown. But McKevitt said: “As concerns grow over rising case numbers, we expect some people will prefer to shop online again to limit their visits to stores.”Britain’s lockdown drinking habits may have had fatal consequences. Deaths caused by alcohol in 2020 increased by almost 19%, marking the biggest rise since records began, according to the Office for National Statistics. There were 8,974 deaths from alcohol specific causes registered in the 12 month period, up from 7,565 deaths in 2019 – the highest year-on-year increase since the data series began in 2001. It bucks a trend in which fatalities from alcohol remained stable for the previous seven years. In England, the number of people drinking more than 14 units a week increased after the first national lockdown, according to surveys by Public Health England (PHE), and has remained at similar levels since. As pubs shut, drinking at home soared, with off-licence sales of beer rising 31% and spirits 26% compared with 2019. [See footnote] Dr James Tucker, the head of health analysis, said: “There will be many complex factors behind the elevated risk since spring 2020. “For instance, Public Health England analysis has shown consumption patterns have changed since the onset of the coronavirus pandemic, which could have led to hospital admissions and ultimately deaths. We’ve seen increases in loneliness, depression and anxiety during the pandemic and these could also be factors. However, it will be some time before we fully understand the impact of all of these.” Close to eight out of 10 of the deaths were from alcoholic liver disease and although alcohol-related cirrhosis can take a decade or more to develop, most deaths occur as a result of acute-on-chronic liver failure owing to recent alcohol intake, a PHE study in July found. Scotland and Northern Ireland continued to have the highest rates of alcohol deaths, but the fastest rises were in Wales and England. The sharpest rise in deaths in England was in the West Midlands, followed by the south-west and London. Nearly twice as many men died as women, which is consistent with previous years. “The harm caused by alcohol goes beyond this unacceptable, avoidable loss of life,” said Dr Richard Piper, the chief executive of the charity Alcohol Change UK, which is calling for minimum unit pricing. “Millions more suffer from worsened mental and physical health every day as a result of harmful drinking.” Referring to the government’s unveiling on Monday of a new drug strategy, Sir Ian Gilmore, the chair of the Alcohol Health Alliance, said: “[We] fail to understand their complacency on this other drug of dependence, alcohol.” He added: “Our poorest communities suffer most from alcohol harm, and so if our prime minister is serious about ‘levelling up’ he must back the robust plans for drugs with an alcohol strategy that seeks to turn this tragic trend around.” The threat of liver disease had been growing before the pandemic. For example, liver mortality rates in England increased 43% between 2001 and 2019, to the extent that liver disease became the second leading disease causing premature death among people of working age, according to PHE. Previous studies have shown that while there was an increase in the number of people abstaining from alcohol, in the early months of lockdown people with problem drinking either increased their intake or broke a dry period. The picture for smoking is less certain. Official statistics released on Tuesday showed a drop in smoking from 14% of over-18s in the first three months of 2020 to 12% for the rest of the year. However, statisticians cautioned this was “implausible” and highlighted a change to the survey method from face-to-face to phone. Another survey, of over-16s, which did not change its methodology, found a statistically insignificant decrease in smoking in Great Britain, from 15.8% in 2019 to 14.5% in 2020. • This explanatory note was added on 8 December 2021. Public Health England – some of whose Covid impact findings are cited above – has now been replaced by the UK Health Security Agency and the Office for Health Improvement and Disparities; the latter is to carry on the Wider Impacts of Covid-19 on Health (WICH) monitoring project.Pure evil is all around in this unnervingly subtle, sophisticated movie; it is a conspiracy drama-thriller, shot with a kind of desiccated blankness, about the occult world of super-wealth and things not to be talked about. The title is a Swiss banker’s codeword in conversation for “be silent”. It is set in 1980 in Argentina, at the time of the junta’s dirty war against leftists and dissidents. Azor gives a queasy new perspective on the horror of those times, and there is even a nauseous echo of the Swiss banks’ attitude to their German neighbours in the second world war. Yvan (Fabrizio Rongione) is a private banker from Geneva – elegant, discreet, an excellent speaker of Spanish, English and French – who is making what appears to be an emergency diplomatic visit to soothe his well-heeled and secretive clients in Argentina, in the company of his elegant, supportive wife Inès (Stéphanie Cléau). Yvan’s rich clientele are deeply troubled by the new political regime; they fear that they could find their assets being sequestrated by the government. And what is even worse is that these people were used to dealing with Yvan’s colleague Réné, a genial and exuberant figure who has also now vanished. Part of the chill in Azor is the professional calm cultivated by Yvan and Inés; Yvan affects never to be really upset or distressed about what has happened to Réné and what is happening all around him. There is something dreamlike in the series of social calls that Yvan and Inés make to a succession of wealthy, elderly, melancholy people who sense that their lives and their prosperity are coming to an end but never respond to any sense of emergency. It is a film that continues to echo mysteriously inside my head.Here’s some things you might not know about Dolph Lundgren: he’s got a master’s in chemical engineering, Jerry Springer played the US president in his directorial debut The Defender, and his real first name is … Hans. Well, would Hans Lundgren have been the same big deal? The ultimate Euro-iceman in the 1980s, he played a villain in Bond film A View to a Kill (at the behest of then-girlfriend Grace Jones who had a starring role), and man-mountain Soviet boxer Ivan Drago in the fondly remembered Rocky IV (so fondly remembered, in fact, that director-star Sylvester Stallone, weirdly, felt the need to release a director’s cut a few weeks back). Lundgren, notoriously, put Stallone in hospital with a dangerously swollen heart after he was allowed to whale on his co-star, no holds barred, for a few seconds. Not having really meant to be an actor in the first place, he transitioned into a star of head-cracking action pictures in the 1990s, the third in the great action B-movie triumvirate of Steven Seagal and Jean-Claude Van Damme. The standout is probably Universal Soldier, alongside Van Damme – another Euro expert in human bashing – which also happened to be Roland Emmerich’s first Hollywood film. Other highlights of the period include martial arts pic Showdown in Little Tokyo, cyber thriller Johnny Mnemonic, and mercenary drama Men of War. Not going to lie, things seemed to go downhill a bit for Lundgren when the new millennium dawned, as the kind of whack-and-run film he specialised in lost ground. Luckily, though, he could ride the noughties’ nostalgic wave of affection for those 80s/90s action films by getting a role in Stallone’s revival project The Expendables, getting his face alongside the likes of Stallone himself, Jason Statham and Stone Cold Steve Austin. But there is another string to his bow. Oddly enough he had forged a working relationship with – of all people – Sidney J Furie, the Canadian director who had knocked everyone for six with The Ipcress File in the 1960s. After starring in two successive films for Furie – Detention in 2003 and Direct Action in 2004 – Lundgren embarked on a new career as a director after Furie became ill while shooting a third, The Defender. Lundgren has directed four more films since; including the new one, Castle Falls, which features Scott Adkins. So you’ve no doubt got hundreds of questions for Mr Lundgren. Post your questions in the comments below. The thread will close at noon GMT on 8 December and the responses will be published soon. • Castle Falls is released on Digital from 20th December and Blu-ray &amp; DVD 10th January 2022Indigenous leaders on the frontline of the climate crisis are calling on the Science Museum to cancel its sponsorship deal with a company they say is responsible for widespread destruction in their homelands. Leaders from communities in Australia, India and Indonesia warned that the museum’s new agreement with Adani Green Energy, whose parent company Adani Group is a major operator of coal mines and coal-fired power stations, is legitimising its “destructive coal expansion activities”. In a letter to the museum, they state: “Indigenous communities in all these countries are experiencing land-grabs, repression, the destruction of sacred lands, pollution of air, land and water and, of course, the worsening impacts of climate change exacerbated by burning coal.” The appeal follows criticism of the museum over its deals with fossil fuel giants – and companies associated with them – in the midst of a climate crisis. In recent months it has faced resignations and protests over its relationship with Adani Green Energy and Shell. Last month the Guardian revealed how two scientists had refused to allow their work to be featured by the museum, with dozens more coming out in support of a boycott a few days later. In Tuesday’s letter Adrian Burragubba, spokesperson for the Wangan and Jagalingou Family Council in Australia; Phillip Kujur, from Adivasi Activist Forum for Indigenous Rights, Jharkhand, India; Siti Maimunah, from Jatam, Indonesia, and Joseph Zane Sikulu, from the Pacific Climate Warriors, accuse the director of the museum, Sir Ian Blatchford, of dismissing indigenous concerns during a recent appearance on the BBC. Responding to comments from an indigenous spokesman, Blatchford appeared to question the truth of some of the accusations being put forward and said “some campaigners exaggerate very significantly those issues”. The letter says that the move to “dismiss the concerns of Indigenous peoples” is “completely unacceptable for any publicly funded institution, and particularly concerning coming from a museum of science”. It adds: “When Indigenous peoples approach the museum with deeply held concerns that their rights are being violated by one of its partners, they must be respected, listened to and acted upon, not dismissed as exaggerated and untrue.” In response Blatchford said it was not his “intention to comment on the detailed working practices of Adani Mining nor to dismiss the concerns of anyone”. He added: “The point I was seeking to make … was that it would be for Adani Mining to respond to allegations about its activities in Australia and that a proper discussion of such allegations should involve other relevant voices, in this case the people impacted by mining activities, the mining company and the Australian government.” The Adani Group did not respond to requests for comment about the accusations in the letter. Previously it has insisted it is “very supportive” of traditional communities and cultures. It has also said its coal mining projects in India have improved the country’s energy security and boosted employment, education and healthcare. Mary Archer, chair of the museum, defended its relationships with Adani Green Energy which she said was one part of the Adani Group, “which includes five other businesses with interests spanning ports, airports and coal mining”. “Each of the businesses is an independent, publicly traded entity with its own board of directors,” she added in a letter. “This clear distinction is important, specifically because of Adani Green Energy’s potential to have a very positive impact, both in supporting millions of people in India who have currently no access to electricity and in expediting India’s transition away from coal.” Archer also defended the museum’s wider sponsorship deals with fossil fuel companies. “Given the enormous expertise and wealth tied up in major energy companies, they need to play a much bigger role in urgent change to prevent a climate catastrophe … We believe the right approach is to engage, debate and challenge companies, governments and individuals to do more to make the global economy less carbon intensive.”We would like to hear how women in England have experienced antenatal care, giving birth and postnatal care this year. If you have had a baby recently, or are currently pregnant, how did you find your antenatal care, care during and after birth and maternity services? Did you or do you feel well supported in pregnancy and birth and the postpartum period? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.On the evening of 9 August 1956, a couple of hundred people squeezed into a student union lounge for a concert recital at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, about 130 miles outside Chicago. Student performances didn’t usually attract so many people, but this was an exceptional case, the debut of the Illiac Suite: String Quartet No 4, that a member of the chemistry faculty, Lejaren Hiller Jr, had devised with the school’s one and only computer, the Illiac I. Decades before today’s artificial intelligence pop stars, Auto-Tune and deepfake compositions was Hiller’s piece, described by the New York Times in his 1994 obituary as “the first substantial piece of music composed on a computer” – and indeed by a computer. One of the four musicians who performed the piece that night was George Andrix, a violist and composition student at the university. Now 89, Andrix remembers an auditorium packed with people “who showed up to see what this monster of a computer could do.” The Illiac I, short for Illinois Automatic Computer, was the first supercomputer to be housed by an academic institution. “It would have been a big point of pride that the computer was being used in this way,” he says. The following day, a wire story published by the United Press cast the show, which lasted 15 minutes, in a contentious light. It referred to the piece as “a suite composed by an electronic brain” that was “sponsored” by Hiller and his research associate Leonard M Isaacson. “Some people didn’t dig the beat,” the article claimed, citing one unnamed audience member who likened the music to a barnyard and another who feared “it does away with the need for human composers”. Hiller, the man primarily responsible for the Illiac Suite, became an overnight celebrity, appearing in Time magazine and Newsweek. “I went from total obscurity as a composer to really being on the front page of newspapers all over the country,” he told an interviewer in 1983. “One week I was nobody, and the next week I was notorious.” Biographer James Matthew Bohn recalls stories of Hiller’s phone “ringing almost off the hook” in the aftermath of the performance. “He was very famous for 15 minutes,” Bohn says. Sixty five years later, the Illiac Suite has gone back to being largely unknown outside certain classical, experimental and academic circles, but it marked a historic first step towards the world of computerisation and AI in music. Computers weren’t completely foreign to the field at that time. In 1951, British scientist Alan Turing recorded the melodies to three songs, including God Save the King, with laboratory equipment. But for the Illiac Suite, the Illiac I was used to generate the music itself, utilising a series of algorithmic probabilities that were programmed into it by Hiller and Isaacson. No one had ever used a computer to compose music in this manner before. Others, such as John Cage, helped lay the groundwork by experimenting with randomised composition methods in the early 1950s. Around the same time, Greek composer Iannis Xenakis developed a process he called “stochastic music,” whereby he based his compositions on mathematical formulas that were calculated by a computer. Hiller went one step further. “[He was] setting up algorithms for the computer to make choices,” says his daughter, Amanda Hiller, who was born several years after the suite’s completion. “But each one of those algorithms represented a set of particular views about what the musical outcomes could or should be.” A native of New York City, Lejaren Hiller had played music for much of his life. He studied composition under Milton Babbitt and Roger Sessions and performed in student ensembles while he attended Princeton University, where he received his PhD in chemistry in 1947 at the age of 23. “He absolutely adored the standard [classical] repertory,” says Neely Bruce, one of Hiller’s former students. After contributing to the war effort as a chemical researcher, Hiller worked for DuPont in Waynesboro, Virginia, before taking his position at Illinois in the fall of 1952. His arrival coincided with that of the Illiac I, which was unveiled that September and took up the better part of an entire room. Operating it was a laborious process that required entering code on to paper tape and waiting for it to blurt data back out – in the case of composing music, that data was then transcribed by hand into musical annotation. “Very few people got to interact with it,” says Bohn. “Even those who wrote programs for it never got in the same room with it.” Hiller, however, was one of them. After working with the computer during research into synthetic rubber, Hiller began to think about how the algorithms could be applied to basic musical counterpoint exercises. Babbitt encouraged him to pursue the idea. The Illiac Suite’s four movements were a series of progressively more complicated experiments that mimicked different historical styles of classical music, from the Renaissance to Arnold Schoenberg’s 12-tone serialism of the early 20th century. At the time of the premiere, only the first three parts were completed. Sanford Reuning, the second violinist for that performance, is the only other living musician to have played that night. “It sounded like a first piece by a computer, if you know what I’m saying,” he says. “It was certainly not anything startling.” The real departure came with the fourth movement, finished in autumn 1956, where Hiller drew on Markov chains, a particular kind of probability method where the music was based only on the note that directly precedes it, with little or no ability for the computer to memorise an overarching theme. After the plunked strings and skittering, sawing melodies of the opening movements, the fourth pops and percolates; it skips, stops, and starts, ratcheting up the intensity as it arrives at a series of dead ends and cliffhangers. Adding to the unpredictability was the fact that Hiller, devoted to the purity of his experiment, didn’t want to edit what the computer came up with. Thus, says David Rosenboom – who, as a student at Illinois, played violin on a 1967 re-recording of the suite – it can sometimes be awkward and unnatural. “It’s a hard piece to play,” he observes. “It requires technical skill, but at the same time, there’s a certain quirkiness about it that throws you off a little here and there as you jump around trying to play these big leaps.” Hiller and Isaacson published a book about their research, Experimental Music: Composition with an Electronic Computer, in 1959. A review in the Chicago Tribune showed continued public skepticism, about whether a computer “can create music of lasting value or is an intriguing sidelight on the fascinating and fast growing science of automation”. Concerns about a computer takeover, still very real today among composers, missed the point back then says Amanda Hiller: “I certainly don’t think he ever thought a computer could replace a person as a composer.” By autumn 1958, Hiller had transitioned full-time from the chemistry to the music department, where he spearheaded the establishment of Illinois’ Experimental Music Studio – only the second of its kind in the world, after the Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center. Cage himself did a residency at Illinois, working closely with Hiller on his landmark piece HPSCHD, which combined computer composition techniques with chance-based decision making from the I Ching. It made its premiere in an elaborate, multimedia performance that lasted five hours and included 52 tape players and 64 slide projectors at a campus auditorium in 1969. (Bruce was among the players.) The year prior, Hiller left to join the music faculty at the State University of New York at Buffalo, where he remained until his retirement, due to the onset of Alzheimer’s, in 1989. Hiller ultimately assembled a large and highly eclectic body of music – “I’d say more of his compositions were non-digital [than digital],” his daughter points out – but he never fully shed the stigma of an amateur musician. He was a lightning rod among many of his musical peers, particularly those who worked alongside him at Illinois. “He was totally despised by certain members of the faculty. Because, you know, he touched a nerve in a very deep way,” says Bruce. He recalls Robert Swenson, who actually played cello at the suite’s premiere, complaining that “Hiller has a hotline to the international press.” Those at Buffalo, like conductor Jan Williams, were more receptive. “The fact that somebody started using computers only piqued my interest. I thought it was fabulous,” he says. The Illiac Suite stands today as a monument to a certain postwar epoch, one where structuralist philosophies could be wed with digital technology and rule-based, mathematical songwriting techniques that date back as far as ancient Greece. “It’s a landmark piece in the development of the use of algorithmic thinking in music, which is now everywhere,” says Rosenboom. “Do I put it on and listen to it as dinner music? Not necessarily. But I think it was a very important experience in thinking about the musical form, and what that form can tell us and not tell us.” Bruce is more succinct: “I love the piece,” he says. “I think it’s fantastic.” Ironically, Andrix and Reuning had little idea of the blowback that followed their first performance of the suite until later. It has since come to take on greater meaning for both. “I was a little surprised,” says Reuning, of when he came to appreciate the impact it made. “And I felt good, because I’d had a part in it and gave the first performance of it. That made me feel good to have been on the ground [floor] of this thing.”It’s been an oddly fractured year for dance. Repeated lockdowns stifled talent, thwarted new ideas. Online and outdoor offerings provided some release but when theatres reopened in May, dancers emerged as if from hibernation, full of life, anxious to get on with their notoriously short careers. None more so than Marianela Núñez. The Royal Ballet has excelled as a company this year, but she is the fixed star gleaming at its heart, never disappointing, always moving towards her aim of perfection. Her smile irradiates the stage, but it is the purity of her classical technique, the sense that you are watching someone at the absolute peak of their abilities. She returned to performance in June in Jerome Robbins’s Dances at a Gathering, a piece for 10 dancers to Chopin’s piano music, which is both wistful and joyous, a subtle celebration of friendship and love. As the girl in pink, she was by turns playful and melancholy, carefully poised so as not to reveal too much but suggesting hidden depth. “It was just so lovely to be back and to feel the atmosphere with the other dancers,” she says. “We’d all been stuck in our little bubbles, working on our own, and it was very emotional to be back.” Being part of a company is important to Núñez. She is a principal but not a prima donna. Last month, she danced the title role in Giselle but also, at other performances, the secondary part of the threatening, ghostly Myrtha. “I danced Myrtha a lot in the beginning of my career and then as soon as I started to dance the title role, I stopped. Yet Myrtha is so important for the story of the ballet; she establishes that mystical world in the second act and she has to hold the stage for so long. I just thought how brilliant it would be now when I have more understanding to give it another try. So I asked Kevin [O’Hare, the director of the Royal Ballet] if I could do it. It was a dream. But oooh, it’s demanding physically.” She grins, letting out her breath with a sigh. “Sometimes I catch myself thinking, oh my god, how can I love this so much, especially with roles like the classics, because they’re scary. The challenge is huge. But it gives me so much. Coming back has been phenomenal. I keep trying to taste every little bit of it. What lockdown taught me, one more time, is just how much I love what I do. It is my true love and passion.” All Núñez’s performances are notable for their refinement, the sense they give that she is pushing deeper on a long journey into classical ballet. She is determined to mine every nuance from roles that were created in the 19th and 20th centuries so that 21st-century audiences understand and appreciate them. “I am such a bun-head,” she says with a giggle, making fun of her obsession with ballet history. “Before my performances in Giselle, I re-watched the Anton Dolin documentary [A Portrait of Giselle] about the ballet, with dancers such as Alicia Markova, Yvette Chauviré, Carla Fracci, all these legends, and I am just constantly ticking all these things in my head. “There is so much to learn. I am definitely getting more curious about these classical works, these styles, but also about me, how I approach these famous roles. Every rehearsal is seriously a journey. I still ask how can I push that, so that each performance is a work in progress. I still have a huge chance to achieve, to get better.” Born in Argentina, Núñez turned up at the Royal Ballet in 1997, as a prodigy who had been dancing leading roles at Teatro Colón in Buenos Aires since the age of 14. UK employment law meant she spent a year in the Royal Ballet school, joining the company at the age of 16 and then working her way to principal in 2002. Now 39, she is still in her pomp, her physical abilities showing no sign of waning. “I really do feel I am in my prime,” she says, with another laugh. “But I feel actually I have been in my prime for a long time. The fact that I can sustain it is the biggest gift to me. It’s not only to do with maturity and understanding about the art form, but also my body feels great. I can perform three days in a row and still feel really good.” For someone who loves dancing, lockdown proved a particular challenge. For her first, long enforced absence from the stage in 2020, she went to Argentina to be near her parents – “I got the last plane out” – and her boyfriend, Alejandro Parente, a former principal at Teatro Colón. She ended up staying for five months. “Lockdown there was super-tight. At least here in the UK people could go for a walk in the park; we were only allowed to go round the block.” Like every other dancer, she kept herself going by doing class in a confined space, finding refuge and solace in that daily routine of exercise. “I thought I was going to go crazy. But I was actually surprised about how grown up I was about it. I thought there were going to be more tears,” she says, smiling at herself. “I think it was because I could see that all over the world, we were all in the same place, giving each other strength. It was hard, but we did it.” The return to England and to dancing, displaying radiant virtuosity in pas de deux from Don Quixote and Le Corsaire, when restrictions briefly lifted at the end of last year, was pure joy. “I could see how well everyone was dancing. I felt so proud. I think that just gave me a push to know that it was going to be OK, we just had to be patient.” This year, her performances have been unforgettable. Not just in Dances at a Gathering, but also as a glorious Aurora awoken from sleep in the third act of The Sleeping Beauty. “The word I think of is content,” she says. “She has to be happy but not in a toothy way. It feels very grand.” The description might as well apply to Núñez herself. She contains happiness in her dancing, but it goes much deeper than teeth and smiles. Since she wants to continue performing for as long as she can, she recognises the lockdown may actually have had a beneficial side-effect, because it gave her chance to rest, to ease those odd aches and pains that a dancing body always suffers. “My physio said it is going to give me another 10 years,” she says, laughing again. She is inspired by dancers such as Sylvie Guillem and Leanne Benjamin, prodigies like her who extended their careers well into their 40s. “It wasn’t just that they kept dancing, it was that every time you saw them, they were great. You could feel their energy. If I get to be like them, it will be amazing.”The “disastrous” way in which plastic is used in farming across the world is threatening food safety and potentially human health, according to a report from the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organization. It says soils contain more microplastic pollution than the oceans and that there is “irrefutable” evidence of the need for better management of the millions of tonnes of plastics used in the food and farming system each year. The report recognises the benefits of plastic in producing and protecting food, from irrigation and silage bags to fishing gear and tree guards. But the FAO said the use of plastics had become pervasive and that most were currently single-use and were buried, burned or lost after use. It also warned of a growing demand for agricultural plastics. There is increasing concern about the microplastics formed as larger plastics are broken down, the report said. Microplastics are consumed by people and wildlife and some contain toxic additives and can also carry pathogens. Some marine animals are harmed by eating plastics but little is known about the impact on land animals or people. “The report serves as a loud call for decisive action to curb the disastrous use of plastics across the agricultural sectors,” said Maria Helena Semedo, deputy director general at the FAO. “Soils are one of the main receptors of agricultural plastics and are known to contain larger quantities of microplastics than oceans,” she said. “Microplastics can accumulate in food chains, threatening food security, food safety and potentially human health.” Global soils are the source of all life on land but the FAO warned in December 2020 that their future looked “bleak” without action to halt degradation. Microplastic pollution is also a global problem, pervading the planet from the summit of Mount Everest to the deepest ocean trenches. The FAO report, which was reviewed by external experts, estimates 12.5m tonnes of plastic products were used in plant and animal production in 2019, and a further 37.3m in food packaging. Plastic is a versatile material and cheap and easy to make into products, the report says. These include greenhouse and mulching films as well as polymer-coated fertiliser pellets, which release nutrients more slowly and efficiently. “However, despite the many benefits, agricultural plastics also pose a serious risk of pollution and harm to human and ecosystem health when they are damaged, degraded or discarded in the environment,” the report says. Data on plastic use is limited, it says, but Asia was estimated to be the largest user, accounting for about half of global usage. Furthermore, the global demand for major products such as greenhouse, mulching and silage films is expected to rise by 50% by 2030. Only a small fraction of agricultural plastics are collected and recycled. The FAO said: “The urgency for coordinated and decisive action cannot be understated.” Prof Jonathan Leake, at the University of Sheffield in the UK and a panel member of the UK Sustainable Soils Alliance, said: “Plastic pollution of agricultural soils is a pervasive, persistent problem that threatens soil health throughout much of the world.” He said the impact of plastic was poorly understood, although adverse effects had been seen on earthworms, which played a crucial role in keeping soils and crops healthy. “We are currently adding large amounts of these unnatural materials into agricultural soils without understanding their long-term effects,” he said. “In the UK the problems are especially serious because of our applications of large amounts of plastic-contaminated sewage sludges and composts. We need to remove the plastics [from these] before they are added to land, as it is impossible to remove them afterwards.” As a solution, the FAO report cites “the 6R model” – refuse, redesign, reduce, reuse, recycle, and recover. This means adopting farming practices that avoid plastic use, substituting plastic products with natural or biodegradable alternatives, promoting reusable plastic products and improving plastic waste management.Global inequality is as marked as it was in the early 20th century pinnacle of western imperialism after the capture by the super-rich of an increasing share of the world’s income, a new report has shown. A study by a group of economists including Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez said 30 years of the globalisation of trade and finance had widened the gap between rich and poor. Although the World Inequality report found inequalities between nations had declined since the end of the cold war, it said inequality had increased within most countries and had become more pronounced as a result of the global pandemic of the past two years. The wealth gap between rich and poor was even wider than the income divide, the report added, with the boom in asset prices last year resulting in the sharpest increase in billionaires’ wealth on record. The research showed the richest 10% of the global population currently taking 52% of global income, compared with an 8% share for the poorest half. On average, an individual from the top 10% of the global income distribution earned $122,100 (£92,150) a year, whereas an individual from the poorest half of the global income distribution makes $3,920 a year. “Global inequalities seem to be about as great today as they were at the peak of western imperialism in the early 20th century,” the report said. “Indeed, the share of income presently captured by the poorest half of the world’s people is about half what it was in 1820, before the great divergence between western countries and their colonies.” The report – the work of more than 100 researchers from around the world – found income inequality varied between regions, with the Middle East and north Africa (MENA) the most unequal and Europe the least unequal. In Europe, the top 10% income share is about 36%, whereas in MENA it reaches 58%. While some countries – including the US, Russia and India – had experienced “spectacular increases” in inequality, other parts of the world, such as European countries and China, had reported relatively modest rises. Gender income inequality remained high despite a small narrowing of the gap between men and women over the past 30 years. Women’s share of income stood at 30% in 1990 and had risen to nearly 35% by 2020. The report, the work of the World Inequality Lab, which is hosted jointly by the Paris School of Economics and the University of Berkeley, California, said progress in tackling gender inequality had been “very slow” at a global level. The wealth of the 50 richest people on earth had increased by 9% a year between 1995 and 2001, with the wealth of the richest 500 rising by 7% a year. Average wealth grew by 3.2% over the same period. Since 1995 the top 1% took 38% of all additional wealth, whereas the bottom 50% captured just 2% of it. Lucas Chancel, the lead author of the report, said: “The Covid crisis has exacerbated inequalities between the very wealthy and the rest of the population. Yet, in rich countries, government intervention prevented a massive rise in poverty, this was not the case in poor countries. “If there is one lesson to be learned from the global investigation carried out in this report, it is that inequality is always political choice.”A swift reprisal package against Russia – including US troops and Patriot missiles stationed in the Baltics, the cutting off of Russia from the Swift banking payments system and reinstated sanctions on the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline – must be prepared now in case it invades Ukraine, the Latvian foreign minister has said. The warning from Edgars Rinkēvičs comes as Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin prepare to hold talks about the growing tensions. The US has said it would send reinforcements to Nato’s eastern flank in the event of an invasion, as well as imposing severe new economic measures against Russia. With an estimated 100,000 Russian troops already gathered within striking distance of the borders, the situation is the worst it’s been since 2015, when Moscow staged a large-scale incursion into Ukraine, clandestinely sending tanks and artillery to encircle Ukrainian troops and compelling Kyiv to sign a peace agreement in Minsk that has since come close to collapse. Rinkēvičs said he had already discussed the issue with the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, when Latvia hosted the Nato foreign ministers summit last week. “Russia has to know that if you do something bad in Ukraine then the Nato and US presence in the eastern flank of the alliance will increase. If you do this, you will provoke a bigger presence than now”, he said. “These decisions had to be made now through bilateral channels and the alliance so if Russia acts there can be a swift and broad response that does not take months or years. “Work is already underway for a tough economic sanctions package, including the disconnection of Russia from the Swift banking system, sanctions on the Russian gas pipeline Nord Stream 2 and other economic sanctions. That package needs to be prepared so it can be applied reasonably quickly. We need to be able to target those who are helping Russia to get more revenues. “In addition, there must be an increase in the Nato presence in the eastern and Black Sea flank. If there is military activity in Europe, and an aggressive stance by the Russian federation, we must be prepared to defend the territory of the alliance and to send a clear signal that this is a direct consequence of Russian activity.” He added that Russia needed to be told Nato would not accept its red lines on countries such as Ukraine and Georgia being admitted to the alliance. “If the country in question is ready to join Nato, that is a sovereign Nato decision and there will be no third country meddling”, he said. He also said, regardless of whether there was an invasion, it would be possible at the last minute to prevent the near-complete Nord Stream 2 pipeline going ahead, saying it was a matter for the EU energy ministers: “ … that is a decision for the European Union and this could be achieved. Some European nations have started procedures requiring the European Commission to check the applicability of EU law to Nord Stream. There is no straight easy answer.” The pipeline, bypassing the existing route through Ukraine, would deprive Kyiv of badly needed transit revenues, and make Europe even more dependent on Russian gas at a time of rising prices and geopolitical tension. “If Nato fails to protect its member states or its territories,” he warned, “then it will not just be a military and political failure but a complete mental collapse of the system of values that have been built since the end of world war two. It will mean the whole transatlantic community will be in complete disarray and the glue that keeps us together has failed”.I write this from a Birmingham city centre hotel, a few minutes’ walk from a doorway I slept rough in during the 1990s, near the alleyways where I injected drugs. Sadly, more than 20 years later, people are still sleeping in that same doorway and are still injecting drugs in those alleyways. The government’s 10-year drug strategy, announced on Monday, will do little to help these people. It is a criminal sanction-led approach – and I know from my own experience that a system designed to punish rather than support will only force drug users into hiding, back to those filthy dark alleyways with the rats running about. I have lost too many friends to drug overdoses over the years – today, deaths are at their highest levels since the early 1990s. I have tried to change this by campaigning for safer injecting facilities (I ran the first unsanctioned one in the UK in Glasgow in April). These kinds of spaces are used in cities around the world – and help keep thousands of people alive by allowing people to use drugs under professional supervision, reducing harm, such as contracting illnesses like HIV, and supporting people into treatment. They have not been adopted by the government in the new drug strategy. Instead, there is a call to crack down on middle-class drug users by revoking their passports and driving licences and a focus on targeting criminal drug gangs. These “war on drugs”-style tactics will not reduce illicit drug use and they won’t help those most at risk. I never had a passport when I was using heroin, for a start, and seeing the prime minister taking part in a drugs bust would have made no difference to my using whatsoever. The fact is that drugs will always be available and people will take them. Criminal sanctions often create more harm than the drug use itself – I was put through a traumatising experience of police cells, courts and news reports about being a “junkie”. A better way to deal with criminal gangs is to support people to get off street drugs and on to safer medications such as methadone, buprenorphine and diamorphine – then allow them the time and space they need to work with professionals. From there, they can begin to address the issues that many people who have used drugs problematically face – complex traumas, mental health issues, experiences in the care system, abuse and neglect. But instead the government wants “abstinence-based recovery”. This method of treatment nearly killed me. I first entered the criminal justice system as a teenager, where I remained stuck between young offender institutions and various court orders. What I actually needed was care and support to address my problematic drug use. However, like many others, I was sent, time and time again, into abstinence-based rehabs, where I would leave and relapse. Using again after a period of abstinence is very dangerous – your body has lost its tolerance and a deadly overdose is much more likely. The strategy has mooted that drug testing people will become part of this prohibition system. But rather than testing people, we should be testing the drugs. More lives will be lost if the government attempts to go down this road again of “a drug-free society”, coercing and encouraging people to be abstinent and insisting they cannot get social or psychological support until they are. I was not ready to stop using until I was ready. And until such a time as someone is ready to stop, if ever, they should not be forced into it. Our stigmatisation of opiate substitute treatments needs to end if we are to really get on top of the drug deaths crisis. People cannot recover if they are dead. And if it is right for a person to stay on medication, they should not be excluded from drug services as they too are in recovery, but it is often not seen that way. There are some small wins in the new strategy: more money for diversion services, which are a chance for people to get help with their drug problems before they enter the criminal justice system. And more money is also being invested in frontline services (albeit in the context of debilitating underfunding over the last 10 years). The complete lack of continuity of care in drug services – which in part happens because services don’t have the funds to pay staff decent salaries – means that people like me end up having to explain our story again and again to multiple drug workers. It leads to retraumatisation and a lack of trust – getting clean is hard enough without a rotating cast of support workers. I recently lost another family member – they were not an everyday drug user, they didn’t have an “addiction” or a need for “rehab”; they would still be alive had we had drug checking and safe consumption spaces. They left behind a young daughter, partner, mother, sister and brother. All are devastated. Peter Krykant is a project lead for the substance misuse charity CranstounA pedestrian who fatally stabbed a driver who shouted at him for crossing the road carelessly has been convicted of murder and sentenced to a minimum of 23 years in prison. Alexander Layton was convicted of murdering James Stokoe, a 40-year-old father, in his BMW in Thornaby, Teesside, in May 2020, after a trial at Teesside crown court. Stokoe’s four-year-old son was strapped in a car seat during the attack and has been “substantially affected” and left needing therapy because of the trauma of his father’s murder, the court heard. Layton, 34, from Thornaby, caused Stokoe to brake sharply as he crossed the busy main road after getting off a bus. Stokoe pulled over to shout at Layton, who walked up to the car and repeatedly stabbed his victim with a 30cm (12in) kitchen knife he was carrying in his rucksack. In the course of the attack, Stokoe’s femoral artery was severed. Although an air ambulance was called to the scene, Stokoe bled to death in minutes. Evidence showed that Stokoe, who was strapped to the seat behind the wheel, tried to defend himself. The fatal wound was inflicted with such force that it passed through the victim’s thigh. Judge Howard Crowson described Layton’s attack as “disproportionate and unjustified”. “James Stokoe was a happy, successful, proud husband, father and son. He did nothing to justify your attack upon him,” he told the defendant. After the attack, which was witnessed by many passersby, Layton fled the scene and disposed of the knife, which has not been recovered. He spent the night camping in Great Ayton and was arrested the next day in a pizza shop. Layton pleaded not guilty, claiming self-defence. However, the jury convicted him of murder after deliberating for less than three hours on Monday. During the sentencing, the judge said that Stokoe’s son had been “substantially affected by all he saw and lives in fear of a similar attack”.What makes the best party snacks? Rachel, Hove “Anything that can be eaten cleanly in a mouthful is ideal,” says Guardian food columnist Ravinder Bhogal. “Anything too big, messy or that requires lots of chewing should be avoided – there’s nothing worse than those awkward, mouth-full moments when someone suddenly strikes up a conversation.” Rachel doesn’t want to be spending all her time in the kitchen, either, which is why Itamar Srulovich, chef and co-owner of Honey &amp; Co, Honey &amp; Smoke and Honey &amp; Spice in London, recommends following the path of least resistance: “Our rule of thumb is to make one thing and buy the rest.” One such thing could be hot cheesy buns. “They’re so easy,” Srulovich says. “Put them in the oven when everyone arrives and the whole place will smell like melted cheese.” He has a few variations on the cheesy bun theme, but harissa and goat’s cheese is a particular favourite (and in his cookbook Honey &amp; Co At Home). Combine 175g self-raising flour and 100g diced butter in a bowl, then mix in half a whisked egg, 30g grated pecorino/parmesan, 125g ricotta, 125g soft goat’s cheese, 30g rose harissa and a teaspoon of salt and bring together into a dough. Divide in two, roll each piece into a 20cm-long log and brush all over with the other half of the egg. Mix another 30g grated cheese with a tablespoon of cumin seeds, roll the logs in this mix and chill for an hour. Slice each log into 10 and bake at 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6 for 13-15 minutes. “If you don’t have harissa, use tomato paste or omit it altogether. No goat’s cheese? Use cheddar.” Serve with radishes, pickles and olives, and don’t forget the sparkling wine or beer: “Cheesy buns go especially well with anything bubbly.” Bhogal is also all about the cheese, but in croquette form. You could, of course, knock up her beetroot number, or plump for an aloo gobi cheddar nibble: “Make a cauliflower curry with cumin, coriander and green chillies, roughly mash, then fold into a bechamel rich with the tang of Montgomery cheddar. Roll into balls, breadcrumb and deep-fry.” These little beauties are “moreish and nostalgic – like deep-fried cauliflower cheese on speed.” For a cheesy hat-trick, Marie Mitchell, chef and co-founder of Island Social Club, suggests goat’s cheese and caramelised onion tartlets: “Sweet, tangy, maybe a little spicy or salty, and always deeply delicious.” She caramelises onions, in olive oil and butter, if you want to be extra-indulgent, adding sugar or honey, balsamic or red-wine vinegar, and salt and pepper, until sticky – “for 40 minutes minimum”. “And a little chilli oil, if you’d like additional depth and warmth [and you should].” She puts soft goat’s cheese in mini, shop-bought pastry cases (or stamps out rounds from ready-rolled shortcrust), tops with the sweet onions and pops in the oven just to melt the cheese. Every party needs a happy ending, Bhogal adds, “And few things beat the sensory pleasure of a warm madeleine – just ask Proust!” Flavour with honey, orange blossom or saffron, or “add peanut butter, cut through the middle and fill with raspberry jam”. Srulovich, meanwhile, goes for “something very easy”, eg chocolate truffles. “I love hard liquor in them – rum, whisky, grappa.” Now, they’re sure to entertain you. • Got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.comIcelandic director Valdimar Jóhannsson makes a coolly outrageous feature debut with this jawdropping horror-comedy of loneliness, co-written by Jóhannsson with the lyricist and Björk collaborator Sigurjón Birgir Sigurðsson, or Sjón. It is performed with unflinching commitment by its executive producer-star Noomi Rapace, who is first among equals in a great cast of humans, animals and various prosthetic and digital creature effects. Maria (Rapace) and Ingvar (Hilmir Snaer Guðnason) are an unhappy couple with a remote farm in Iceland: it gradually becomes clear they have lost their only child. The drama begins with a strange spirit-visitation in the barn that scares the animals: a ewe becomes pregnant with a bizarre animal-human hybrid and poor, stricken Maria (her name’s importance is left for us to digest) conceives a passionate attachment to this precious being, naming it Ada after her dead human daughter. As this sweet woolly little thing gets bigger and dressed up in the children’s clothes that this couple appear to have bought in advance for their lost human child, their situation as Iceland’s Unholy Family becomes ever more macabre, and even more so considering the complete calm and naturalness of their behaviour. It comes to a crisis of sorts when Ingvar’s dodgy brother Pétur (a failed pop star with some shady friends) shows up needing a place to stay, and the couple’s new houseguest is extremely freaked out by his hosts’ spawn of unnature. Intending some tough love, Pétur takes a rifle and leads trusting Ada by the hand out into the hills. But the ovine side of Ada’s family might have something to say about all this. We have to wait to get a good look at Ada and confront the full, horrible truth about what she represents, but Jóhannsson cleverly converts our horror into a stupefied comic bewilderment from the outset. We are not supposed to be scared. What is required of us is compassion and respect for Maria’s strange dignity and strength. It’s a great performance from Rapace. • Lamb is released on 10 December in cinemas.Regularly drawing TV audiences in the 1970s that would these days be attainable only by royal funerals or England World Cup penalty shootouts, The Morecambe &amp; Wise Show used the conceit of pretending the studio was a theatre. A gold curtain opened on to sketches that often spoofed stage musicals. Reversing the image, Hamish McColl and Sean Foley’s The Play What I Wrote, a West End and Broadway hit 20 years ago, returns Eric and Ernie’s screen routines to the boards. The premise is that a failing comic double act – played by Dennis Herdman and Thom Tuck, replacing the original’s McColl and Foley – lands a gig as a Morecambe &amp; Wise tribute show; the second half is a full meticulous pastiche of the finale of a Christmas special. Much material comes from the scripts by Eddie Braben, the brilliant scriptwriter who reimagined the comedians as a platonic married couple sharing a flat and a bed. Crucially, though, McColl and Foley can write new topical lines in perfect imitation of Braben; he would have loved the pun involving two tennis stars and a famous American play. This revival is directed by Foley, a master of farce. At startling but comprehensible speed, wordplay, sight gags and slapstick constantly compete to top each other. The avalanche of laughs spans trick arms and legs, joke bread loaves, botched magic tricks and, hardest of all to replicate, the most sublime of Braben’s running gags. That involved classical actors – Glenda Jackson, Diana Rigg, Michael Redgrave – inveigled into delivering the anti-syntactical, arrhythmic lines of the plays “what” Ernie wrote. A variety of famous faces will feature across the play’s run, but the production began with the joke at its absolute purest. Tom Hiddleston – the joyous shock of the audience that it was genuinely him filling the theatre – spoke the cod-French tosh of the revolutionary epic A Tight Squeeze for the Scarlet Pimple as if he were still giving his Coriolanus (an entry on the actor’s CV that the script isn’t going to miss). Hiddleston’s vocal double-takes at what he finds himself saying, rank with those of Dame Glenda in the 1972 Christmas show; he also gets double entendres the BBC would surely have refused to let Braben use. As Hiddleston presumably has other things to do than guest star every night, it was good to see his perfect comic turn being filmed for future use. In the first night audience, I was intrigued to spot another significant star, collar high and baseball cap low, who Birmingham may presumably see at some point. But, regardless of the guest, the constant central trio is worth the ticket. Herdman and Tuck beautifully meet the need to inhabit the spirit of Eric (gangly irascibility) and Ernie (gentle self-delusion) without impersonating them. Mitesh Soni offers a glorious crowd of cameos, including Hollywood legends, the alleged producer of The Play What I Wrote, a menacing dog, a musician suffering harmonica interrupts and at one point a whole village. Laughing so long and so loudly felt as energising and cleansing as going to the gym after a spell of vegetating. This show is the perfect therapeutic humour for these seriously unfunny times. • At Birmingham Rep until 1 January.The government has apologised for failures in the lead up to the Grenfell Tower fire, admitting to “errors and missed opportunities” that helped create “an environment in which such a tragedy was possible”. It told the public inquiry into the disaster it was “deeply sorry” and conceded it did not know how building regulations were being applied on the ground. It said the “system failed”. The admissions were made in an opening statement by the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities (DLUHC) to the final stage of the public inquiry that will investigate the role of dozens of government figures from junior officials to former ministers including Eric Pickles and Gavin Barwell. The department also admitted it failed to properly learn lessons from previous high-rise fires, including the 2009 cladding blaze at Lakanal House in Southwark where six people died. Its concessions are likely to be closely watched by tens of thousands of leaseholders trapped in unsellable flats built with similar construction methods to the Grenfell refurbishment that have now been found to breach building regulations. On Monday, the inquiry heard allegations from the bereaved and survivors of the 14 June 2017 fire that the government may be guilty of a “deliberate cover-up” over the dangers posed by combustible materials and that successive administrations were responsible for “collusion” with the construction industry. It heard MPs had written to the government 21 times, pressing it to tighten building regulations after Lakanal, without success. Governments had shown “an unbridled passion for deregulation”, one of the lawyers representing victims, Stephanie Barwise QC, told the inquiry. The inquiry this week also criticised the government’s approach, saying it was trying to play “cat and mouse” with evidence and “trying to smuggle something past” the inquiry. The government said it had delivered tens of thousands of pages of documents and dozens of witness statements from junior civil servants to former secretaries of state. On Tuesday, counsel for the DLUHC, Jason Beer QC, said: “The department is deeply sorry for its past failures in relation to its oversight of the system that regulated safety in the construction and refurbishment of high-rise buildings. It also deeply regrets past failures in relation to the superintendence of the building control bodies.” He conceded: “Had there been a functional enforcement system … non-compliance [with the building regulations] to the extent that gave rise to the Grenfell Tower tragedy may not have been possible.” However the government also pointed the finger at the construction industry and said the building regulations were “sufficiently clear” for “competent professionals” to apply. It insisted that had they been properly followed, a large-scale cladding fire could not have happened. Grenfell United described the government statement as “deeply offensive”. “It is a disingenuous attempt to carry on their masquerade of innocence,” the bereaved families and survivors group said. “We know government knew about the deadly materials and the consequences, but covered up the risks. Let’s see how long their apology stands up against the evidence at the public inquiry in the coming weeks. No one should be exempt from accountability.” Seventy-two people died as a result of the fire, which followed a refurbishment signed off by local authority building control officers. The inquiry has already heard evidence that the manufacturers of the combustible materials used on the tower and on thousands of other homes in the UK, were able to persuade officials they were safe by manipulating the testing and certification systems. Beer said: “The public, residents and … government trusted that those constructing and approving high-rise blocks and the products used in them were following the law and doing the right thing. This trust was both misplaced and abused. The department greatly regrets that it took the Grenfell Tower tragedy to lay bare this misplaced and abused trust.” The bereaved and survivors have argued the government’s stance was driven by a pro-business deregulation agenda and have asked for David Cameron to be called to give evidence after he gave a speech in 2012 that promised to “kill off the health and safety culture for good”. Beer conceded that the introduction of competition into building control, whereby private companies were allowed to sign off buildings as safe starting under Margaret Thatcher in 1985 and expanding since, increased the risk of “systemic failure”. The inquiry continues.Forty endangered sea turtles injured when the water off Massachusetts cooled down so quickly that they couldn’t swim away are being nursed back to health at the Mississippi Aquarium, having been flown there by a volunteer pilot group, Turtles Fly Too. All were Kemp’s ridley sea turtles, the world’s smallest sea turtles and the most endangered of six species found in US waters, the aquarium said. “All 40 of the Kemp’s ridleys are pretty small,” as little as 2.2lb (1kg), said Alexa Delaune, the aquarium’s vice-president of veterinary services. Most showed signs of pneumonia and would be treated with antibiotics, she said. Sea turtles can become lethargic when stunned by water that chills before they can swim to warmer waters. The cold alone can kill them. It can also lead to pneumonia, shock and frostbite. Some experts believe climate change is increasing the number of turtles afflicted off Cape Cod each winter. A spokesperson for the New England Aquarium, Tony LaCasse, told the Guardian Cape Cod Bay can act as “a deadly bucket” for sea turtles. The bay is shaped like the crook of an elbow, therefore requiring turtles hunting there in the warm season to swim north and east to escape, when the turtles instinctually want to swim south. “Their instinct tells them to retreat back into the shallow warmer water of the bay and wait it out,” LaCasse told the Guardian in 2018, when 790 turtles were stranded on local beaches. “The problem is it’s the end of the season and there’s no way to get out.” The number of turtles stranded in Cape Cod Bay has increased “by nearly an order of magnitude” in recent decades, a study published in PLOS One found in 2019. Scientists believe the increase is driven in part by climate change, which has warmed waters in the Gulf of Maine, making the area more attractive to turtles. This encourages turtles to stay longer, before they are hit by cold New England weather. The current group of cold-stunned turtles was flown to Gulfport on Friday after the New England Aquarium ran out of room and appealed for help, a Mississippi Aquarium spokesman said. The aquarium was already caring for two turtles rescued last year in Massachusetts, one with a severe lung infection and the other with a shoulder infection that restricts movement. The Boston aquarium asked the Gulfport aquarium to take the two poorly testudines to make room for this year’s injured, officials said in November. Last year, 75 turtles stranded in Massachusetts were treated in Gulfport and New Orleans. Thirty were sent to the Audubon Species Survival Center in New Orleans, 25 to the Mississippi Aquarium and 20 to the Institute for Marine Mammal Studies in Gulfport. The Audubon center is not treating any sea turtles from this winter’s strandings but is ready to do so if needed, spokeswoman Annie Kinler Matherne said.Malcolm X writes in his autobiography of how he spent hours reading in the library at Norfolk Prison in Massachusetts. Now the cell that the human rights activist is believed to have occupied is set to be transformed into a library itself, thanks to the work of the poet and lawyer Reginald Dwayne Betts. Betts, who won a MacArthur “genius” grant worth $625,000 (£471,000) in September, was incarcerated himself after being tried as an adult for a carjacking at the age of 16. He has spoken of how, during the nine years he spent in prison, he was “writing every day, reading every day, imagining that words would give me the freedom to understand what got me in prison”, because “when you’re trapped in a cell, literally, words are your only lifeline”. Betts is now working to set up 1,000 micro-libraries in prisons across the US through his charity, Freedom Reads, supported by the Andrew W Mellon Foundation. The first Freedom Library opened this month at the MCI-Norfolk, in the cell believed to have been Malcolm’s in the 1940s. While there, the activist, who had been jailed for robbery, spent many hours reading and studying the dictionary in the library and joining the debating society. “One of the things Malcolm X said was that a prerequisite for changing your life is an understanding of what it means to be guilty,” Betts told the Boston Globe. “And what it means to want to be more than that thing. And I think books give you access to that. So it’s this opportunity for people to come close to personal discovery, to come close to reflection.” The new library combines a broad range of fiction and non-fiction, from Malcolm X’s autobiography to works by Dickens and Steinbeck, Betts said. “It skews toward contemporary work and it’s diverse in every way you might expect,” he told the paper. “It’s a lot of women writers. And it’s a combination of fun books and challenging books.” The idea to place the library in Malcolm X’s cell came from the prison’s superintendent Nelson Alves. “Alves said ‘I’ve worked in prisons 25 years and I’ve never seen anything beautiful here’. And so we built this thing that’s beautiful that has all this knowledge, and we’ve built it with the hope and the expectation that it will benefit the staff and those doing time as well,” said Betts. “When you hear Malcolm X talk about it — and understand it’s a prison in the 40s — he talks about it as a place where people valued education, where people valued knowledge. He got a chance to be a leader of an intellectual community. So a project like this, what better place to put it to begin?”The emergence of a new and worrying variant of Sars-CoV-2 shouldn’t be a surprise to anyone. Omicron appears to be a real threat, and should give pause for thought on how countries can protect their populations against this and other similar challenges in the future. The UK has helped to create the conditions for variants to emerge by opposing the granting of a patent waiver so that countries worldwide could step up the production of much-needed vaccines. At the same time, the British government has prioritised vaccinating its own. Vaccines are of course an important tool in protecting most individuals from severe disease when infected, but no single intervention, no matter how technologically sound, would keep the virus suppressed and under control in the population. An appropriate strategy at this point would be one based firmly on all three pillars of an effective public health response – prevention, vaccination and control. They are not alternative courses of action. Their combined effect would not just be additive but synergistic – producing a greater benefit than the sum of the parts. Prevention means stopping us coming into contact with Sars-CoV-2 by reducing the risk that the air we breathe carries the virus. Vaccination helps us reduce the risk of illness if we come into contact with the virus. Control means that we help those who do become infected to avoid passing it on to others. A key reason for the government’s lack of strategy and planning is that it is not interested in prevention and public health. Its instinct is to put the responsibility on individuals whenever possible, rather than taking collective action. This explains why the government emphasises individual hygiene measures such as washing hands and sanitising surfaces. The failure to highlight the well-established fact that the virus is predominantly transmitted through the air, rather than by touching surfaces or contact with large droplets, gravely hinders the actions needed around ventilation and filtration of air in enclosed spaces. Health and safety at work legislation is explicit that it is the duty of employers to ensure that employees working in enclosed spaces have adequate supplies of fresh or purified air. The Health and Safety Executive has confirmed that the regulations still apply during the pandemic. But there is little sign of the rules being enforced. Without a rapid reversal of its 50% reduction in real-terms funding between 2010 and 2020, an enfeebled HSE is unlikely to be able to undertake the massive enforcement job needed to protect workers and the public. People of all ages working in or visiting office, educational, retail, hospitality or leisure buildings should be able to feel confident that ventilation or air purification is sufficient to ensure their safety. The “scores on the doors” approach, similar to the food hygiene scores in places serving food, is advocated by the Independent Sage group of scientists and should be introduced as an urgent priority. This system would boost public confidence in entering all sorts of premises, and would undoubtedly reduce infections. The amount of money currently wasted on obsessive cleaning and sanitising regimes would go a long way towards paying for permanent ventilation improvements. Clear and consistent messages about the use of face masks are also needed. We, quite rightly, will only accept Covid-19 vaccines with a high level of effectiveness but seem content to promote the use of very basic face coverings that provide comparatively less protection than masks meeting international standards, such as KN95 or FFP2. Controlling further spread from those who are unfortunate enough to become infected is an essential task that the UK has failed to do effectively. There is currently a large number of people becoming infected every day, and it is critical that we rapidly identify those individuals through testing and help them to isolate. We also need to identify and find their close contacts so that they can be tested. At present, close contacts of someone who has tested positive are requested to isolate, but only to get tested if they develop symptoms. This is not in line with international guidelines for controlling Covid-19. The calls for an effective find, test, trace, isolate and support system have been ignored from the beginning. It isn’t too late to rebuild the system, based on local directors of public health working with the local NHS and primary care. But the dithering and delay that has bedevilled the government’s pandemic response now seems to have been consolidated into a permanent stance of inaction and obfuscation. Omicron is a stark reminder that Sars-CoV-2 is an ever-changing and dangerous virus that we desperately need to get under control. We are a long way from eliminating it from our communities, but we can suppress it significantly and reduce disruption, illness and deaths. The government and its advisers must recognise that prevention, vaccination and control is the only sensible approach and, for the first time in the pandemic, set out a detailed public health-focused strategy. Gabriel Scally is visiting professor of public health at the University of Bristol and a member of the Independent Sage committeeEuropean governments should consider mass vaccination programmes for primary school children given the risk of grandparents being infected with Covid over the holiday season, the World Health Organization has said. Hans Kluge, the WHO’s Europe director, said it was “not unusual” for the level of infection in schools to be two to three times higher than that found in the general community. The WHO has long championed the need for children to stay in school, but Kluge said the level of infection had to be addressed through the use of masks, ventilation and potentially vaccination programmes for the young. “As school holidays approach, we must also acknowledge that children contaminate their parents and grandparents at home,” Kluge said. Those groups are 10 times more likely to develop severe disease, be hospitalised or – if unvaccinated – die, he said. “The use of mask and ventilation and regular testing should be a standard at all primary schools. And vaccinating children should be discussed and considered nationally as part of school protection measures. “Vaccination of younger children not only reduces their role in Covid-19 transmission, but also protects them from paediatric severity whether associated with long Covid or multi-system, inflammatory syndromes.” The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency in the UK is currently reviewing the safety of a Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine designed for children aged five and above. The government’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), responsible for approving vaccine programmes, is also currently examining data as a “matter of urgency” in order to be able to respond quickly should there be regulatory approval. But the European Medicines Agency, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the regulator in Australia have all already authorised the vaccine for young children, raising concerns that the UK is being slow to act. Young children started receiving doses in the US at the start of last month. On Tuesday, Spain’s public health commission approved the use of the Covid vaccine on children aged five and above from 15 December and Italy’s government has said it will roll out its programme later this month, with other EU capitals expected to follow suit. Dame Rachel de Souza, the children’s commissioner for England, said at the weekend she believed primary school children wanted to be vaccinated in order to protect their parents and grand parents from infection. All children aged 12 to 15 years in the UK are supposed to have been offered a vaccine jab although the level of coverage has been found to vary widely around the country. In further comments at a virtual press briefing from Copenhagen, Kluge, a Belgian doctor and public health expert, also cautioned against rushing to making vaccination mandatory given the risk to public acceptance. The Greek government is fining people aged 60 and above for failure to receive a vaccine jab and Germany is expected to hold a vote on compulsory vaccination early next year. Kluge said: “Mandates around vaccination are an absolute last resort and only applicable when all other feasible options to improve vaccination uptake have been exhausted. They have proven effective in some environments to increase vaccine uptake. But the effectiveness of mandates is very context specific.” Kluge said it would become clear that countries that dealt well with the Delta variant would be well positioned to cope with the new challenges. Concerns were raised on Wednesday at the identification of 17 Omicron cases in Norway, many of which have been linked to a super spreader event at a nightclub in the capital. Amid concern over rising hospitalisations, combined with the impending flu season, the Norwegian government is expected to announce new restrictions on Tuesday evening. In the last 24 hours, Norway reported 4,117 Covid infections, an increase of 1,240 compared with the same day last week. Most striking, however, has been the outbreak linked to a Christmas dinner at Oslo’s Louise nightclub, which has resulted in 130 Covid cases. Norwegian media quoted Tine Ravlo, an infection control doctor, suggesting half of the infections could be the Omicron variant. The club had been booked by Scatec, a renewable-energy company, for its Christmas party, despite the fact that only vaccinated employees were invited and had been required to take a rapid test the day before. It appears now that some guests had recently returned from South Africa and may have been infected there. Meanwhile, Dr Catherine Smallwood, the senior emergency officer at the WHO regional office for Europe, said 43 countries in the European region had imposed travel restrictions because of Omicron but that this would prove ineffective in halting the spread. “Disease outbreaks are contained at their source, not at their borders,” she told the press briefing. “And travel bans, though they may be easily accessible in terms of political decision-making, they are not effective in preventing spread of disease. They really are not effective.”In the United States, only certain types of theft are newsworthy. For example, on 14 June 2021, a reporter for KGO-TV in San Francisco tweeted a cellphone video of a man in Walgreens filling a garbage bag with stolen items and riding his bicycle out of the store. According to San Francisco’s crime database, the value of the merchandise stolen in the incident was between $200 and $950. According to an analysis by Fair, a media watchdog, this single incident generated 309 stories between 14 June and 12 July. A search by Popular Information reveals that, since 12 July, there have been dozens of additional stories mentioning the incident. The theft has been covered in a slew of major publications including the New York Times, USA Today and CNN. In most coverage, the video is presented as proof that there are no consequences for shoplifting in San Francisco. But the man in the video, Jean Lugo-Romero, was arrested about a week later and faces 15 charges, including “grand theft, second-degree burglary and shoplifting”. He was recently transferred to county jail where he is being held without bond. Just a few months earlier, in November 2020, Walgreens paid a $4.5m settlement to resolve a class-action lawsuit alleging that it stole wages from thousands of its employees in California between 2010 and 2017. The lawsuit alleged that Walgreens “rounded down employees’ hours on their timecards, required employees to pass through security checks before and after their shift without compensating them for time worked, and failed to pay premium wages to employees who were denied legally required meal breaks”. Walgreens’ settlement includes attorney’s fees and other penalties, but $2,830,000 went to Walgreens employees to compensate them for the wages that the company had stolen. And, because it is a settlement, that amount represents a small fraction of the total liability. According to the order approving the settlement, it represents “approximately 22% of the potential damages”. So this is a story of a corporation that stole millions of dollars from its own employees. How much news coverage did it generate? There was a single 221-word story in Bloomberg Law, an industry publication. And that’s it. There has been no coverage in the New York Times, USA Today, CNN, or the dozens of other publications that covered the story of a man stealing a few hundred dollars of merchandise. ••• While Lugo-Romero has been behind bars since June on allegations that he stole several thousand dollars in a series of shoplifting incidents, no one at Walgreens has had to take personal responsibility for stealing millions from its employees. Stefano Pessina, who served as Walgreens’ CEO during the majority of the alleged wage theft, saw his compensation rise from $7,133,155 in 2015 to $17,483,187 in 2020. In 2021, Pessina transitioned from CEO to executive chairman. Pessina’s 2021 compensation is not yet available, but the previous executive chairman made $8,797,713 last year. Needless to say, neither Pessina nor any Walgreens employee has had to spend any time in jail as a result of millions in wage theft. Lugo-Romero’s alleged thefts are part of a larger problem of retail theft. But, after accounting for all retail theft, Walgreens recorded $2.3bn in profits in fiscal year 2021. Walgreens is still a highly profitable business. Meanwhile, the median Walgreens employee makes just $33,396. When the company steals hundreds or thousands of dollars in wages from its employees, it has a real impact on workers who are struggling to make ends meet. The only way in which Walgreens is an aberration, unfortunately, is that it had to pay some of its employees back. Numerous companies steal billions in wages from workers in the United States each year. It is a crime that is seldom prosecuted – or covered in the media. ••• Wage theft occurs whenever an employer doesn’t pay workers according to the law. And it can take many forms. Sometimes employers fail to pay minimum wage. Sometimes employers don’t pay overtime to employees who work more than 40 hours a week. In other cases, employers force workers to perform tasks “off the clock” and without pay. A 2017 study of minimum wage violations, which is just one kind of wage theft, found that in the 10 most populous states “2.4 million workers lose $8bn annually (an average of $3,300 per year for year-round workers) to minimum wage violations –nearly a quarter of their earned wages.” In these states, wage theft affected “17% of low-wage workers, with workers in all demographic categories being cheated out of pay”. A typical victim of wage theft “is losing, on average, $3,300 per year and receiving only $10,500 in annual wages.” If similar levels of wage theft are found in other states, it suggests “the total wages stolen from workers due to minimum wage violations exceeds $15bn each year.” That’s more than the value of stolen goods in all property crimes, according to the latest FBI statistics. Shoplifting is just a small fraction of total property crime because more than half of the value of all stolen property comes from stolen vehicles and currency. Nevertheless, media coverage of shoplifting vastly exceeds media coverage of wage theft. A search of United States publications in the Nexis news database reveals 11,631 stories mentioning shoplifting so far in 2021. Over the same period, the same outlets published just 2,009 stories mentioning wage theft. ••• The disproportionately low media coverage for wage theft is partly due to lack of media interest. But it is also a product of grossly inadequate resources for enforcement. Federal enforcement of wage theft falls under the purview of the Wage and Hour Division (WHD) of the US Department of Labor. According to research by Northwestern University professor Daniel Galvin, in 1948 “the WHD employed 1,000 investigators and was responsible for protecting 22.6 million workers.” Today, according to a report in NBC News, 765 federal investigators are responsible for protecting 143 million workers. At the same time, corporations have “increasingly embraced subcontracting, franchising, and supply chain models”. These trends both put workers more at risk of wage theft and make it more difficult to lodge a complaint. Fewer employees are represented by a union and it is common for workers to have little or no interaction with the people responsible for paying fair wages. ••• Walgreens workers in California were able to recover wages lost from wage theft by filing a class-action lawsuit. But for many workers, that kind of lawsuit isn’t an option. California is one of a handful of states – along with Minnesota, New York, Oklahoma, Massachusetts and Virginia – that offer protections against wage theft beyond federal law. But in some areas, employees are increasingly required to waive their right to sue for wage theft as a condition of employment. According to a report from the National Employment Law Project (NELP), “17.75m workers in the United States earning less than $13 per hour ... were subject to forced arbitration in 2019”. Millions of these workers are victims of wage theft. But the “employer-imposed collective and class-action waiver” prohibits them from joining forces to take on employers who cheat. Instead, disputes are pushed into private arbitration, a forum that is notoriously friendly for corporations. This means the only way to recover stolen wages would be for each employee to individually file a complaint. This is something most employees will never have the time or knowledge to do. With few exceptions, they cannot afford legal representation. And even if everyone were able to figure out how to challenge their employer themselves, “public agencies, operating at their current capacity, could recover less than 4%” of wages stolen from employees locked out of class action lawsuits. A piece of federal legislation, the Forced Arbitration Injustice Repeal Act, would prohibit companies from forcing employees to forfeit access to the legal system. This would allow victims of wage theft to join forces and seek recovery in court. And, perhaps, it could pressure more employers to follow the law in the first place. Judd Legum is the founder and author of Popular Information, an independent newsletter dedicated to accountability journalism, where this post originally appearedA bronze disc inlaid with gold symbols and two gold cone-shaped hats decorated with solar motifs are among objects from the Stonehenge era that will go on show for the first time in the UK at a landmark exhibition at the British Museum. The objects are among more than 250 being loaned to the nation’s flagship museum by institutions in six European countries and across the UK. In total, more than 430 objects will be on display at the British Museum’s first ever big exhibition on the story of Stonehenge, which opens in February. The aim is to set the stone monument – built 4,500 years ago, and one of the most recognisable sights in Europe – into the context of an era during which there was huge social and technological change. “Most people know the monument, but they don’t know the people and they don’t know the time of Stonehenge. We’re going to unravel and contextualise the monument,” said Neil Wilkin, the curator of The World of Stonehenge. “Many of the objects are either new discoveries from the landscape around Stonehenge or objects from across Britain and Europe. Some have never been to Britain before.” The 3,600-year-old Nebra sky disc is being loaned from the Halle museum in Germany. Discovered by treasure hunters in 1999, it has a blue-green patina and its gold symbols are believed to represent the sun, moon and stars. “It is the earliest concrete depiction of the cosmos in the world, and an amazing object to behold. It encodes key astronomical information,” said Wilkin. A gold hat, being loaned from a museum in Speyer, Germany, is “a magical object” covered in solar symbols. Another hat, the Avanton gold cone, will come from a museum near Paris. “Some people have argued that they represent calendars of the cosmos, but others have suggested that just the act of wearing them would have given their bearer a certain status as a sun priest or priestess,” said Wilkin. At the exhibition’s centre is the loan of a 4,000-year-old timber monument, called Stonehenge of the sea or Seahenge, which re-emerged on a Norfolk beach in 1998 because of shifting sands, which had preserved it. Consisting of a large, upturned tree stump surrounded by 54 oak posts in a 6.6-metre-diameter circle, it has partially been displayed at the Lynn Museum in Norfolk. At the British Museum, many timber posts will be on show for the first time. “It’s an incredibly important record of the importance not just of stone but of wood to people’s understanding and belief,” Wilkin said. “We can’t bring Stonehenge to the exhibition, but we can bring a monument that’s arguably as important. “When we asked the museum to lend it to us, I was expecting them to say no because it’s so fragile and so precious.” People tended to think of Stonehenge as “quintessentially British, but actually this was a world of interconnection and interconnectivity right across Europe. What we show is that you can’t understand Stonehenge without understanding its European setting,” Wilkin said. Hartwig Fischer, the director of the British Museum, said the exhibition would be a “landmark show that sets the great monument [of Stonehenge] in the context of one of the most remarkable eras which saw huge social and technological revolutions alongside fundamental changes in people’s relationship with the sky, land and one another”. • The World of Stonehenge is at the British Museum, London, from 17 February to 17 July 2022Andrew Neil says he has launched legal action against Jennifer Arcuri, the US businesswoman and former lover of Boris Johnson, after she made claims about the veteran journalist’s inclusion in a contact book owned by the deceased paedophile Jeffrey Epstein. In a public spat that started with a disagreement over the effectiveness of Covid-19 vaccines, Arcuri tagged the former BBC presenter in a now-deleted tweet that read: “Citation for @afneil: Not only is he a paid for pharma puppet but here he is on the pedo elite train. Everyone knows what happened on that plane.” Alongside were the hashtags #itsOver and #ticktock, a picture of Neil arm in arm with a woman, and a screengrab from Epstein’s address book purportedly showing Neil’s name. Neil wrote in response: “I have clicked to follow you. Please DM your address/contact details so my lawyers can serve legal papers against you for this clear libel and defamation. I’ve instructed the papers to be drawn up now. All those tweeting support for and spreading her tweet will also be served.” To this, Arcuri responded: “You really are threatened by me @afneil. Thank you for confirming. Now the world sees exactly what you are.” Neil, who was chairman of GB News until he resigned this summer, replied to Arcuri again, writing: “I will not engage in a public Twitter spat with you, though every subsequent tweet you make just makes it worse. Please just DM your address to me so we can begin the necessary legal action against you. Thank you.” Many of the hundreds of individuals in Epstein’s address book insist they never had any contact with the deceased financier, whose former partner Ghislaine Maxwell is on trial in New York on sex trafficking charges. Alongside known Epstein associates such as Prince Andrew are the names and contact details of prominent individuals. In a series of tweets about Epstein, Neil told another Twitter user he had no connection to the deceased man. “I’ve never even met him, communicated with him, never mind visited any of his properties or been on his planes, cars, buses, helicopters, ponies,” he tweeted. “Now what is it you don’t understand about piss off. And apologise before you do, please, piss off.” Arcuri, who has increasingly used her online presence to criticise Covid-19 vaccines while continuing to make claims about her affair with Boris Johnson, is now based in the US – which may offer her some protection from the UK’s tougher libel laws. Last month she shared extracts of her diary with the Observer, detailing her affair with the future prime minister and has also offered to assist with a Greater London assembly investigation into Johnson’s conduct. In another tweet late on Monday night, Neil wrote that he had taken the action “not just to hold Arcuri, who I’ve never met and have no interest in, to account but, more important, to establish that the twitterati can’t just promulgate evil lies without consequences. If you think anonymity will protect you, you’re in for a big surprise.” One of the biggest challenges in taking legal action against anonymous Twitter users is finding out their contact details. Under British law, it is possible to ask a court to make a Norwich Pharmacal order – named after the 1970s case that established the principle – and ask sites such as Twitter to hand over any information they may hold on an account, such as the email used to register it and other identifying markers.Spain Spain has banned all non-vaccinated Britons from entering the country. The ban is expected to last until at least 31 December, at which point the rules will be reviewed. Travellers into Spain from the UK will need to show proof of a full course of a Covid-19 vaccination, with the second dose given at least 14 days before travel, in order to enter the country. Documents If fully vaccinated, visitors must present an in-date NHS Covid pass as proof of vaccination and fill out a passenger locator form. Rules on arrival Restrictions are being decided at regional level. Check the rules for the region you are visiting before you travel – the Spanish tourist board’s Travel Safe website has an interactive map showing the regional rules. At a nationwide level everyone over the age of six must wear a face mask in enclosed public spaces, on public transport, and in crowded outdoor areas where it is not possible to socially distance. Portugal On entry, all travellers, regardless of vaccination status, must now show proof of a negative PCR or rapid antigen test taken 72 hours or 48 hours respectively prior to departure. Documents If fully vaccinated, present an in-date NHS Covid pass as proof of vaccination and fill out a passenger locator form. Rules on arrival There are different restrictions depending on whether you are travelling to mainland Portugal, Madeira or the Azores. Check entry requirements here. If fully vaccinated, you must now also present proof of a negative test to enter indoor establishments, including nightclubs and bars, and to attend large events. The NHS Covid pass will be required in order for visitors to stay in hotels, go to the gym or eat indoors in restaurants. Visitors are required to wear a face mask indoors. Germany Full-vaccination status or proof of recovery from Covid-19 is required to enter Germany from the UK. Documents If fully vaccinated, present a NHS Covid pass as proof of vaccination and fill out this online form providing details of any Covid certificates before departure. Rules on arrival Germany has announced a nationwide lockdown for the unvaccinated. Those who have not been vaccinated will be banned from accessing all but the most essential businesses, such as supermarkets and pharmacies. Most facilities and attractions are fully open, although visitors are required to wear a mask. France Anyone over the age of 12 will need to provide proof they are fully vaccinated and show proof of a negative current PCR or antigen test taken no more than 48 hours before travel. Documents An in-date NHS Covid pass can be used as proof of vaccination. People from the UK also need to complete a “sworn statement”, proof of negative Covid test. Rules on arrival A health pass – the pass sanitaire – is mandatory for bars, restaurants, and entertainment venues, and has been extended to ski lifts. You can show your vaccination status via the NHS app. Switzerland The 10-day quarantine requirement for British travellers was removed on 4 December. Air and bus passengers aged 16 or more must show a negative PCR test done no more than 72 hours before boarding; the same applies to independent arrivals by road. All arrivals from the UK must report their arrival to the relevant cantonal office within two days and must complete a further test (antigen or PCR) after four to seven days in Switzerland, and must send the result of the second test to the relevant cantonal office. Find the relevant cantonal office. Documents Visitors need to fill in an entry form and present an in-date NHS Covid pass as proof of vaccination. Rules on arrival Proof of vaccination is needed to enter restaurants and bars and face masks are compulsory. Italy British travellers must show a negative test result carried out 48 hours prior to arrival in Italy, and present proof of full vaccination. Documents An in-date NHS Covid pass and a passenger locator form. The rules on arrival Italy has introduced tougher restrictions for unvaccinated people with the requirement of a Covid “super green pass” to access many public activities including entry to theatres, cinemas, music venues, sports events, restaurants and bars until mid-January. The pass shows proof of vaccination, or recovery from the virus within the last six months. The country will accept the UK’s proof of Covid-19 recovery and the NHS Covid pass as the equivalent to a green pass. Netherlands The Dutch authorities currently classify the UK as a “very high risk country”. This means that only fully vaccinated UK nationals, who can provide acceptable proof of vaccination, which includes the NHS Covid pass, will be allowed to enter the Netherlands. Documents If you are traveling from a high-risk country, you will have to show proof of vaccination, a negative PCR test result taken no more than 48 hours before departure or a negative antigen test result taken no more than 24 hours before departure, upon arrival. You also need to fill out a health declaration before boarding your flight. The Dutch government has published a checklist for travel to the Netherlands. The rules on arrival The country is currently in a partial lockdown with public venues including restaurants and bars closed from 5pm to 5am, and all events cancelled. Supermarkets are open until 8pm. Masks are compulsory. Those who break the rules could incur a fine of €95. Greece Greece is open to those who are fully vaccinated. Visitors who have had Covid can enter the country in the 180 days after they have recovered from their infection – a recovery certificate can be issued 30 days after the day of the first positive coronavirus test. Those who are unvaccinated or who cannot show proof of recovery from Covid will need a negative PCR test result no older than 72 hours or a rapid test no older than 48 hours. Documents A passenger locator form must be filled out before travelling to the country. One PLF should be submitted per family. Rules on arrival Random testing is carried out and you will need your in-date NHS Covid pass to enter most indoor venues including bars, restaurants, and theatres. Face masks are compulsory in indoor establishments. Ireland New rules introduced on 5 December mean that UK travellers will be asked to show a negative antigen test carried out no more than 48 hours before arrival or a negative PCR test which was carried out no more than 72 hours before arrival. Documents required Everyone must complete a passenger locator form. The rules on arrival An NHS Covid pass is required to enter some indoor venues, including bars, restaurants and cinemas. Masks are compulsory in shops and on public transport. Pubs, restaurants and nightclubs have reduced hours and close at midnight. United States Travellers have to be fully vaccinated and will have to show a negative Covid antigen or PCR test, which must have been taken within one day of departure. Full requirements for pre-travel testing can be found on the CDC website and the US embassy website also provides useful information. Documents An in-date NHS Covid pass is needed, as well as the normal visa or an Electronic System for Travel Authorisation (ESTA) visa waiver to enter or transit the US. You should consult the US State Department website to determine which you will need. Rules on arrival Face masks are required in airports, shops and on public transport. Local rules may vary. Indoor venues ask for a digital proof of vaccine that can be easily verified. *Correct at time of press on 7 December, please check latest travel advice/government updates • This article was amended on 8 December 2021 to include Switzerland’s and Netherland’s requirement that arrivals from the UK have a pre-travel PCR test. Rules and information for France and the United States had earlier been updated or corrected.Where have these two storms come from? The UK is facing a second big storm, Storm Barra, while some homes in the north are still lacking power after the devastation of Storm Arwen just over a week ago. Both storms formed in the mid-Atlantic. Barra has followed a fairly typical course across into the Republic of Ireland. Arwen was more unusual, tracking up around the north of Scotland and then coming inland from the North Sea, hitting the eastern coast of Scotland and north-east England on 26 November. The unusual route may be one reason that it took down so many trees. Are they particularly bad storms? Storm Arwen brought wind gusts of up to 98mph, and was described by the Met Office, which gave a red warning, as one of “the most powerful and damaging winter storms of the latest decade”. This wind gust was the highest recorded in north-east England since 1984. The aftermath has been devastating too: three people died; thousands of trees were blown over; and more than a million homes lost power as lines were brought down. Some households remain cut off. Storm Barra hit the Republic of Ireland with wind speeds of up to 50-60mph, but speeds were increasing and predicted to rise as high as 80mph. Red warnings have been given in the counties of Cork, Kerry and Clare, and there are flood warnings in place in the south of England and snow warnings for Scotland. Thousands of homes have lost power in Ireland. Barra has displayed what is technically known as “explosive cyclogenesis” or, more excitingly, been described as being a “weather bomb”. Brendan Jones, a meteorologist at the Metdesk, said: “It means the storm developed particularly rapidly over a 24-hour period, which is why we’ve been seeing 85mph winds in Ireland. But it has reached peak intensity now, and will begin slowly dissipating as it crosses the country during Wednesday.” Is it usual to have two big storms so close together? Jones says it is not that unusual. “If anything it’s very common to get named storms in close proximity; when you’ve got the disturbed weather pattern we’re currently seeing over the Atlantic, you can often see consecutive storms over a two- to three-week period.” Can we link them to climate breakdown? It is too early for these storms to be directly attributed to climate breakdown. However, scientists have long said the climate emergency will make extreme weather events more likely. The complexity of our weather systems make it hard to pin down one cause for any event. But it is known that, for example, much of Earth’s trapped heat goes into the oceans – and rising sea temperatures produce more energy for hurricanes and typhoons. Carbon Brief, a UK-based website specialising in the science and policy of the climate emergency, analysed about 350 studies of “extreme event attribution”. It said the studies found 70% of the events and trends looked at were made more likely or more severe by human-caused global heating.Over the last 12 months, graphic novels have explored everything from injustice to hedonism. But perhaps unsurprisingly in a year that saw many reflect on their lives, a crop of fine memoirs dominated the shelves. The biggest event of the year was the return of Alison Bechdel. The Secret to Superhuman Strength (Jonathan Cape) is a meditation on exercise and happiness that paints the Vermont cartoonist as a “neurotic wretch”, moving between sporting obsessions as relationships come and go. Karate, running, cycling, skiing and yoga all promise peace of mind, but it never lasts. Bechdel’s previous books have made her one of the superstars of graphic fiction, and this funny, perceptive and merciless account shows that, while her personal bests may have slipped, her talent remains undimmed. Lauded in her native France, Élodie Durand’s Parenthesis (Top Shelf; translated by Edward Gauvin) is finally available in English. Durand’s young life was shattered by a tumour that brought severe memory loss, epilepsy, pill after pill and operation after operation. She draws tense consultations, giant tumours and gouged self-portraits in a desperately affecting book about the struggle to hold on to yourself when your world is in pieces. Sabba Khan’s family moved from Kashmir to east London before she was born. The artist and architectural designer puts her overlapping identities at the heart of The Roles We Play (Myriad), which explores history, culture, family ties and psychotherapy. Imaginative framing, expressive sketches and thoughtful prose combine in a fascinating debut full of acute observations (after the 2005 London bombings, her headscarf has “grown louder than me”), with a recommended song for every chapter. Where Khan explains herself with scrupulous care, Shira Spector’s Red Rock Baby Candy (Fantagraphics) spins a chaotic spectacle of bright collages and strange visions, her text bouncing off drum kits and reaching into bloodstains and ink spills. Vibrant illustrations sit alongside descriptions of her father’s cancer diagnosis and her attempts to conceive in an inventive debut memoir that’s as deeply felt as it is stylistically playful. The finest British graphic novel of the year was In. by Will McPhail (Sceptre), a clever and touching account of a young illustrator dealing with his mother’s illness and his own ennui. This beautifully composed debut mixes nuanced observation with hipster satire, and scalpel-sharp one-liners about the things that don’t matter with stumbling attempts to articulate the things that do. It has been some time since Barry Windsor-Smith was a promising newcomer – the comics veteran began his career drawing for Marvel 50 years ago – but Monsters (Jonathan Cape) is likely to be his defining work. This big, bruising epic about an attempt to create a cold war supersoldier features Nazi scientists, helicopter gunfights and psychic powers. But while Windsor-Smith doesn’t shirk on spectacle, he’s more interested in pulling back the curtain on sordid military-industrial compromises, and showing how hate leaches from one man to another in a study of violence, redemption and parenthood. Exploitation echoes down the centuries in historian Rebecca Hall’s Wake (Particular), which delves into the neglected story of female slavery and resistance. Hall combines re-creations of revolts with an account of her own research, which is held back by unhelpful archivists and myopic official histories. She uncovers vital details, such as why women played a crucial role in slave-ship mutinies – they were often left unchained on deck. Aided by Hugo Martínez’s stark artwork, Hall compellingly describes the terror and resilience of people who were brought across the ocean in shackles and enslaved for generations, speaking of reckonings still to come. Slavery shadows Dash Shaw’s Discipline (New York Review of Books), a startling, panel-free work that follows a Quaker family ruptured by the American civil war. Brother Charles abandons pacifism to fight for the Union, while his sister Fanny deals with schisms at home in a book whose powerful images spring out of white space. The seasons change as war takes its toll, and earnest letters – adapted from real correspondence – beat with tension beneath their matter-of-fact surface. There was hedonism too this year, in the return of Brecht Evens, whose The City of Belgium (Drawn and Quarterly) explores a bacchanalian nightscape. Three characters, their lives on the edge of change, dance their way through lurid bars and dark passageways in a swirl of tall tales and lush inking. Evens is a master of crowd scenes and colour, and his psychedelic symphony bleeds into a pensive, washed-out dawn that suggests that even the wildest trips must end sometime. Simon Hanselmann drew a webcomic every day for the first nine months of the pandemic. The collected Crisis Zone (Fantagraphics) sees his longstanding cast of witches and anthropomorphic animals cram themselves into a house, bicker, shoot pornography and take drugs. They are hit by Covid and become the subjects of a reality TV show in a provocative and funny descent into social-media notoriety and violence. For something more wholesome, settle down with Esther’s Notebooks (Pushkin; translated by Sam Taylor), in which cartoonist Riad Sattouf lays out a series of strips based on his friend’s daughter’s Paris schooldays. They’re not exactly escapist – racism and the spectre of terrorism intrude on the playground frighteningly early – but these three funny, insightful volumes, packed with phone envy, classroom politics and friendship, are a comic treat. • Browse all the featured books and save up to 15% at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.At this time of year many of us return to the same places for our favourite Christmas activities, whether it’s wreath-making or crafting at a Christmas fair, a blustery winter walk or a getting our skates on at an ice-rink. So we would like to hear about your favourite Christmas activity. If you have a relevant photo, do send it in – but it’s your words that will be judged for the competition. Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe in the paper, too. We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition. The competition closes on Tuesday, 14 December at 9am Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.England go into the Ashes series as massive underdogs after disappointing results in six home Tests against New Zealand and India across the summer. So far, so familiar: exactly 35 years ago a side travelled to Australia in precisely the same situation, and if what followed does not quite provide a blueprint for Joe Root’s side it certainly offers a couple of pointers. In 1986 things got quite a lot worse before they started getting better, with a succession of dismal results in warm-up games and performances so poor that the Daily Telegraph’s Martin Johnson famously noted that “there are only three things wrong with the English team – they can’t bat, they can’t bowl and they can’t field”. Looking back on the series now, the England batter Allan Lamb thinks even those games worked to their advantage. “I think we really pulled the wool over their eyes,” he says, “because they must have thought: ‘My God, this side’s in an absolute state.’” On the night before the first Test in Brisbane Ian Botham stood up to address his teammates. “Ian turned round and said, ‘Guys, right, this is it. We start now. We’ll beat these Australians,’” Lamb recalls. “Then he probably opened another bottle of red wine and proceeded to finish that, and then we took on the Australians the following day. Listen, everyone looked at Ian and thought, ‘What’s he talking about? We know the games start now.’ You’re playing a Test match, you’ve got to really pull your finger out.” Whatever the impact of Botham’s tubthumping speech, England won every battle the following day except the toss. Put in to bat, they ended the first day on 198 for two and though both Bill Athey and Lamb got out early on day two that only brought in David Gower, who went on to get 51, and Botham, who scored 138. By the time their first innings was over England had scored 456, and they went on to win the match by seven wickets. “Oh, it was massive,” Lamb says. “If you lose the first Test match it’s so difficult to come back. That’s why it’s so important not to lose it.” Chris Broad only scored eight in that first-innings effort in Brisbane, but in the first innings of the next three Tests England’s opener scored 162, 116 and 112. Jack Richards, the wicketkeeper, played 13 innings in eight Tests across three series and his highest score outside Australia was eight; he averaged 37.71 during the Ashes including 133 in the first innings of the second Test. Graham Dilley was England’s leading wicket-taker but when his knee gave way before the third Test, forcing Gladstone Small to be drafted into the team at an hour’s notice, Small produced his finest Test performance and one of two career five-fers, the second coming in Sydney a couple of weeks later. It was, in short, a series in which everything just clicked, and England won it 2-1 to retain the Ashes. “You’ve got to say Broad had a fantastic tour, he was the saviour there,” Lamb says. “To have a guy just pumping out runs like he did, the Aussies could never work him out and they just kept bowling at his legs – all they had to do was bowl wide, but they only realised that at the end of the tour. Then Bill Athey, the other opener, got stuck in too, so that took a lot of pressure off. Then we had the spinners in John Emburey and Phil Edmonds, and Dilley had a bit of pace. And then Ian Botham had one over on the Australians because he was sort of a figurehead, they thought he was a problem. The Australians always had this in their mind about Ian, that he could change a game. If they’d just said, ‘Listen, he’s nothing,’ and carried on it might have been different, but because of the success he’d had against them they had this problem.” In fact the only batter who consistently failed was Lamb himself. “Thank God everyone else was getting runs around me,” he says. “I had a poor series for myself. I should have got plenty more runs. I should have been up in the top run-getters and it didn’t quite work out that way.” The full story of the 1986-87 Ashes series is told in the new series of the Inside the Tour podcast, enthusiastically presented by Mark Pougatch and with Lamb among a stellar cast. Now 67 and recuperating from treatment for prostate cancer – “I feel quite good. Sometimes I feel a little tired but I’m just getting better and better” – Lamb watched with some bemusement as this year’s Ashes was thrown into doubt by discussions over Covid-19 protocols and arrangements for families. “We had to pay for our families to come out,” he remembers. “We had to pay for their rooms, for their air tickets, everything. So if your wife came out with your kids, that was basically your fee gone. They have it bloody easy now, flying their wives business class all over the bloody world. I mean, I’m not against it. If they play better with their families around then I’m all for it. But they’ve also got to realise that if their wives can’t be there then you’ve got to crack on – you’re playing for your country.” Since 1987 England have won only one Ashes series in Australia, when Andrew Strauss’s side brought home the urn in 2010-11. “The big thing is when you’re playing in Australia you’re playing against the nation. I remember when we arrived in Australia, we landed at 11 o’clock or 12 o’clock at night and at customs they made us all open our cricket bags, take our boots out – ‘Where are the bats made? Is there any soil?’ They just pissed us about on purpose. They knew what the score was. We were there until two o’clock in the morning. And then when you’re walking on the streets you get: ‘You’re going to get a bloody hammering you pommies, why don’t you go back home?’ That’s how Australia was. So you’ve got to be competitive. You’ve got to have some hard players out there. You’ve got to take them on, get right up their noses – that’s what Botham did. Root’s got to be really aggressive, really get his boys fired up. That’s the big thing. You’ve got to play the game they play, and you’ve got to play it hard. If you lie down the Aussies will just walk over you.” Allan Lamb will be taking part in a live Ashes debate alongside Alec Stewart and Gladstone Small at 6pm on 13 December to raise awareness for Prostate Cancer UK. Watch free online at @ProstateUK or @InsideTourPod on Twitter. • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, just visit this page and follow the instructions.For Oscar Wilde, the tragic paradox of Victorian philanthropists was that their “remedies do not cure the disease … Indeed, their remedies are part of the disease.” He could easily have been talking about the British government’s approach to drugs. This week, the government announced its new 10-year strategy “to combat illegal drug use”, with the prime minister claiming that “it’s been a long time since the government said drugs are bad and dangerous”. Shamelessly dressed up as a cop to announce the new strategy, Boris Johnson’s message to drug gangs is that there is a new sheriff in town. These bold proclamations appear a little overblown when considered against the fact that this is at least the sixth new drugs strategy that a UK government has announced in the past quarter of a century. This purportedly groundbreaking new drug strategy admits that the current policy is not working, and then promises to continue heedlessly with its failed vision. Despite umpteen millions being thrown into enforcing prohibition over the decades, it recognises that “the global availability of drugs is higher than ever before” and that we are registering record levels of drug-related deaths. But the prime minister refused to even consider suggestions that the UK learn from more radical models of drug policy reform being implemented across the world, dismissing talk of decriminalising drugs by saying there is “no evidence that that’s the right thing to do”. He must be receiving his global drug policy information from the same source that told him there was no need for a lockdown in early 2020, despite the rest of the globe shutting its borders. When politicians dismiss radical drug policy reforms, they tend to present a false dichotomy: a macho “crackdown” or free-for-all legalisation. In reality, around the world we can see a number of different policy approaches that could be transformative for both users and society at large. Legalising the cultivation, trade and use of some recreational drugs is very much a real-world option today, as we have seen with cannabis in Uruguay, Canada and 18 states in the US. Last month, Germany’s incoming coalition government confirmed that it would also legalise the sale of recreational cannabis as part of its economic programme. Others have adopted a policy of decriminalisation, where drug possession is not legal but is not criminalised. Instead, it is treated as a minor civil offence, similar to parking on double yellow lines or travelling on the train without a ticket. Decriminalisation has been employed most comprehensively in Portugal, where, following a rise in drug-related death rates, in 2001 the government decided to decriminalise all drugs and redirect the money that was being spent on policing them into public health. The result was a fall in the rate of drug-related deaths, infectious disease transmission and the overall social costs of drug use. For intravenous drugs, there are the safe consumption rooms that exist in Spain and Switzerland among others, where users who are going to inject anyway can at least do so in a safe and clean environment. All of these ideas should be under discussion by any government that is serious about tackling drug harm, and looking at the evidence of what works. The Conservatives’ new drugs strategy is a missed opportunity for the UK to join the global sea change in drug policy. The government is dusting off its old Atari PC while the rest of the world is discussing the pros and cons of cryptocurrency. Much of the language used in the strategy document dates back to before some members of the cabinet were born. Once again there are promises of “tough punishment” for drugs gangs, a commitment that the government will “crack down” on drugs and renewed assurances that we can “stop drugs entering the UK” once and for all. Headlines this week proclaiming that “Boris Johnson unleashes all-out war on drugs” could almost have been copy-pasted from any time in the past 50 years. Journalists repeated tired claims that “half of all murders, robberies and burglaries are linked in some way to drugs” – which has been debunked by academics since the 1990s. Such exaggerated claims rely upon an assumption that when an offender is found to have been engaging in drug use, it was the drugs that caused the criminal offence. As Alex Stevens, professor of criminal justice at the University of Kent, stated: “by that logic, 100% of murders are water-related”. Buried underneath the tough-talking headlines, the new strategy contains some limited good news for those concerned with evidence-based drug policy: there is a commitment to restore significant investment in the drug treatment and rehabilitation services that had been cut to the bone under austerity. But this wasn’t the part of the strategy that the government emphasised. Instead, ministers pushed the idea that this drugs strategy would be different from previous incarnations because they would not go easy on “middle-class drug users”, threatening to remove the passports and driving licences of those convicted of drug offences. Presumably upper-class drug users, like several members of the cabinet who have admitted to previous experimentation, will be able to continue to indulge in their favourite substances with impunity. Furthermore, a failed policy that has devastated the lives of Britain’s poorest communities and most marginalised racial groups does not suddenly become effective when you promise to extend it to the middle classes. Though it may sound impressive to some Conservative voters, this reheated “war on drugs” rhetoric is the ultimate expression of feelings over facts. The evidence shows that just increasing punishment doesn’t deter drug use. The demand for drugs appears to be pretty inextricable from human life, and has been for thousands of years – tied to the need to numb pain, isolation and trauma, and deeper urges to experience the extremes of pleasure and intoxication for the brief period of time that we are alive. That historic demand is not going anywhere, and as long as the demand is there, people will be working out new ways to meet it. You cannot hope to stamp out drug use, you can only make it safe. The government’s drugs strategy should start from that basis. Dr Kojo Koram teaches at the School of Law at Birkbeck, University of LondonFrom “a black site” in Thailand in 2002, CIA officers warned headquarters that their interrogation techniques might result in the death of a prisoner. If that happened, he would be cremated, leaving no trace. But if he survived, could the CIA offer assurance that he would remain in isolation? It could. Abu Zubaydah, the agency said in a cable, “will never be placed in a situation where he has any significant contact with others” and “should remain incommunicado for the remainder of his life”. So opens The Forever Prisoner, an HBO documentary by Alex Gibney, which tells the story of the first high-value detainee subjected to what the CIA calls enhanced interrogation techniques (EITs) and what the rest of the world knows by a simpler, uglier word: torture. Nearly two decades after that dehumanizing cable, the CIA has proved as good as its word. Zubaydah, never charged with a crime or allowed to challenge his detention, is incarcerated at the Guantánamo Bay prison camp. The election of Joe Biden has done nothing to signal an end to his purgatory or status as a non-person. “He faces the horror that some people at Guantánamo face, which is maybe the most existential horror of all, beyond even a prisoner who is given a life sentence,” Gibney says in an interview at a Washington hotel, a mile from the White House. “You don’t really know what your future is. “Your future is forever undefined. You don’t know whether you’re ever going to get out or whether you’ll ever get an explanation of why you continue to be there and that’s the stuff we make movies about when we’re trying to portray tyrannical regimes. “That’s Orwell. It’s not the boot on the face forever, but it’s that sense of eternally not knowing what is going to happen to you or why. That is soul-crushing and has got to be psychologically destabilizing in some really potent way where you just don’t know.” Few would dispute that, in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on New York and Washington, Zubaydah was a person of interest (“He’s not Hollywood innocent, as even his lawyer would say,” Gibney notes). The Saudi-born Palestinian had fought in Afghanistan. He forged passports, arranged travel for jihadists and had knowledge of terrorist plots. He used more than 30 aliases and was seen as a master of disguise. But when Zubaydah was captured in Pakistan in March 2002 (he was shot while trying to escape), he was wrongly demonised as a high-level al-Qaida operative rather than an independent facilitator. He was whisked to a secret location in Thailand for questioning by men obsessed with how to prevent another 9/11. Gibney says: “Abu Zubaydah was patient zero for the CIA’s torture programme. That’s the reason to investigate his story because you learn how the rule of law was upended. How we went down a road where we were more interested in listening to what we wanted to hear, which is what torture tends to give you, rather than what the facts really were.” Zubaydah underwent enhanced interrogation techniques at the hands of CIA contractors, including 83 applications of waterboarding in one month alone. In an account he gave to his lawyer in 2008, Zubaydah recalled: “They kept pouring water and concentrating on my nose and my mouth until I really felt I was drowning and my chest was just about to explode from the lack of oxygen.” He also spent more than 11 days in a coffin-sized box, and 29 hours in an even smaller box just 21 inches wide, 2.5 feet deep and 2.5 feet high. The documentary includes images of brutal treatment drawn by Zubaydah himself as well as entries from his pre-capture and post-capture personal diaries. The US was deploying torture as government policy for the first time in history – and it was wildly haphazard. Gibney adds: “The CIA would like to pretend that it was a scientific programme carefully calibrated by rigorous scientists. That’s not true at all. It was just improvised. ‘Let’s try 24 hours of sleep deprivation. That’s not working. How about 48 hours? How about 72 hours?’ “Well, your mind turns to mush after 72 hours of sleep deprivation and they could have asked one of their own experts who would have said, actually, your cognitive ability just about disappears at that point. So why would you interrogate somebody after 72 hours of sleep deprivation? It’s nonsensical. Clearly, when they were on the waterboard, they didn’t know how far to go. “What horrified me when I got into the details of this was how careless and reckless and ad hoc the whole thing was. It was just shoot from the hip. ‘Hey, let’s try a little bit of nudity today. How about some cold water? Oh, that’s not working. Let’s try the old hang ‘em from the wrists. “‘Let’s put him in a box where he will defecate on himself for four or five days. That might work. Let’s play music really loud. How about some Red Hot Chili Peppers over and over and over again?’ That was a period where officially EITs had not been legally approved so they’re just improvising their spitballing.” For Gibney, the case offers a stark demonstration that there are rules against torture because it is both immoral and fails to produce fact-based evidence. “Over the course of doing documentaries for a number of years, I keep coming across this phrase ‘noble cause corruption’. Once people think they’re doing something for a noble cause, they allow themselves to start bending the rules, like planting a joint on a on a perp you can’t get any other way and then the next thing you know, you’re killing people. “I would hope that people would begin to understand that the notion of the end justifies the means is never a good idea because once you accept that, it means you’re basically allowing yourself to upend the very principles that you’re claiming to uphold.” He interviews James Mitchell, a retired air force psychologist and the chief architect of the EITs, who expresses no regrets for doing what he saw as his patriotic duty. Mitchell tells the filmmaker: “If my boss tells me it’s legal, especially if the president has approved it, I’m not going to get into the nuances about what some guy in the basement or what some journalist thinks about it, because they’re free to trade places with me any time they think they can do a better job of protecting Americans.” Gibney also sued the CIA to un-redact former FBI agent Ali Soufan’s book, The Black Banners: How Torture Derailed the War on Terror after 9/11, and gained access to Soufan’s interrogation notes about his time with Zubaydah. This enabled Soufan to speak more freely than before and shed new light on the case. Gibney reflects: “The reason for [the torture] had always been that Abu Zubaydah was completely uncooperative. What was revealed in the new Ali Soufan interview, along with his interrogation notes, was that within an hour or two of interrogating him, he gave them an ongoing plot. “That was in Israel funded by the Saudis and they helped to stop that plot. So knowing that you’d have to conclude he was completely cooperative: he’s giving them an ongoing plot that they can actually stop. But the conclusion reached by the CIA was just the opposite.” Zubaydah was taken to further black sites in Poland, Guantánamo Bay, Morocco, Lithuania, Afghanistan and back to Guantánamo Bay, where he has been held since 2006. Somewhere along the way in CIA custody he lost his left eye; he now wears a patch. Unable to speak to him directly, Gibney could only communicate via his lawyers. “On the one hand his lawyer calls him a diva and says he’s a man of fierce intelligence, a dark sense of humour, but also somebody who has been deeply traumatised. He has fierce headaches, he has nightmares of drowning, not surprisingly.” It emerged last week that Zubaydah has petitioned a federal court for his release on grounds that US wars in Afghanistan and with al-Qaida are over. A legal filing describing his treatment over the past 20 years as a “parade of horribles”. For the time being, however, he remains in a legal twilight zone, out of sight and out of mind except when filmmakers such as Gibney force America to re-confront the stain on its moral authority. The director casts Zubaydah as the origin story of America’s defining failure of intelligence and the betrayal of its ideals. “I hope that this is a wake up call,” he says. “When you go through the things that they put Abu Zubaydah through and also the way in which it was done in such a ham fisted, careless and frankly stupid fashion, I hope people will say, ‘I can’t believe this really happened and that we allowed this to happen’. “Furthermore, I hope the intellectual reaction will be to say Guantánamo as a prison, as a place outside the law, is some kind of cruel joke and we’ve got to shut it down because it’s not who we aspire to be. He’s there in Gitmo not because of what he did to us but for what we did to him. That’s why he’s being kept silent.” The Forever Prisoner is now available on HBO with a UK date to be announcedRestaurant workers at Harrods say they have won a 25% increase in pay, with some chefs now earning more than £12.50 an hour – averting a threatened strike during Christmas week. The United Voices of the World union (UVW), which represents waiters and chefs at the Knightsbridge department store, said the deal represented a “new benchmark for pay in the hospitality sector”, with some Harrods workers in line for £5,000 extra in annual pay. It said the deal, for some, included agreed annual pay rises of 3% from 2023. The union said early last month that it would ballot staff about a potential strike over poor pay and a heavy workload for staff after job cuts. One restaurant worker said: “After weeks of organising with our union, UVW, we are delighted that our bosses have engaged with us and recognised our hard work. We will be getting the pay rise we have fought for and that we deserve – good news for us and workers beyond.” Petros Elia, the general secretary of UVW, said: “We’re proud to set a new benchmark for the sector, a sector notorious for poverty pay and appalling conditions. This is affirmation of the power of organised and strike-ready workers – this remains the biggest and most powerful tool in workers’ arsenal today. The fight does not stop here: we are now talking with retail staff to ensure they are not left behind. We’ve been saying it’s time for £12 and now that time has arrived.” Harrods said on Tuesday that the increased pay for restaurant staff was not driven by the threat of union action but came after three months of reviews to ensure pay was in line with industry benchmarks. The retailer said in a statement: “This has been entirely driven by ongoing discussions and work internally with our restaurant colleagues, and at no point during this three-month process have we engaged with a third party. “We are consistently reviewing our pay policies to ensure we continue to attract and retain the best talent.” Harrods, which is owned by Qatar Holding, the investment arm of Qatar’s sovereign wealth fund, has said the Covid-19 pandemic was a significant challenge for the business last year. Sales fell 50% to £429.5m in the year to the end of January 2021 and the company frecorded a £68m pre-tax loss from a £232m profit a year before.If there’s one song that hardly seems Christmassy, it’s The Black Angel’s Death Song by the Velvet Underground. While Lou Reed’s lyrics mention “the cosy brown snow of the east”, it’s the kind you inject rather than go dashing through on a one-horse open sleigh. Nonetheless, it’s the song that kicks off Taylor Mac’s Holiday Sauce … Booster!, a festive show with a twist. “I wanted to counter the schmaltz of holiday time, so I just thought it would be a nice way to think of angels as, ‘Oh, the black angel of death is coming.’” Mac laughs down the phone from rehearsals. “Christmas is a time when people often kill themselves, so let’s just acknowledge the darkness of this holiday right from the get-go and then maybe in the show we can perform a ritual of why that is and how to find a way out of it.” Mac identifies as “performer”, uses the pronoun judy, dresses in astounding costumes (designed by cohort Machine Dazzle) and creates shows that are genre-splicing, expectation-defying, carnivalesque and queer. “I don’t like a small show,” judy notes. “I like to make a happening.” Mac’s apotheosis came in A 24-Decade History of Popular Music, which used the songs of each decade from 1776 to 2016 to create a kaleidoscopic portrait of judy’s native America. Mashing up drag, cabaret, burlesque and performance art, and 24 hours long, it has only been performed in one go once, five years ago in New York, where Mac is based. I was there, awake for 23 hours of it (I kipped through the 1940s), and had the night (and day) of my life. Holiday Sauce … Booster! requires less commitment. Mac and an enormous troupe of performers and musicians have been putting on the show annually since 2017. This is a version made especially to be streamed in the UK, through the Barbican’s website – a timely decision given Omicron’s unwelcome debut. “I was originally going to call the show Holiday Sauce … Variant! but I thought I’d choose something a little more positive,” Mac says. The premise of the show is that through Mac’s subversive take on popular songs, we’ll collectively create a new kind of Christmas ritual, shared with our actual nearest and dearest, which will bring the festival back to its pagan roots. In other words, it’s a much-needed alternative to Christianity, overconsumption, and fighting with your relatives. “Normally we get as many people in the audience as possible on stage, pass out bourbon and sing songs with each other,” Mac says. “But since you’ll be watching it virtually, you’ll have to do that yourself.” Mac originally envisaged the show as a performance of the whole of the Velvet Underground &amp; Nico album, but done in a Christmas adaptation. As well as The Black Angel’s Death Song, Holiday Sauce still includes All Tomorrow’s Parties (in a medley with The Little Drummer Boy), though we have been denied a festive take on Venus in Furs, or indeed Heroin. Instead, we get God Rest Ye Merry Gentlemen accompanied by burlesque performer Tigger! stripping in an outfit that starts out as the Virgin Mary and ends up as the baby Jesus. Then there’s a character called Sexual Consent Santa. “Sometimes we do a training session on how to sit on Santa’s lap with consent, what consent is and how it works in the larger culture of capitalism,” Mac says. Is this a reference to British office parties, where people used to lunge at one another and photocopy their bottoms? “That’s the thing about the holidays – they’re supposed to be moments where you release the tension that you’re holding all year long,” Mac says. “There are ways to release tension without harming other people, so that’s the thing everyone’s got to learn now. But I’m not against people photocopying their bottoms. If you work in a place where you can’t photocopy your bottom, you should probably change jobs.” Though the line-up of songs changes from year to year, in the past it has included the Pogues’ Fairytale of New York.“We probably should put it back in because I was in a pub in London and it came on the jukebox,” Mac says. “The entire pub screamed it at the top of their lungs and I thought, ‘I would love to live in a country where everyone knows every lyric to that song.’” Is Mac aware of the row that breaks out in the British media every year over the song’s use of the word “faggot”? “Well, when a big old queer sings it, it means something different, so maybe I have the solution!” Mac’s shows include so much collaboration and audience participation that lockdown must have been especially difficult. “I’ve always been someone who appreciated their alone time, and I love hanging out, so it felt like about half my life wasn’t functioning and obviously I’m not alone in that,” Mac says. “I’m a live artist and you can come up with albums or a film, but I’m just more interested in the ephemeral art form. To not have that, I wondered, ‘What’s my purpose in life?’ – it was an existential crisis.” Mac laughs. “But you just dig in.” As the presence of the black angel confirms, many people find themselves having to dig in to get through Christmas. Holiday Sauce is for them, a demonstration of an alternative way to mark the passing of another year, and the hope of a new one. “If you’re not religious and you don’t like sports, you don’t have rituals in your life and we need them to help us transition from things like isolation in a pandemic to entering the culture again,” Mac says. “That’s the reason for this holiday show. I want to check in with the audience and say this is what we did, this is what we’re doing, and then we’re going to work towards next year.” Taylor Mac’s Holiday Sauce … Booster! is streamed on the Barbican’s website on 10, 17 and 24 December at 8pm.Name: Night owls. Age: They come in all ages. Appearance: Tired and unhappy, at least when the rest of us see them. What do you mean by the rest of us? The early birds. I’m not an early bird. I just get up because my alarm goes off. Oh well, at least you’re happy. I’m not happy. I hate my job. You’re happier than the night owls are, at any rate. Who says? Science. Science who? Science in the guise of a Journal of Sleep Research article called The mediating role of perceived social support in the relationship between morningness-eveningness and subjective wellbeing … I don’t even understand the title. The study, from the University of Warsaw, reinforces previous evidence that being an early riser is positively related to reported happiness. And being a night owl isn’t? “Evening-oriented individuals show greater difficulties in self-regulation, together with a reduced ability to process and regulate negative emotions,” according to the study. But why should that be? Nobody really knew for certain – it might be the extra daylight or better sleep patterns. But this new study suggests another factor is at work. What other factor? The notion that morning people receive – and perceive – higher levels of social support from friends, family and significant others. Everybody loves an early riser. Or, more likely, they don’t like a late one: being sluggish and uncommunicative in the mornings may elicit strong disapproval from, say, the parents of groggy teenagers. It’s prejudice, is what it is. It’s also thought that morning people are better aligned with the schedules of many common social activities – school, work, etc – that occur during the day. Discrimination, pure and simple. That’s entirely possible. “Neither type of chronotype is worse or better, it’s just that some people have a natural preference for going to bed and waking up early, while others prefer a later daily schedule,” the study’s lead author, Joanna Gorgol, told the Times in a plea for understanding. If they taught chemistry at midnight, I might have another A-level to my name. More importantly, social support is itself a strong predictor of subjective wellbeing, which in turn may lead to better sleep. Sorry, what? I was yawning too loudly to hear you. Never mind. Do say: “Early to bed and early to rise, enhances your standing in everyone’s eyes.” Don’t say: “So I like to stay up all night, and sleep all day, in a coffin. Don’t judge me.”More than 30,000 homes and businesses in Ireland have been left without power as Storm Barra made landfall. The Met Office has issued severe yellow weather warnings across most of the UK, with the exception of the far north of Scotland. Gale-force winds and blizzards are expected in parts of Northern Ireland, Wales and south-west Scotland later on Tuesday. Heavy snow is also expected across northern England. The latest storm comes less than two weeks after Storm Arwen hit the UK. If you have been affected by Storm Barra, we would like to hear from you. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. Though we’d like to hear from you, your safety and security is most important. When responding and particularly if taking photographs or video please make sure you put your safety and the safety of others first. Extreme weather events can be very unpredictable and carry very real risks. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.A 20-year-old woman was “a terrible mother” who was cruel to her toddler daughter but did not kill her, a court has heard. Sixteen-month-old Star Hobson died on 22 September 2020 after being beaten to death in the flat she shared with her mother, Frankie Smith, in Keighley, West Yorkshire. Smith admitted child cruelty part way through the trial at Bradford crown court. But she accuses her partner, Savannah Brockhill, a 28-year-old amateur boxer and security guard, of killing Star. The pair, who had been in a “toxic” relationship for 11 months at the time of Star’s death, are both standing trial accused of murder and causing or allowing her death. They both deny the charges. But they accept that instead of calling an ambulance they went on the internet, Googling “shock in babies” and “how to bring a baby out of shock” 11 minutes before Smith’s phone texted 999. The trial, which has been running for seven weeks, has heard that numerous friends and family members called social services to express concerns about Star in her short life. The first referral was made in January 2020. Zafar Ali QC, representing Smith, said he was not going to pretend his client was a good mother. “Frankie Smith was a terrible mother. She was selfish and sometimes callous … and cruel to her own daughter,” he said in his closing speech on Tuesday. “Her behaviour was more than immature and ignorant. Her behaviour was simply terrible. Frankie Smith’s priorities were all clearly wrong,” he continued. But he told the jury that Smith had been telling the truth when she said she was in the toilet when Star suffered the catastrophic abdominal injuries that caused her death. A pathologist previously told the court that Star’s injuries had been caused by “a severe and forceful blow or blows, either in the form of punching, stamping or kicking to the abdomen”. Ali said that Brockhill punched Star and then tried to cover up what she had done by deliberately performing CPR wrongly on the little girl, pressing hard on her stomach instead of her chest. He called this “theatrics” that were designed to offer an alternative explanation for Star’s injuries, telling the jury that Brockhill had been a “star student” in her first aid class. A postmortem found Star had other older injuries, including a fractured skull and leg. The prosecution has said Brockhill inflicted these the weekend before her death when she took Star to work with her at a recycling plant in Doncaster overnight so that Smith could go out drinking. “Frankie is in the bottom 2% of the population for intelligence, with an IQ bordering on what used to be called mentally retarded, but in these politically correct times is referred to as extremely low,” Ali told the jury. He said Smith was “abnormally compliant” and “abnormally prone to going along with what an authority figure is telling her to do”. But the prosecuting barrister, Alistair MacDonald QC, argued that Smith had been clever enough to convince social services the referrals were malicious. Last week, Brockhill’s barrister, Katherine Goddard QC, told the jury: “To say the relationship between Savannah Brockhill and Frankie Smith was toxic is about the biggest understatement anyone could make. From the start, it was riddled with distrust and insecurity from both sides.” The case continues.The seed for Galal Yafai’s gold medal at the Tokyo Olympics was planted five years earlier. At the Rio Games in 2016, the British flyweight boxer lost in the second round. The defeat really hit him on the flight home: while Team GB’s medal winners, the likes of Nicola Adams and Mo Farah, were treated to first-class and business seats, the other athletes were “brushed to the back of the plane”. It was a feeling that Yafai did not want to relive. “I was devastated,” he recalls. “I was devastated losing and then when I got on the plane, no one wants to take photos of you, no one wants to speak to you. And I remember thinking: ‘This is absolutely horrible. If I go to another Olympics, I need to be sitting at the front.’” The 28-year-old Yafai arrived in Tokyo far from fancied, but over five contests in the Kokugikan Arena, he was precise, stylish and explosively powerful. In the gold-medal match, after he dropped his opponent, Carlo Paalam of the Philippines, to the canvas in the first round, the result was never in doubt. “On my day, I knew I could beat anyone in the world,” he says. “And I peaked at the right time.” Yafai’s gold was one of six medals for Team GB’s boxing team, making it Britain’s most successful Games in that sport for more than 100 years. “I’m seeing my friends live out their dreams right in front of me,” Yafai says. “And I’m living out my dreams in front of them and yeah, it’s just surreal and really motivating.” Turning right on to the aeroplane after Rio isn’t the only hardship that Yafai, born and raised by his Yemeni parents in the West Midlands, has had to endure. For most of his sporting life, he has been in the shadow of his older brothers, Kal and Gamal, both highly decorated boxers: Kal was a longtime super-flyweight world champion; Gamal has won European and Commonwealth titles. While this was happening, their younger brother Galal was working the night shift at the Land Rover factory in Solihull for three years in his early 20s. “I remember thinking: ‘God, I hate this job!’” laughs Yafai. “No disrespect to Land Rover, they are a brilliant company, but I just thought: ‘I want to be a superstar in boxing.’ Those were my words: ‘I want to be a superstar.’ I’m stuck in this dead-end job and my brothers are getting the limelight on the telly and they’re in all the newspapers and I’m nowhere to be seen.” Yafai could have turned professional after losing in Rio, but he decided he had unfinished business at the Olympics. When Tokyo 2020 was delayed because of Covid, he was close to pulling out of the Team GB system. “I was gutted and I wasn’t sure I could do another year,” he says. “I thought: ‘I’m praying to God this pays off. Because if it doesn’t, I’m going to look like a real nitwit here.’” Tokyo validated his decision to be patient. Yafai is planning to turn professional now, and he hopes to be fighting for a world title within two or three years. Even still, he doesn’t think that anything he does in the ring will surpass the gold he won this summer. “I can go anywhere in the world and say to someone I’m an Olympic champion and automatically get their respect,” he says. “Being a world champion, it might financially be better in the long run, but being Olympic champion is something I can live with for ever.” There have been other perks from his success. At the GQ Men of the Year awards, he met Ed Sheeran and Idris Elba. Liam Gallagher has tweeted him: “Yes eye Yafai.” He couldn’t get hold of a PlayStation 5 before Tokyo, and now he’s been sent one for free. When asked in Tokyo what he was most looking forward to after winning gold, he replied “Five Guys”, and the burger chain gave him a stack of vouchers. “I think I’ve had one too many Five Guys,” Yafai admits. Mainly, though, Yafai seems pleased that he has finally got bragging rights in his family. “I’m at the top of the tree now with the brothers,” he says. “I think so, I won’t tell them that though!”TRACEY CROUCH IS A FOOTBALL FANATIC (BUT HER PATTER’S ERRATIC) Select committees are usually tedious affairs, and the one Tracey Crouch appeared before this morning was no different. But it is a slow news day, so let’s feign interest. Crouch was in front of the digital, culture, media and sport committee, you see, proselytising for her fan-led review of football governance, which makes several mild redistributive recommendations for the benefit of everyone, and has therefore been compared in some Premier League boardrooms to a year-zero purge, because this is the level of political debate in 2021 and we can’t have nice things. Not allowed. To be fair to Crouch, she’s not taking this entirely rational response lying down, and today came out all guns blazing to fight for a scheme that would see, among other things, clubs paying a 10% transfer levy that would help those further down the food chain. Countering pushback from owners, Crouch pointed out that resistance would be “interesting because it was actually proposed by a Premier League club” and that “if, God forbid, the Conservative Party wasn’t re-elected”, harsher diktats would almost certainly be handed down by a “communist” government led by [Fiver adjusts glasses, squints] Keir Starmer. Crouch also restated her belief that an independent regulator, given the power to performatively wag its finger in public, would “encourage growth and investment”, “enable confidence” and ensure “long-term sustainability … I don’t see it as an attack on the golden goose, quite the opposite”. Fine and admirable words, but Tories gonna Tory eventually, and it wouldn’t be a select committee appearance without at least one statement you wouldn’t dare make while not covered by parliamentary privilege. “West Ham could win the league,” Crouch insisted, in the time-honoured Conservative party-approved brazen through-the-teeth style. As the Fiver adjusted its ear trumpet, the committee responded with a perfectly timed theatrical beat. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Scott Murray from 5.45pm for hot updates of RB Leipzig 1-2 Manchester City and join Simon Burnton from 8pm for Milan 1-3 Liverpool. TOP 100 Yes pop pickers, it’s that time of year again: the 100 best female footballers in the world 2021. Counting down from 100 to 71. And here’s how we ranked them. QUOTE OF THE DAY “Plymouth Argyle Football Club is delighted to announce the appointment of Steven Schumacher as our new First-Team Manager. Schumacher, 37, succeeds outgoing boss Ryan Lowe, who has resigned from his position with the intention of accepting a managerial role elsewhere” – in a nice bit of comms 101 Plymouth get ahead of the news cycle by announcing their new manager before revealing the old one has departed. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Get your ears around Football Weekly, here. FIVER LETTERS “As a country music fan I enjoyed the reference to Dolly Parton in Monday’s Fiver. Country has a long tradition of giving prominence to fiddle players, from Jerry Rivers of the Drifting Cowboys to Amanda Shires, with many others in between. It’s appropriate then that it was used to introduce a piece about Everton fans, whose protest at the imbalance between their amount of trophies and their sense of entitlement has many of us reaching for our tiny violins” – Ed Taylor. “Regarding Seth Kleinschmidt’s concerns (yesterday’s Fiver letters) about Spurs players being too mentally and physically fragile to receive powerful hugs from their manager – I wonder if Conte has considered air kisses as an alternative? Or perhaps nicking West Ham’s on-pitch bubble machine, setting it to volume 11 and lining the player’s tunnel with a soothing layer of micro-bubbles to avoid unpleasant skin grazing incidents? He could also leave out in the dressing room a few complimentary gift vouchers for an introductory psychotherapy session. Might help with some of those unresolved chairman-won’t-let-me-go adjustment issues” – Steve Malone. “The Hall at Dewsbury (yesterday’s Fiver letters) would indeed be well worth a visit, being over 700 years old – circa 1298 – and built next to the Saxon Minster church of St Paulinus. Sadly it was demolished in the enlightened 1960s as part of a ring road scheme” – Richard Lee. “Daniel Kennedy’s Dewsbury-Hall reference reminded me of the occasion when a colleague queried, whether the Fulham/Villa I had attended at the weekend, was National Trust” – Jon Algar. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our letter o’ the day is … Steve Malone, who bags a revised and updated version of Richard Foster’s Premier League Nuggets. We’ll give a copy away every day this week, and it is available to buy here. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Tottenham are facing a tricky time of it after a Covid outbreak at the club. Jude Bellingham has been fined €40,000 after his “You give a referee who has already match-fixing the biggest game in Germany. What do you expect?” venting in a TV interview about the referee Felix Zwayer after defeat to Bayern at the weekend. “The player of the Bundesliga club Borussia Dortmund has already agreed to the judgment, the judgment is now final,” 1984ed the DfB. Mo Salah’s Liverpool contract talks will, as the Beautiful South said, need a little time, says Jürgen Klopp. Mateo Kovacic returned to Chelsea training on Monday but tested positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday. He’ll be quarantining on Wednesday. And on Thursday and Friday and Saturday. West Ham’s Kurt Zouma is facing three months out with hamstring-ouch. The Premier League is to trial a saliva test to diagnose concussion in players. RECOMMENDED LOOKING It’s Tuesday so it’s Squires day! STILL WANT MORE? Jonathan Liew + Football Governance + Chinese Communist Party = Excellent Reading. Ben Fisher tells the story behind Firewall FC’s Football League survival fight. Richard Jolly on a night of dissent and joy at Goodison Park. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! THE FIVER’S ROLL-UP SMOKING, BITTER-DRINKING, WILLOW-WIELDING COUSIN IS VERY EXCITEDThe “race for space” that became characteristic of the property market during the Covid pandemic could be starting to slow, according to Halifax. As people shunned city centre work and life during lockdowns, and the government introduced a stamp duty holiday, demand for country living – or at least a spare room – grew. But in its latest snapshot of the housing market, the mortgage lender said there were signs this trend could be fading. Growth in the price of flats was now outpacing growth in the price of detached houses, which were in high demand during lockdown. In November, flats were changing hands for 10.8% more than at the same time last year, while detached houses were typically fetching 6.6% more. The percentage difference does not tell the whole story: according to Halifax, the average price of a flat that it agreed a mortgage on in November was £118,771, up from £107,159 last year, while the average detached house costs £517,650, compared with £485,684 in 2020. So a much smaller cash-price rise comes through as a bigger percentage at the lower end of the market. But there are reasons why demand may have tipped in favour of flats. For months the housing market boomed on the back of sales of larger properties, with commentators reporting that lifestyle changes prompted by the pandemic were fuelling demand for homes with gardens, studies and spare rooms as more people worked from home. These were also the properties where buyers had most to gain from stamp duty holidays launched after the first lockdown. In England and Northern Ireland, until the end of June homes costing up to £500,000 could change hands with no tax to be paid. Buyers paying more than that for a property could save £15,000 in duty – enough to persuade many to bring forward purchases, or to look in a slightly higher price bracket than they might have otherwise. The withdrawal of the stamp duty break, which was phased out over the summer and ended on 30 September, plus the reopening of some city centre offices, could have tipped demand towards flats. There is evidence of an increase in demand from buyers. According to the property website Rightmove, in November last year detached homes were the most searched for, but last month flats took over. “A shift in demand from bigger houses to flats has emerged as more of society has opened up again and people have assessed where they will work throughout the week, with many now considering a move closer to a city than further out, Rightmove’s property data expert, Tim Bannister, said. “Prospective buyers looking for a flat, with a must-have for many of them now being a shared garden or balcony, will find there’s more availability than other property types and lower average asking price growth over the last year, but there’s now more competition.” Jeremy Leaf, a north London estate agent and former residential chair of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, said his agency was still receiving multiple offers for any three- and four-bedroom family houses. “Flats are making a bit of a comeback now that post-furlough working and commuting patterns have been formalised for many, at least in the medium-term,” he said. Sarah Coles, a personal finance analyst at the advice firm Hargreaves Lansdown, said the market in flats may not purely be driven by those taking early steps on the housing ladder. She said industry figures showed the sums of money people were withdrawing when they remortgaged had been rising, and that on average those who remortgaged to free cash for reasons other than debt consolidation or home improvement took an average of £80,000. “There’s a strong chance that an awful lot of this is funding another property,” she said. “When we think of second homes we might usually think of a cottage by the sea or in the countryside, but the pandemic has changed the way we live, and may well be affecting second home trends too. The growth of flexible and hybrid working means it makes more sense to buy a home where we really want to live, and a small place near work for when we absolutely have to go into the office.”A businessman who has a severe nut allergy has accused the UK government of endangering his life after he was served nuts and traces of nuts during hotel quarantine after returning from a work trip to South Africa. Richard Lace, 40, went into anaphylactic shock and had to call for an ambulance after eating two mouthfuls of a rice dish at a hotel at Heathrow on 3 December. The Department of Health and Social Care has now released him from quarantine on medical grounds – something Lace had requested to no avail four days previously – after it was contacted by the Guardian. “It really is ridiculous. They had the information from day one. They had two opportunities to get it right and not kill me and I can’t trust that they won’t kill me on the third occasion,” he said. The incident comes just days after the film-maker and actor Richard E Grant criticised the government for the “very poor standard” of food served in another hotel after he, too, was forced to quarantine after a trip visiting his mother in South Africa. Lace, who runs a security firm and had flown to South Africa for business meetings, described the Covid quarantine process as a joke. He said elderly people and young families were made to stand in a queue for three hours to be processed and then had to wait an hour for a coach, with a further hour sitting on it because the hotel had not yet opened to them. He carries an EpiPen for emergencies but had not expected to have to use it, as he had notified the hotel of his allergy in the clearly marked area on the form all passengers were asked to complete. After being served breakfast pastries with whole nuts visible he alerted hotel managers again to the life-threatening risk of nuts and cross-contamination in food. “I told them it was crazy to serve nuts. I told them ‘I have an EpiPen and I could literally end up in hospital or dying in my room. You have got to make sure this doesn’t happen again’, and they said ‘OK, no problem, so sorry’. “Then tea came. It was some sort of rice dish and I took two bites and straight away I could feel something wasn’t right. I could feel my chest tightening, I was wheezing and looked in the mirror and the left side of my face was puffed out. My anxiety levels went through the roof and I called the number they give you for a medic. I must have rang three times and no one picked up and then I dialled security and nobody picked up and then I just rang zero and a young lad answered and called an ambulance straight away,” said Lace. The paramedics arrived within 10 minutes and stayed with him for more than two hours. After that, Lace refused all hotel food until his release, saying he could not trust the kitchen not to endanger his life again, and instead relied on fruit and Pot Noodles ordered online from a supermarket.More than 56,000 homes and businesses in Ireland have been left without power after Storm Barra made landfall, with winds gusting up to 80mph (130km/h) as it moved east throughout the day. Heavy rain, sleet and snow fell on Tuesday over the north-west of Ireland and Scotland, threatening further disruption to areas only just recovering from lengthy power cuts in the wake of Storm Arwen. . Ireland’s national weather service, Met Éireann, said the storm could pose a danger to life over the next two days. The UK was also braced for strong winds and heavy showers, less than two weeks after Storm Arwen caused significant damage to parts of the country. Gusts of 69mph were recorded near Stranraer, in Dumfries and Galloway, while seven schools in the region have been shut. Restrictions are in place on bridges across Scotland including Skye and Erskine in the west, and Dornoch, the Forth road and Tay bridges on the east coast. The Scottish Environmental Protection Agency (Sepa) warned the public that, as the storm moves north-east across the country, “we expect to see coastal flooding due to the combination of high tides, storm surge and large waves leading to potential wave overtopping”. In Aberdeenshire, one of the areas worst-hit by the damage of power cuts caused by Arwen, the council assured residents that welfare arrangements would remain in place over the coming days. Power cuts were reported in Cork, Kerry, Dublin and Limerick and people in three counties on the west coast were advised to remain indoors. Flooding in Cork and Kerry rendered several roads unpassable because of water or fallen trees. The storm coincided with high tide in Cork city, with flood waters flowing across South Mall from riverside quays in Morrison’s Island. A rare red weather alert was in place in counties Cork, Kerry and Clare, and orange wind warnings were issued for Limerick, Waterford, Galway, Mayo, Wexford, Dublin, Louth, Wicklow and Meath. Schools in 12 counties subject to red and orange warnings were advised to close, while Aer Lingus cancelled all flights in and out of Cork with some services disrupted in Dublin. In the UK, the Environment Agency issued three flood warnings for England’s south coast, as well as 35 flood alerts. Severe gales have led to travel disruption across the Isle of Man, with cancelled daytime ferry services between the island and Lanchashire and several blocked roads due to fallen trees. Fallen trees have blocked several roads around the island. Yellow snow warnings were in place in northern England and Scotland, with blizzards and snowfall of up to 20cm causing treacherous conditions on roads at higher altitudes, the Met Office said. The Met Office meteorologist Aidan McGivern said Storm Barra’s gusts and impact would be “a notch down” compared with Arwen, which led to widespread power cuts on 26 November, some of which had not yet been restored. Heavy rain was forecast in Northern Ireland and the south-west of the UK with drifting snow and blizzards turning heavy across northern hills. On Monday, while about 1,600 households in the north-east of England were still without electricity almost two weeks after Storm Arwen struck, Boris Johnson said he had spoken to the chief executive of Northern Powergrid and had been “assured [customers] would be reconnected tomorrow at the latest”. That evening the electricity supplier said it had reduced the number of homes and businesses affected to 700. Ice was forecast overnight in parts of the UK before Barra’s arrival and the Met Office issued a yellow warning for potentially hazardous driving conditions in western Scotland and north-west England. • This article was amended on 7 December 2021. A picture caption was corrected to refer to “New Brighton” rather than “Brighton” and a reference in the text to “the north-east of the UK” was changed to “the north-east of England”.A groundbreaking new show in New York showcases the work of three under-recognized Asian American sculptors who worked and taught in the city during the 1960s and 70s. On view at Chelsea’s Tina Kim Gallery, The Unseen Professors highlights modern sculptures by Leo Amino (1911-1989), Minoru Niizuma (1930-1998) and John Pai (born 1937), three pioneering Asian-born artists who immigrated to America, eventually had work in major shows and collections, and influenced younger artists through their teaching but remain little known today. “This kind of exhibition is so overdue,” says Tina Kim, a gallerist who approached poet and critic John Yau a few years ago to learn more about Asian American artists in the 80s and 90s. Yau, who curated the show, suggested going back even further, “to the first generation of artists who came”, Kim said. “They struggled so much but made a strong impact in the New York art scene. It is time now that their work receives the proper attention and we investigate their contributions.” “This show is a historical event,” agrees Genji Amino, grandchild of the sculptor Leo Amino. “I’m not sure when the last time, if ever, three Asian American artists of my grandfather’s generation or the following were shown together in New York.” In July 2020 Genji Amino curated of a show of Leo Amino’s work at David Zwirner. Before that, they say, “I doubt I could point to solo shows in New York for earlier generations of Asian American artists apart from the only two sculptors of Asian descent to achieve a measure of lasting national and international recognition: Ruth Asawa and Isamu Noguchi. And this is despite the incredible amount of activity of Asian American artists around the second world war.” Histories of Asian American art on the west coast, while still woefully neglected in a national context, have been much better recorded thanks to the efforts of a larger and more longstanding Asian American community and history of activism, exhibition and scholarship. On the east coast, the record is far less complete. “It has been quite a revelation that a Japanese American artist of my grandfather’s generation was living in Greenwich Village alongside the abstract expressionists and teaching at Black Mountain College, exhibiting nearly every year at the Whitney in the 40s and 50s, and developing the new medium of plastics two decades before it was recognized in the work of a younger generation of artists in Los Angeles,” Genji Amino says. This marks the first major exhibition of Minoru Niizuma’s work in nearly 25 years, although “he helped shape the genre of stone sculpture in a way that very few have,” says Arata Niizuma, his son. “In my mind, my father created a breadth of work in stone sculpture that is rivaled only by the likes of Henry Moore and Isamu Noguchi.” The three artists belonged to different generations and worked in different mediums, using different processes, and indeed the exhibition acknowledges that they have little in common aside from the region where they were born and the fact that they were never affiliated with a mainstream movement or style. “There’s many art worlds in New York, and sometimes they overlap, but sometimes they’re completely separate from each other,” Yau says, adding that even the now famous Yayoi Kusama and Noguchi stood apart from the mainstream art world. Genji Amino notes that diversity in backgrounds and practices “reflect both the multiplicity and the inherent contradictions implied by the concept ‘Asian American’”. “I think Leo would have been proud to show his work alongside other artists who found themselves to be outsiders to the white avant gardes of their respective generations, both in terms of the adversity they faced as Asians in America and in terms of the alternative set of concerns that drove their unorthodox aesthetic practices,” they added. Artist John Pai recalls that when he first heard about the exhibition, “I felt as if I was about to be reunited with a long lost family,” he told the Guardian. “Although I had never met any of the other artists, I was all too familiar with the forces that shaped them and the dreams of a new world that challenged their imagination.” Pai was compelled by how each artist met this challenge in different ways. “Imagine what kind of form could emerge from a jackhammer, a test tube and an oxy-acetylene torch? Calmly coherent sculptures, it turns out.” Pai remembers fondly the fertile milieu from the era covered in the show. “Today, race, politics and power have churned into a formidable brew that reasonable people find hard to believe how paralyzed we are by it. This show harkens back to a time when people from all walks of life strove to integrate all the arts towards a dynamic and creative society. The depth and breadth of creative energy was awe-inspiring. One can only wonder, will it ever happen again?” Despite their achievements, many Asian American artists from this period risk becoming lost to history: perhaps an artist had a show, but it was probably not reviewed (due partly to the dearth of critics of color at the time) and if there was a catalog, it may be out of print or difficult to find. Putting the exhibition together was challenging given the lack of documentation, Kim notes. “These histories will be forgotten unless we document them now,” she says. “So much research needs to happen. My show only opens the door of so many conversations we should be having with institutions and scholars.” Genji Amino aspires for the show to go beyond mere visibility and assimilating these undersung artists into the art historical canon. Instead, they hope it’s the first step toward new histories and ways of seeing, ushering in more transformative engagement with communities and issues outside the art world, especially at a time when many art institutions and the public are reconsidering what and whom art history is for. “The art histories that would claim these artists of color have more to gain from the experiments and provocations represented by their lives in art than the artists themselves have to gain from any gesture of inclusion,” they say. “We want to allow the power of this artwork to radically redefine the parameters of art history, not simply to have a few new figures ushered into it.” The Unseen Professors is showing at the Tina Kim Gallery in New York until 29 JanuaryRalf Rangnick has recruited Sascha Lense to be Manchester United’s first sports psychologist for two decades, describing the move as “absolutely logical” if the team are to be successful. United’s previous mental coach was Bill Beswick, who joined in 1999 when Sir Alex Ferguson was the manager and left two years later. Lense, who is yet to have his work visa processed, worked with Rangnick at RB Leipzig from 2015-18. The interim manager was asked whether he was surprised that a club of United’s profile did not employ a psychologist. “I don’t know what the situation is like here and in other clubs,” Rangnick said. “In Germany most clubs have employed sports psychologists or mental coaches – whatever you would like to call them. It is absolutely logical. I even had someone like this back in 1998 [Hans-Dieter Hermann at Ulm]. “If you have special coaches for goalkeeping, physical education, even for strikers, fitness, whatever, you should also have an expert for the brain. It’s not so much putting them on the red sofa and holding hands for the players because most of them won’t do that anyway. It is about helping the players: that their brain should assist the body, not work against it. The players and everybody in our team should think in the right way. “Whenever we speak about football we know that the major part is up here [the head]: what do you think, how do you analyse the situation?” Rangnick outlined Lense’s approach. “I am very happy to have Sascha on board. He is hands-on. He is not working too much on the theory. The players have to buy in. I can tell them whatever I want but I need to convince them. I need to get into their heart, into their brains, into their blood. “Having worked together at Leipzig I know we will benefit a lot [from Lense]. For me it is vital that we should have the best possible person for this job. He’s from Germany, a former second division player. I worked with him for three years at Leipzig – one year we won promotion from second division to first with myself [as the coach] and the following years with Ralph Hasenhüttl as head coach. I very much hope we will have him on board [by] the latest on Thursday.” Rangnick also confirmed Chris Armas would replace Michael Carrick on the coaching staff once the American’s paperwork is processed. “He will hopefully join us in the next two days,” he said. United host Young Boys on Wednesday in the final Champions League group game, having already qualified for the last 16. Rangnick said he may field a much-changed side from Sunday’s win over Crystal Palace and confirmed Donny van de Beek and Dean Henderson would start. He also said Nemanja Matic would be captain, indicating Harry Maguire will be rested.A runner from Ethiopia who dreams of representing Team GB is facing deportation back to his home country even though a state of emergency has been declared there. Seyfu Jamaal, 21, arrived in the UK aged 17 after travelling to the UK in the back of a lorry and claimed asylum. The Home Office accepts he was persecuted and trafficked before he arrived in the UK. But officials refused his asylum claim in May of this year after keeping him waiting for more than three and a half years for a decision, saying it would be safe for him to return home. Current advice from the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office is against travel to Ethiopia – where a state of emergency was declared on 2 November – because of its ongoing military conflict. Jamaal has received support from The Running Charity, which is campaigning for him to be allowed to remain in the UK. Alex Eagle from the charity said that Jamaal has become one of its most committed and popular runners. Eagle said: “Seyfu has built a community and family within the UK. His bond with our coaches, our young people, and the wider running community have become his family. So many of our young people draw inspiration from him, model his behaviour and his attitude to training. The community would be so much poorer without him.” In June 2019, Jamaal won the London Landmarks Half Marathon in a course record of 1hr 8mins 50secs. He is a regular top 10 finisher in the national parkrun times and his ambition is to run and represent Team GB. He also mentors other young runners. Jamaal is traumatised by the things that happened to him before he reached the UK and is distressed by the Home Office’s refusal of his asylum claim. He said: “Running removes my stress, my mental problems. It helps me forget, it’s my remedy. When I run I am healthy, I am happy. There are times you remember the problems, the journey, the traffickers, but I feel safe in England. “I have never felt unsafe when I have been here. People think slavery has been abolished. Between Sudan and Libya, we were treated as a commodity, bought and sold, bought and sold, people telling you they own you, that you are their property. You always feel captured.” Esme Madill, a solicitor at the migrant and refugee children’s legal unit at Islington Law Centre, said: “Seyfu applied for asylum in November 2017 while still a child. He had to wait until May 2021 for a decision on his application. A three-and-a-half-year delay which was devastating for him. “The Home Office have accepted his account but say it is safe for him to return despite the government’s own advice. Given the Home Office promise, post-Windrush, to place greater emphasis on a more compassionate approach to individual applications, it is disappointing that no compassion was shown to Seyfu, and no recognition of his wonderful contribution to the running community.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “Human trafficking has absolutely no place in our society and we are committed to tackling these heinous crimes, while ensuring victims are protected and receive the support they need through our national referral mechanism.”The federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, is prepared to override local branches to determine who will run in the key marginal electorate of Parramatta, amid allegations of unresolved branch stacking in the seat. The move to replace the outgoing MP, Julie Owens, comes as the party’s left faction splits over whether to allow a rank and file ballot, and as the right faction makes a bid for the seat, arguing it needs compensation after Hunter was given to the left’s candidate, Dan Repacholi. The soft left, or “Ferguson left” named after powerbroker Laurie Ferguson, which controls branches in the seat, is pushing for a rank and file ballot, but their support is said to be split between Granville state Labor MP Julia Finn, and Durga Owen, who ran for the state seat of Seven Hills at the last state election. Neither candidate is seen as acceptable to the federal executive, with Albanese’s hard left faction arguing for a federal intervention to install Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union legal director Abha Devasia unless the soft right comes up with a better candidate. Other candidates understood to be in the mix include former East Hills candidate Cameron Murphy – the son of high court justice and Whitlam government attorney general Lionel Murphy – and Liverpool city councillor Charishma Kaliyanda. It has been reported that the former state MP David Borger has knocked back requests to run. The use of federal intervention powers would spark a backlash among local branch members who have been calling for a rank and file ballot to decide who will contest the key seat, held by Labor on a 3.5% margin. In her valedictory speech to parliament, Owens paid tribute to the “remarkable” branch members in the seat who had supported her since her election in 2004 and said she had made clear to Anthony Albanese her preferred successor. “Traditionally it is the branch members that choose who will stand for the election again, and they will decide who has the extraordinary opportunity to try to ask the community to give them the opportunity to represent them in this house,” Owens said. “It is a role they take very, very, very seriously. They’ve been out there for years getting to know who in their ranks knows how to work, who is consistent, who is honest, who volunteers, who genuinely cares about the community, who has flaws that would negatively impact on their job, they staff the booths, they do it all and they know the branch members, they know each other very, very well. “They are well placed to make a decision about who will represent Labor in the forthcoming election.” But party figures say that systemic branch stacking in western Sydney remained a problem, pointing to the findings of an internal inquiry completed by Evan Moorhead in 2020 which recommended a two-year pause on rank and file ballots. The Moorhead report found seven party officials – including Ferguson – had engaged in “unworthy conduct” by engaging in branch stacking with membership books routinely falsified. Finn, who is in the same faction as Owens, stood aside from Labor’s frontbench following the review for breaching party rules, but maintained she had done nothing wrong. She later returned to shadow cabinet after she was cleared of any wrongdoing. A “stalemate” over how to proceed with the Parramatta preselection will probably result in the NSW branch requesting federal intervention, as occurred in Fowler and Hunter despite the concerns of local members. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning One party figure said a rank and file ballot would not be allowed to take place given the branches were still “rorted”. “A rank and file preselection is untenable given the branch rorting and past indiscretions in the seat.” However, another Labor source said it would be “very brave” of the party to risk upsetting local branch members in such a critical seat, pointing to the backlash in Fowler after the party decided to install NSW senator Kristina Keneally into the seat without a rank and file ballot. The push by the right to also have one of their candidates considered by the federal executive was seen as an ambitious claim, particularly given Repacholi, who will contest the right-aligned seat of Hunter, was yet to formally join a faction. Amid the jostling for Parramatta, the party’s administrative committee decided on Friday that a rank and file ballot would be held in the seat of Cunningham, the Wollongong seat being vacated by Labor’s Sharon Bird. Alison Byrnes, a staffer to Bird and the wife of state MP Paul Scully, is expected to win the ballot.A Sydney GP who was left tens of millions of dollars by a patient has denied striking a deal with the man to keep him out of hospital if the doctor was included in his will, during civil proceedings in the New South Wales supreme court. The court has heard Raymond McClure altered his will twice in the five months before he died with Dr Peter Alexakis eventually left 90% of his estate worth more than $30m. Previous wills – the first of which was made in 1986 – made the Salvation Army and other individuals, including a longtime business partner, the benefactors of McClure’s estate. The Salvation Army’s legal secretary, Gary Masters, is challenging the validity of the final will in the NSW supreme court arguing that it was executed in suspicious circumstances and that Alexakis had undue influence over McClure. The will is also subject to multiple cross-claims. McClure, who had few family or friends, died aged 84 in November 2017. Alexakis says he had no knowledge McClure included him in the will and that he never discussed the extent of his estate with his former patient. Alexakis said during a hearing this week it was the second time he had benefited from the will of a patient which had been finalised by solicitor Angelo Andresakis – the lawyer who assisted McClure prepare his final will. Andresakis also acted for the GP’s wife, who Alexakis told the court owned at least 17 properties, including eight shops, a bowling alley and a large office complex in Chester Hill, and a five-star hotel and four other properties in Greece. Andresakis had also prepared Alexakis’s father’s will. But Alexakis denied he directed the solicitor to ensure McClure made the will in his favour. He said he introduced Andresakis to McClure after his patient told him he wanted to get his affairs in order. Andresakis is expected to give evidence later in the hearing. McClure had been desperate to leave hospital in mid-2017, saying he felt as if he was in prison. He referred to himself as the Count of Monte Cristo, according to evidence heard during this week’s hearing. McClure had previously left hospital without being medically discharged. He had believed belongings had been stolen from his hospital room and complained about the television. He did not trust hospital staff, the court heard. Alexakis agreed he knew McClure wanted to leave hospital and he had wanted him to help. McClure suggested on multiple occasions the GP help him return home and offered $10,000 if he assisted, the court heard. But there was no evidence Alexakis accepted that offer. The GP denied he made a deal with McClure to help him on the condition he alter his will. Alexakis agreed once McClure returned home it had been difficult to adequately care for him. He broke down in tears on Tuesday when describing his efforts to look after McClure in his historic Strathfield mansion. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning He had agreed that McClure was the sickest patient he had treated, but denied he was determined to keep him out of hospital simply because he had struck a deal to be included in his will. McClure had a variety of health problems including diabetes, colorectal cancer that had metastasized, a bowel obstruction, prostate enlargement, cataracts, and lymphedema. “That’s the frustration I had managing this man at home,” Alexakis said, before breaking down. “I’m a team player, not an individual. I can’t do this work on my own, it was impossible. “Personally, I did what I could for that man to keep him at home, so he could enjoy his life at home the best he could. I’m immensely proud of … the work I did to keep him out of hospital.” Alexakis had been McClure’s GP since 2014, but the court heard he stopped acting in this capacity after a telephone conversation on 27 October 2017. He denied he was aware McClure became “scared” of him after this point and that between October and November he once visited McClure’s home and shouted at him “I’m still your friend, I’m still your friend”. The court heard Alexakis has had strict conditions placed on his medical registration by the Medical Council of NSW since McClure’s death, including conditions preventing him from conducting home or nursing home visits and limiting the number of patients he sees each day. The GP denied evidence provided by another witness that McClure had told them he changed his will after speaking with Alexakis about the Salvation Army’s links to child sex abuse. Alexakis said he had never discussed changing McClure’s will with him, and when asked why a witness had given evidence to the contrary, said: “Someone’s lying, but it’s not me”. The hearing before justice Trish Henry continues.Melbourne institution Cherry Bar shuttered its doors for the first time in its history over the weekend as fallout from hospitality staffing shortages continue. “I made a call I never had to make in 15 years and said ‘We can’t open because we don’t have any staff’,” rock promoter James Young said. “We had to close the fucking doors.” The live music venue was due to hold a showcase event on Sunday with rock trio Cross Bones Boogie. But Young took to social media on the weekend to announce the band would be rescheduled. “Everyone worked too hard and too late last night,” he wrote on Facebook. “Staffing is a real issue in hospitality at the moment … this has never happened ever before.” Since lockdown restrictions were lifted, Young has shortened the opening hours of his two 24-hour-licence venues – CBD rock’n’roll venue Cherry Bar and Collingwood dance spot Yah Yahs – due to staffing shortages. The Victorian Chamber of Commerce and Industry manager of policy and advocacy, Dylan Broomfield, said the “significant” shortages in the hospitality sector were pushing many venues to reduce their opening hours. The constraints are expected to continue for months, in part due to the hospitality sector’s heavy reliance on international students and short-term visitors. International students and skilled migrants were to have been allowed back into Australia from 1 December but the reopening was delayed to 15 December due to concerns over the Omicron strain of the virus. “Skilled chefs, bar staff, waitstaff and kitchen staff are all in high demand and there’s a lot of competition between venues to ensure that they can maintain adequate staffing levels,” Broomfield said. “Some venues are having to decrease their operating hours and days simply because they don’t have the staffing capabilities.” Broomfield said many hospitality workers found employment in other industries that offered greater certainty during prolonged lockdowns which was contributing to the shortage. Young said Cherry Bar had continually been attempting to hire since restrictions eased in Melbourne to keep up with business – which had come back “with a vengeance”. “Try getting a decent restaurant booking at the moment, they’re all frigging packed because everyone’s out,” he said. “If I had more staff I would open Cherry Bar seven days a week 6pm to 6am, we’d be the place to go to at 3am when you’re still out and don’t want to go to the casino.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Until Sunday, Young had managed to stay open, but limited staffing numbers, coupled with a Covid scare at Yah Yahs on Friday, had led to the decision to shut. “Managers had been working very late, and bars are doing well now … we hadn’t had full capacity for over 20 months,” he said. “While we weren’t contacted by the government we knew there’d been a Covid exposed person at Yah Yahs on Friday and decided all staff would be tested. It meant on Saturday we had to spread staff even thinner by bringing Cherry staff across to bridge the gap. Young said there were no senior managers available to open Cherry Bar on Sunday unless they had a three-hour break between shifts. “But in praise of Melbourne, the attitude has been all ships rise to the tide, we’re not competing. I thought three people would see my post and say ‘Oh, see you next week’ but I got calls from venues saying ‘I’ve got six staff, I can probably get by with five’ which is a lovely attitude. “The silver lining of this horror experience as the most locked-down city is we’ve come out the other side more caring of each other because we all value the scene we’re in.” Hospo Voice United Workers Union director Karma Lord said underpayment and a lack of job security were contributing to the staffing shortages hitting the sector generally. “This industry continues to preside over endemic wage theft and extreme job insecurity, with four out of five workers casually employed,” Lord said. “Trained, experienced workers have quit this industry in droves. We’re seeing some venues offer sign-on bonuses and other inducements. But the danger is workers will find the rug pulled from underneath them when competition for workers start to ease off.”Wangayarta is not a typical cemetery. It has been carefully designed to permanently house the ancestral remains of the Kaurna nation, the traditional owners of the Adelaide plains. Instead of having rows of headstones, its lawns have been shaped to resemble from above a Kaurna shield, surrounded by more than 5,000 newly planted saplings of acacia, paperbark, kangaroo grass and other species native to the area. The large mounds that encircle the grass include soil collected from every corner of Kaurna country, which stretches from Crystal Brook in the state’s mid-north to Cape Jervis on the Fleurieu Peninsula. The remains of more than 100 Indigenous ancestors were finally laid to rest at Wangayarta in Adelaide’s north on Tuesday in a long-awaited repatriation ceremony. Before the ceremony, the remains were carefully prepared by Kaurna people and transported from the South Australian Museum’s storage facilities in Netley, which has for many years housed the remains of 4,500 Aboriginal people from around Australia. Kaurna elder Uncle Major “Moogy” Sumner described the significance of Wangayarta and the ceremony. “I’ve been involved in repatriation for about 40 years, travelling all over the world, bringing our old people home,” he said. “And I’ve never seen anything like this. This is what we all need in our community, a special place where we can take our old people, where they’ll never be dug up again, never be put into boxes, shipped across the other side of the world.” Sumner, along with Kaurna elder Aunty Madge Wanganeen and South Australian premier Steven Marshall, descended into the burial site to lay to rest the first ancestor, regarded to be among the first Kaurna remains taken into the museum’s custody in the 19th century. A procession of Kaurna, young and old, then began the long and careful process of placing parcel after parcel into the red earth of their new – and final – resting place. Marshall, whose state government committed $300,000 to the pilot project, said the work at Wangayarta seeks to address a dark legacy that belongs to the whole state. “Repatriation is the responsibility of all South Australians as a result of activities and attitudes of the past,” he said. “Our lives here as South Australians are built on the historic disturbance of Aboriginal country. Those activities destroyed Aboriginal burial sites across the greater Adelaide area to create houses and infrastructure that we now use. “Aboriginal ancestral remains found their ways into museums and collecting institutions in the past because of attitudes that today we find abhorrent and impossible to comprehend. But we all have a responsibility to understand our history and to take the appropriate action in response to it.” John Carty, head of humanities at the South Australian Museum, delivered an apology on behalf of the museum, the University of Adelaide and the wider community. “I’m sorry that our forebears did not treat your ancestors as brothers and sisters,” he said. How the remains ended up in the museum’s custodianship is a long and painful story. Many were disturbed by a century of land-clearing, construction and excavation works, with a recently completed University of Adelaide report documenting at least 300 Kaurna burial sites across the Adelaide plains. Others came to the museum through more macabre circumstances. For many years, members of South Australia’s medical and scientific fraternities took part in an international trade in Indigenous remains that is still being unravelled today. Addressing an issue of such scale and injustice has long been a complex question for Kaurna and the Museum. A breakthrough finally came in 2019, when the Adelaide Cemeteries Authority offered Kaurna leaders a permanent burial site on land adjacent to its Smithfield Memorial Park. The old people laid to rest at Wangayarta represent an important step in repatriating the many hundreds of Kaurna ancestors held by the museum. They account for only a portion of the 4,500 at its Netley keeping place. For the rest, it is hoped that Wangayarta will offer not only a permanent resting place for Kaurna people, but a model for First Nations and non-Indigenous communities around the country.The number of television shows produced for Australian children has halved since the Morrison government scrapped quotas for commercial broadcasters, according to Screen Australia’s annual drama report. The number of children’s titles produced in Australia dropped from 14 in 2019-20 to seven in 2020-21, and six of those – including Bluey series 3 – were financed by the ABC. Apart from Bluey, the ABC produced The Strange Chores series 2, and live action titles Born to Spy, Hardball series 2, Itch series 2 and MaveriX. The three free-to-air broadcasters and all the streaming services combined, financed only one children’s show, Dive Club, which was a co-production between Network 10 and Netflix to screen on free-to-air television first. In August last year Guardian Australia reported the government’s plan for a “simplified” quota system for Australian drama and children’s TV would result in more than half of that content disappearing from free-to-air television. Overall, the report showed an uptick in the level of expenditure on drama production to a record $1.9bn, although the vast majority of that was from foreign projects: $874m was spent on Australian projects and $1.04bn on international projects, classified as those which were either shot or post-produced in Australia. Screen Australia chief executive Graeme Mason said the interruptions to the production sector from Covid-19 had been tough but had produced some unexpected outcomes – like more foreign productions moving to Australia. “It’s obviously been a massive year, for the industry,” he said. “I do think it’s due to a great combination of the resilience and abilities of our local sector on all counts.” Mason said while the sector had undoubtedly lost work from the drop in production, children had not suffered because they were “predominantly watching television on the ABC, on ABC Me, or online”. “We’re well aware and we’re looking at the impact on kids’ producers,” Mason said. “But we are balancing that by saying the impact on the kids themselves is not the same as that impact on the producing companies. “To be absolutely fair, we’ve got a couple of shows in production now, which would be in next year’s report, with Channel 10.” Two more children’s programs, Alice Miranda – A Royal Christmas Ball from Stan and Surviving Summer from Netflix, weren’t included in the children’s TV category as they had their first screening on a streaming service rather than on free-to-air. Screen Producers Australia (SPA) say the increase in expenditure last year has largely been generated by foreign productions ($1.04bn up from $413m pre-pandemic) working in Australia. “While we welcome the overall strong result, the $874m in Australian content expenditure was in fact only a modest rise on pre-pandemic levels ($797m 2018/19),” SPA president Matt Deaner said. “This is of concern given that this year’s figure would include a substantial number of projects which were delayed in 2019-20 and which subsequently commenced in 2020-21.” Australian producers have argued there is a need for a regulatory structure because children are missing out on Australian content and the industry has lost a lot of work in children’s television. Nine, Ten and Seven have been lobbying the government for years to abandon quotas which required them to air 260 hours of children’s programs and 130 hours of preschool programs. The government handed them a break under the cover of Covid in April 2020 when communications minister, Paul Fletcher, announced the regulations would be suspended for 2020, a move which was made permanent in September. The broadcasters argued quotas for commercial broadcasters should be relaxed to account for the competitive new media environment, which included streaming services such as Netflix and platforms like YouTube. The Screen Australia report also gives a snapshot of the growth in Australian productions on streaming services. Between 2016 and 2021, 29 Australian drama titles were produced for first release on the streaming platforms, generating 115 hours of Australian content. The government has suggested they spend 5% of their local revenue on Australian productions, but the struggling screen industry wants them to spend 20% of their local revenue on new Australian drama, documentary and children’s content, in line with France and Canada. Of the Australian streaming productions, 18 were released on Stan, which is owned by Nine Entertainment, and five on Netflix, with the remainder released across Amazon, Acorn TV and Presto. Five years ago the average budget for a title was $800,000 but last year it rose to $13.5m. The amount spent on adult Australian drama has also fallen, from $326m in 2018-19 to $189m in 2019-20. Commercial free-to-air broadcasters are still required to ensure that 55% of all content they broadcast is Australian.Two dozen Iraqi nationals who served alongside Australian soldiers battling Islamic State say they have been abandoned in their homeland, living in fear of militia groups who have sworn retribution against anyone who assisted foreign forces. “The threat is real and there will not be a ‘warning’ or anything like that,” said one former interpreter, Mohammed, who has gone into hiding. “The militias are criminals. They have killed people who worked with foreign forces before … if they catch me or any of us, there will not be a second chance.” In 2019, the Guardian reported more than 60 ADF interpreters were caught in a bureaucratic limbo – told they were ineligible for resettlement or unable to apply for visas from inside Iraq – as their country roiled under sectarian violence. However, some were subsequently able to get out. In mid-2020, former interpreters were invited, in an email from Australia’s defence department, to confirm their interest in applying through Australia’s dedicated Iraq Locally Engaged Employee (LEE) scheme. At least 35 of those interpreters have since been granted visas to resettle in Australia: 30 have already moved. But 25 say they remain stuck in Iraq, their applications to Australia stalled, and with no response from the Australian government for more than a year. No interpreters who have worked for Australia have yet been killed, but most have had to move out of Baghdad, or away from their family homes for fear of reprisal attacks as Iranian-backed militias continue to threaten and attack anyone viewed as having connections to the West. Militants launched an exploding drone attack on the Iraqi prime minister’s house last month. The Guardian is aware of at least one interpreter who, after waiting several months for a response from Australia, abandoned his application, and sought a visa to the US. He was granted a protection visa to resettle in America by himself, and is trying to apply for his family to join him. Another was forced to flee over Iraq’s borders with his family. In hiding in Turkey, he described his exile as “the worst days of my life”. The interpreters have provided photos of themselves serving alongside Australian comrades – which the Guardian has chosen not to publish for security reasons – as well as employment notices, contracts, and multiple glowing references from coalition military leaders, including officers from Australia’s Task Group Taji. Mohammed – who is remaining anonymous for his own safety – served the ADF’s Task Group Taji, training Iraqi soldiers between 2016 and 2018 in Baghdad and west Iraq. He said he “formed very strong relationships with almost all the Aussies and Kiwis and Americans”. “I have continuing friendships with a lot of them.” Mohammed has been forced to move out of Baghdad with his wife and family, fearing militant attacks. “Most of us had to change our residence and move to a less populated area or an area with fewer militias … to give ourselves and our families the best chance of surviving. “Thanks to Covid-19, I can cover my face so no militia member could recognise me. It sounds ironic that a virus is saving my life.” Islamic State militants killed three civilians and 10 soldiers in an attack in Iraq’s autonomous Kurdish region in the country’s north this month. Mohammed said Islamic State remained a potential threat in southern Iraq, but a secondary one. “Daesh is a minor problem at the moment, the real danger are the Iranian-backed proxies and militias, they live among us, they eavesdrop and hunt anyone who worked with coalition forces.” The Iran-backed groups have vowed revenge for the US drone-strike assassination of Maj Gen Qassem Suleimani, the head of Iran’s Quds force, at Baghdad airport in 2020. Another interpreter, Saif, said those remaining in Iraq were “suffering from the political and economic crises that Iraq is going through: hunger, lack of job opportunities, chaos, instability, ongoing conflicts between the parties and the threats we face”. After being emailed by defence over the LEE program, applicants were re-vetted, and some interpreters were then issued with approval letters by defence, with which they applied to the department of home affairs for an “in-country special humanitarian visa” subclass 201, granted to people who face persecution in their home country. The Guardian has spoken with a number of those who have moved to Australia in 2021. One says “it has literally saved our lives”. But those left waiting indefinitely are in an “ambiguous” situation, Mohammed says. The last email he received from the Australian government was more than a year ago. “They never came back to us, neither with negative nor positive answer, no explanation at all. We have been so proactive and sent a number of follow-up emails but alas no reply. “We tried to email the embassy but they informed us they can not do anything without the referral of the defence. We have worked hard to the last day of the mission, so there is no reason to leave us behind.” Australia’s LEE scheme for Iraq was established in April 2008, when the Rudd government announced 600 places additional to the government’s humanitarian visa quota would be reserved for “locally engaged employees”, including interpreters, from its Iraq operations, acknowledging that they had been “targeted” by insurgents for their connection to western forces. A Home Affairs official said this week the 600 places had been almost entirely filled. Iraqi LEE candidates are required to have been individually “certified” by the minister of their employing Australian government agency “as being at significant risk of harm due to their employment”. “Visa applications from certified LEE are afforded the highest processing priority within the humanitarian program but applicants must still meet rigorous health, character and national security requirements. Depending on individual circumstances this may take a significant period of time.” In correspondence with the interpreters, the department of defence has said interpreters “will generally be required to apply within six months of ceasing employment with the Australian Defence Force”. “Should you not apply within this timeframe, your application will only be considered under this policy in exceptional circumstances.” Task Group Taji ran from 2015 until June 2020, tasked with “training and assisting the Iraq Security Forces (ISF) in their fight against the terrorist organisation Daesh”. More than 2,500 Australian troops served in Taji. As Iraqi comrades plead for Australian assistance, Canberra has also been urged to do more to resettle interpreters and other military support staff from its other most recent theatre of conflict, Afghanistan. A Senate inquiry heard there are nearly 650 former “locally engaged employees” of Australia stranded in Afghanistan after the withdrawal of coalition forces in August.New South Wales police have sought to confiscate and auction a station wagon belonging to a young climate activist after it was seized during her arrest last month. Activist group Blockade Australia says the car is the property of 26-year-old Sasha, who was arrested in the vehicle on 17 November. She was on a public road near the Port of Newcastle. The group says Sasha has faced court and pleaded guilty to separate charges of attempting to hinder mining equipment and attempting to hinder a railway. She was convicted and given a 24-month community corrections order, and “thousands of dollars” in fines. She was also given a year-long “non-association” order relating to her partner. Sasha was subsequently given a “freezing notice” by police that her car, a 2018 Hyundai Kona station wagon, would remain in the possession of police under the NSW Proceeds of Crime Act. The notice is a temporary measure that freezes the asset until a court can make an ultimate decision on whether it should be forfeited to the state. The Act also covers the forfeiture of “tainted property” used in the commission of an offence – although it is highly unusual for police to pursue forfeiture for offences where a court does not impose a prison sentence. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A criminal lawyer told Guardian Australia that – without knowing the specific circumstances of the alleged offences or the woman’s arrest – it seemed like a “long bow” to connect the car to the woman’s activism. Police said they could not comment because the forfeiture matter was before the court. Blockade Australia said Sasha had been mostly living in the car, which was registered in Queensland. “This demonstration of intimidation and repression against a young activist highlights the deeply political nature of the police and courts,” the group’s statement said. “They exist to serve the interests of the select few who are set on digging up the Earth until there’s nothing left. Australia has always used repression tactics for control – against First Nations people, and poor and marginalised people, who formed its original prison colony. We know that a car is trivial in comparison to the lives Australia steals constantly. “Australia will, like always, use whatever it can to protect itself. For the rest of us, everything is at stake. Seizing a car, banning people from associating with their friends and families, sentencing someone to a year in prison: these repression tactics pale in comparison to the consequences of inaction.” About 30 anti-fossil fuel activists were arrested in November during a series of coordinated protests targeting the world’s largest thermal coal export port at Newcastle. One campaigner, Eric Serge Herbert, was sentenced to 12 months in prison.The second feature film written by the musician Nick Cave is a grisly, sweat-stained tale of outback violence and colonial oppression that has lost none of its power in the 16 years since its release. Directed by John Hillcoat, The Proposition is awash with striking scenery and ugly truths about Australia. After a fierce gunfight, outlaw Charlie Burns (Guy Pearce) and his brother Mike (Richard Wilson) are captured by Captain Stanley (Ray Winstone). Although both brothers are former members of the notorious Burns gang, Stanley’s real target is their sadistic older sibling Arthur (Danny Huston), who is wanted for the brutal murder of a local family. With no lead on Arthur, Stanley turns to more “inventive” methods, offering Charlie a proposition. He will release Charlie, while Mike will hang in nine days for the crimes of the Burns gang. But both will be pardoned if Charlie can locate and kill Arthur. Mike is naive and not able to mentally comprehend their situation, so Charlie feels he has no choice but to protect his younger brother and accept Stanley’s deal. Cave’s script presents a compelling dilemma for our antihero and a nuanced view of characters who don’t fit into pigeonholes of “good” or “bad”. In so doing, The Proposition is able to make a much bigger point about the realities of life during colonial rule in the 1880s. Stanley’s mandate is to “civilise” the country but we need only see him wearing a heavy woollen coat in 40C heat, sweat running down his face, to understand the absurdity of transposing a British way of life on to a land where it will not fit. Just like the fake snow his wife Martha (Emily Watson) orders for Christmas, it is all artifice. The captain views the country as something to be conquered. “Australia, what fresh hell is this?” he opines, while the Burns gang view nature as a salve, hiding out in remote caves and stopping to appreciate the beauty of a sunset … before embarking on a killing spree. The colonial settlers’ “civility” certainly doesn’t apply to treatment of the local Aboriginal people, who are exploited as servants or massacred in response to perceived injustices. Meanwhile, Martha is left to rattle around an empty house on her own lest she come to town to be objectified by Stanley’s men or patronised by town officials. Whether depicting horror or beauty, The Proposition is visually arresting. The violence is staged with wince-inducing authenticity, in stark contrast to the beauty of the cinematography, with languid views of dusky horizons and parched panoramas. The core cast – Pearce, Winstone, Huston and Watson – are exceptional, complemented by a supporting cast featuring John Hurt as a scene-stealing bounty hunter, David Wenham as a prim but odious town official and David Gulpilil as a tracker on the trail of the Burns gang. Tom E Lewis (Balang Lewis) – who compared the intensity of The Proposition to that of his acclaimed debut, The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith – is also noteworthy as gang member Two Bob. The Proposition was not Cave and Hillcoat’s first collaboration. They worked together on 1988’s dystopian prison drama Ghosts … of the Civil Dead as well as the soundtrack to Hillcoat’s second feature, To Have and to Hold, and the video for Nick Cave &amp; the Bad Seeds’ Babe, I’m On Fire. The Proposition’s score is a collaboration between Cave and Warren Ellis and is as integral as any character. Raspy vocals and screeching strings provide the perfect sonic anxiety to the chases and violence, while melancholy violin and piano accompany shots of stunning horizons and characters awaiting inexorable confrontations. At heart The Proposition is a savage yet utterly compelling story. Its gritty, uniquely Australian take on the western deserves to be recognised as one of the genre’s best.Daniel Johns has announced his first solo album in seven years just weeks after the media-shy singer-songwriter starred in a tell-all Spotify podcast. The former frontman of Silverchair, the Dissociatives and Dreams put the news in a letter to fans, writing: “I know I have a tendency to go missing but I’m back now.” He described FutureNever, which is set for release on 1 April 2022, as “a place where your past, present and future collide” and where “the quantum of your past experiences become your superpower. The experience of the [Spotify] podcast has helped me make peace with my past and I’m ready to tackle this new world bravely.” On 20 October, the enigmatic 42-year-old released the first in his hugely popular five-part podcast, Who Is Daniel Johns?, in which he opened up about his struggles with fame, obsessive fans, anorexia and reactive arthritis, as well as the breakup of Silverchair and his 2008 divorce from Natalie Imbruglia. The podcast’s creators, Kaitlin Sawrey, Amelia Chappelow and Frank Lopez, were granted unprecedented access to Johns’ life, including his childhood bedroom; five bonus episodes featured the musician in conversation with Billy Corgan, Van Dyke Parks, Tom Delonge, Tame Impala’s Kevin Parker and Imbruglia. Writing in Guardian Australia, Andrew P Street described it as “the Australian equivalent of Britney Spears’ fame-trauma story”. In the letter announcing his new solo album – his first since 2015’s debut LP Talk – Johns wrote: “Thank you for listening to my podcast Who Is Daniel Johns? I didn’t know that I needed that experience but I did. The reception around the world has inspired me and I’m not anxious about what comes next any more.” He described FutureNever as “an eclectic mix of music that I’ve made over the last couple of years”, featuring collaborations with “a few of my friends”. The album is the first Johns has released on his own label via a new global deal with BMG. “I won’t be leading in with singles, the album is designed to be enjoyed as an album. Call me a hopeless romantic but that’s the benefit of releasing music on your own label. Nobody can tell you what to do.” He said he would be “slowly revealing” songs in the lead-up to the April release. In an interview with The Project in October to promote Who Is Daniel Johns?, the singer was emphatic he would never perform live again and also declared: “I wouldn’t get Silverchair back together with a gun to my head for a million dollars.”Cal Wilson traded Christchurch for Melbourne back in 2003. In the 18 years since her trans-Tasman move, the comedian has been a fixture on Australian TV screens, dispensing her playful wit on everything from Spicks and Specks to Thank God You’re Here and Have You Been Paying Attention? This year, Wilson has spent a lot more time watching TV than appearing on it: specifically, she’s been bingeing a decade-old reality program called Love It or List It: Vancouver. But after a long stretch in lockdown, Wilson is happy to finally get off the couch and back on stage with a pair of shows at So Soiree this weekend, as part of the Melbourne fringe festival. As well as brushing up on Canada’s housing market, Wilson’s lockdown hobbies included getting trigger happy with a hot glue gun. Here, she tells us about the “ridiculous headdresses” she made to stave off boredom, and the stories of two other beloved belongings. What I’d save from my house in a fire A gloriously grotesque concrete bird bath in the shape of three cats sitting on top of each other, with one holding the dish part. I coveted it loudly when my husband and I first lived together. He managed to buy it so sneakily that I got all snippy with him at Christmas, thinking he hadn’t taken any notice. He produced it out of thin air on Christmas morning. Humble pie? Mmm, delicious. It’s incredibly heavy and would be the worst thing to lug out of a fire. I haven’t thought this through at all. My most useful object My hot glue gun, because making ridiculous headdresses with it kept me sane over lockdown. Plus, in a pinch, you can use it to hem a skirt. I will take no further questions. The item I most regret losing A silver bangle that was a family heirloom dream. It got thrown out with the rubbish, at a friend’s place, more than 30 years ago. I still have dreams about finding it. My mother still doesn’t know. (Nobody print this out and show it to her!) Also, I regret losing the ability to stand up from a sitting position without making a “hgnnnnnrrgh” noise.If you hold a Christmas beetle – small, brown, mechanical – in the palm of your hand, it moves as though under a spell. The spell commands it to keep walking, to burrow its surprisingly strong legs endlessly forwards, like the end of the year growing steadily nearer and just as steadily receding. In Europe, Christmas beetles are called “cockchafers”. In the year 1478, they appeared in a French court to stand trial on the charge of having been sent by witches to destroy the laity’s crops (and jeopardise the church’s tithes). The judge, addressing the beetle as “Thou irrational and imperfect creature”, writes EP Evans in the Criminal Prosecution and Capital Punishment of Animals, found them guilty and banished them. Were the beetles to “think you have some reason for not complying”, they were to re-appear six days later at precisely one o’clock, “to justify yourselves or to answer for your conduct”. In 1479, the cockchafers were accused of “creeping secretly in the earth”. Again the court ordered them “banned and exorcised”, adding that they, “through the power of Almighty God shall be called accursed and shall daily decrease whithersoever you may go”. Centuries passed and lo, the satanic scarabs persist. In Australia and South Africa, they have reinvented themselves as Christmas beetles. They herald summer and the end of the year; they are the people’s beetle. (Back in the northern hemisphere, their name proves harder to shake: “Look here, you old cockchafer, what makes you think you can run a history department, even at a place like this, eh, you old cockchafer?,” asks our hero Jim Dixon in Lucky Jim). In 2017, on a South African breakfast show called Expresso, the hosts are talking about Christmas beetles: “Agh they’re so small man, come on,” says one. The guest entomologist is asked whether Christmas beetles are considered pests. They are not, he says, and besides, “I hate it when people just see bugs and want to kill them”. “Yeah man,” says one of the hosts, before our learned friend continues, “If you really want to kill them, get a bucket of water, put a drop of washing up liquid in there and just throw them in there, let them drown”. (At the end we discover that he is “actually a big fan of ants”). In 2019, a woman in Australia looks up Christmas beetles on YouTube and finds the episode. She watches, then posts a comment: “I found one tonight I’m in Australia. The fire’s are terrible”. It is December 2021 and the theme of my eight-week-old daughter’s days is “hands”. She chews on her little fist, she grasps and ungrasps my index finger, she stares, alarmed, at the ends of her unsteady arms. I imagine her – a future daughter, one I have yet to meet – in Sydney, where we live, or Johannesburg, where I am from, enclosing a small brown insect gently in her hand. In the dark the beetle moves under its spell, compelling her forward in time. • Helen Sullivan’s Calcium-Magnesium, a collection of essays about science and the natural world, will be published in 2023.An animal rights campaigner closely involved in the rescue of Pen Farthing and his animals from Afghanistan said he was confident “pressure had been brought to bear” by the prime minister, Boris Johnson, to ensure the controversial airlift could go ahead. Dominic Dyer told the Guardian that he believed his intensive lobbying of No 10 – which included texting the prime minister’s wife, Carrie Johnson, with updates “every few days” – had prompted Johnson to overrule defence secretary Ben Wallace at a critical moment during August’s chaotic evacuation of Kabul. His comments came hours after a former Foreign Office employee, Raphael Marshall, had said the prime minister had issued “an instruction” to ensure 173 dogs and cats at Farthing’s Nowzad charity were rescued this summer – fresh testimony in a row that had first surfaced in the summer. But the twin claims were contradicted by Johnson and Downing Street on Tuesday, anxious to avoid the charge from Marshall that it had prioritised what been described as a rescue of “pets over people,” during the chaotic evacuation from Kabul in the last days of August. “That’s complete nonsense,” Johnson said. Wallace had been blocking the airlift of Farthing, staff at the charity and the animals, arguing their rescue could not be a priority when the military were scrambling to airlift thousands of what he believed were more pressing cases of people at risk from the Taliban to the UK. That changed suddenly when Wallace announced a surprise U-turn in a tweet at 1.33am on 25 August. Dyer said that could only have come about after an intervention from No 10. “I’ve been around politics a long time. You don’t get a situation where the secretary of state changes his view and puts out a tweet at 1.33am unless pressure has been brought to bear. I believe the PM got involved,” the campaigner said. The story behind the controversial rescue of Farthing, a former royal marine, and the animals from the Nowzad charity has come back in focus in the light of Marshall’s extraordinary written testimony to the foreign affairs select committee, released overnight. In it Marshall wrote that the US and UK militaries were taking “extreme measures” to preserve limit evacuation capacity at Kabul airport on 25 August. They included requests “not to evacuate the [British] embassy guards” and British soldiers “forcibly removing people” from the Baron hotel processing centre. “In this context, we received an instruction from the prime minister to use considerable capacity to transport Nowzad’s animals,” Marshall wrote, a decision that he said meant “British soldiers were put at risk” to help the evacuation go ahead. “The protection of domestic animals was not a UK war aim in Afghanistan,” Marshall added in his testimony. At lunchtime, Downing Street vehemently denied what it called “entirely untrue” claims by Marshall and others. “At no point did the prime minister intervene,” Johnson’s spokesperson said. “We have always prioritised people over animals, as we said both during and subsequently.” The spokesperson also rejected the idea that Carrie Johnson sought to ensure the Nowzad charity was assisted, saying: “Neither the PM nor his wife were involved.” The MoD referred all inquiries back to Downing Street. Dyer said that it was not true that he and Farthing were simply focused on rescuing animals: “This was never pets before people, there were 60 staff and dependents we were trying to get out. In the end they couldn’t get into the airport and were airlifted out to the UK separately after they had crossed the border to Pakistan in September”. The campaigner also acknowledged he could not definitely prove that Johnson had overruled Wallace, but he said that he had heard from other political sources that the prime minister had become personally involved: “I know Rod Liddle, the columnist, who had told me that Priti Patel had told him that she’d been asked to approve visas for Nowzad’s staff by the prime minister”.Everyone is just winging it. That’s one of the most valuable things I’ve learned as I’ve gotten older, but not particularly wiser: it doesn’t matter how successful or grown-up someone appears on the surface, deep down they are desperately winging it and hoping nobody notices. Some of us, of course, are winging it rather more than others. Exhibit one being Elizabeth Holmes, the CEO of the health tech company Theranos, who is on trial for fraud in California. Everyone is now well aware that Holmes wasn’t the visionary she pretended to be, but the gap between Holmes-the-human and Holmes-the-brand can still be jarring. During her testimony last week, for example, Holmes presented a set of note cards on which she had scribbled a daily schedule, written during her early days at Theranos, that is disturbingly reminiscent of Patrick Bateman’s opening monologue in American Psycho. You remember that? “My name is Patrick Bateman … I believe in taking care of myself, in a balanced diet, in a rigorous exercise routine … There is an idea of a Patrick Bateman. Some kind of abstraction, but there is no real me.” Like many CEOs, Holmes started her dayat 4am: “Rise &amp; thank God. Most things are not logical,” she wrote on her schedule. From 4.14 to 4.45am, she meditated and cleared her mind. At 5.20, she gave herself an hour to “change, shower, shave, perfect”. From 6.30 to 6.45, she had breakfast (bannanna [sic] whey). Apart from the spelling of banana, none of that is particularly disturbing; it’s bog standard high-powered executive stuff. What really stand out, however, are the instructions on how she should handle herself, scrawled underneath her schedule. “My hands are always in my pockets or gesturing,” she writes. “I know the outcome of every encounter … I show no excitement. Calm directed, pointed, non-emotional. ALL ABOUT BUSINESS … I speak rarely. When I do – CRISP AND CONCISE.” There was an idea of an Elizabeth Holmes. Some kind of abstraction. But there was no real her. I’ll be as crisp and concise as I can about the legal bits. Holmes’s lawyers have presented these note cards because they are arguing that Sunny Balwani, Holmes’s ex-boyfriend and former president of Theranos, was controlling her life. I have no idea how true that is, but what I can observe is that Holmes was a product of her environment. Until the pandemic hit, society encouraged people to act like Holmes. Silicon Valley told you to “fake it until you make it” and there was an obsession with “hustle culture” and productivity porn. For a while, it seemed like every single successful person was competing to get up earliest and have the weirdest schedule. Apple’s CEO, Tim Cook, jumps out of bed at 3.45am, endless articles told us; Mark Wahlberg gets up at 2.30am! It was an age of affluent asceticism: the rich and the famous were constantly boasting about how disciplined they were. The subtext to all these schedules, of course, being that they deserved their obscene wealth. The pandemic, I think, put an end to our obsession with toxic productivity by making it uncomfortably clear what hard work actually looks like – and how little it is rewarded. I would like to say that we have replaced toxic productivity with something more positive, but I don’t think that is the case. Instead, we have entered what the New York Times has called the yolo (you only live once) economy. Instead of boasting about getting up at 4am, privileged workers are boasting about taking time out. Meanwhile, get-rich-quick schemes are all the rage as people make money from non-fungible tokens, meme stocks and cryptocurrencies. Instead of productivity porn, a form of “unproductivity porn” has become popular. Which makes sense really. It is a lot harder to applaud rich CEOs for waking up at 4am to meditate when it has become so obvious that it is the low-paid essential workers, working all hours, who keep the world running. • Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistStephen Colbert Stephen Colbert tried to separate fact from fiction regarding the Omicron variant on Monday evening, as demand for vaccines spiked across the nation. Given fears about transmissibility of the variant, which is still poorly understood, New York City mayor Bill de Blasio this week unveiled the nation’s first vaccine mandate for private companies, which will apply to 184,000 businesses. “That’s the full range of New York businesses, from Famous Original Ray’s Pizza, to Original Ray’s Famous Pizza Ray,” the Late Show host joked. De Blasio also imposed proof of vaccination requirements for all kids between the ages of 5 and 11 entering restaurants, theaters and gyms. “That’s great, we’ve got to make it safe for our 6-year-olds to hit the leg press,” Colbert quipped. Still, “the only thing spreading faster than Omicron is misinformation from conservatives,” he continued, such as Georgia representative Marjorie Taylor Greene, who tweeted over the weekend: “Every single year more than 600,000 people in the US die from cancer. The country has never once shut down. Not a single school has closed.” “Because cancer is not contagious, you nimrod,” Colbert responded. “That’s like comparing apples and oranges to cancer.” Greene wasn’t the only GOP lawmaker to sow doubt over the legitimacy of a virus variant. On Fox News host Brian Kilmeade’s radio show last week, Wisconsin Senator Ron Johnson said: “Fauci did the exact same thing with Aids. He overhyped it.” “Yes, Aids: the pandemic the federal government famously took too seriously,” Colbert deadpanned. “Well, if Aids was overhyped, Senator Johnson, then I guess you don’t have to wear protection when you go fuck yourself.” Seth Meyers On Late Night, Seth Meyers also touched on confusion surrounding the Omicron variant. “Thankfully, scientists being the cautious, measured people that they are, have given it a totally benign and not at all terrifying name,” he joked. “The Omicron Variant sounds like a paperback I read at my grandma’s house because there was nothing else to do.” “Seriously, the Omicron variant? I thought scientists were supposed to be mild-mannered, analytical types who don’t want you to panic,” he continued. “I get that they’re just going by the Greek alphabet, but the Greek alphabet is very scary. I propose we start naming the variants after popular child stars of the 90s. I would just panic less if Fauci was on TV talking about the Lipnicki variant.” Omicron, “AKA Haley Joel Omicron,” is already in the US, yet Fox News “is dismissing it as some sort of liberal hoax”, Meyers reported. Former White House physician and now Maga congressman from Texas Ronny Jackson called Omicron the “midterm election variant”, while Fox News hosts accused Democrats of orchestrating the variant to implement their “pro-lockdown, anti-freedom agenda”. “Are you out of your fucking mind?” Meyers said. “You think anyone wants this pandemic to keep going? Do you think that’s good for Democrats politically? Everyone is miserable. No one wants this thing to keep going. We all desperately want life to go back to normal.” Trevor Noah And on the Daily Show, Trevor Noah delved into the US diplomatic boycott of the 2022 Beijing Winter Olympics. White House press secretary Jen Psaki announced Monday that while US athletes will compete, US government officials will not attend the event, citing China’s human rights abuses and genocide of the Uighur people. “Honestly, it doesn’t surprise me that Joe Biden would do this,” Noah said. “For one thing, he cares deeply about humans rights. For another, he’s 79 years old. I mean, he’s not about to fly across 12 time zones to watch a bunch of Norwegians sweep an ice rink.” “That’s the one cool reason to be president!” he added. “Most of us, if we don’t want to do something, we have to come up with some lame excuse. And then everyone else shows up and talks about how we didn’t come. But if you’re president, you can just be like, ‘Diplomatic boycott! No one is allowed to attend Emily’s birthday brunch.’” Though the boycott is supposed to protest China’s treatment of the Uyghur people, “when you think about it, it’s a little weird to accuse an Olympic host of genocide but then still send all of your athletes to that country,” said Noah. “I mean, it’s genocide. At least pull out the bobsled team. Because now all you’re doing is saying, ‘You know all our boring people? Well we’re not sending them, that’s the punishment.’” “If Biden really wanted to punish China, he shouldn’t withhold government officials, no; he should send government officials,” Noah concluded. “In fact, he should send the ones nobody can stand. If you want to get back at China, you have Marjorie Taylor Greene in the stands.”Since this column started to appear in our feeds, I’ve been filled with anxiety-induced dread for anyone made to create one. There’s simply too much good content. How is anyone expected to see then remember anything? Here is a list of things that I remember that are funny. 1. Today Now! interviews the five-year-old screenwriter of Fast Five Sometimes the Onion is so accurate in its parody work that it veers into documentary. I love this satire of the levels of show business at play here. Also, VROOOM! 2. Rejected lyrics to HBO’s Succession theme Succession is now into season three. If you don’t have time to catch up but want to know everything that has happened so far, all you need to do is watch this. Or, if you’re like me and a fan of Succession, watch this clip then think about it every day. 3. Being bigoted in the workplace Aunty Donna has been making me laugh for a decade on stages and the internet. There’s so much of their gear to choose from. Whenever a new YouTube series or video drops, I schedule in time to a) watch it and b) recover from watching it. 4. Flora Anderson’s feminist Bond girl Flora serves up excellent tweets and character videos on her socials. After you watch this one, follow her, then head to her Instagram to catch up on the oeuvre. 5. This episode of the Beef and Dairy Network podcast Technically something I have HEARD on the internet. I dip in and out of the Beef and Dairy Network podcast. This episode is the most tear-inducing comedy I’ve ever listened to. The makers of this podcast are comedy gods and this episode is bovine. 6. MY MOM INTERNED AT A NONPROFIT AND NOW ALL HER EMAILS ARE DIFFERENT Before we really became friends and colleagues, I had seen this written by Evan Williams and it made me squeal when I read it. As someone who has worked inside the do-gooding industrial complex and also has a mother, this is just wonderful writing. 7. One more thing from the Onion … a disenfranchised Trump voter I worked in America for three years trying to make satire in the Trump era. This Onion piece made me want to go and become a gardener instead. 8. The NFL: a bad lip-reading This is the dumbest series on the internet. I love it not just for the jokes; the audio production is sublime. Every element of the audio in this series is lovingly recreated to bring a smile to your eardrums. 9. Stephen Colbert at the 2006 White House Correspondents’ Dinner I watch this every year on my birthday. I remember torrenting this clip in my sharehouse back in 2006. Back then I thought it was the single most brilliant bit of satire that’ll ever be made, then … Donald Trump. 10. Look around you: maths I don’t know if you know this, but maths is everywhere. Grab your copybook and your pencil and prepare to learn. The creator is Peter Serafinowicz, who is a comedy master who doesn’t get enough credit by those who were inspired by this. They ripped him off. • Dan Ilic is a comedian, podcaster and outdoor media buyer. You can follow him on Twitter, subscribe to his news podcast A Rational Fear or come to the podcast’s 10-year anniversary show at the Sydney Opera House on 29 January 2022.Chelsea’s problems in midfield have deepened after Mateo Kovacic tested positive for Covid-19 a day after returning to training from a lengthy absence with a hamstring injury. Thomas Tuchel, who will be without N’Golo Kanté and Jorginho when Chelsea look to win their Champions League group by beating Zenit St Petersburg on Wednesday, had hoped to include Kovacic against Leeds on Saturday. The midfielder has not featured since 26 October and his presence in training on Monday was a boost, particularly as there is no timeframe on Kanté’s return from a knee injury and Jorginho has been playing through back and hip pain. Injuries have taken a toll on Chelsea, who have lost their place at the top of the Premier League, and Tuchel’s frustration increased when he received news that Kovacic has been forced to isolate for 10 days. The 27-year-old, who was unlikely to travel to Russia, must return a negative test before playing again and will be absent at home to Leeds on Saturday and Everton on 16 December. “We have bad news because Mateo was in training yesterday with a big smile, pure pleasure to have him back, and he tested positive today for corona and is isolating,” Tuchel said. “He will be out for several days, which is a huge setback for him and me, and all of us. This is what reality is at the moment so we have to be ready to adapt and secure people’s health.” Chelsea, who hope that Kovacic will be available at Wolves on 19 December, are short of options before facing Zenit. Ross Barkley is in the squad, Ruben Loftus-Cheek could start for the fourth consecutive game and there could be a rare start for Saúl Ñíguez, who has made little impact on a season’s loan from Atlético Madrid. Saúl has struggled with the intensity of the Premier League and he was substituted at half-time when Chelsea beat Watford last week. “He needs rhythm and minutes,” Tuchel said. “We try to encourage him because he grows into Chelsea more and more.” Tuchel denied that he had to be more careful with Kanté, who has struggled with injuries in the past two years. “I’m not so careful when to bring him back,” Chelsea’s manager said. “He takes care of his body and doesn’t want to take risks. He is a super man; the guy everyone in the whole world wants in his midfield. We built him up after his last injury. Now we have an accident. It’s not related to age or overload. It’s simply an accident during a match.” Tuchel said he was worried about the physical demands on his squad before the festive period. Chelsea, who will be eager to bounce back from their sloppy defeat at West Ham, are waiting to find out whether a knee injury will keep Ben Chilwell out for the rest of the season. Trevoh Chalobah could return from a hamstring problem next week, and Marcos Alonso and Kai Havertz have shaken off knocks.Aaron Sorkin’s strenuously unrelaxed comedy-drama is inspired by the legendary US TV show I Love Lucy starring real-life married couple Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz whose surname on the show was “Ricardo”; their programme boldly cast Latino and white together, pioneered the three-camera sitcom, ruled the airwaves in the 1950s and dominated schedules with reruns for decades afterwards. (There’s a gag in Crocodile Dundee about Mick seeing a TV for the first time in years and nodding calmly to see I Love Lucy is still on.) This movie imagines a stressed Ball dealing with tabloid rumours about her husband’s infidelity and career-endangering rumblings from the reactionary press that she is a Commie (actually, a passing youthful enthusiasm learned from her left-wing grandfather), all the while striving with unashamed perfectionism to get a misfiring scene exactly right. Nicole Kidman gives a conscientious but bafflingly mannered, un-intuitive and latexed impersonation of Ball, and Javier Bardem is the roguish Arnaz. Nina Arianda and JK Simmons are Vivian Vance and William Frawley who played their neighbours Ethel and Fred; Tony Hale is their long-suffering executive producer Jess Oppenheimer and Alia Shawkat plays head writer Madelyn Pugh. Sorkin himself has a track record in situation comedy: he wrote the peculiar Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip, about an imaginary SNL-type show, and brilliantly mocked both himself and this programme with his cameo on Tina Fey’s 30 Rock. He has of course created brilliant movies and TV shows of all sorts, but his verbose dialogue could itself be called “screwball serious”: an often exhausting display of self-important liberals winning arguments against each other. This was what for me sank his previous film The Trial of the Chicago 7 and it makes this one weirdly uphill work, for all that it is ingeniously structured and vehemently performed. (With shrewd self-awareness, however, Sorkin here emphasises that Ball’s forte was physical, not verbal comedy.) There is also a mockumentary framing device in which older actors play some of the supporting characters interviewed in the present day (or, presumably 10 or 20 years ago, given the timeframe) with the repeated phrase “What you gotta understand is …” This formulation, which crops up in the main action, is an oddly hectoring but characteristic form of words, especially when they are not talking about anything all that weighty, and when important subjects, such as Ball’s actual current political opinions, are left unexamined. An oddity, in which all the characters seem to be avatars for the loquacious Sorkin himself. • Being the Ricardos is released on 10 December in cinemas, and on 21 December on Amazon Prime Video.New Caledonia is set to hold a referendum on independence from France this weekend, the third and final poll meant to conclude a decolonisation process initiated 30 years ago. For anyone who witnessed the first two referenda, the contrast with the vote set for 12 December is striking: instead of the countless Kanaky flags or the red, white and blue of the French tricolour that adorned houses, balconies, roadsides, pickups or even people in the run-up to the 2018 and 2020 votes, this year there is little to see. On the Place des Cocotiers, in the centre of Nouméa, the capital, the quiet is disturbed only by the incessant patrolling of police trucks, part of the increased security around the vote. The FLNKS, a coalition of pro-independence parties, has called for the vote to be delayed and for Kanaks not to participate, arguing that pandemic lockdown measures and traditional mourning rites prevent it from campaigning properly. The archipelago’s Indigenous population – who make up 40% of the total and are more likely to vote for independence – have been disproportionately affected by Covid-19. More than 60% of the territory’s 276 Covid deaths have been among Kanak and other Pasifika communities. “The health situation has not stabilised and the risk of a second wave is still very present and tangible,” FLNKS said in a statement last month. “Today, the majority of people who have died from Covid are Pacific Islanders, most of them Kanaks.” Adolphe Wamytan, who lives in Saint-Louis, a predominantly Kanak village close to Nouméa, says: “With us, among the Kanak people, mourning is not only sorrow – it is an important part of the custom.” He has lost an aunt to the pandemic. Kanak mourning rites take a year. All the clans and their leaders meet, each with an important role to play. “The referendum? We have others things on our minds,” Wamytan says. He voted in the previous referenda but says he does not want to vote this year. He backs FLNKS’s stance on the vote, but says he does not do so blindly. Efforts made over the past 20 years as part of the decolonisation process to rebalance the economy and politics in favour of the Indigenous population have largely failed. Fifty thousand out of New Caledonia’s 280,000-strong population live below the poverty line and Kanaks make up over 70% of the poor. And while two of the territory’s three provinces are controlled by pro-independence parties, the third and wealthiest, home to Nouméa, is ruled by pro-France parties. “We know they [Kanak politicians] are in a difficult situation and France is a very big power to challenge but the situation here is still not satisfying,” Wamytan says. “The Indigenous people have no horizons, big difficulties in getting jobs, getting involved in the life of Caledonian society.” In N’dé, in the township of Païta, the Kanak youth also feel abandoned; there is a deep divide between young people and their political leaders. Marc Gaïa, 28, works in a nickel mine, an industry critical to the territory’s economy – New Caledonia is the world’s third-largest nickel producer. “But I deeply regret that the elders have chosen to encourage us to work primarily in the mine and not in the agricultural sector or in an activity that does not destroy our land,” he says. “All we produce here is nickel! … Our living conditions are very difficult because here everything is so expensive that we have difficulty in obtaining essential goods.” High stakes for France The referendum was promised to the people of New Caledonia as part of the peace process, following the “Events”, a quasi-civil war that left scores of dead in New Caledonia in the 1980s. The agreement, called the Nouméa accord and signed in 1998, allowed long-term residents to vote on New Caledonia’s future political status and the transfer of sovereign powers over defence, foreign policy, currency, police and courts. Despite the text’s attempt to hand more power to Indigenous people, the FLNKS’s calls for Kanaks not to participate in December’s vote has met with little sympathy in France. The minister of overseas territories, Sébastien Lecornu, told Europe 1 radio last month: “Non-participation is a right in democracy.” But he later added on Twitter: “It’s our responsibility under this [presidential] five-year term to see the completion of this agreement, signed in 1998, and to plan for the future.” The stakes for France are high. Support for independence grew in the last two referenda – from 43% in 2018 to 47% in 2020 – and as more pro-independence voters enrol, the prospect of a breakaway has become a very real possibility. But France’s overseas territories give it the world’s second-largest maritime zone, and New Caledonia is also geostrategically important. Its loss would further diminish France’s status in the Indo-Pacific just after Australia’s withdrawal from its submarine deal with Paris and the announcement of the Aukus alliance. By keeping the 12 December date, French president Emmanuel Macron, who faces an election next year, also ensures that the vote, now likely to be in favour of the status quo, will take place within his term – his main opponent is shaping up to be the far right, which is largely against New Caledonian independence. The French government has been backed by local parties opposed to independence. “If we remain French, it is because all ethnic groups combined – Caldoches, Kanak, Vietnamese, Javanese etc – will have voted ‘no’ three times,” Nicolas Metzdorff, leader of the Générations NC party, said. ‘There will be a reaction’ There are fears that unhappiness over the vote could spill over into violence – as it has done in the past. Frustrations over a 1987 independence referendum organised by France and boycotted by FLNKS culminated in members of the alliance taking 27 unarmed gendarmes hostage, as well as a public prosecutor and several members of the French military, in a bid to force talks on independence. A military assault on the cave where they were being held ended the episode but resulted in the deaths of 19 of the kidnappers and two of the rescuers. This year France has sent 2,000 gendarmes to reinforce security, an unknown number of soldiers, several armoured vehicles and even additional personnel to staff the courts, so that those potentially arrested and charged can be more efficiently dealt with. While calling for calm, Daniel Goa, president of the Union Calédonienne, the largest member of FLNKS, said in a statement that he could not control the anger of “an uncontrollable youth”. In Saint-Louis, Wamytan agrees: “Faced with a result that we know in advance, there will be a reaction. It may be intense and brief, but there will be a reaction.” FLNKS leaders have also said they will write to the UN commission overseeing the ballot to contest its validity. Faizen Wea, a young man from the Gossanah tribe, members of which carried out the 1987 kidnapping, says he feels “betrayed by my own politicians”. “The times are very troubled, the pro-independence politicians have forced all the people to get vaccine for example. Why? Everything is confused. But one thing remains: we are not giving up on the idea of being free and independent. We do not want to stay in France because we cannot bear the idea that the Kanak people are drowning in French people. We have the right to our freedom and our country, like the other Pacific islands. Our time will come.”Germany’s next coalition government, which will be sworn in on Wednesday, will come with a lineup of new faces, a new set of policy priorities and a new dose of energy. It will also speak with a distinctive accent. Olaf Scholz, the centre-left politician who will step into Angela Merkel’s shoes, is a man of the German north not only by upbringing but by voice. When the former mayor of Hamburg recently warned in parliament that Covid-19 had not yet been beaten, he leaned into the stretched out fricatives typical of Germany’s second-largest city: Scholz pronounces the word besiegt as besiecht. Meetings of his cabinets will be more likely to open with a casually mumbled Moin Moin than the Servus greeting exclusive to the states of the south. In Scholz’s chief of staff, Wolfgang Schmidt, (also from Hamburg), the vice-chancellor, Robert Habeck (from Kreis Plön in Schleswig Holstein), the foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, and the labour minister, Hubertus Heil, (both from Lower Saxony), several leading voices around the table hail from the northern third of the country. Regional representation is a matter of utmost importance in Germany’s decentralised political system and governments work hard to give each of the 16 federal states their due share of the seats of power in Berlin. But a shift of balance under Scholz is already discernible. For one, his cabinet will be the first in the country’s postwar history without a minister from Bavaria. Germany’s largest and southernmost state ended up “on the subs’ bench”, the general secretary of Bavaria’s ruling Christian Social Union grumbled this week. In many ways the northward drift of German political power goes against the grain. The south dominates the country in economic terms: it has most of the big companies registered on the German stock exchange, provides homes to more start-ups, employs more IT professionals and registers more patents than the north. It reigns supreme in German football, where traditional northern clubs like Werder Bremen and Hamburg SV have fallen into decline while Bayern Munich wins trophy after trophy. But in politics the centre of gravity has been quietly shifting north ever since the seat of parliament was moved from Bonn in the Rhineland to Berlin. After the Hamburg-born, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern-raised Merkel and the Hanoverian Gerhard Schröder, Scholz is the third northern chancellor in a row; the last four deputies have all come from northern states. To an extent the strength of the north is a result of the weakness of the south and south-west, where the conservative party bloc is particularly prone to infighting. Had the Christian Democratic Union overcome its complicated relationship with its Bavarian sister-party, the Christian Social Union, the Bundestag may well have seen the CSU leader, Markus Söder, sworn as chancellor on Wednesday. Tom Mannewitz, a political scientist at the Federal University for Public Administration, said: “With festering inner-party factionalism and the historic split between the CDU and CSU, the conservative bloc has a strategic disadvantage in Germany’s south.” Even so, accents play a surprisingly important role in German politics. Scholz’s speech, while still displaying distinctive northern markers, is a far cry from the strong Hamburg dialect of his idol Helmut Schmidt. As with Merkel and Schröder, most Germans would be likely to identify his accent as standard German or Hochdeutsch, lending him an everyman quality that politicians from south of the so-called Uerdingen line, separating “high” and “low” dialects of German, can struggle to attain. “We are increasingly seeing that the northern German type of politician who speaks in high German enjoys more acceptance across the country as a whole,” said Jürgen Falter, a political scientist at the University of Mainz. “Southern politicians, by contrast, often struggle to shake off an air of provincialism.” The last two contenders who fell short in their run for the top job, the Social Democrat Martin Schulz in 2017 and Merkel’s designated successor, Armin Laschet, at this September’s election, both hailed from Aachen, close to the old power centre of the Bonn republic, and sounded that way when they spoke. Their folksy appeal, a boon at state level or in the European parliament, became a burden as they tried to storm the national stage, evoking stereotypes of jolly but unserious carnival jesters: Laschet’s ratings dived spectacularly after he was filmed laughing at a joke during a sombre event in a town hit by summer’s flash floods. Michael Elmentaler, a professor of linguistics at the University of Kiel, said: “After the second world war, there was a series of strong German leaders whose regional accents were accepted as part of their identity, from Konrad Adenauer and Ludwig Erhard to Kurt Kiesinger and Helmut Kohl. “What we are seeing now, however, is that the tolerance towards regional dialects is waning. If a German politician spoke like Adenauer today, people would laugh at him.” Linguists like Elmentaler have charted the disappearance of regional dialects not just from the German national parliament but also town halls and television networks, where the language of news presenters has become more casual but also more standardised. Linguistic quirks associated with specific cities or towns have made way for broader “regiolects”. If Scholz’s northern identity helped him claim the chancellory, will it also shape his management of the country? “There’s a powerful cliche of a certain type of northern German politician, the Hanseat,” said Christoph Strupp, a historian at Hamburg’s Research Centre for Contemporary History. “They are supposed to be sober pragmatists, humble in their public appearance, with an independence of mind suitable to a city state, and with a knack for finding compromises.” While large states like North Rhine-Westphalia have different power centres whose interests can be hard to reconcile by a single politician, in Hamburg “there’s a closeness of politics, business and the media that can make it easier to build a consensus”, said Strupp. “Scholz certainly lives up to many of the Hanseatic cliches,” Strupp said – both in the negative and the positive sense. “He proved himself capable of holding together a red-green coalition that wasn’t short of conflicts. He managed to find decisive and workable solutions to festering problems in the city, such as the over-budget Elbphilharmonie concert hall or the shortage of housing.” Hamburg’s town hall lies adjacent to the city’s chamber of commerce, with a skyway bridge connecting the two buildings – a symbol, some say, of a proximity between political and business interests that has created a culture of backroom deals. Running for the Hamburg mayorship in 2011, Scholz simply recruited the president of the chamber of commerce as his business senator – and won.Donald Trump’s plan to launch “Truth Social”, a special purpose acquisitions backed social media company, early next year may have hit a roadblock after US regulators issued a request for information on the deal on Monday. The request from the SEC and the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority for information from Digital World Acquisition Corp (DWAC), a blank-check SPAC that is set to merge with Trump Media &amp; Technology Group, comes as a powerful Republican congressman, Devin Nunes, announced he was stepping out of politics to join the Trump media venture as CEO. The twin developments set the stage for a major political battle over Truth Social, a platform that purportedly plans to challenge Twitter and Facebook, social platforms that have banned or curbed the former president over his involvement in stoking the 6 January Capitol riot. The request for information relates to DWAC board meetings, policies about stock trading, the identities of certain investors and details of communications between DWAC and Trump’s social media firm. It comes three weeks after Democratic Senator Elizabeth Warren asked the SEC to investigate possible securities violations at the company. Warren quoted news reports that said DWAC “may have committed securities violations by holding private and undisclosed discussions about the merger as early as May 2021, while omitting this information in [SEC] filing and other public statements.” But investigations into the Trump project appear to predate Warren’s request. “According to the SEC’s request, the investigation does not mean that the SEC has concluded that anyone violated the law or that the SEC has a negative opinion of DWAC or any person, event, or security,” DWAC said in a statement. Last week, Reuters reported that Trump’s new company is trying to raise up to $1bn by selling shares to hedge funds and family offices at a price higher than the SPAC pre-merger valuation of $10 a share. It also comes as the launch of the Trump media venture failed to meet a November deadline to release an invitation-only beta version of the platform. In October, soon after the deal was announced, shares in DWAC soared by more than 1,200%, suggesting the implied value of the enterprise could reach $8.2bn. Trading in the company was halted 12 times as Trump fans pumped the stock on Reddit and StockTwits, pushing Trump’s 58% stake in the combined TMT-DWAC company to $4.8bn. DWAC shares were trading at $43.19 per share on Monday morning, down almost 3% on news of the filing, even as equity markets broadly were higher. According to a press release from Trump Media &amp; Technology, the media operation will begin operations in the first quarter of next year, with Truth Social launching ahead of the 2022 midterm election and a potential subscription video on-demand service coming later. Milos Vulanovic, an expert in SPAC deals at the Edhec Business School in Nice, France, told the Guardian that Trump’s politically oriented media venture could bring “new investors who may not fully understand how SPACs work” into the market. “I don’t see why Trump-sponsored media couldn’t take 10% of the social media market and make huge money for Trump and his investors.”To someone in a remote place, cut off by hostile weather, a friendly face in uniform might be a welcome sight, although not as welcome as the lights coming back on. About 300 armed forces personnel have been on manoeuvres in rural parts of north-east England and Scotland, checking on vulnerable people in the aftermath of Storm Arwen and, according to the Ministry of Defence, “providing reassurance”. In a more tyrannical regime that phrase, coupled with the image of soldiers going door to door, would have a sinister ring. In Britain it is uncontroversial, which is not necessarily a sign of healthy politics. Deployment of the military to bail out civil authorities should not be taboo, but nor should it be routine. In October, when petrol pumps ran dry, the army was brought in, ostensibly to drive tankers, but also to show panicking motorists that the government had things under control; “providing reassurance”. There are some peacetime jobs that only trained military personnel can do – bomb disposal, for example. Then there are episodes of turmoil when politicians need to show a flash of khaki to prove that they are still in charge. Military drivers were put on standby during the 2000 fuel protests. Troops stepped in to provide security for the 2012 Olympics when the private contractor fell short. Military involvement has long been a measure of severity in floods and other natural disasters. The pandemic has seen a huge increase in the use of what Whitehall calls Maca – military aid to the civil authorities. Soldiers have erected field hospitals, moved people and protective equipment around, provided logistics support for testing and vaccination programmes. Army medics have been on the clinical frontline. The scale of the Covid challenge has required something like wartime mobilisation and Britain is not the only country to have leaned on its armed forces. But there is a difference between occasional auxiliary action and playing backstop to a state that cannot cope with stress. The need for such a service speaks to some deeper malaise in the workings of government, which brings us to the evacuation of Kabul. Here the crisis was already military by nature, and the pressure to deliver was entirely on civilian authorities. They failed. The London side of the operation was “dysfunctional” and “chaotic”, according to testimony by a civil service whistleblower to a parliamentary inquiry. The scene in the Foreign Office, as depicted by Raphael Marshall, a former desk officer at the department, is one of institutional and individual failure at every level. Dominic Raab, then foreign secretary, now justice secretary, is portrayed as an indecisive control freak: fussing over the formatting of documents instead of engaging with their contents, and delaying action on cases of desperate Afghans seeking refuge from vengeful Taliban forces. Thousands of emails, representing matters of life and death, went unread in deserted offices as staff clocked off at end of their Friday shifts. The Taliban didn’t get the memo about not working weekends. To the extent that Downing Street took an interest in particular cases, the lucky evacuees appear to have been animals in the care of a rescue charity run by Paul “Pen” Farthing. Marshall testified that “considerable capacity” had to be allocated for Farthing’s cargo on instructions from the prime minister. No 10 denies that Boris Johnson made that call and Farthing rejects claims that his pet project diverted military resources. But safe passage was a precious, finite resource and arranging capacity for dogs was a distraction from rescuing people. Raab disputes Marshall’s account. He concedes that there are lessons to be learned “in hindsight” but does not specify what they might be, beyond his previously expressed regret at having tried to manage the crisis from a beach in Crete. His subsequent removal from the Foreign Office was punishment for having bungled the brief. More precisely, it was a rebuke for ineptitude on such a scale as to invite scrutiny of the prime minister’s role in the debacle. (Johnson, too, had been on holiday.) Raab’s offence was not incompetence, but failure to keep the tide of bad headlines away from the threshold of No 10. He is still in the cabinet, still deputy prime minister. Not all government failures are the fault of ministers. There is also a Conservative reading of Marshall’s testimony: the evacuation programme was inhibited by the volume of people working from home, and by a culture that valorised a “work-life balance” so much that, for some staff, entitlement to leisure trumped public service. The riposte would be that being short-staffed is more often a function of inadequate budgeting than deficient work ethic. The same arguments swirl around the government’s handling of the pandemic. There is a view from the right that finds fault in a rusty, over-privileged and antique civil service machine, unfit for 21st-century challenges. And there is the counter-claim from the left that austerity stripped the state of assets it needed to get the job done properly. Both sides can be right. An unreformed state bureaucracy might lack the agility to deal with a complex emergency, while underfunded services are easily overwhelmed. In both instances, inattentive and cowardly leadership makes the difference, turning complication into crisis. And it takes special arrogance and stupidity at the top to obstruct the flow of urgency lower down in the hierarchy. There are flaws in the British state that pre-date the current government and managerial problems that are common to all large organisations, private and public. But there is a particular moral flimsiness about the Johnson regime that takes administrative dysfunction to a new level. It is the pattern of unpreparedness and indecision, leading to reckless choices with terrible consequences, followed by a flight from responsibility. It is the effect of hypersensitivity to public demand that something be done, applied in the absence of an ethical core to dictate what that action should be. This was all eloquently expressed in the dereliction of duty over Afghanistan. By the time the crisis caught up with Raab and Johnson, the moment to grip it had already passed. There was no option of calling in the armed forces. They were already there, in Kabul, doing their job, which was not the scene back in Whitehall or Downing Street. This is what happens when government is led by people who seek the thrill of power without wanting the burden of office. The terrible price of that complacency is still being paid by Afghans who called to Britain for sanctuary and got no answer. Rafael Behr is a Guardian columnistIn a sudden reversal, former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows will not cooperate with a House of Representatives committee investigating the deadly attack on the US Capitol on 6 January, a lawyer for the former Trump aide said on Tuesday. The committee warned that Meadows will face contempt proceedings if he refuses to cooperate on Wednesday. “The Select Committee has numerous questions for Mr Meadows about records he has turned over to the Committee with no claim of privilege, which include real-time communications with many individuals as the events of January 6th unfolded,” it said in a statement. “Tomorrow’s deposition will go forward as planned. “If indeed Mr Meadows refuses to appear, the Select Committee will be left no choice but to advance contempt proceedings and recommend that the body in which Meadows once served refer him for criminal prosecution.” Meadows indicated last week that he would speak to the panel. But on the same day the Guardian broke news of Meadows’s memoir, The Chief’s Chief, in which he detailed Trump’s positive and negative Covid tests and their cover-up before his first debate with Joe Biden last year. Trump gave Meadows a glowing blurb for his book but news of its contents kicked off a firestorm of controversy and prompted a backlash from the former presidenttowards Meadows. On Tuesday, Maggie Haberman, a New York Times journalist, reported that “sources close to Trump say he hates Meadows book and feels betrayed by him”. Haberman also wrote that Meadows’s “cooperation was always seen as bare minimum. The reality doesn’t change much but timing is notable.” Meadows’s attorney, George Terwilliger, wrote in a letter on Tuesday that a deposition would be “untenable” because the 6 January select committee “has no intention of respecting boundaries” concerning questions that Trump has claimed are off-limits because of executive privilege. Executive privilege covers the confidentiality or otherwise of communications between a president and his aides. The Biden administration has waived it in the investigation of 6 January. Trump and allies entwined in events leading up to the storming of the Capitol, around which five people died, have invoked it. Terwilliger also said he learned over the weekend that the committee had issued a subpoena to a third-party communications provider that he said would include “intensely personal” information. In an interview on the conservative Fox News network, the attorney added: “We have made efforts over many weeks to reach an accommodation with the committee.” But he said the committee’s approach to negotiations and to other witnesses meant Meadows would withdraw cooperation. “The chairman of the committee [Bennie Thompson, a Democrat from Mississippi] … publicly said that another witness’s claiming of the fifth amendment would be tantamount to an admission of guilt,” Terwilliger said, claiming that called into question “exactly what is going on with this committee”. That was a reference to Jeffery Clark, a former justice department official who pitched a plan to Trump regarding overturning election results and who, like Meadows, has been threatened with a charge of contempt of Congress if he does not cooperate with the 6 January investigation. Terwilliger wrote in his letter: “As a result of careful and deliberate consideration of these factors, we now must decline the opportunity to appear voluntarily for a deposition.” Meadows has claimed executive privilege covers any communications with Trump that the committee may wish to examine. In the aftermath of reports about his book – the Guardian being first to report that Meadows tried to downplay the Capitol riot as the work of “a handful of fanatics” – members of the committee suggested that by publishing the memoir Meadows had waived any claim to executive privilege protections. Adam Schiff of California told Politico it was “very possible that by discussing the events of 6 January in his book … [Meadows is] waiving any claim of privilege. “So, it’d be very difficult for him to maintain ‘I can’t speak about events to you, but I can speak about them in my book.’” Thompson, the committee chair, told reporters: “Some of what we plan to ask him is in the excerpts of the book.” Meadows had been due to appear before the committee on 12 November but failed to show up. At the time, Thompson warned that “there is no valid legal basis for Mr Meadows’s continued resistance to the select committee’s subpoena”. Another former Trump aide, former campaign chairman and White House strategist Steve Bannon, has been charged with criminal contempt of Congress, the first such charge since 1983. Facing a fine and jail time, he has pleaded not guilty. Trump has attempted to stall much of the committee’s work, including in a court case, by arguing that Congress does not have the right to information about his private White House conversations.Having had a double mastectomy, Eleanor Howie wanted other women in her position to feel confident in their bodies after surgery, so she decided to start her own lingerie business Eleanor Howie has been thinking about how to improve the lives of women who’ve had mastectomies for a very long time. She lost her aunt to breast cancer, and remembers from her childhood the effect surgery had on her mum’s self-esteem after she too was diagnosed with the disease. And then, while still in her early 20s, she found out that she had a high risk of breast cancer. At 24, she had preventative surgery. This was a decade ago, before Angelina Jolie and others had raised awareness of such procedures. Afterwards, Howie went looking for post-surgery lingerie and struggled to find anything “age appropriate” – everything had a clinical look that put her off. Like her mother before her, Howie saw her confidence drop. But the idea for better post-mastectomy bras was planted. “My story and the business’s story are so intertwined,” she says. The spur to turn that idea into a business came in the form of her wedding in 2019. “I found it impossible to find any lingerie to wear under my wedding dress,” she says. “All the old frustrations and insecurities resurfaced. After I came back from my honeymoon, I thought: ‘I can do something about this!’” She made the leap and started her own business, Valiant Lingerie, in January 2020, two months before the first Covid lockdown. As she trialled designs, fabric warehouses closed down, making it hard to assess the feel and texture of what she was ordering – this is particularly important for post-mastectomy bras, as scar tissue can be incredibly sensitive. The experience of running the business in lockdown was, she says, a “mixed bag’. But technology enabled the business to keep developing. She did fit-testing, where a prototype is fitted to a real-life model, using video calls over Google Meet. It was tricky, she says, but it worked and allowed product development to move ahead. Throughout the process of establishing and growing the business, Google has played a part, from “the most basic” first step – purchasing a web domain – to the day-to-day tools, such as email and calendar organising. Google Analytics has enabled her “to understand how I’m reaching people and how I might better reach people in the future as the brand grows”. For example, she says that Google Analytics revealed what content people were interacting with on the site, which resulted in her making changes to improve the user experience. “I have seen the benefits reflected in increased page views,” she says. “Understanding what content people interact with also helps me to plan strategy, for example, in terms of further articles for the site.” She also created a Google Business Profile – which gives company owners control over information appearing in Google Search and Maps, such as product shots and customer reviews. She says this resulted in more people finding Valiant and knowing what the company is all about. Howie says a key part of the business is increasing representation for women who’ve had mastectomies and helping them feel less isolated. When she had her own surgery, she says, she struggled to find anyone of a similar age in the same position. With that in mind, she uses social media to help create a community and attract new customers. It’s clear that she is really pleased with how the business has grown – especially given the pandemic. Asked what advice she would give someone who has a business idea related to their own lived experience, her response is simple: “Just start.” She adds: “I think it’s really easy to strive for perfection, and to not want to get going and put yourself out there, particularly if it’s based on your own lived experiences. “It’s easy to keep telling yourself: ‘Oh, I’m not quite ready yet, it’s not perfect’. But there comes a point where you just have to tell yourself: ‘Now’s the time to start,’ because things are never going to be perfect.” To see the Valiant Lingerie collection, visit valiantlingerie.com A fresh start: how one entrepreneur turned redundancy on its head Janet Aspin, founder of JA Executive PA Services. Photograph: Shaw &amp; Shaw/Guardian Janet Aspin set up her own virtual PA business providing support for small- to medium-enterprises after being made redundant during the pandemic. Never having worked for herself, everything was new to her and she started with limited technical knowledge, but with perseverance and help from online tools, such as Google Business Profile, she’s seeing her business grow How did you come to start a business during the pandemic? I was made redundant after 25 years of working for the same company. I tried to get back into employment, and was offered a new position. However, I had such a traumatic experience during their onboarding process that my health was suffering. I have multiple sclerosis and a risk assessment they wanted to carry out took several months and I didn’t have a start date. Not long after, I went to the hairdresser who introduced me to his mum, Jacqueline Winstanley, who set up the Inclusive Entrepreneur Network. Jacqueline told me about the support and advice for disabled entrepreneurs and suggested I work for myself. So I decided to walk away from the job and set up JA Executive PA Services. I created social media accounts and a Google Business Profile – the business started from there. How has Google helped? Google has been helpful in all parts of my business, from undertaking the initial research, to setting it up. When launching my business, I knew that I needed people to find it online and that I needed a digital presence. My first aim was to appear in Google Search rankings. So I set myself up with a Google Business Profile and updated my social channels. Now if I search for myself online my virtual PA business comes up, that’s what I wanted. I’d never worked for myself before, so everything was new at the beginning, but I’ve started to understand more. Just seven months after launching, I’ve become more aware of things and feel more confident knowing what platforms and tools can help. What’s it like to be a disabled entrepreneur? It’s not easy, but I have a support worker who comes in and makes sure everything is set up as I need it and helps me proofread things when fatigue makes it difficult. Working from home has made it a lot easier. I work in the kitchen, so I can easily just move from the living room. Working online suits me. There’s a lot more accessibility online now, with things such as video calls. Having a group like the Inclusive Entrepreneur Network also gives disabled entrepreneurs the support we need. We get to meet, and see that everybody is kind of battling through. To learn more about JA Executive PA Services, go to jaexecutivepaservices.co.uk Discover the tools, training and support Google provides to help businesses across Britain grow at g.co/growbritainThat’s all for today. Thanks for following along with us again and be sure to read our full report from Game 9 here. Carlsen bristles at question from a Norwegian journalist about when he touched the knight on his 18th move before playing 18. ... h6. “Not this again,” he says. “This happens in every single world championship match. Clearly some pieces are adjusted and it’s with no intent to move. Do better.” He’s then asked what we can expect stylistically from the next five games now that he’s opened a three-game lead: “We’ll see. I’ll probably just try and play and it’s more up to him than anything else to try and change the course.” Asked whether he felt sorry for Nepomniachtchi at any point during today’s game, Carlsen’s response is straightforward: “It’s the world championship. Basically, you prefer to beat an opponent who’s playing at his very best. But if he’s not, you take it any day of the week.” Carlsen is asked whether he gets more satisfaction from winning games like Friday’s classic as opposed to benefitting from opponent blunders. “I think that goes without saying,” he says. “But in the standings they look the same. I think that goes for everybody that earning a victory through really hard work is more rewarding than getting one handed to you by your opponent. Actually, that’s not the case for everybody. I remember (Dutch grandmaster Jan Hein) Donner wrote in his book that he appreciated a game won by luck a lot more than a game won by skill. But for me, (I) definitely feel a lot more satisfied when I actually win a good game. But I’ll take it.” Nepomniachtchi is asked whether to toll of Friday’s epic eight-hour defeat contributed to the blunders that cost him on Sunday and today. “There is a few reasons to speculate,” he says. “But in general I think it’s basically two one-move blunders in a row. Sometimes your opponent can blunder your way to victory. That’s actually happening. In general there is a lot of work to do to understand why is it going on like this and what’s the reason. Lack of concentration maybe combined with not the best luck.” Asked how he feels: “It’s been better before.” On multiple occasions during the post-game press conference, Carlsen refers to Nepomniachtchi’s blunder as “absurd”. He’s asked why he uses that word for it. “Because you don’t expect to basically win a piece for nothing,” he says. “What can I say? As (Nepomniachtchi) said, it’s also a bit of bad luck that he doesn’t even have any try that gives him any chances. I think absurd covers it pretty nicely.” He adds: “As I said before, no style points awarded. I’ll take it. It was a tough game in which I was under pressure both on the board and on the clock. Just to turn it around like that was unexpected.” “I couldn’t imagine there is actually a way which exists to blunder in this position,” Nepomniachtchi says of his fatal blunder (27. c5?). “The position was somewhere between slightly better and much better during most of the game. ... It’s even funny there’s a way to blunder this position in one move. Who could know?” He admits that he didn’t even notice his opponent’s winning response (27. ... c6) until after Carlsen played it. “Till it was played I was quite happy,” he says. “Just some insanely bad luck.” Asked his thoughts on the state of the match with five games to go: “It’s worse than I expected.” Carlsen is asked whether he felt any extra pressure at the start of today’s game due to Nepomniachtchi’s new look and new opening. “I kind of thought today was going to be a big fight anyway so that was OK,” he says. “It’s very typical after a free day to change your appearance and try and mix up something, so I think that was a good idea. And I think the game progressed more or less normally. My position was a little bit cramped but it has long-term potential. So I was not too worried. And then perhaps I was a little bit rash when I went for this (22. ... Kxe5) thing because I hadn’t seen Qe1. So I wasn’t intending to give up a pawn in that particular manner. “Anyway I thought after I’d sort of calmed down immediately I thought the position is probably still fine for me. I’m going to make a draw quite easily. Yeah, (27. c5?) was just extremely careless. It’s not like the idea of c6, trapping the bishop, is particularly hidden. He mentioned to me after the game that since Kc5 is always the theme, he wasn’t really concerned about c6. And then after he went c5, obviously the knight kind of saved it. That was just a very, very strange lapse.” The Norwegian is asked what could possibly account for a blunder so rarely seen at the world championship level. “I think it’s the tension for sure,” he says. “And also that Ian is probably a bit more prone to blundering than some other opponents. But it happened to Vishy as well (in the 2013 world title match). He also made some uncharacteristic errors at the end. Pressure gets to everybody.” Asked whether it’s accurate to say this match is done and dusted, Carlsen in to the point: “It’s not 100% accurate. But it’s obviously looking great now.” And it’s over! The players shake hands and Magnus Carlsen has all but retained his world chess championship after Ian Nepomniachtchi resigns. The world No 1 has taken a commanding 6-3 in their best-of-14 match with five games remaining. The situation is no less grim for Nepomniachtchi after 38. a7 Rd8. He’s spending a lot of time on his next move, hoping to throw one final curveball at Carlsen while he’s under four minutes. Finally the challenger plays 39. Nxc5, leaving the champion with two playable options: Bc6 and Ra8. And Carlsen goes with 39. ... Ra8 after nearly two minutes, leaving him with a comfortable 1min 41sec to make his final move before the added hour. That’s when the resignation will likely happen. Carlsen spends nearly eight minutes calculating before capturing a pawn: 36. ... Nxg3. That leaves him with 4min 8sec for his next four moves until the time control. Nepomniachtchi plays 37. Na4, leaving him with 19 minutes for his next three. Nepomniachtchi plays 29. Re4 after eight minutes but he’s searching for a solution that isn’t there. Nothing for black after 29. ... Ra7 30. Rb4 Rb8 31. a4. Carlsen finally takes the bishop (31. ... Raxb7). A pair of rooks are traded off in the next sequence as the challenger moves his a-pawn down the board: 32. Rb6 Rxb6 33. cxb6 Rxb6 34. Nc5 Nf5 35. a5 Rb8 36. a6. Nepomniachtchi has not been at the board for more than 10 minutes. Then 15. He finally returns and plays 28. f3 after nearly 20 minutes. Carlsen immediately answers with 28. ... Nh6. “This is a terrible moment for [Nepomniachtchi],” says American grandmaster Fabiano Caruana on Chess.com’s broadcast. “It’s also such a preventable one. The match may have been out of his hands, pretty much. It was certainly a steep hill to climb. But the game was not going badly for him. Maybe he didn’t make the most of his advantage, but he was still up on the clock. ... Just another rushed moment. He’s trying to blitz Magnus and he ends up trapping his own bishop instead. Now it doesn’t matter how much time Magnus has. Even if he had two minutes here, there’s nothing you can do because all of black’s moves are instantly made from now on.” Adds three-time British champion David Howell on Chess24’s feed: “You work a whole lifetime for one shot and this is what happens on the biggest scene. He’s probably never blundered like this in his whole career. It’s just so sad.” And Nepomniachtchi has made a massive error! The natural response (c6) will trap white’s bishop and all but assure victory for black. Total self-destruction by the challenger. And Carlsen finds the correct 27. ... c6. This is going be a win for Carlsen with the black pieces and game, set, match for the world No 1. And the queens are off the board after Carlsen plays the predicted 24. Qxe1+. Nepomniachtchi recaptures (25. Rxe1) and next moves follow in short order: 25. ... h5 26. Bxb7 Ra4. Nepomniachtchi plays 22. Reb2 after five and a half minutes. Carlsen simplifies with a knight exchange (22. ... Nxe5 23. dxe5), then attacks white’s queen with his knight (23. ... Ng4). The challenger then offers a queen exchange (24. Qe1), which it’s hard to imagine Carlsen won’t accept given the circumstances: playing as black with a two-point lead in the match and a mounting time deficit in this ninth game. Additionally, that move (Qxe1+) is the engines’ top choice by some distance. Carlsen plays 21. ... Qb4 after more than nine minutes, targeting the hanging pawns. He’s below 27 minutes with 18 moves until he gains an hour after move 40. Nepomniachtchi has more than an hour on his clock as he ponders his response. White appears slightly better after 19. ... Bd7 20. Ne5 Be8 21. Qe3. Carlsen is back on the clock, still nearly a half-hour behind Nepomniachtchi with 35 minutes remaining to make his next 19 moves until the time control. Carlsen finally takes back the pawn with 17. ... Qxa3, a natural move. Nepomniachtchi plays 18. Qe2 and steps away from the board. Carlsen appears to touch his knight on f6 before withdrawing his hand and playing 18. ... h6. Oh boy! Under the touch-move rule, Carlsen would have been forced to move that knight (with no good options), only Nepomniachtchi was not in the room to call an arbiter. Nepomniachtchi plays 19. h4 and Carlsen thinks for more than 12 minutes before answering with 19. ... Bd7. Carlsen plays 15. ... Rd8, bypassing the immediate recapture. The position looks dead even after 16. Nb3 Nf6 17. Re1, but some real attacking chances for Nepomniachtchi that were lacking in his previous white games. And Nepomniachtchi opts for the natural 15. bxa3. A relief for Carlsen, who can recapture immediately and avoid the forced lines of the alternative. Additionally, the challenger spent less than five minutes before playing it. His haste at crucial moments throughout the match has been a recurring criticism. Carlsen plays 14. ... a3 after exactly four minutes. Interestingly, the engines say the best move for Nepomniachtchi is pushing the b-pawn two squares forward (b4). That’s effectively a pawn sacrifice to black’s knight with the potential of recapturing in the next few moves. Will he find it? Carlsen plays 12. ... a4 after four minutes. A forced trade of bishops follows (13. Bxe7 Qxe7) before Nepomniachtchi goes forward with his knight (14. Nc5). Nepomniachtchi finally pushes the pawn (12. d4) after nearly 25 minutes. The Norwegian supercomputer Sesse now evaluates the position as dead even. Nepomniachtchi is in the think tank for the first time today. He’s been considering his response to Carlsen’s 11. ... O-O for 22 minutes (and counting). “What Ian has done so far I really like,” American grandmaster Fabiano Caruana says on Chess.com’s broadcast. “Everything: his new approach to the opening, his play thus far, although we can safely assume it has been preparation. He’s gotten a fighting position. The only thing is, I really do feel like Magnus still knows the position even though he’s taking a lot of time.” Carlsen plays 10. ... Ng4 after three and a half minutes. Nepomniachtchi keeps the time pressure on by quickly playing 11. Bc5. Another long think for Carlsen, who ponders the position for 10 minutes before castling (11. ... O-O). He’s more than an half-hour behind on the clock. Carlsen plays 8. ... Be7 and Nepomniachtchi quickly plays 9. e3. The champion opts to capture instead of defending his central pawn (9. ... dxe3) and Nepo captures back with his bishop (10. Bxe3). Some interesting body language from Carlsen, who appears frustrated with the position, head in his hands. “The only concern I have for Ian is that Magnus must still be in book,” Dutch grandmaster Anish Giri says on Chess24’s broadcast. “You don’t play the world championship and develop the bishop to c5 without prep. The riskiness of this approach is so high. [Carlsen] could play improvised like that in a random blitz game. But this is a world championship match. He’s leading by two points. Losing this game would be really a huge disaster. He cannot not be prepared.” Carlsen has another lengthy think before playing 7. ... a5 and Nepomniachtchi immediately answers with 8. Nb3. A very positive opening for the challenger, who’s created a complex position with no easy answers for black while opening a 20-minute edge on the clock. Says Sergey Karjakin, the 2016 world title challenger who’s been summoned to Dubai to assist Nepomniachtchi’s comeback bid: “The position is complicated, and it’s basically what Ian needs to go to get to complicated positions to try to outplay Magnus.” Carlsen spends 10 minutes on his sixth move. Ultimately, he goes with the predicted 6. ... Nf6, transposing into a more mainstream position. Nepomniachtchi answers with 7. Nbd2. A quick note on the scale of the task facing Nepomniachtchi. The world No 5 is attempting to become only the third player in the 135-year history of world championship matches to win after trailing by two or more points. The others were Max Euwe, who trailed 5-2 against Alexander Alekhine before winning 15½-14½ in 1935, and Bobby Fischer, who trailed 2-0 against Boris Spassky before winning 12½-8½ in 1972. Nepomniachtchi waits three minutes before playing 4. Nf3. Carlsen immediately answers with 4. ... Nc6. A much slower pace today relative to Nepomniachtchi’s other white games and surprisingly aggressive for black. And after 5. O-O Bc5, we’re already in rare territory: only six games in the database have followed this line and none at the highest level. Nepomniachtchi follows with 6. d3. New haircut, new opening. No closed Ruy Lopez today. Nepomniachtchi opens with 1. c4, the English Opening. Carlsen plays into the Agincourt Defense (1. ... e6 2. g3 d5 3. Bg2) and is now taking his time here. And after four minutes he plays the very ambitious 3. ... d4. Game on! The biggest news of the morning: Ian Nepomniachtchi has cut off his man bun. The challenger appears to have had a haircut on the rest day and has turned up to the playing hall today with a brand new look. A quick refresher on the format for this world championship match. It will consist of 14 classical games with each player awarded one point for a win and a half-point for a draw. Whoever reaches seven and a half points first will be declared the champion. (Carlsen leads 5-3 over Nepomniachtchi after Sunday’s second win.) The time control for each game is 120 minutes for the first 40 moves, 60 minutes for the next 20 moves and then 15 minutes for the rest of the game plus an additional 30 seconds per move starting from move 61. If the match is tied after 14 games, tie-breaks will be played on the final day (16 December) in the following order: • Best of four rapid games with 25 minutes for each player with an increment of 10 seconds after each move. • If still tied, they will play up to five mini-matches of two blitz games (five minutes for each player with a three-second increment). • If all five mini-matches are drawn, one sudden-death ‘Armageddon’ match will be played where White receives five minutes and Black receives four minutes. Both players will receive a three-second increment after the 60th move. In the case of a draw, Black will be declared the winner. Notably, Carlsen’s second and third title defenses both came down to tiebreakers. But many believe the increased length of this year’s match (from 12 to 14 games) and the stylistic matchup at hand promises a decisive result in regulation. Hello and welcome back for the ninth game of the World Chess Championship. The overall score in the showdown between Magnus Carlsen and Ian Nepomniachtchi is 5-3 to Carlsen after the Norwegian’s breakthrough wins in Game 6 and Game 8, putting the Russian challenger into something of a desperate situation with six contests remaining. On Sunday, a fatal blunder by Nepomniachtchi donated a pawn to Carlsen in the middlegame, gifting the 31-year-old world champion an advantage he leveraged until the Russian challenger resigned after 4hr 6min. For anyone just coming aboard, Carlsen, who turned 31 last week, has been at No 1 in the Fide rankings for 10 straight years and was considered the world’s best player even before he dethroned Vishy Anand for the title in 2013. Nepomniachtchi, also 31, is ranked No 5, having earned his place at the table by winning the eight-man candidates tournament in April. The best-of-14-games match is taking place at the Dubai Exhibition Centre with the winner earning a 60% share of the €2m ($2.26m) prize fund if the match ends in regulation (or 55% if it’s decided by tie-break games, as happened in Carlsen’s second and third title defenses). We’re a little under a half-hour from today’s first move. Will we see Nepomniachtchi play yet another closed Ruy Lopez? Or will the challenger go for broke as the situation demands? Bryan will be here shortly. In the meantime here’s his report from Sunday’s eighth game in Dubai.British nationals and vulnerable Afghans who have been approved for evacuation have spoken of their anguish and frustration as they remain trapped in Afghanistan months after it was taken over by the Taliban. After devastating testimony by a whistleblower in the Foreign Office, who claimed there was an incompetent and chaotic response to the fall of Kabul, those waiting to be evacuated have called for rapid action from the UK government. A former security adviser to the British embassy, employed under contract by the global outsourcing firm GardaWorld, said he was approved for evacuation under the Arap (Afghan relocations and assistance policy) scheme in August, but was unable to make his way through the crowds of thousands to get to the door where British officials were processing claims. Since then he has been frustrated by the infrequent updates he has received from the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO). He tried calling a number he found on the department’s website, created for people stuck in Afghanistan, but he was on-hold in a queue for an hour before being disconnected shortly after getting through. “It’s very expensive for us to call this number, about $1 (76p) a minute, it’s a huge amount of money – it is not fair that it’s so expensive,” he said. He is no longer trying to call the hotline, and has been emailing different accounts which he has found online, trying to get information about when he and his wife and four children might be called for evacuation. Around three weeks ago he received an email asking if he was happy for officials to share his family’s details with officials in Pakistan, so that he could leave Afghanistan through that border. He agreed, but has heard nothing since. “Our bags have been packed since August. We’re ready to leave now. It feels like life has stopped. I’m looking at my phone all day to see if we have received an email with news,” he said. The Guardian understands FCDO is trying assist British nationals to leave where possible. While British nationals are being offered consulate assistance, queries about anyone who isn’t a British national are directed to the Home Office. A 47-year-old cab driver, who first moved to the UK as an asylum seeker 21 years ago, said he was once so proud to be a British citizen. But that pride has dimmed significantly over the past few months, as he remains trapped in Afghanistan. “They left us behind. It’s like a slap in the face. I’m just thinking I’m not a British citizen,” he said while remaining in hiding. “Nobody cares. Nobody wants to talk to us. Nobody calls us – nothing. If you see the emails that we get … They’re just updating the site every month.” He had travelled to Afghanistan to marry in July and has been stuck ever since. When he calls the Foreign Office, and gets through, he said he is told to wait and that very little can be done. His mood has darkened as he faces his first Christmas and new year outside the UK in more than two decades. A British national, who fled Afghanistan as a refugee in 2001 and acquired UK citizenship in 2008, is also waiting for news from the FCDO after he and his wife and five children were unable to get near the airport for their evacuation flight in August. “It was such a mess at the airport. We formed a group of British nationals and asked the British officials to help us get into the airport, but they didn’t,” the Londoner said. He has found it hard to get clear advice about what to do since then. “I’ve had one call telling me they can facilitate the journey if I travel to the UK alone. I can’t leave my family here,” he said. He has helped create a WhatsApp group of about 200 stranded British nationals, and was preparing to attend a Zoom meeting with the others from his group to discuss what to do. “Everyone is going through a difficult financial situation. There are no jobs and we’re stuck here,” he said. In that group is a 26-year-old British national whose wife remains trapped in Afghanistan. He has a screenshot of the three-and-a-half-hours he waited on hold as he tried to get through to someone in the Foreign Office. He was in Afghanistan with his parents, who are British nationals, and wife, an Afghan national, in August. While he and his parents were allowed to board Qatari charter flights, his wife wasn’t. “Both the Home Office and the FCDO have been providing me with conflicting information, leaving me in the dark and unable to decide what to do.” Desperate emails from both him and his dad to the consulate failed to change the situation and eventually they were forced to flee without his wife. “I didn’t have tears in my eyes because in our culture we can’t cry, but deep down, I was broken. The message she sent me was ‘it was better off for you to kill me than live in a state like this’ … It’s unbearable and I’ve tried putting this forward to the British government, but they just won’t listen.”For a completely sustainable alternative Christmas tree (Real or fake: which Christmas tree is most sustainable?, 4 December), we hunt for a small, twiggy branch – easily found at this time of year, especially after a storm – and hang lights and decorations on it. We have ornaments from many years back, so that’s added sustainability. We think it looks amazing; it doesn’t take up much space and rots down afterwards. Dee Northover Bristol • As a child in the 1950s, I remember my mother ironing Christmas wrapping paper after we had unwrapped our presents to use it again the next year (How to make sure Christmas cards and wrapping don’t end up in landfill, 4 December). Following her thrifty example, my family are still making use of the stock of gift bags I collected from presents given to me by primary school pupils before I retired 15 years ago. Margaret Cockburn Morpeth, Northumberland • When were we drawn into the use of terms such as “pre-booking”, when “making a booking” for a theatre ticket used to be sufficient? Surely a pre-owned item is one that hasn’t been bought yet? Pre-loved? Secondhand. Now we have pre-grated cheese (Fromage fictions, 6 December). The picture in print shows a piece of pre-grated cheese and a dish of grated cheese. Colin J Merry Lincoln • John Whittingdale would like broadcasters to make more programmes reflecting British values (David Tennant questions Tory focus on ‘Britishness’ of TV shows, 7 December). Does this mean making sitcoms where people lie, cheat and involve themselves in sleazy activities? David Prothero Harlington, Bedfordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Kwasi Kwarteng urged those still without electricity to call 105, the emergency power cut phone number (Report, 1 December). Perhaps he could explain how in the future, when BT has completed the conversion of the telephone network to an all-digital one, this will be possible when vast areas will be without mains power for days on end as now, and your telephone connection will depend on your broadband connection? Will BT still have battery or generator backup that keeps the current service working in power cuts? Will mobile phone stations have such emergency power backup on every facility? I have seen no answers to these questions. Geoff Thomas Merthyr Tudful • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Re your report (Middle-class drug users could lose UK passports under Boris Johnson’s plans, 6 December), organised crime is a “bad thing”, with organisations that supply drugs such as cocaine and heroin connected to many other crimes. Gangsters make obvious villains in many policy narratives. But after 30-odd years examining substance use by young people, I suggest four measures that have nothing to do with additional penalties: • Improve child protection: histories of abuse and severe adversity figure prominently in the development of adults who use cocaine and heroin habitually. • Reduce social inequalities: the demand for drugs is greatest in neighbourhoods where young people grow up feeling they are already life’s losers. • Create accessible and stable housing in the same neighbourhoods: this is the foundation for recovery in many drug users. • Encourage the employment of adults with histories of drug use: so many people with criminal records find legitimate jobs impossible to get. Prof Woody Caan Duxford, Cambridge • Boris Johnson appeared in a police uniform in a recent photocall. While it is perfectly legal to impersonate a prime minister, impersonating a police officer is a criminal offence (assuming that there is an intention to deceive). Felix Bellaby Buxton, Derbyshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.This is a heartbreaking case, and my heart breaks further when we learn that there were opportunities, in plain sight, to avert this tragedy (The Guardian view on Arthur Labinjo-Hughes: more lessons to learn, 6 December). So is it not time that grandparents had a legal right to protect their grandchildren? In poor little Arthur’s case, both grandmothers had raised concerns, but it seems these were not taken seriously. In dysfunctional families, many children are used as pawns in a game of vengeance or are, just as regretfully, unloved and abused, leading to tragic consequences. Who is supporting these little ones, when social workers report back that “all’s well, it appears to be a happy household”? A six-year-old cannot say in front of his abusers that it isn’t, even when the bruises tell his side of the story. We can’t just blame social workers, because we all have a responsibility as a caring society. Grandparents can be the next line of defence for an abused child who thinks that no one loves them. By giving grandparents a legal route, the child’s voice can be heard, and this may go a long way to averting this kind of neglect. Our reactions of shock and horror come too late for little Arthur. Are we going to wait for another tragic case, or are we going to put measures in place now to prevent such tragedies from happening again? God bless you, little Arthur. Your short life shouldn’t be in vain. Patricia Davis Scarborough, North Yorkshire • Twenty years on from the killing of Victoria Climbié, history repeats itself with Arthur Labinjo-Hughes. We don’t need another major review. We know what to do. After the Laming report, many recommendations were taken forward, with a transformation programme for a multi-agency approach and the policy of “every child matters”. The idea was to support children and families early, before problems got out of control. This recognised that it is not just about social work, but about schools, youth services, the police, youth offending teams, drug and alcohol support and so on. Two key ideas were the common assessment framework and the lead professional. The framework meant that information travelled with children so it didn’t slip through gaps and families didn’t have to repeat themselves, feeding their mistrust of agencies. The lead professional was one person, from as many as 17 agencies working with a child, who would coordinate their care. The other major focus was on culture change, sorting protocols so that agencies weren’t pulling in different directions. For instance, police were judged on arrests, youth offending teams on keeping children from being arrested. The ideology that saw the Department for Children, Schools and Families being refocused as the Department for Education binned all this. Detailed research supporting evidence-based practice was taken offline. So let’s not pretend that we don’t know how to do better, and that this is a big shock. Where on earth is our collective memory? Mandy Barnett Kendal, Cumbria • When these horrible things happen, the first thing to do is to set up a review (Report, 5 December). That gets the problem off the front pages. With luck, you’ll be able to put a chunk of blame on some teachers and social workers for not performing perfectly under stress. The truth isn’t that difficult to spot if you read the newspapers: chronic pressures on education staff; a high number of vacancies for children’s social workers; declining levels of experience and collapsing morale in the education and social care sectors. Who started the rot? George Osborne – companion of honour. Peter Brooker West Wickham, Kent • I am once again appalled by the wider media’s condemnation of social workers. The two people responsible for the death were his father and his father’s girlfriend. People who abuse children are cunning and manipulative, specialists in deception. And what about the role of wider society in this child’s murder? Others witnessed the abuse he suffered. Why did they not take action? Are we now such a divided and self-centred society that the only people who are expected to act are those who are paid to care? Jane Moorhouse Ledbury, Herefordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Leaders of the world’s biggest oil companies have used an industry gathering in Houston to launch an attack on the speed of transition to clean energy, claiming a badly managed process could lead to “insecurity, rampant inflation and social unrest”. Executives from oil companies including Saudi Aramco, the world’s biggest oil producer, and US oil giants ExxonMobil and Chevron publicly described the shift towards clean energy alternatives as “deeply flawed”. They called for fossil fuels to remain part of the energy mix for years to come despite global efforts for an urgent response to the climate crisis. Saudi Aramco’s chief executive, Amin Nasser, told delegates at the World Petroleum Congress in Houston, Texas, that adapting to cleaner fuels “overnight” could trigger uncontrolled economic inflation. “I understand that publicly admitting that oil and gas will play an essential and significant role during the transition and beyond will be hard for some,” he said. “But admitting this reality will be far easier than dealing with energy insecurity, rampant inflation and social unrest as the prices become intolerably high, and seeing net zero commitments by countries start to unravel. “The world is facing an ever more chaotic energy transition centred on highly unrealistic scenarios and assumptions about the future of energy.” Anders Opedal, the boss of Equinor, Norway’s state oil company, said: “The volatility in commodity prices and the impact on business and people illustrates the risks we face in an imbalanced transition.” Global oil and gas prices have surged in recent months since the original Covid-19 lockdown, which stifled economies around the world in 2020. Energy experts and economists have argued that the global energy market surge – which has triggered blackouts, higher bills and the shutdown of factories in some countries – should encourage policymakers to accelerate the move away from volatile fossil fuels. Amin said that many “assume that the right transition strategy is in place”. He said: “It’s not. Energy security, economic development and affordability are clearly not receiving enough attention.” Saudi Arabia’s state-owned oil company has made the biggest contribution to the carbon dioxide emissions responsible for the global climate crisis of any major company, according to an investigation by the Guardian, after producing almost 60bn tonnes of CO2 emissions between the 1960s and 2017. Chevron has made the second largest corporate contribution to global heating after producing 43.35bn tonnes of CO2 emissions over the same period. The company’s chief executive, Mike Wirth, told the same industry conference that oil and gas “continue to play a central role in meeting the world’s energy needs, and we play an essential role in delivering them in a lower carbon way. Our products make the world run.” Darren Woods, the chief executive of ExxonMobil, the fourth largest corporate climate polluter behind Russia’s state-backed gas company Gazprom, told the conference: “The fact remains, under most credible scenarios, including net zero pathways, oil and natural gas will continue to play a significant role in meeting society’s need.” The calls for a slower transition to clean energy put oil executives on a collision course with those energy industry experts, climate scientists and governments which have warned that without a rapid phasing out of CO2 emissions within the next decade catastrophic levels of global heating will be unavoidable. The US deputy energy secretary, David Turk, speaking at the same conference, rebuffed the industry’s stance against a rapid shift to cleaner energy by insisting that action to address the climate crisis was urgent. “There is not an alternative to stepping up and fixing the threat to climate change,” he said. The global energy watchdog, the International Energy Agency, told the industry last year that no new fossil fuel projects were compatible with plans to prevent a climate crisis before 2050. A spokesperson for Greenpeace UK said: “The fossil fuel markets have been a rollercoaster of volatility ever since they were invented and it’s ludicrous for big oil bosses to blame renewables for their instability. If anything, the recent surge in gas prices and the hardship it caused to so many households are yet more proof that the sooner we wean our societies off fossil fuels the better.” • This article was amended on 8 December 2021. Global CO2 emissions by Saudi Aramco totalled almost 60bn tonnes between the 1960s and 2017, not 60m tonnes.Time to recap. World stock markets have rallied as concerns about the potential severity of the Omicron variant ease. European stocks posted their best day in over a year, lifted by tech shares and auto companies. In London, the FTSE 100 has bounced back above its levels before the latest variant sparked alarm about travel restrictions and possible new lockdowns. On Wall Street, the Dow Jones industrial average is currently up 508 points or 1.4% at 35,735, as it also recovers its recent losses. Apple has hit a record high. The rally came as top US scientist Anthony Fauci told AFP that while it would take weeks to judge the severity of the new Covid-19 variant Omicron, early indications suggested it was not worse than prior strains, and possibly milder (although also probably more transmissible). Investors were also cheered by Beijing’s pledge to roll out measures to kickstart its faltering economy, as China’s central bank eased monetary policy to encourage banks to lend. A jump in China’s imports last month also suggested improved domestic demand, as firms stocked up on raw materials again. But the road ahead could still be bumpy -- given the uncertainty over Omicron, supply chain disruptions, and inflation pressures. Craig Erlam, senior market analyst at OANDA, says: We’re seeing improvements in risk appetite again on Tuesday as fears around Omicron continue to ease following earlier reports of less severe symptoms. This is still an extremely fragile market but the early signs are offering some hope. The initial announcement a couple of weeks ago had investors fearing the worst and so far, that’s not what we’re seeing. Time will tell whether investors are getting ahead of themselves but a couple of days without a negative Omicron headline has the dip buyers flooding back in. Given the concern among global leaders and various organisations over the last couple of weeks, I struggle to see all of the updates being as positive which makes more two-way price action a strong possibility. And if it is, then we just have high inflation and monetary tightening to contend with at a time when the global economy is hardly thriving. Of course, that’s a better outcome than higher inflation, rising rates, and Omicron lockdowns but it’s far from perfect which may spoil the party a little. A Santa rally may be underway but it will be a bumpy ride. Gas prices have jumped, on fears that escalating Uraine-Russia tensions would lead to US sanctions on Moscow. Inflation is also on the rise, pushing up the cost of Christmas dinner. Goldman Sachs’ CEO, David Solomon, says we could see a period of above-trend inflation, but probably not a return to the 1970s. The United Arab Emirates is moving to a 4.5 day week, as it shifts its weekend to Saturday and Sunday. The move could give the UAE an economic boost. UK house prices grew at the fastest pace in 15 years over the past three months, with the average home valued at £20,000 more than this time last year, according to Halifax. Prices rose by 3.4% in the quarter to the end of November, which is the highest quarterly rate since late 2006 and brought the average price of a home to a record of £272,992. A shortage of properties on the market, a strong jobs market and competitive mortgage rates were all propping up prices, the lender said. A new study has found that global inequality is as marked as it was in the early 20th century pinnacle of western imperialism, after the super-rich captured an increasing share of the world’s income. Travel firms have called on the government to provide urgent financial help as fresh Covid-19 restrictions come in to force on Tuesday, hitting holiday travel just before the peak booking period. US activist investor Elliott Management has ratcheted up the pressure on the UK firm SSE, with a public attack on the company’s energy transition strategy and a call for two new independent directors. London could be hit by further tube strikes after transport bosses outlined plans to shed 600 posts to combat the effects of the pandemic on the capital’s finances..... ...but Harrods has avoided a strike at its restaurant, by handing workers a pay rise. Global inequality is as marked as it was in the early 20th century pinnacle of western imperialism after the capture by the super-rich of an increasing share of the world’s income, a new report has shown. A study by a group of economists including Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez said 30 years of the globalisation of trade and finance had widened the gap between rich and poor. Although the World Inequality report found inequalities between nations had declined since the end of the cold war, it said inequality had increased within most countries and had become more pronounced as a result of the global pandemic of the past two years. The wealth gap between rich and poor was even wider than the income divide, the report added, with the boom in asset prices last year resulting in the sharpest increase in billionaires’ wealth on record. Back on Wall Street, Apple’s stock price has hit a new all-time high. Tech stocks are continuing to rally, shaking off anxiety over the omicron coronavirus variant, and concerns that the Federal Reserve may speed up its withdrawal of stimulus. In other strike news... restaurant workers at Harrods say they have won a 25% increase in pay, with some chefs now earning more than £12.50 an hour – averting a threatened strike during Christmas week. The United Voices of the World union (UVW), which represents waiters and chefs at the Knightsbridge department store, said the deal represented a “new benchmark for pay in the hospitality sector”, with some Harrods workers in line for £5,000 extra in annual pay. It said the deal, for some, included agreed annual pay rises of 3% from 2023. London could be hit by further tube strikes after transport bosses outlined plans to shed 600 posts to combat the effects of the pandemic on the capital’s finances. Transport for London (TfL) is poised to impose a recruitment freeze on customer services jobs, with about 250 currently unfilled and further 350 posts to go as and when staff leave. The RMT union said it would ballot its London members for industrial action to stop what it called a “cynically engineered crisis”, while the TSSA union said the timing before Christmas was “shameful”. Stock markets across Europe have racked up their best day in over a year. Optimism that the Omicron variant will be less severe than initially feared drove up markets across the region, with the pan-European Stoxx 600 closing 2.5% higher. That’s its best day since 9th November 2020, when Pfizer and BioNTech announced that their coronavirus vaccine was 90% effective in trials. Germany and France both saw strong gains, up around 2.9%, while the Amsterdam index surged by 3.5%. Mining stocks, tech companies, and consumer-focused firms all had a strong day. David Madden, market analyst at Equiti Capital, says: Traders continue to be bullish as the fear surrounding the omicron variant of the coronavirus continue to fall, and that has pushed up equity markets Commodities are in high demand today as the overall risk-on sentiment is boosting oil as well as industrial metals such as silver, platinum, and copper. Gold is up today too, and it is remarkable the yellow metal is rising in the face of a firmer US dollar as well as bullish stock markets. Britain’s FTSE 100 index has clawed back all its omicron losses. The blue-chip index closed 107.6 points higher tonight at 7340 points, a three-week high. In another development, scientists have identified a “stealth” version of the Omicron variant which cannot be detected with the routine tests that public health officials are using to track its spread around the world. The stealth variant has many mutations in common with standard Omicron, but it lacks a particular genetic change that allows lab-based PCR tests to be used as a rough and ready means of flagging up probable cases. Here’s the details: Risk appetite is improving as evidence incrementally supports the case that the omicron variant will be less damaging to the economy than feared at the end of November, says Neil Wilson of Markets.com. Although bad news about Omicron could still emerge, and restrictions could hit growth, investors are more confident the new variant won’t be as bad as first feared. Fears about America’s central bank wrapping up its stimulus programme more quickly have also eased. Wilson writes: Even though the Federal Reserve is in a very different place to this time last year, there is enough strength and depth and liquidity at the moment to absorb 5-7% drawdowns without too much fuss. And whilst omicron news is risk-on right now – risk-on from oversold levels that is – we shouldn’t ignore the impact of a central bank. Yesterday’s decision by the People’s Bank of China to cut the reserve requirement ratio by 50 basis points amounted to no small amount of easing, and clearly boosted risk appetite across the piece. That’s helped the FTSE 100 back to its pre-Omicron levels this afternoon, as this chart shows: World stock markets are rallying as concerns about the potential severity of the Omicron variant ease. In New York, the Dow Jones industrial average has jumped by 521 points, or 1.5%, in early trading back to 35,748 points. That’s close to its levels before Thanksgiving, just before the emergence of Omicron spooked markets. The broader S&amp;P 500 index has gained 1.7%, with technology stocks, travel companies and oil producers all higher. European markets are pushing higher too, with Germany’s DAX and France’s CAC up around 2.5%. That follows gains in Asia-Pacific markets earlier, where Japan’s Nikkei gained 1.9%, with strong Chinese import figures also lifting the mood. The FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares in London now up 98 points at 7331, recovering all its losses after the discovery of the omicron variant rocked markets in late November. Mining companies lead the FTSE 100 risers, benefitting from optimism about the global recovery. China’s moves to boost its slowing economy, and to pump 1.2 trillion yuan ($188 billion) into the economy by letting banks hold less capital, is also lifting stocks. Commodities giant Anglo American has jumped 6.5%, with BHP Group gaining 5.6%. Conference organiser Informa, which would be disrupted by lockdowns and travel restrictions, has risen 4%. UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, told ministers today the early indications are that the Omicron variant appears to be more transmissible than Delta. But, early hospital data from South Africa suggest it could result in less severe illness than previous waves. The Financial Times explains: Early data from the Steve Biko and Tshwane District Hospital Complex in South Africa’s capital Pretoria, which is at the centre of the outbreak, showed that on December 2 only nine of the 42 patients on the Covid-19 ward, all of whom were unvaccinated, were being treated for the virus and were in need of oxygen. The remainder of the patients had tested positive but were asymptomatic and being treated for other conditions. Oil is continuing to strengthen too, with Brent crude up 2.5% today at almost $75 per barrel. Brad Bechtel of investment bank Jefferies says anxiety over the latest variant is dropping: Its still a little early to fully shrug off Omicron fully, which is why governments and markets are tip toeing, not running, towards this conclusion, but it is starting to feel a little more constructive again for global growth. We probably won’t know for sure about Omicron until after the holidays so jumping on now is definitely early to the theme, but the theme is gaining some momentum in the past 48hrs. British drugmaker GSK also reassured investors, reporting today that its antibody-based COVID-19 therapy with US partner Vir Biotechnology is effective against all mutations of the new Omicron coronavirus variant, citing new data from early-stage studies. It looks like investors have made up their minds about Omicron, says Fawad Razaqzada, analyst at Think Markets. After careful consideration, they think it is probably no more dangerous than the Delta variant of coronavirus and that preventative lockdowns and restrictions that we have seen will soon ease. Another major economic shock will thus be avoided.... Investors have been relieved to find out that Omicron hasn’t yet prompted a big rise in hospitalisations and deaths, while some pharmaceuticals (e.g., GSK) have revealed they have come up with treatment against the new strain. So, there’s hope – hope that at worst, Omicron may be just as transmissible as the common cold, but no more dangerous than some of the other variants of Covid and that current vaccinations are effective against it. America’s trade deficit has narrowed to a six-month low, thanks to a rebound in exports. The US trade gap fell to $67.1bn, from September’s record high of $81.4bn, driven by a rise in shipments to the rest of the world. In October, exports rose 8.1% to $223.6bn while imports were up a much smaller 0.9% to $290.7bn. Another encouraging sign for the global economy, after this morning’s jump in China’s imports. Andrew Hunter, senior US economist at Capital Economics, says the data suggest supply chain problems are improving. The 8.1% m/m surge in exports in October means that net trade is on course to add about 1% point to fourth-quarter GDP growth, which we think will be 6.5% annualised, and provides more evidence that global supply chain bottlenecks are easing. Earlier hurricane-related disruption also unwound, with oil exports rebounding by more than 20% month-on-month. Car exports also rose strongly as the easing global chip shortage allowed plants to reopen across North America, he adds. European gas prices have jumped today, ahead of a crunch virtual summit between Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin. The US president will warn his Russian counterpart to expect severe economic penalties, including banking sanctions, should he invade Ukraine. Biden has a wide range of punitive measures at his disposal, including a range of tough economic measures such as sanctions on Russian corporations and banks, or oligarchs and their families. A Ukraine invasion could also lead to the cancellation of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia to Germany. Benchmark Dutch front-month gas jumped as much as 7.6%, on concerns of disruption to Russian gas supplies to Europe. The British wholesale gas price for Q1 2022 rose by 6.4%, while day ahead prices are up 8%, close to their highest level in two months. Goldman Sachs chief executive David Solomon has predicted that inflation will be higher for a period of time, but doesn’t expect a repeat of the cost rises seen in the 1970s. In an interview with CNBC, Solomon says people have lost the historical perspective of how markets look, and what is normal, after living with inflation below trend for a long time. That could change, he says: “There’s a reasonable chance that we’re going to have inflation above trend for a period of time but that doesn’t mean it has to be like the 1970s. It could be, [but] doesn’t have to be. Inflation hurts asset prices, and it slows down your ability to make money with almost any asset, Solomon added, citing the 1970s as a tough time to make money in the markets. “You’ve got to be cautious and manage your risk appropriately.” Solomon also told CNBC that he doesn’t own bitcoin or ethereum himself, but is “a big believer” in the digitisation and disruption in the financial services space. I think bitcoin is really not the key thing. The key thing is how can blockchain, and other technologies that are not developed yet, accelerate the pace of the digitisation of the way financial services are delivered.” The UAE’s economy will get a ‘massive boost’ from its move to a four-and-a-half day week, and a Saturday-Sunday weekend, says Nigel Green, the CEO of Dubai-headquartered deVere Group. He reckons it’ll encourage businesses to relocate to the emirates. “The UAE, and in particular Dubai and Abu Dhabi are already recognised as two of the most powerful business and financial hubs in the world by international investors who are lured by the incredible possibilities offered in terms of finance, trade and commerce, plus the famous ‘can do’ attitude and the low tax environment in these destinations. “The transition to a four and a half day working week which now aligns with most major economies around the world will prove to be another significant ‘pull’ for international corporations that are currently based elsewhere.” In the energy sector, US activist investor Elliott Management has ratcheted up the pressure on UK firm SSE, with a public attack on the company’s energy transition strategy and a call for two new independent directors. Iin a letter addressed to the SSE chairman, Sir John Manzoni, Elliott said the firm’s investment strategy lacked ambition and called on the company to provide a detailed and credible plan “to address investor concerns around SSE’s corporate governance, its ability to fund its growth in the long term, and its persistent undervaluation”. The hedge fund attacked the underperformance of the company and its share price during the eight years it has been run by Alistair Phillips-Davies as chief executive, in its latest campaign for change at a UK-listed company. The FTSE 100 company has rejected the idea from the New York-based hedge fund – which has built a stake in SSE in recent months – that it should spin off its renewables arm. On Tuesday, it issued a further swift rebuff of Elliott’s demands. Here’s the full story: UK councils and taxpayers could face higher prices and lower service quality if the €13bn (£11.1bn) merger between French waste and water management giants Veolia and Suez goes through, Britain’s competition watchdog fears. The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) said the tie-up, which was announced earlier this year, could lead to a loss of competition in the supply of key waste and recycling services. Chief executive Andrea Coscelli explained: “Councils spend hundreds of millions of pounds on waste management services. “Any loss of competition in this market could lead to higher prices for local authorities, leaving taxpayers to foot the bill, and reduced innovation to achieve net-zero targets. “Everyone in the UK uses waste and recycling services in some way; it is therefore vital that this deal is subject to more detailed scrutiny if our concerns aren’t addressed.” Veolia and Suez are two of the biggest suppliers of waste management services to councils and businesses in the UK, including waste collection, composting services, incineration and landfill sites. The CMA said it will refer the deal for an in-depth probe if Veolia and Suez do not put forward suitable proposals to address its concerns within five working days. The United Arab Emirates government is bringing in a four-and-a-half day working week, as part of a shift of the national weekend. The UAE’s working week currently runs from Sunday to Thursday, with Friday and Saturday set as the national weekend. Under the new plan, the weekend for government bodies will move to Saturday and Sunday, in line with Western schedules, and begin at noon on Fridays. The move, announced by state news agency WAM on Tuesday, will come into effect on January 1, 2022, and could be followed by educational establishments and private sector firms. The Abu Dhabi government media office said the transition is: “in line with the UAE’s vision to enhance its global competitiveness across economic and business sectors, and to keep pace with global developments.” Under the new model, employees will have to complete an eight-hour workday from Monday to Thursday but are only expected to work only for 4.5 hours on Friday. Government employees will also be allowed to choose “flexible work or work-from-home options” on Fridays. Friday sermons and prayers will be held at 1:15pm, according to news service Al Jazeera. Wall Street is on track to open higher, after a strong day yesterday as concerns about the Omicron variant eased. The tech-focused Nasdaq is up around 1.8% in the futures market, with chipmakers and big tech firms set to rally. Reuters has more details: Some high-flying technology shares have been battered in recent days as investors priced in an aggressive tightening of U.S. monetary policy despite concerns about the Omicron coronavirus variant. Tesla Inc rose 3.3% in premarket trading after dropping into bear market territory on an intraday basis on Monday, falling more than 20% from its record high close hit on November 4th. Intel Corp surged 8.1% after revealing plans to take Mobileye public in the United States in mid-2022, a deal which could value the Israeli unit at more than $50 billion, according to a source. South Africa’s economy contracted 1.5% in the last quarter, as the pandemic, supply chain problems, and July’s riots all hit growth. Agriculture, construction, mining, transport and communications, manufacturing and trade all shrank in the July-September quarter. The economy was disrupted by rioting and looting by supporters of Jacob Zuma, after the former president handed himself in to serve a 15-month jail term (he was then released in September due to ill health). The civil disorder claimed 337 lives, the government said in July, with hundreds of shops looted, factories destroyed, warehouses razed, clinics vandalised and ports disabled. German investor confidence has been hit by the rise in Covid-19 cases this autumn, and the supply chain bottlenecks that have hit the economy this year. The ZEW economic research institute’s economic sentiment index has fallen to 29.9 this month, from 31.7 points in November, showing investors are less upbeat about future prospects. ZEW’s index for current conditions dropped into negative territory for the first time since June, falling to -7.4 from 12.5, as the surge in infections and the lockdown on unvaccinated citizens hits the economy. ZEW President Achim Wambach said. The German economy is suffering noticeably from the latest developments in the COVID-19 pandemic. Persisting supply bottlenecks are weighing on production and retail trade. The decline in economic expectations shows that hopes for much stronger growth in the next six months are fading. Especially the earnings expectations of export-oriented and consumer-related industries are assessed more negatively. Today’s jump in industrial production could have lifted spirits, except German factories reported a drop in new orders yesterday.... German industrial production has returned to growth, despite supply-chain bottlenecks hampering output. Total industrial output, covering manufacturing, energy and construction, jumped by 2.8% during October, faster than expected, after a 0.5% drop in September. Encouragingly, manufacturing output grew by 3.2%, including a 12.6% jump in the production of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers, where semiconductor shortages have hampered factories for months. Inflation is pushing up the cost of some Christmas dinner staples, but that isn’t deterring shoppers from filling their baskets with festive fare. UK grocery prices rose by 3.2% in the latest four weeks, market researcher Kantar reports, which is the highest rate of inflation since June 2020. The average cost of a meal for four is now £27.48, which is an increase of 3.4% compared with last year, driven by pricier turkeys, sprouts and parsnips. Despite the rise in prices, UK grocery sales are staying strong, Kantar reports. Grocery spending in the last 12 weeks was 7% than in 2019 (although 3.8% lower than last year, when England was in its second pandemic lockdown in November). But, the emergence of the Omicron variant could change shopping patterns, says Fraser McKevitt, Kantar’s head of retail and consumer insight: Recent concerns over the next stage of the pandemic may see consumers change the way they shop in the next few weeks. Our excitement about Christmas this year has been slightly tempered as news of the Omicron COVID-19 variant has emerged. Online grocery sales fell by 12.5% in the four weeks to late November, as we compare against more orders last year during the second lockdown. As concerns grow over rising case numbers, we expect some people will prefer to shop online again to limit their visits to stores. UK house prices grew at the fastest pace in 15 years over the past three months, with the average home valued at £20,000 more than this time last year, according to Halifax. Prices rose by 3.4% in the quarter to the end of November, which is the highest quarterly rate since late 2006 and brought the average price of a home to a record of £272,992. A shortage of properties on the market, a strong jobs market and competitive mortgage rates were all propping up prices, the lender said. House prices rose for a fifth month by 1% in November and were 8.2% higher than the same time last year, when the average property cost 252,235. Both the monthly gain and the annual growth rate were the same increases as in October. Wales remained the UK nation with the fastest house price growth, with annual inflation of 14.8% taking the average price of a home to more than £200,000 for the first time. Northern Ireland also continued to record double-digit annual growth, of 10%, and a typical property cost £169,348. In Scotland, the average price of £191,140 is the most expensive on record, as values rose 8.5% year on year. European electricity prices are surging again today, with strong demand from chilly homes and offices. Low wind speeds are forcing energy providers to burn more fossil fuels, points out Bloomberg’s Javier Blas: The oil price has jumped this morning too, with Brent crude up almost 2% at $74.50 per barrel. That’s its highest point in a week, as traders anticipate that Omicron will not have a severe impact on energy demand. Opec+’s decision last week to keep adding more oil to the market suggests it remains confident about demand, as Naeem Aslam of Think Markets explains: Oil prices have also started to return to their upward trajectory as concerns regarding the Omicron variant subside. Because cases from the new strain seem to be mild, the likelihood of stricter controls and the execution of lockdowns seem to be minimal. Because of this, the future outlook for oil demand has returned to being positive while oil supply remains tight as economies recuperate from the rock bottom situation witnessed in 2020. The argument for a strong future outlook for oil demand is supported by Saudi Arabia’s, the biggest exporter of crude oil, decision to raise prices for crude oil and OPEC+’s judgment to stick to its plan of pumping 400,000 barrels a day into the markets in January as well. Meanwhile, negotiations between the US and Iran have stalled once more, implying that markets should not expect Iran to pump any more oil anytime soon. Hence, in the short term, investors should very likely expect oil prices to keep on rising unless we see a sudden uptick in coronavirus cases. The pan-European Stoxx 600 index has hit its highest level since the Omicron tumble over a week ago, up 1.4%. Technology shares are leading the rally, with the sector up 3.1%. Miners are being lifted by hopes for China’s economy after the People’s Bank of China eased monetary policy yesterday, and firms imported more coal and metal last month. European stock markets have opened higher, as investor’s anxiety over the Omicron variant fades. The jump in China’s imports in November has also eased concerns about the global economy, lifting stocks. Britain’s FTSE 100 has jumped by 73 points, or 1%, to 7305 points, only slightly below its levels before Omicron sent markets plunging on 26th November. Plumbing and heating group Ferguson are leading the risers, up almost 5%, after telling that City that its expectations for this financial year have increased, after a strong performance. Mining giants - a good gauge of economic optimism - are also rallying, with Anglo American up 3% and Rio Tinto up 2.7%. Mark Haefele, Chief Investment Officer at UBS Global Wealth Management, says: “Our base case is that the market focus will shift back toward the positive outlook for economic growth and earnings. So we think investors should consider whether now is a good opportunity to add some of the winners from global growth that have been most negatively affected in recent days – including the Eurozone, Japan, energy, and financials.” Uncertainty over the Omicron variant could also cool UK house price inflation, if people become nervous about making major financial decisions. Graham Cox, founder of the Bristol-based Self-Employed Mortgage Hub, suspects house price rises may reverse very soon. For starters, the Bank of England meets on December 16th and could well raise interest rates to put a lid on soaring inflation. Throw in the uncertainty around Omicron and there’s every chance of a severe hit to consumer confidence. The property market of 2022 could be the polar opposite of 2021.” Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, also warns that the market could start to lose steam. The housing market is no stranger to the inflationary pressures facing the UK economy with prices up more than £20,000 versus the same period last year. Despite concerns about a softening housing market after the stamp duty holiday ended, house prices have held up, underpinned by rock-bottom interest rates and a shortage of supply. However, with a potential rise in interest rates and slowdown in economic activity, the housing market could start to cool with growth rates levelling off, particularly if Omicron or other COVID-19 variants weigh on economic output.” The 1% jump in house prices in November suggests the market shrugged off the end of the stamp duty holiday in September. But a rise in borrowing costs, perhaps this month or in February 2022, could cool demand. Rob Peters, director of Altrincham-based Simple Fast Mortgage says the BoE interest rate decision on December 16th will set the tone for next year. “First-time buyers looking to access the property market may get their Christmas wish early as the ridiculous rise in house prices finally starts to fade. We have already seen buyers’ interest tailing off now that thoughts are moving to festivities and plans for 2022, although the sparse availability of stock continues to support prices. The proof will be in the December pudding when the Bank of England meets to decide whether to increase interest rates or not. With widespread predictions of an imminent increase to curb rising inflation, December will set the tone for how the property market enters 2022.” Wales has seen the fastest house price growth of any UK nation or region. Prices jumped 14.8% in the last year, taking the average price through the £200,000 barrier for the first time to £204,148. Northern Ireland, South West England and North West England all recorded double-digit annual growth. In London, though, annual inflation was just 1.1%, as the pandemic and the move to homeworking encouraged some people to move out of the capital. Halifax’s Russell Galley add that price inflation for flats (10.8%) outpaced detached properties (6.6%) in the last year, suggesting demand for larger, less central housing was fading. This could suggest the ‘race for space’ is becoming less prominent than it was earlier in the pandemic, with industry data also showing the overall number of completed transactions has fallen back since the end of the Stamp Duty holiday. But, Halifax doesn’t expect house prices to keep rising so fast, given the squeeze on households and possible increases in UK interest rates in the coming months. Galley says: Economic confidence may be also be dented by the emergence of the new Omicron virus variant, though it remains far too early to speculate on any long-term impact, given insufficient data at this stage, not to mention the resilience the housing market has already shown in challenging circumstances. “Leaving aside the direct impact of a possible resurgence in the pandemic for now, we would not expect the current level of house price growth to be sustained next year given that house price to income ratios are already historically high, and household budgets are only likely to come under greater pressure in the coming months.” British house prices grew at the fastest pace in 15 years over the past three months, as the property boom continues to run. Mortgage lender Halifax has reported that prices rose by 3.4% in the last quarter, which is the highest quarterly rate seen since late 2006. Prices jumped by 1% in November, which left house price 8.2% higher than a year ago -- at a new record high of £272,992. The average house price has now risen by over £20,000 since this time last year, according to Halifax’s data. A shortage of properties, and the ‘race for space’ earlier in the pandemic have helped push up house prices since the first lockdowns lifted, with low mortgage rates also helping. Russell Galley, managing director at Halifax, explains: This is the fifth straight month that average house prices have risen, with typical values up by almost £13,000 since June, and more than £20,000 since this time last year. On a rolling quarterly basis the uptick in house prices was 3.4%, the strongest gain since the end of 2006, bringing the new average property price up to a record high of £272,992. Since the onset of the pandemic in March 2020, and the UK first entering lockdown, house prices have risen by £33,816, which equates to £1,691 per month. The performance of the market continues to be underpinned by a shortage of available properties, a strong labour market and keen competition amongst mortgage providers keeping rates close to historic lows. Those taking their first step onto the property ladder are also playing an important role in driving activity, with annual house price inflation for first-time buyers at 9.1% compared to 8.8% for homemovers. China’s policy makers moved to expand support for the nation’s economy today, as a property-market downturn threatens to hamper growth into next year. My colleague Martin Farrer explains: China’s politburo has signalled measures to kickstart the faltering economy as the crisis gripping the country’s debt-laden property sector continued to blight prospects for growth. President Xi Jinping’s senior leadership committee rubber-stamped a plan from the central bank on Monday for more targeted lending to businesses and outlined support for the housing market. The People’s Bank of China (PBOC) said it would cut the reserves most banks must hold by 0.5 percentage points, releasing another 1.2tn yuan ($188bn) into the economy, the central bank said in a statement. Leaders had also agreed to “promote the construction of affordable housing, support the commercial housing market and better meet the reasonable housing needs of buyers”, Xinhua state news agency said. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. There’s a risk-on mood in the markets today, after China’s exports and imports grew faster than expected in November. China’s imports unexpectedly surged almost 32% year-on-year to about $254bn, as firms scrambled to restock depleted commodities like coal ahead of the holidays at the turn of the year. Exports growth slowed, but was also stronger than forecast - up 22% to almost $326bn. The data suggest that external demand surged ahead of the year-end holidays, and that domestic production picked up as China’s power crunch eased --- just as the Evergrande crisis casts a shadow over the slowing property sector. Adam Cole of RBC Capital Markets says the strong import growth is “a positive sign on the strength of domestic demand.” Michelle Lam, greater China economist at Societe Generale SA in Hong Kong, says local stimulus measures also helped. “Exports picked up in line with seasonality in November and suggest still pretty solid momentum in external demand. “The surprise in import growth was driven by a rebound in commodity volume, probably reflecting improving infrastructure capex demand as local governments stepped up stimulus toward the turn of the year.” Imports of metal and energy both soared, with coal imports at their highest level this year, natural gas imports the strongest since January, and crude purchases at a three-month high. Back in October, Chinese premier, Li Keqiang, called for “all-out” efforts to keep people warm this winter, in the global scramble for energy. The news helped to boost stocks. Japan’s Nikkei is up 1.9%, while MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan has jumped 1.4%. It’s on track for its biggest jump in two months, after dropping to a one--year low on Monday. European markets are set to open higher today, after a rally yesterday which saw the FTSE 100 gain 1.5%. We also get new trade data from the US, and German factory output and investor confidence data. The agenda Today: Eurozone finance ministers hold an Ecofin meeting 7am GMT: Halifax house price index for November 7am GMT: German industrial output for October 10am GMT: ZEW index of German economic sentiment 1.30pm GMT: US trade balance for OctoberThe barrister and anti-racism pioneer Sibghat Kadri, who has died aged 84 of cancer, was the first Muslim appointed Queen’s Counsel and also established the first multiracial chambers in Britain. His life, in and out of court, was dedicated to the pursuit of racial equality. The barrister and Labour peer Lady (Helena) Kennedy QC protested alongside Kadri in his student days and co-defended a series of race cases with him in the 1980s, when minority communities were under attack from the National Front and stood their ground. She described him as a “fierce and fearless” lawyer who, when he was doing race cases, always said that he had “one foot in the dock”. Kennedy said: “He had experienced racism first hand and had a visceral way of communicating its poisonous effects. He was very clear that colonialism had left a deep imprint on our society.” The son of Firasatullah Kadri and Tanwir Fatima, Sibghat (Sibghatullah) was born into a religious but liberal family in Uttar Pradesh, in northern India. Two years after partition in 1947 they migrated to Karachi in West Pakistan. Leaving close friends behind, he found the move traumatic and described it as “losing his childhood”. Sibghat shared a single room with his parents and seven siblings, and taught younger children in order to fund his own education. At the wish of his father, a religious scholar, who wanted him to become a scientist, he enrolled at Karachi University in 1954 to study chemistry and mathematics. He became active in student politics, and in 1958 was arrested and detained for opposing the military regime of General Ayub Khan. He drafted his own petition of habeas corpus against his unlawful detention to the Pakistani high court and was released after six months. Nonetheless, he was expelled from university and deported to Hyderabad, in Sindh province. A visit to London in 1960 to see his dying sister turned into a permanent move. His incarceration had ignited his interest in civil liberties and he resolved to follow his brother, who was a barrister, into the law. Although he did not have a degree, Inner Temple admitted him as a member on the basis that he should not be punished twice for his imprisonment. He studied part time for the bar exams while working as a postman, a clerk for a mail order firm and a waiter at a curry house in Kilburn, north-west London. For BBC radio he became a regular producer and broadcaster for the Urdu service and a presenter of the Home service Asian programme. In late 1968, Kadri began studying for his bar finals, and quickly sought to mobilise his fellow students against discrimination in legal education. His course privileged British university graduates over Commonwealth ones in several ways, and all would-be barristers had to declare if they intended to practise in the UK – which effectively forced immigrants on student visas to choose between disqualification and deportation. The action forced the bar to allow the establishment of a students’ union at the Inns of Court, and Kadri was elected president of the Inner Temple Students’ Association. He was instrumental in setting up the bar reform committee, which organised the first ever sit-in at the Inns of Court school of law. Called to the bar in 1969, at a time when there were fewer than 10 black or Asian barristers in Britain, and solicitors often refused to brief non-white barristers, Kadri applied for pupillage unsuccessfully for two years. In 1971 he was finally offered a pupillage with Lord (Anthony) Gifford at Cloisters, the chambers of John Platts-Mills. On the first day of his second six-month pupillage, Kadri began a conspiracy trial at the Old Bailey that resulted in the acquittal of his Indian client. Such an achievement would normally have made a tenancy, or permanent position in chambers, almost certain. Despite making numerous applications, Kadri could not get a tenancy and in 1973 found a typically radical solution, by setting up his own chambers at 11 King’s Bench Walk. In 1970, he had been a founder of the African-Asian and Caribbean Lawyers Association (renamed the Society of Black Lawyers in 1981). He was also instrumental in setting up the race relations committee of the bar council. He developed a practice defined by his commitment to equal rights, becoming a leading civil rights lawyer and an authority on immigration, Sharia and race relations. In the early 1980s, he defended people accused of taking part in the Bristol and Brixton riots, as well as the Bradford Twelve, charged with preparing petrol bombs for what they claimed was to defend themselves against attacks from white skinhead gangs and National Front members. The case established that self-defence could include community defence. Defending a group alleged to have taken part in the Bristol riots, Kadri used a centuries-old procedure known as a “peremptory challenge” to request a more racially diverse jury. He called for the resignation of the master of the rolls, Lord Denning, when, in his book What Next in the Law (1982), Denning complained that the defence team had “packed” the jury with “coloured” jurors, who he said often came from countries “where bribery and graft are accepted as an integral part of life, and where stealing is a virtue so long as you are not found out”. The book was withdrawn and reprinted without the offending passage. Denning retired soon afterwards and later apologised for his remarks. As legal adviser to the Pakistan Workers’ Association, at a rally in April 1970 in protest over the fatal stabbing of Tosir Ali, a Bengali immigrant in the East End of London, Kadri reminded the crowd that the law allowed people to defend themselves. He told a Daily Telegraph reporter that while the victims of racist violence were not looking for trouble, “they will be ready to deal with it”. Judges, said Kennedy, were often wary of Kadri’s “pugilistic style” but the senior judge Sir Henry Brooke saw beyond it and encouraged him to apply to join the ranks of Queen’s Counsel. He took silk in 1989. Kennedy said: “It was such a great moment when a radical like Sibghat received this recognition. It meant the legal profession was at last listening to his lessons about the need for law to embrace difference.” Eight years later he was made a bencher of the Inner Temple, and last year he was chairman and plenary speaker of the Inn’s first annual round table series Race and the Legal Profession. He told young barristers that discrimination has not vanished and the “struggle continues”. While studying for his bar exams, he met Carita Idman, an au pair from Helsinksi working in London, and they married in 1963. She survives him, along with their children, Sadakat and Maria, and two grandchildren. • Sibhat (Sibghatullah) Kadri, barrister and race equality campaigner, born 23 April 1937; died 2 November 2021Rebel Wilson, one of Hollywood’s top comedy actors, has said her own team was opposed to her losing weight because she was “earning millions of dollars being the funny fat girl”. The Australian actor, 41, documented her physical transformation on social media after embarking on a health and fitness journey a couple of years ago. “I got a lot of pushback from my own team actually, here in Hollywood, when I said, ‘OK, I’m going to do this year of health, I feel like I’m really going to physically transform and change my life’,” she told BBC Breakfast. “And they were like, ‘Why? Why would you want to do that?’ Because I was earning millions of dollars being the funny fat girl and being that person.” Wilson, star of Hollywood hits including Bridesmaids, Pitch Perfect and the Hustle, received significant media attention for her weight loss, but she’s also been vocal about wanting people to focus on her career rather than her body. “Is that what a woman has to do in the world, lose weight to get attention?” she said. “It’s fascinating, why are people so obsessed with it? Like, with women in particular about their looks? I know what it’s like to be a woman who is essentially invisible to most people because of not being seen as traditionally beautiful or whatever. It’s crazy to try to fit that. It’s just better to be the healthiest version.” On Instagram, Wilson has opened up about her past relationship with food, last summer posting an old photo with tennis star Novak Djokovic and remarking that it was taken when she was at her “most unhealthy”. She said on Tuesday that while she was always confident in how she looked, “I knew deep down inside some of the emotional eating behaviour I was doing was not healthy”. Now a producer and director with an estimated $22m fortune, Wilson said she believed it was a defence mechanism that helped her deal “with not being a natural performer” when she was trying to establish herself as an actor. Wilson is not the first celebrity to directly address the public conversation around her appearance. Adele said recently that her body has been objectified her entire career. “I was body positive then and I’m body positive now,” the singer told Oprah, adding that her focus was always on her mental health and not on weight loss. Wilson also discussed her struggle with fertility, saying the reason she shared her journey online was to help others. “I feel for any woman going through it,” she said.My son Fred Konynenburg, who has taken his own life aged 52, was a highly respected lawyer with the international commercial law firm Hill Dickinson. He also had a lifelong passion for all periods of history. In his spare time he was a meticulous model maker of mostly second world war ordnance, and also took part in scale re-enactments of major battles. Fred was born in Bristol when his mother, Julie Welch, and I were both students. In 1970 our family moved to London for Julie to commence her journalistic career, and for me to complete architectural training. Although Julie and I eventually separated, Fred was an important member of both our subsequent extended families. Passionate about the Roman empire as a child, Fred developed a keen interest in all historical periods. He followed his parents’ passion for football to become an enthusiastic and active Liverpool FC supporter. He was also a keen Dylanologist, enjoying many gigs of his musical icon. After primary school in south London, he attended Haileybury college and then Manchester University, where he studied history. Upon obtaining his degree he carefully considered whether to continue with historical study, but attendance at a career fair sparked an interest in the legal profession. He undertook a conversion course in the subject at Chester College, and was fascinated by the fact that laws of shipping and international trade were founded many centuries ago. In 1995 he joined the City-based law firm Middleton Potts, where he became a partner aged only 32. When the firm was merged with Hill Dickinson, he became a bedrock of the firm’s commodities team. Entries in prominent legal directories acknowledge him as a brilliant legal mind with a practical nous that invariably solved problems at the outset. Fred was a very kind and gentle person with a great humanity and a large number of friends both within his profession and socially. He had a tremendous brain, and was both interested and interesting. Whilst at Middleton Potts, he met Susan Kearney, and their son, Aiden, was born in 2005. Fred is survived by Susan and Aiden, and his stepdaughter, Jade; and by his parents and step-parents, his brothers, Tim, Mike, Lucas, Nick and Joshua, and his sister, Saskia.The wreckage of a 1970s shopping centre will form the centrepiece of a Nottingham development that will include a park and leisure space. A striking design by Thomas Heatherwick, the creator of the 2012 Olympic cauldron, the new Routemaster bus, and the Coal Drops Yard shopping redevelopment in London’s King’s Cross, stands at the centre of a £500m scheme that will include 750 new homes and a hotel as well as shops, offices, conference facilities and leisure space. The Frame is a reimagined wreck of the former Broadmarsh shopping mall, which in artists impressions is depicted swathed in greenery, and hosting markets, leisure facilities such as a climbing wall and vast trampoline or events space for boxing or music. About half of the Broadmarsh centre, which opened in 1975, was demolished amid redevelopment of the 8-hectare (20-acre) site, which was halted when its former owner, the retail property group Intu, went bust last year. The lease was taken on by Nottingham city council, which launched a public consultation and steering committee to help decide on the future of the site. Members of the committee include Sir Tim Smit of the Eden Project in Cornwall and Greg Nugent, a former director of the London 2012 Olympics committee. Heatherwick said: “The challenge of what to do with the former Broadmarsh shopping centre has been a chance to think about the failure of our city centres. They should be about bringing people together, not just about retail. Rather than demolish the structure, we are proposing to keep the frame and breathe new life into it, creating a place that can hold the diversity and vibrancy that is so lacking from many city centres. The aim is to bridge between generations, communities, and cultures so that the new Broad Marsh [the historic name for the area] can reflect the true diversity of the city.” The redevelopment is likely to be seen as a bellwether for major overhauls of moribund shopping centres around the country which have been pushed aside by online shopping, out-of-town retail parks and increased interest in leisure activities, rather than buying physical stuff. The Elephant &amp; Castle shopping centre in south London is now a pile of dust; Stockton-on-Tees’ Castlegate shopping centre is scheduled to be demolished next year as part of plans to create an urban park; the Riverside centre in Shrewsbury is coming down under a plan for new housing, offices, cafes and a promenade; while both the Chilterns centre in High Wycombe and Nicholsons in Maidenhead are to be razed to build new homes. David Mellen, the leader of Nottingham council, welcomed Heatherwick’s design, which he said included key elements locals had asked for, including a “green heart” – a park – at the centre and enhanced access to heritage sites such as the city’s network of caves. “By proposing to make some use of the existing frame, reducing the waste and carbon emissions from new construction, it is sustainable, something which is very important for the city’s ambition to be the UK’s first carbon neutral city by 2028. And it respects and promotes the city’s rich heritage by opening up views to the castle, enhancing the caves, one of the city’s hidden gems, and re-establishing old street patterns.” Mellen said work would now begin to secure the investment needed to implement the scheme from public and private sector partners. He said doing so would “take time to get right” but major changes would become apparent soon with the opening up of part of the park. The Guardian’s architecture critic, Oliver Wainwright, said Heatherwick’s design reflected an historic architectural interest in “ruin porn”. “Thomas Heatherwick’s vision for Nottingham town centre could be straight out of a post-apocalyptic disaster movie, depicting the semi-ruined Broadmarsh shopping centre dripping with vines, as if reclaimed by nature. “As ever with Heatherwick, the fairytale images present a beguiling, Tolkienian picture, but the test will be in the detail of how the structure is actually adapted and what uses it will contain. There is a danger it could end up being a greenwashing decoy, the novelty centrepiece of what otherwise appears to be a fairly bland commercial development around the rest of the site.”Even as Vladimir Putin has built up an invasion force on his borders, he has repeated a refrain that Russians and Ukrainians are one people, bemoaning a “fraternal” conflict that he himself has provoked. As Putin speaks on Tuesday with Joe Biden, western analysts have likened his focus on Kyiv to an “obsession” while Russians have said Putin believes it his “duty” to reverse Ukraine’s path towards the west. Putin has threatened a broader war in Ukraine over Nato enlargement, demanding “legal guarantees” to ensure Ukraine does not join the military alliance or become a kind of “unofficial” member hosting troops or defence infrastructure. But that fear has gone hand-in-hand with chauvinistic bluster that indicates Moscow has a distorted view of modern Ukraine and the goals it wants to achieve there. “Russia fundamentally misunderstands Ukraine and its nature,” said Pavlo Klimkin, the former Ukrainian foreign minister. “Russia has been continually trying to prove that Ukraine is a sort of failed state, that Ukraine has no statehood, no history, no language, no religion. It’s a kind of separate reality.” In June, Putin published an article in which he doubled down on a public claim that “Russians and Ukrainians were one people”, saying the formation of an ethnically Ukrainian state hostile to Moscow was “comparable in its consequences to the use of weapons of mass destruction against us”. Analysts in Washington were alarmed by the rhetoric because it came shortly after Russia had engineered its first troop build-up, causing a war scare in April. Eugene Rumer and Andrew S Weiss of the Carnegie Endowment called Putin’s text a “historical, political, and security predicate for invading it – if and when that ever became necessary.” In Moscow, Putin’s 5,000-word essay is not seen simply as an empty treatise, but a window into the mind of a leader seeking historical arguments in his conflict with the west. “I know that this article was very much his idea, his wish to prepare this and he was personally very deeply involved in this text,” said Fyodor Lukyanov, a leading Moscow foreign policy analyst. For Putin, the issue of an independent Ukraine that could potentially serve as even an informal ally of Nato on Russia’s border has become a true “red line”, he said. “I think he sees it as his duty as president not to leave this problem for the next leadership,” said Lukyanov. That Putin himself is responsible for that political change, by annexing Crimea and then launching a proxy war in east Ukraine that has left 13,000 dead, does not appear to have factored into his thinking. Some close advisers are even more hawkish than Putin. Nikolai Patrushev, a former intelligence officer who now heads the Kremlin’s security council, has represented Russia during meetings with the CIA director, William Burns. In recent remarks, he called Ukraine a “protectorate” and warned of a potential of an “outburst of tensions so strong that millions of Ukrainians will flee to seek refuge in other places”.’ But even if the Kremlin bluster is just a smokescreen for Russian power politics, Kremlin officials have indicated that they think they can merely conclude agreements over Kyiv’s head or manage public opinion through friendly elites. Direct engagement with the administration of Volodymyr Zelensky has virtually ceased. “The key problem is that Russia denies Ukraine any agency,” said Orysia Lutsevych, a research fellow and manager of the Ukraine forum in the Russia and Eurasia programme at Chatham House. “They genuinely believe that Ukraine is a kind of puppet state … That’s why I believe the situation is so dangerous because Putin is demanding something that Biden cannot give.” For instance, Moscow has said Biden should force Kyiv to negotiate directly with Russian-backed separatist governments as agreed to in a 2015 peace deal. But both sides have violated that deal and public opinion in Ukraine strongly opposes direct negotiations with forces viewed as Russian proxies. The demand is a non-starter. Putin’s anger over Ukraine’s 2014 revolution, in which a pro-western government replaced that of Viktor Yanukovych, has become intertwined with other historical grievances, specifically the accession of former Soviet countries into Nato in 2004. Putin does believe in his rhetoric about Ukrainian statehood, said Tatiana Stanovaya, the founder of the R.Politik political analysis firm, but is primarily focused on the perceived security threats posed by Nato. “In my view, if he begins a military operation against Ukraine … it won’t be for him to try to reclaim what he considers Russian [land],” she said. “It will be to stake out territory where he believes there could be Nato missiles.” For many Russians, Ukraine remains a blind spot that is viewed primarily as a junior partner. “They view Ukraine as their little brother and they have a subconscious fear that the little brother will achieve more than the older,” said Abbas Gallyamov, a Russian political analyst and former speechwriter for Putin. And Putin’s rhetoric has convinced many that he is among them. “He still believes Ukraine is a kind of conspiracy, a kind of aberration,” said Klimkin. “It’s all about Slavic unity, about trying to get Ukraine away from Russia. And I believe it’s all sitting deep in his mind, which you can read from his very different statements.”London could be hit by further tube strikes after transport bosses outlined plans to shed 600 posts to combat the effects of the pandemic on the capital’s finances. Transport for London (TfL) is poised to impose a recruitment freeze on customer services jobs, with about 250 currently unfilled and further 350 posts to go as and when staff leave. The RMT union said it would ballot its London members for industrial action to stop what it called a “cynically engineered crisis”, while the TSSA union said the timing before Christmas was “shameful”. TfL said discussions were at an early stage, but the underground would remain well staffed, with more than 4,500 customer service staff across the network. Nick Dent, London Underground’s director of customer operations, said: “The devastating impact of the pandemic on our finances has made a programme of change urgently necessary. “The safety and security of customers and colleagues is still our top priority, and we will ensure in all circumstances our staff will continue to be visible and available to help customers at all times – including offering the on-demand turn up and go service to assist disabled customers.” Strikes have already been called in response to changes over working conditions around the night tube, with RMT members on affected lines walking out at weekend evenings until Christmas, and a 24-hour strike scheduled for 18 December. More widespread action is now likely, with the RMT fearing the plan to axe 600 posts is the start of further cuts, with the government imposing stringent conditions on the funds it has given to London. The RMT general secretary, Mick Lynch, said TfL’s crisis had “been deliberately engineered by the government to drive a cuts agenda which would savage jobs, services, safety and threaten the working conditions and‎ pensions of our members … The politicians need to wake up to the fact that transport staff will not pay the price for this cynically engineered crisis.” Lorraine Ward, the TSSA’s organising director, said the union would fight job losses: “We need to encourage more people on to public transport, but cutting station staff will damage that effort. Staff are already fearful for their futures and the way that London Underground has snuck this out just weeks before Christmas is shameful. London has appealed to central government for more emergency funding to cover the shortfall in revenue, with billions lost in tube fares since passengers were told to avoid public transport at the start of the pandemic. While demand has come back to about 60% of pre-pandemic levels on weekdays, a TfL report on travel trends published this week said that demand may stay below previous forecasts, with an expected rise in journeys not materialising after “freedom day” when Covid restrictions were lifted in July. It said 84% of workers expect to have some form of hybrid working in future, with only about 70% of people yet returning to city workplaces at all. Talks have started between TfL and the government before an 11 December deadline, when the current deal runs out. TfL is looking for a further £1.7bn in funding until April 2023, but even under the existing settlement it has committed to reduce expenditure. The transport commissioner, Andy Byford, has warned that without support London faces a “bleak future” of managed decline, while the city’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, has said there would be “no choice but to make significant cuts to services just as demand is growing again”. A government spokesperson said: “We will continue to discuss any further funding requirements with TfL and the mayor, and any support provided will focus on getting TfL back on to a sustainable financial footing in a way that is fair to taxpayers across the country.”Tracey Crouch is braced for the Premier League to “push back very, very hard” against her recommendation that English football should be subject to independent regulation. The Premier League and its clubs appear determined to resist two elements of Crouch’s recently published fan-led review. The Conservative MP and former sports minister’s proposals advocate the establishment of an independent regulator, possessing powers to intervene at badly run clubs, and a levy on top-flight transfer fees, designed to support lower-league teams and the grassroots. On Tuesday Crouch told the digital, culture, media and sport select committee that she was optimistic the legislative framework required for the independent regulator’s introduction would be included in the next Queen’s speech with a view to its establishment for the start of the 2023-24 season, staffed by up to 50 financial regulatory experts. Crouch would like to see the immediate creation of a taxpayer-funded shadow regulator which would cost about £5m to set up but could start as early as January. Crouch was unimpressed by a claim from Aston Villa’s chief executive, Christian Purslow, that her review’s recommendations risked “killing the golden goose”. “I don’t see it as killing the golden goose – quite the opposite” she said. “What we have at the moment is a system subject to vulnerabilities. If you remove some of those vulnerabilities through better regulation, that actually encourages growth and investment in English football.” Crouch said there was a lack of consensus among Premier League clubs, but Purslow is far from alone in his opposition to the proposal. Top-tier counterparts to have raised public objections include the Leeds chief executive, Angus Kinnear, who has compared Crouch’s transfer tax recommendation to Maoism. She described Kinnear’s reaction as “a tad extreme” and hinted he had not comprehended her argument. “All I’m trying to do is to get some money down the football pyramid,” she said. “Some of the criticism from chief executives made it very clear that they hadn’t read the report. It’s not about a government regulator, it is an independent regulator. The remit is about the long-term financial sustainability of football.” Even so, she accepts winning hearts and minds will not be easy. “My understanding is that the Premier League from their meeting on Friday is going to argue very, very strongly for the independent regulator to not be set up via legislation,” she said. “I think they will push back very, very hard on the statutory aspect of the independent regulator and would rather it was a unit in the Football Association.” Crouch also expects resistance to the transfer levy. “That’s interesting because it was actually proposed by a Premier League club,” she said. “The transfer levy’s really important.” Crouch suggested Kinnear, Purslow and company could reduce the government’s enthusiasm for increased independent statutory control by implementing a levy immediately. “The Premier League could change the rules tomorrow and have it,” she said. “They could introduce a 3%, say, levy in January, it could go to grassroots and player welfare and it’s done. That would, to use a football analogy, effectively put them 1-0 up and park the team bus in front of goal. I’d encourage them to do that. I think I’ve been very reasonable in what I’ve recommended in this football review.”My father, Michael Jones, who has died aged 93, was a science teacher who campaigned successfully for a change in the law to protect people from the nuisance of tall Leylandii hedges. He claimed to have invented the phrase “neighbour from hell”. After winning his own case against a neighbour in Selly Oak, Birmingham, he lobbied politicians, resulting in a section of the Anti-Social Behaviour Act, 2003. His legal success attracted news coverage around the world; Boris Johnson interviewed him for the Daily Telegraph. He then created Hedgeline, an advice service for others. Michael was one of six children of Evelyn (nee Round) and Clarence Jones, a clerk. Born close to the West Bromwich Albion ground, in the West Midlands, he was a lifelong supporter of the football club. He was also a committed pacifist. At the age of eight, he heard his brother and sister talking about an event they had attended with the social reformers Canon Dick Sheppard and George Lansbury, who were launching the Peace Pledge Union, at Birmingham Town Hall. Hearing about this had a profound impact on him. At Handsworth grammar school he refused to become a cadet in the Officer Training Corps. He was once sent to the headteacher for distributing Labour party literature. The head wasn’t bothered and gave him back his leaflets. After a year in the sixth form, in 1945 he left school to train as a teacher at St Peter’s College, Saltley. He refused to do national service and registered as a conscientious objector, working at a residential school in Somerset for children with emotional and behavioural difficulties, where he also had agricultural duties. Just after the second world war, he accompanied his sister Connie to Germany, where seeing the devastation of Dresden cemented his pacifism. In 1949 he became a teacher at Rounds Green primary school, Oldbury, but later retrained as a science teacher and moved into secondary education, teaching at All Saints C of E secondary school in West Bromwich and then Alexandra high school (now Q3 Academy, Tipton). In 1951 he married Maureen (nee Barry), a primary school teacher, and they settled on the Bournville Village Trust estate in Birmingham. In 1971 they moved to another part of the estate, where the trust had built new houses. Some of the older residents on the estate were not pleased that new housing could be seen from their windows. One of them planted a row of fast-growing Leylandii hedges to blot out the view. By the early 1980s the hedge was blocking light from the house. In 1987, after considering his legal position, Michael cut back the hedge. The neighbour sued him for £28,000. Defending himself, Michael won the case, and won again in the court of appeal. Michael enlisted support across the UK and started Hedgeline, an advice service for others having similar problems. At one point there were three phone lines into the house and a fax machine. He was a superb campaigner, going to the political party conferences and Downing Street. In 2003 the “high hedges legislation” received royal assent as part of the Anti-Social Behaviour Act. He retired from teaching in 1982. This gave him time for his garden, which won him many prizes. He also organised nine annual peace festivals in George Cadbury Hall in Selly Oak. Maureen died in 2014. He is survived by his sons, Martin and me, and by seven grandchildren.The prosecution and inevitable conviction of Myanmar’s deposed leader Aung San Suu Kyi and Win Myint, its former president, are a show of strength by the military that only emphasises its failures. These two are “hostages, not criminals”, observed Tom Andrews, the UN special rapporteur on human rights in Myanmar. The generals’ attempt to launder the detention through closed court proceedings fooled no one. The repression has only grown in the 10 months since the junta seized power, because it knows repression is all it has. The military chief Min Aung Hlaing made a serious miscalculation when he launched the coup, overturning the arrangements that allowed the army to maintain a high degree of power despite the National League for Democracy’s electoral triumphs. He assumed the military could return to the old ways, beating down political opposition and keeping the 76-year-old safely locked away. Perhaps he hoped that international reaction might be muted by the Nobel peace prize laureate’s tarnished reputation, after she personally defended Myanmar in the international court of justice genocide case over the treatment of Rohingya Muslims. (Rohingya survivors this week announced that they are suing Facebook for £150bn over hate speech on the social media platform.) But everyone knows she was seized and sentenced for representing democracy. This is not about one individual, but 54 million. The effects of the coup were devastatingly broad, plunging the country into economic despair; three-quarters of households have lost income since February, compounding the pandemic’s effects, and health and education systems have collapsed. The opposition to it was equally wide-ranging. Tens of thousands joined a civil disobedience movement. The military assumed its brutal tactics would swiftly quell opposition once more. The regime is believed to have killed 1,250 people – including young children – and arrested 10,000; detainees have been raped and tortured. But the resistance has been extraordinary. Ordinary families have boycotted military-linked companies; some opponents have taken up arms, launching attacks on army convoys, local administrators and similar targets in the country’s heart, in an unprecedented development. Some have forged links with ethnic armed groups that have long battled the centre. The military has retaliated by pummelling civilian areas with heavy weaponry. In September, the national unity government – the shadow government of elected but now exiled politicians – called for a “people’s defensive war”. Army morale has plunged, producing a steady trickle of defectors. Though the military says there will be elections in 2023, it launched its coup in part because it finally realised that it could not win over the public. Its actions convinced many that the generals must be removed from power entirely – which will, of course, entrench their determination to crush opposition. No one expects them to go anywhere any time soon. The UK has steadily if slowly ramped up sanctions, but others could do much more: notably, the EU and the US should levy sanctions on oil and gas. A UN committee last week deferred the junta’s application for a new representative; the generals must not be afforded respectability. Finally, with no swift or easy resolutions to this crisis in sight, all who support democracy should diplomatically and financially back the UN’s independent investigation mechanism for Myanmar’s attempts to bring justice to victims of human rights abuses in the long term.In August, with Kabul on the brink of falling to the Taliban, the then foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, was advised to call his Afghan counterpart. Facilitating the swift evacuation of translators who had been working for British forces was becoming a matter of extreme urgency. But Mr Raab – holidaying in Crete at the time – failed to pick up the phone, and indeed remained on his break as the Afghan government collapsed. The episode suggested a culpable lack of foresight and urgency on the part of the foreign secretary, as the Taliban swept back to power with unexpected speed. But we didn’t know the half of it until this week. The testimony of a former diplomat has painted a devastating picture of the chaos that Mr Raab blithely presided over when he came back from Crete. The evidence of Raphael Marshall, published by the foreign affairs select committee, points to a chaotic, complacent and woefully underpowered crisis operation. According to Mr Marshall, in the final phase of the airlift effort from Kabul airport, when every minute counted, the former foreign secretary took “hours to engage” with exceptional evacuation cases brought to his personal attention. More broadly, the abject failure to prepare for the eventuality of a sudden Taliban takeover – despite warning signals for months – meant that no proper lists or criteria were in place to identify the vulnerable and expedite their evacuation. As a result, claims Mr Marshall, he and other junior officials had to arbitrarily take life-and-death decisions without proper guidance. Those Afghans whose evacuation requests were actually considered constituted a tiny minority of up to 150,000 applicants – though saving animals from a rescue shelter founded by a former marine appears to have been made a priority. Most damningly of all, perhaps, Mr Marshall claims that tens of thousands of emails were wrongly flagged as read, to give the false impression of a functioning process. Mr Raab, now the justice secretary, failed to satisfactorily deal with any of Mr Marshall’s points on Tuesday. As he pointed out, the British army and other actors on the ground played heroic parts in airlifting 15,000 people out of Kabul. But the former foreign secretary’s consistent lack of leadership set the tone and made a harrowing situation far worse. At a foreign affairs committee hearing on Tuesday, a top Foreign Office civil servant admitted that he chose to stay on holiday until 26 August, 11 days after the fall of Kabul. The trust of those who put themselves at risk of Taliban reprisals by working for the British or assuming leading roles in civil society – believing they would be protected – was betrayed. Many of those people are still in hiding. It is too late to rectify the mistakes of last spring and summer. But frightened refugees are now attempting to make their own way to safety, and in some cases arriving in Calais. Scandalously, Priti Patel’s Home Office has still to open the Afghan citizens’ resettlement scheme announced almost four months ago, intended to offer a legal route to Britain for the vulnerable who were left behind. Rather than spending her time devising new ways to keep desperate people out of Britain, Ms Patel should get a move on and belatedly assume Britain’s moral responsibilities. Mr Marshall’s testimony should be a catalyst for the government to at least keep one promise to the people it let down so badly.Elliott Management’s open letters are improving. When the US activist hedge fund tried to take a pop at GlaxoSmithKline in the summer, it produced 17 pages of waffle that could have been condensed to a few sentences of substance. Tuesday’s 10-page blast at energy group SSE was tighter, scored a couple of solid hits and should make the newish chairman, Sir John Manzoni, realise the Perth-based firm is in a scrap. That is not to say Elliott is right on every score, or even on its main demand that SSE should be split in two. Indeed, one of the activist’s points was plainly exaggerated – the idea that an “unequivocal message” was sent by the 4% fall in SSE’s share price on the day last month when the company unveiled its energy transition strategy alongside a delayed dividend cut. Come on, the signal in the share price – now down just 1.8% – simply isn’t clear. Rather than being “thoroughly frustrated”, as Elliott claims, SSE’s investors merely seem uninspired. That, though, is hardly a triumph for a £17bn FTSE 100 company at the moment of its great strategic reset. Manzoni could start by addressing Elliott’s legitimate criticism that SSE didn’t show its arithmetic when it refused to split its renewables assets from its electricity transmission and distribution networks on grounds of cost. The financial detail was indeed missing. What are the £200m worth of separation costs and £95m of “quantifiable dis-synergies”? Both figures need explaining. The heart of SSE’s “better together” defence, though, was weightier: it was the argument that it’s cheaper to finance the construction of more renewables assets, primarily offshore windfarms, when the division is housed under the same roof as a networks and distribution division that throws off cash reliably. SSE’s argument feels intuitively correct since size and diversity of income tend to deliver lower funding costs over time. But it is not one that is universally accepted – three big continental European energy firms are contemplating doing the splits – so, again, the evidence needs to be displayed. In its absence, Elliott’s refrain that a standalone renewables division would be inundated with offers of cheap capital from ESG-friendly investors will sound beguiling. The hedge fund may be guilty of wishful thinking (Danish pin-up Orsted’s share price is down 35% this year, note) but SSE needs to slam its points home, which means showing you’ve engaged with the nitty-gritty. Then there’s the make-up of SSE’s board, which is where Elliott’s case is strongest. Look down the list of non-executive directors and it’s not obvious who the renewable specialists are supposed to be. There is big-project expertise aplenty from directors whose executive lives were spent at the likes of BP, Eon and National Grid, but out-and-out renewables experience is thin. That is a problem when you’re trying to bill yourself as the UK’s “clean energy champion”. The smart move by Manzoni would be to grant Elliott’s wish for two new non-executives. It might even take some heat off the chief executive, Alistair Phillips-Davies, who, after eight years in post, probably isn’t planning to stay forever anyway. In the end, SSE should win this tussle. It was supremely well-connected in Westminster and Edinburgh even before Manzoni, a former permanent secretary of the Cabinet Office, arrived. It is not going to be bullied easily by an activist that, for all its noise and reputation, owns less than 5% of the share capital. But a point-by-point response to Elliott is required. The activist may be wrong about the immediate need for a split, but SSE needs to be seen to win its case convincingly. The company is planning to spend £12.5bn over five years on critical infrastructure. Non-Elliott investors need to be fully signed up. The long-term Train of thought It wasn’t a mea culpa from Nick Train of Lindsell Train, one of the very few fund managers who still enjoys (deservedly) star status among retail investors. Rather, it was an admission that current stock markets are tough. His funds are experiencing “arguably the worst period of relative investment performance in our 20-year history”. An underweight position in technology stocks – the likes of Tesla – is one main explanation, plus an absence of cyclical manufacturing stocks that have enjoyed the Covid recovery. Train promises to stick to his tried-and-tested long-term approach, which is exactly what his investors will want to hear. But the markets do increasingly feel erratic. The FTSE 100 index, up 100 points on Tuesday, seems to have decided that the Omicron variant is not much to worry about. A tad premature, surely.Volkswagen is still considering a stock market listing of its luxury sports car brand Porsche, according to reports, as it looks to raise capital for a costly shift towards electric vehicles. Estimates for what Porsche could be worth as a standalone company range between €45bn and €90bn (£38bn and £77bn). Speculation about what could be a record-breaking Porsche listing has surfaced over the year, but no decision has been made, due to a complex stakeholder setup, sources told the Reuters news agency, adding it was unclear whether a listing would happen. Earlier, the German business newspaper Handelsblatt reported that the Porsche and Piëch families, who control Volkswagen’s largest shareholder Porsche SE, are considering selling part of their VW stake to fund a substantial shareholding in a possible Porsche IPO. The families, who own 31.4% of Volkswagen shares and have 53.3% of voting rights via Porsche SE, could sell enough shares to raise roughly €15bn, the German newspaper said. They would remain the largest shareholder in Volkswagen, Handelsblatt added, ahead of the state of Lower Saxony, which holds a 11.8% equity stake and 20% of voting rights. Porsche SE called the report “pure speculation”, without giving further comment. Volkswagen declined to comment. Volkswagen preference shares, which have fallen significantly in recent weeks due to a leadership tussle, closed up 8.6% at the top of Germany’s benchmark DAX index. Porsche SE shares closed 8.5% higher. The proposed ownership reshuffle would loosen the grip of the Porsche and Piech families on Volkswagen, Europe’s largest carmaker, in favour of direct ownership of the sports car brand founded by their ancestor Ferdinand Porsche, which dates back to 1931. Asked about a potential listing of Porsche in October, its chief executive, Herbert Diess, said that Volkswagen was constantly reviewing its portfolio, but gave no further comment. Diess will probably stay on as the VW CEO although he will cede some responsibilities following a clash with labour leaders, two sources familiar with the matter told Reuters.A Ryder Cup-winning golfer has said he was “embarrassed and felt horrible” after being accused of drunkenly groping a woman on a flight. Thorbjørn Olesen, who was ranked 51st in the world at the time, was on a British Airways flight from the US to the UK when the alleged incident happened. He was travelling with other professionals, including England’s Ian Poulter, 45, and Justin Rose, 41, after the World Golf Championships-FedEx St Jude Invitational in Memphis. Witnesses said his behaviour was “completely bizarre” during the eight-hour flight from Nashville to London on 29 July, 2019. During a hearing at Aldersgate House Nightingale court, in central London, the 31-year-old Danish golfer was said to have run around the cabin “like a little boy”, unable to operate the toilet door, and becoming verbally abusive to cabin crew when challenged. He is said to have pushed one BA worker, kissed another’s hand before making the sign of the cross, and touched a woman’s breast. The golfer was eventually led back to his first-class seat, where he cried before falling asleep, the jury was told. He later urinated on another passenger’s seat. Olesen, of Chelsea, west London, denies sexual assault, assault by beating and being drunk on an aircraft. He told the jury on Tuesday he would never “consciously” risk his career by committing a crime and has no memory of the flight after taking sleeping pills. Asked by his barrister, Trevor Burke QC, about the allegations, he said: “I felt absolutely horrible and I was very sorry. I could not believe what they were saying what happened. I was just embarrassed and felt horrible.” Olesen said he had not slept well for weeks, having played several big tournaments, including the Open, and planned to go straight to sleep on the plane. He said he drank two beers, two glasses of red wine with a sushi platter meal on board a private jet, and one vodka and cranberry juice before boarding the flight. He also took two melatonin tablets, which he regularly uses to combat jet lag, along with two Ambien (zolpidem) pills put into his washbag by his partner, Lauren Zafer. Olesen said he would “never” have taken the pills had he known they were prescription-only or that side-effects included “sleepwalking” and “amnesia”. He said his partner, with whom he has one child, later told him she had experienced incidents, including vacuuming their whole house and eating Christmas chocolates without remembering, after taking the pills for insomnia. Giving evidence, Zafer told how her partner looked “like the world had just ended” and “slightly confused” after he was released by police. The court heard that, after his arrest, Olesen lost lucrative sponsorship deals and was suspended from the European and World Tours. He has temporarily been reinstated to the European Tour pending the outcome of the trial but has struggled for form and has plunged to 440th in the world rankings. He said: “I think it’s been very difficult to concentrate and play when you don’t know if you have ruined your career and maybe never play professional golf again.” Questioned by prosecutor Max Hardy, Olesen denied he was “in a party mood” when he boarded the flight and said he had “definitely not” taken the pills with alcohol “for fun”. “I wanted to try to sleep all the way to London,” he told the court. The court was also told a passenger reported they heard mention of Xanax during a conversation between Olesen and another professional, who has said in a statement he did not give his colleague any pills. Hardy asked: “Did you take any more pills on that flight?” Olesen said: “I don’t remember, I don’t know,” and denied that he was drunk. The trial continues.Britain’s military must embrace the country’s racial, gender and religious diversity after a string of controversies and scandals, the new head of the armed forces said as he rejected the idea this amounted to “wokefulness”. In his first speech, Adm Tony Radakin pointedly declared that the armed forces had to “strive to do better” in every “aspect of our leadership” in a speech to the Rusi thinktank. “That includes reflecting the diverse nation we serve. Because if we don’t, then quite simply, we risk looking ridiculous.” The chief of the defence staff, the first to come from the navy for two decades, said diversity was “not about wokefulness”, adding: “It is about woefulness. The woefulness of too few women. The woefulness of not reflecting the ethnic, religious and cognitive diversity of our nation. “And the woefulness of not following our own values, whether respect for each other or the simple integrity of claiming expenses. This affects our culture, our fighting power, our prowess.” A parliamentary report in June concluded that two-thirds of women in the armed forces said they had experienced bullying, sexual harassment and discrimination during their career and that the three forces were “failing to protect” female recruits. It prompted the Ministry of Defence to say last week that it wanted to dramatically increase the proportion of women serving in the armed forces, setting a new target that 30% of new recruits should be female by 2030. Women currently account for 11% of service personnel while the proportion who are from black and minority ethnic backgrounds is 9.2%. In March, a senior army officer, Maj Gen Nick Welch, was found guilty at court martial of dishonestly claiming almost £50,000 in allowances to pay for his children’s boarding school fees. He is believed to be the most senior officer to have faced a court martial since 1815. Radakin, 55, was picked from a field of five by Boris Johnson to replace Sir Nick Carter in the £270,000-a-year role. Born in Oldham, he trained as a barrister but has served in the navy since 1990, working his way through the ranks until becoming head of the navy in 2019. The speech avoided a lengthy analysis of geopolitical issues, characteristic of Carter, although Radakin argued that the rise of China and Russia over the last 20 years showed that state power “is back with a vengeance”. Instead, in places, the new forces chief sought to justify the military in domestic political terms, citing three of Johnson’s political slogans – “Global Britain. Levelling Up. Strengthening the Union” – as providing benefit in terms of jobs and status around the UK. “If you are in any doubt you only need look to Barrow-in-Furness. It’s a community whose very identity is rooted in a sense of purpose that comes from building nuclear submarines – and the feelings of pride and accomplishment are palpable inside and outside the factory gates,” he said.Elizabeth Holmes continued testimony in her own defense on Tuesday, in her sixth day on the stand in a widely followed trial centering on her now-defunct blood testing company, Theranos. Holmes faces up to 20 years in prison over charges that she defrauded investors and patients, lying about the capabilities of the firm’s core blood-testing technology. She has pleaded not guilty. The prosecution wrapped its cross examination of Holmes on Tuesday after nearly six hours of questioning. Her defense team will now offer its final questions before closing arguments, which are expected this week. US attorney Robert Leach interrogated the 37-year-old regarding the promises she made investors about Theranos’s testing capabilities and what she was told about their shortcomings by scientists at the company. Holmes answered Leach with a more edgy tone than she had in days past, raising her eyebrows and smiling at some repetitive inquiries. She frequently dodged questions, responding “I don’t know” and “I don’t remember”. The prosecution introduced evidence that Theranos was performing very few of its own tests, showing through one 2013 email the company performed only three of its 12 tests on its own devices. Leach also asked Holmes whether she told investors Theranos devices were being used on military helicopters. She said she did not think she did, as it would have been incorrect. However, several witnesses already introduced during the trial, including investors and business partners such as Safeway CEO Steven Burd, testified they believed at the time that Theranos devices were actively being used on the battlefield. When asked whether she was apprised of what was happening with lab shortcomings at Theranos, Holmes responded she was. She said she does not think she told Walgreens that the company was having accuracy problems with its tests. Leach asked Holmes if she recollected dismissing concerns raised to Wall Street Journal reporter John Carreyrou by internal whistleblowers as coming from “two disgruntled lower level employees”, characterizing them as insignificant. Holmes said she “did not remember”. In the preceding days, Leach grilled Holmes over her assertions she was not aware of problems with Theranos devices and interrogated her relationship with her co-executive and former romantic partner, Sunny Balwani. Holmes previously testified that she was emotionally and physically abused by Balwani, who is 19 years her senior. She said the businessman closely controlled how she ran the business, who she spent time with and even what she ate. Balwani denies these allegations and faces his own fraud trial in 2022. Leach has sought to prove Holmes had the final say over decisions at Theranos and showed the jury text messages from Balwani raising questions about the capabilities of the tests compared with what Holmes publicly advertised. He also pointed to evidence Holmes worked to quash inquiries into the accuracy of Theranos tests from reporters as well as internal doubts from employee whistleblowers. “I think I mishandled the entire process of the Wall Street Journal reporting,” Holmes said, in response to evidence suggesting she had aggressively pushed back against the 2015 reporting that would ultimately lead to the company’s downfall. Over the last two months, prosecutors have repeatedly returned to one damning piece of evidence showing Holmes personally doctored documents. In one case, she affixed a Pfizer logo to a report sent to Walgreens executives to imply the pharmaceutical company had endorsed the findings. In another, she used a logo from drug firm Schering-Plough. Holmes said she did so because the company had worked with Theranos on a previous project and said she regretted adding the logo. “I wish I hadn’t done that,” she told the jury. Meanwhile, a number of Theranos lab directors called by prosecutors testified that their concerns over the technology’s shortcomings were largely ignored. Former investors said they were discouraged from scrutinizing the company. Leach is expected to wrap up his cross examination of Holmes on Tuesday or Wednesday, after which Holmes’s defense team will have the opportunity to question her again. The defense team for Holmes has indicated it will not call many more witnesses, which means the trial could draw to a close in the coming weeks.The Omicron coronavirus variant is “already everywhere” and travel bans will not stop its spread, the World Health Organization’s top Europe official has said, as the archbishop of Canterbury called for the scrapping of a “travel apartheid”. As mounting numbers of cases are detected and evidence suggests the Omicron variant transmits faster than Delta, 43 countries in the European region have imposed travel restrictions. But Dr Hans Kluge, the WHO’s regional director for Europe, said bans on incoming flights did not work and were too late “because Omicron is already everywhere”. “Omicron is in sight and on the rise and we are right to be concerned and cautious,” he said. At the same time, he added, vaccines, masks, ventilation and treatments were the best way to curb coronavirus – not travel restrictions. Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, also backed calls to scrap travel restrictions amid criticism of the UK’s red list ban of 11 African countries, adding that sharing vaccines with other countries was “the only route out of this pandemic”. Writing on Twitter, Welby said: “We must find fair and effective approaches for those who are vaccinated and tested to enter the UK. I agree with the Nigerian High Commissioner to the UK – we cannot have ‘travel apartheid’. “It is also morally wrong – and self-defeating – effectively to punish other nations for being transparent when they discover new Covid variants.” Kluge said the evidence so far on Omicron was preliminary and there was no definitive evidence on how well vaccines would protect people. “It has yet to be seen how and whether the latest Covid-19 variant of concern, Omicron, will be more transmissible and more severe,” he said. He said there were “five pandemic stabilisers to keep mortality down”. They were increasing vaccination rates; administering boosters to the most vulnerable; doubling mask-wearing rates indoors; ventilating crowded spaces; and adopting “rigorous therapeutic protocols for severe cases”. Kluge said there was a need to avoid both school closures and home learning. He also said that, as school holidays approached, “we must acknowledge that children contaminate their parents and grandparents at home, with a 10-times increased risk for these adults to develop severe disease, be hospitalised or die when non-vaccinated”. He said: “The use of masks and ventilation, and regular testing, should be a standard at all primary schools and vaccinating children should be discussed and considered nationally, as part of school protection measures. “Vaccination of younger children not only reduces their role in Covid-19 transmission but also protects them from paediatric severity, whether associated with long Covid or multi-system inflammatory syndromes.” Kluge also said vaccines should only be mandated at a population level as a last resort, adding that whatever measures countries were taking against Delta would also provide benefit against Omicron. Dr Catherine Smallwood, a senior emergency officer at the WHO regional office for Europe, said that although travel bans “may be easily accessible in terms of political decision-making, they are not effective in preventing spread of disease”. Smallwood said Delta remained dominant at the moment but that might change. “Clearly Omicron has demonstrated an ability to spread rapidly within a Delta context and within our highly vaccinated context, particularly in gatherings where Covid-19 likes to spread anyway, so Christmas parties, workplace gatherings, conferences – we’ve seen these clusters of Omicron appear in countries across the region. “So there will be further spread. The extent and the rapidity of the speed of that spread is still a question and we’ll find out in a few more weeks.”Scientists say they have identified a “stealth” version of Omicron that cannot be distinguished from other variants using the PCR tests that public health officials deploy to gain a quick picture of its spread around the world. The finding came as the number of cases of the original Omicron variant detected in the UK rose by 101 to 437 in a single day and Scotland announced a return to working from home. The stealth variant has many mutations in common with standard Omicron, but it lacks a particular genetic change that allows lab-based PCR tests to be used as a rough and ready means of flagging up probable cases. The variant is still detected as coronavirus by all the usual tests, and can be identified as the Omicron variant through genomic testing, but probable cases are not flagged up by routine PCR tests that give quicker results. Researchers say it is too early to know whether the new form of Omicron will spread in the same way as the standard Omicron variant, but that the “stealthy” version is genetically distinct and so may behave differently. The stealth variant was first spotted among Covid virus genomes submitted in recent days from South Africa, Australia and Canada, but it may already have spread more widely. Among the seven cases identified so far, none are in the UK. The discovery came as the prime minister told the cabinet that Omicron appeared to be more transmissible and officials conceded this would have consequences for its impact, and the likelihood of further restrictions being needed. At the cabinet meeting on Tuesday, also attended by the government’s chief scientific adviser, Patrick Vallance, and England’s chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, Boris Johnson told ministers the “early indications” were that Omicron was more transmissible than the existing dominant variant, Delta, a No 10 statement said. Johnson’s spokesperson said the next contingency step remained the potential imposition of so-called plan B, which would introduce vaccine certification and instructions to work from home where possible. While the government would “want to make sure that parliament has its say” on any new rules, the spokesperson said, ministers had existing powers to impose plan B restrictions unilaterally, for example if they were needed during the Commons Christmas recess. Despite such considerations, the spokesperson confirmed that for now, official advice remained that people should return to workplaces if they could, albeit with consideration of mitigations such as ventilation and testing. He said: “We are encouraging businesses to bring back people into the office, in line with the guidance.” Scotland announced a return to working from home where possible until at least the middle of January. The first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, revealed that about 4% of Covid-19 cases in Scotland were likely to be the Omicron variant, with that figure “steadily rising”. That translated to about 122 new cases a day with the variant’s genetic marker in Scotland, though only 99 cases overall had been confirmed with genomic sequencing. “Our estimate at this stage is that the doubling time for Omicron cases may be as short as two to three days, and that the R number associated with the new variant may be well over 2,” Sturgeon said. Contact tracing was also being enhanced in Scotland, with close contacts of positive cases told to test and isolate. The discovery of the new form of Omicron prompted researchers to split the B.1.1.529 lineage into standard Omicron, known as BA.1, and the newer variant, known as BA.2. “There are two lineages within Omicron, BA.1 and BA.2, that are quite differentiated genetically,” Prof Francois Balloux, the director of the University College London Genetics Institute, said. “The two lineages may behave differently.” Scientists use whole genome analysis to confirm which variant has caused a Covid infection, but PCR tests can sometimes give an indication. About half of the PCR machines in the UK look for three genes in the virus, but Omicron (and the Alpha variant before it) test positive on only two of them. This is because Omicron, like Alpha, has a genetic change called a deletion in the “S” or spike gene. The glitch means that PCR tests that display so-called “S gene target failure” are highly suggestive of Omicron infections. Informally, some researchers are calling the new variant “stealth Omicron” because it lacks the deletion that allows PCR tests to spot it. One major unknown is how the new variant emerged. While it falls under Omicron, it is so genetically distinct that it may qualify as a new “variant of concern” if it spreads rapidly. To have two variants, BA.1 and BA.2, arise in quick succession with shared mutations is “worrying” according to one researcher, and suggests public health surveillance “is missing a big piece of the puzzle”. • This story was amended on 7 December 2021. An earlier version referred to a “few dozen cases” of the “stealth” variation of Omicron. Seven cases have been identified so far.Sir Philip Barton, the head of the Foreign Office, has been accused at a select committee hearing of covering up the PM’s involvement in the decision to evacuate dogs from Kabul. The Labour MP Chris Bryant made the accusation after he read out a leaked letter from Boris Johnson’s PPS which he said implied Johnson’s “fingers” were “all over” the controversial decision. (See 6.16pm.) Barton did not accept the charge, and earlier Johnson dismissed the accusation that he was involved as “complete nonsense”. (See 1.26pm.) At the foreign affairs committee hearing Barton also admitted that he was wrong not to return from holiday earlier in August as the Afghanistan crisis was unfolding. (See 3.38pm.) After the hearing Tom Tugendhat, the committee chair, said the hearing exposed a “lack of leadership” at the Foreign Office. He said: Today’s session left the committee concerned about the Foreign Office’s role in the evacuation effort. We have seen the disintegration of a nation British troops laid down their lives to protect. In leaving, many Afghan friends and partners were abandoned. This crisis demanded, and deserved, the full attention of the Foreign Office. It seems that junior staff members and soldiers bore most of the burden, having been placed under huge pressure to make life-or-death decisions with insufficient guidance, support or oversight. The evidence we’ve heard today points to a lack of leadership, urgency and adequate resourcing. Dominic Raab has rebuffed a number of charges from a whistleblower who claimed there was an incompetent and chaotic response to the fall of Kabul, saying he would make no apology for asking officials to resubmit urgent appeals for help from Afghans in a different spreadsheet format. Harriet Harman, Labour’s former deputy leader, has said she will step down at the next election after around 40 years in parliament. The government has apologised for failures in the lead up to the Grenfell Tower fire, admitting to “errors and missed opportunities” that helped create “an environment in which such a tragedy was possible”. In the foreign affairs committee, as the session was drawing to an end, Chris Bryant (Lab) said that he had just been sent a copy of a letter that Trudy Harrison MP, the parliamentary private secretary to Boris Johnson, sent to Paul “Pen” Farthing about the evactuation of his animals from Kabul. It was sent on 25 August, Bryant said. He said Harrison was writing as PPS to the PM, and she said: Dear Paul, I’m writing to inform you that I have received confirmation from the FCDO, the Home Office and the Ministry of Defence that you, your staff and their dependents are permitted to travel to Hamad Karzai international airport. Bryant said: “Feels very much like a direction from the prime minister to me, I have to say.” He went on to read more from Harrison’s letter. The secretary of state has made it clear that all 68 persons will be provided a flight by the Royal Air Force as part of the evacuation programme. The secretary of state has also confirmed that animals under the care of Nowzad can be evacuated on a separate chartered flight. The Minister of Defence will ensure that a flight is available. Bryant said this did not equate with what the officials said earlier in the hearing, when they denied any knowledge of No 10 being involved in allowing the animals to be evacuated. Sir Philip Barton, head of the Foreign Office, told Bryant he was not aware of this. He said they had not set out to mislead the MPs. Bryant said the letter implied that “the prime minister’s fingers are all over this”. He went on: “And you are just - I’m hesitant to use the words cover up, but that what it feels like.” There was silence for a short moment, before Barton said again: “I wasn’t aware of the letter.” Bryant replied: Again, it feels like nobody’s ever aware of anything, anything could happen at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, and the senior management, really, are a bit absent. Barton did not reply. Back at the foreign affairs committee, Chris Bryant (Lab), a former Foreign Office minister, says he thinks the Foreign Office falsely held out hope that it would be able to evacuate many more Afghans than it could because ministers were “desperate to please”. He says: What I think really happened is that ministers were desperate to please. They weren’t courageous enough to say: ‘I’m sorry, there’s a limit to what we can do.’ There wasn’t enough preparation done from last year - let alone from April this year - to be able to do a proper evacuation of the numbers that we really knew we were likely to have to evacuate. We offered the prospect, the hope - the expectation, indeed, for lots and lots of people - that they might be able to come to the United Kingdom, cruelly, in all honesty. Bryant says ministers then got hundreds and hundreds of emails about Afghans needing help, and he says the Foreign Office pretended these were being properly considered, when they weren’t. Barton says he does not think this is “an accurate characterisation” of what happened. The animal rights campaigner Dominic Dyer says Zac Goldsmith, the environment minister, was one of the people he contacted when he wanted the government to allow the evacuation of animals from Kabul. Dyer claims pressure from himself and others persuaded Boris Johnson to intervene. (See 4.36pm.) In the Lords Goldsmith was asked by Lord Foulkes, a Labour peer, why Johnson prioritised animals over people. Goldsmith said claims about the PM getting involved were wrong. He told Foulkes: Number 10, indeed the prime minister, have very clearly and emphatically pushed back against any such suggestion. He [Foulkes] shakes his head, but I can tell him from my own experience that his rebuttal is entirely accurate. Downing Street has said the UK government will not be following the Scottish government, and urging people to work from home. Asked about Nicola Sturgeon’s statement to MSPs about working from home (see 2.48pm), No 10 said “that’s not our position”. In her statement Sturgeon stressed that the Scottish government is already encouraging people to work from home. But she said she was now asking employers to ensure that this was possible for workers if they allowed it during lockdown last year. She told MSPs: We already advise people to work from home wherever practical. Today, I am asking employers to ensure this is happening. To be blunt, if you had staff working from home at this start of the pandemic, please now enable them to do so again. We are asking you to do this from now until the middle of January when we will review this advice again. I know how difficult this is, but I cannot stress enough how much difference we think this could make in helping stem transmission and avoid the need for even more onerous measures. The foreign affairs committee hearing was suspended to allow its members to vote in a division, but it has just resumed. Chris Bryant (Lab) says he has spoken to ministers who think it was a mistake for the UK to open its evacuation scheme potentially to so many Afghans. He says it seems “terribly cruel” to imply to people that they might be eligible for rescue. For example, journalists could have been eligible, he says. Nigel Casey, the PM’s special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan, says ministers were responding to pressure, including from MPs. That is why they created a new system for people not eligible for help under Arap (the Afghan relocations and assistance policy). He says media organisations were among those saying the government should help certain people not covered by Arap. Undiagnosed dyslexia is a “quiet scandal”, the former health secretary Matt Hancock has told MPs as he called for all children to be screened for the condition before they leave primary school. PA Media reports: Hancock also told MPs that teachers need special training to prevent dyslexic children slipping through the cracks into a life of crime, as he proposed a dyslexia screening bill under the 10-minute rule procedure in the Commons. The now-backbench Conservative MP said he was “proud to be dyslexic”, but his difficulty with reading and writing was not spotted at school. He was only diagnosed with dyslexia when he went to university in Oxford, which he described as a “lightbulb moment” after “years of frustration at school”. Hancock told the Commons: “I was one of the lucky ones who was caught. There are too many children who are not caught early enough. It is a quiet scandal that an estimated four-in-five dyslexic children leave school with their dyslexia unidentified.” He also said that dyslexic people’s ability to “think differently”, with a higher likelihood of having skills like visualisation and lateral thinking, was becoming more highly prized by employers. He cited the example of GCHQ apprentices who are “four times more likely to be dyslexic”. Hancock said: “These are the skills that dyslexics tend to have in abundance and they are also the skills that the future of work values more and more.” But the West Suffolk MP warned: “We see all to commonly what happens to many undiagnosed dyslexics who then struggle to read and write. Because the flipside is that while 40% of successful entrepreneurs are dyslexics so too are over half of the prison population.” So-called 10-minute rule bills almost never become laws, but they allow MPs to publicise proposals for legislation which sometimes subsequently get adopted by government. Keir Starmer told the BBC that Dominic Raab should have resigned as foreign secretary in the summer over the failings of his department in Afghanistan. He said: It is shocking that we are all now learning that emails and letters that we sent in to the Foreign Office - including from my office - were opened but haven’t been actioned. It’s a total failure of political leadership with an ex-foreign secretary who was busy on the beach instead of doing his job. Asked whether Raab should be in office, Starmer said: I think Dominic Raab should have resigned at the time, that would have been the decent, honourable thing to do. That is a slight difference from the line adopted this morning by Emily Thornberry, who said Raab should resign now. (See 10.53am.) Prisons in England and Wales will be set targets for the first time to root out drugs and rehabilitate inmates under government plans, PA Media reports. PA says: National league tables are to be introduced as part of efforts to hold prison governors to account on how well they can keep illegal substances out of their jails and get offenders “clean”. The proposals have been put forward in a white paper, with the prisons minister, Victoria Atkins, setting out more detail in the Commons. Atkins tolds MPs: “We secured almost £4bn in the spending review to carry out the largest prison-building programme this country has seen in more than a century, creating 20,000 additional prison places by the mid-2020s. “To protect the public we also need to strengthen the prison regime, to reform and rehabilitate offenders throughout their sentence, that is the most effective way to reduce reoffending and cut crime overall. “This government puts public protection at the heart of everything we do. We’re recruiting more police officers, we’re putting serious offenders behind bars for longer and now we’re building the state-of-the-art prisons, bolstered with a regime that will drive down reoffending by making sure that every day an offender spends behind bars, involves purposeful reform and rehabilitation to help them go straight, turn their life around and make a positive contribution to society.” Back at the foreign affairs committee Chris Bryant (Lab) is asking Sir Philip Barton, head of the Foreign Office, about his holiday again. Barton says he left for holiday on 9 August. He repeats the point about how he has reflected on this. Tom Tugendhat, the chair of the committee, tells him this “sounds less credible every time your repeat it”. He adds: “It sounds platitudinous.” Bryant says this line “just feels a bit scripted now”. Bryant also tells Barton that, on 9 August, it should have been obvious there was going to be a crisis. Barton says it was not clear at that point. Dominic Dyer, an animal rights campaigner, has repeated a claim he made in the summer about how the government only agreed to facilitate the evacuation of animals from Kabul following an intervention from Boris Johnson and his wife, Carrie. Dyer said he “reached out” to Carrie when the government was refusing to help. “I went publicly on social media and said to the prime minister ... and I did reach out to Carrie Symonds that evening, and some ministers I was in contact with, including Zac Goldsmith to say ‘look, who’s in charge here?’,” he said. Dyer claimed that the government changed its policy as a result of his intervention. I forced the prime minister’s arm, I think all of us behind this campaign did. The next day, the senior commander in the Ministry of Defence, in the air force department, contacted me and said you can have your flight authorisation and we could get that plane down on the ground into Afghanistan. That’s my proof because without the intervention from the prime minister, [Ben Wallace, the defence secretary] would have continued to block the operation. Downing Street (see 12.25pm), and Johnson personally (see 1.26pm), have both insisted that the PM was not involved. Bristow says the way papers were left in the British embassy in Kabul after it was abandoned giving details of some Afghans who had worked for the British was “a mistake”. The families were quickly evacuated after the Times alerted the Foreign Office to what happened, he says. Royston Smith (Con) asks how many emails sent to the Foreign Office about people needing help in Afghanistan went unread. Barton says they received an uprecedented volume of correspondence. They had to prioritise, he says. He says they ensured every MP got a reply. Q: Who authorised the prioritisation of animals over people? That did not happen, says Barton. Q: So how did animals get evacuated before people? Barton disputes that that happened. He says there was a charter flight. Casey says the charter flight was only allowed out after the evacuation of people had finished. Q: How much staff time did allowing the charter flight out take? Casey says this did not distract from the evacuation effort. Tom Tugendhat, the committee chairs, says if the gates to the airport were open to allow the people and animals boarding the charter flight on to the flight, they could have been open for other people – such as the five-year-old son of an interpreter who used to work for him, who wanted to leave. Casey says the Taliban had not approved a further evacuation. Bristow says the Taliban were becoming increasingly uncooperative. He says he has checked with the commander on the ground if the operation with the animals displaced people. He says no plane failed to land or take off because of this, and no one else would have made it through if the animals had not gone through. Alicia Kearns (Con), a former civil servant, says if soldiers had not been escorting animals, they could have been escorting another planeload of people. Bristow says the trade-off is not that simple. Q: Why not? Bristow says the people who were in the system for evacuation had been processed. He says he cannot say with certainty soldiers were moving animals through the gate. He says his understanding is that no one else would have been able to get out. This is what Raphael Marshall says in his memo (pdf) about how staff were discouraged from working for longer than eight hours, the subject of the exchanges a few minutes ago. (See 3.55pm.) Despite the urgency of the situation, the default expectation remained that FCDO staff would only work eight hours a day, five days a week. FCDO employees were only asked to work shifts for which they volunteered. This likely resulted in a lack of night shifts and limited cover over the weekend because these shifts were less popular. It also resulted in frequent changes of personnel due to days off. FCDO employees were not asked to work over periods for which they had indicated they were unavailable, even if this led to serious shortages of capacity. I believe this reflects a deliberate drive by the FCDO to prioritise ‘work-life balance’. FCDO employees, including senior leaders, are often told that working more than eight hours a day suggests that they are inefficient. Working more than eight hours a day has also sometimes been portrayed as selfish, as it potentially pressures other employees to do so as well. Senior leaders are sometimes encouraged to set a good example by not sending emails outside working hours. Whilst a healthy ‘work-life balance’ is important in moderation, in my opinion the FCDO’s approach has undermined organisational effectiveness. Bob Seely (Con) goes next. Q: What do you make of the criticisms published by Raphael Marshall? Barton says the points in the Marshall memo are ones that the Foreign Office will look at in its lessons learned exercise. He suggests some of the criticisms are fair, but not others. Q: It feels as if we were getting false assurances that this was being dealt with, but you were being overwhelmed. Barton says it was “incredibly difficult” to deal with such a large number of people seeking help. He says, as part of their lessons learned exercise, they will want to look at how they have the capacity to deal with so many emails in an emergency like this. It was not “lack of urgency” that was the problem, he says. He says the problem was to do with the complexity of the problem. Q: Marshall writes about people only working eight-hour days. That is not what should be happening, he says. Barton says there is not a clocking-off culture in the Foreign Office. But, as for working eight hours, there was a three-shift system to cover 24 hours. So that is why people had to clock off. Q: Marshall says you did not have the people. Barton says this was not about work-life balance. This was about ensuring people did not burn out. Stuart Malcolm McDonald (SNP) is asking the questions now. He says when Dominic Raab was giving evidence to the committee, he refused to say when he want on holiday. The consensus is that it was around 4 August, he says. He asks Barton to tell him the date. Barton says he does not want to answer for the former foreign secretary. But he appears to confirm that the Foreign Office will have a record of this. McDonald asks him to tell the committee. Barton says he will take away the request, but does not confirm that he will supply the date. Here is some comment from journalists on Sir Philip Barton’s reluctance to give up his summer holiday. (See 3.38pm.) From the Times’ Henry Zeffman From the Independent’s Rob Merrick From the Times’ Tom Newton Dunn Back in the foreign affairs committee, Sir Philip Barton, head of the Foreign Office, says he has reflected on his decision to go on holiday in August and “if I had my time again, I would have come back from my leave earlier”. I’m happy to get into dates in a minute but let me just say before I do that, I have reflected a lot in August on my leave, and if I had my time again I would have come back from my leave earlier than I did. He says he returned from holiday on 26 August. As my colleague Patrick Wintour reports, that was almost a fortnight after Kabul fell. Q: Where were you? Barton says he does not want to say. He was partly in the UK, he says. Q: Have you changed holiday plans before? Yes, says Barton. He repeats the point about having reflected on this. The government has apologised for failures in the lead up to the Grenfell Tower fire, admitting to “errors and missed opportunities” that helped create “an environment in which such a tragedy was possible”. As my colleague Robert Booth reports, it told the public inquiry into the disaster it was “deeply sorry” and conceded it did not know how building regulations were being applied on the ground. It said the “system failed”. Q: Did you or anyone from government have contact with the Taliban before they took over? Sir Laurie Bristow,the former British ambassador to Afghanistan, says he didn’t. He was accredited to the non-Taliban government. But Nigel Casey, the PM’s special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan, says he did have contact with them. Those contactss were kept secret. He says there had been contacts for some years. Survation has released a poll giving Labour a three-point lead over the Conservatives. It says this is Labour’s biggest lead in polls it has carried out since Boris Johnson became PM. Bristow says, ahead of the evacuation, the number of people in the embassy in Kabul had been reduced from 150 to 75. He says the demand for evacuation was a “known unknown”. They did not know how many people would want to be evactuated. They did not know how many British passport holders were in the country on any given day. We did not know how many people would come forward on the day for evacuation, if that’s what it came to, because we did not know how many British passport holders were in Afghanistan on any one day, we had no way of knowing. Q: Wasn’t it likely that there would be a surge? Bristow says that was “top of everybody’s mind”. But this was just one of several scenarios. Q: So in April there was no plan to help people like judges who had sat in on narcotics cases? Barton says people might have been assessed under the scheme. He does not answer directly. Casey says category 4 of ARAP said that some people who did not work directly for the British in Afghanistan (the main beneficiaries of ARAP) would be included. Q: So did you not think that more than 4,000 people might apply? Casey says, as the situation worsened during the summer, the number of people wanting to leave went up. Q: How many people did you expect to have to evacuate? Barton talks about anticipating the evacuation, but does not put a number on it. Casey says they expected to evacuate 3,000 Britons, and 4,000 others eligible under the Afghan relocations and assistance policy (ARAP). Barton says no one expected the Taliban to take over Afghanistan as quickly as they did. He says it was a particularly challenging period for the Foreign Office. More than 15,000 people were evacuated, he says. But he says they would like to have evacuated more. He says there are lessons to be learnt, as with any big event. The foreign affairs committee is about to take evidence from Sir Philip Barton, head of the Foreign Office, about the withdrawal from Afghanistan. He will be appearing with Nigel Casey, the PM’s special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan and a senior FCDO official, and Sir Laurie Bristow, former British ambassador to Afghanistan. There will be no changes this week to current Covid restrictions in Scotland, Nicola Sturgeon has said, while telling the Scottish public “it is time for all of us to go back to basics” She urged employers to ensure that all staff who can are working from home until the middle of January, telling people to do a lateral flow test “on every occasion” they intend to mix with others over the festive season, whether at work, socialising or going shopping. At her regular Covid briefing to MSPs, Sturgeon confirmed 99 cases of the Omicron variant in Scotland, an increase of 28 since yesterday. To give a sense of the speed of increase - albeit at this stage from a low level - the figure I reported this time last week was nine. She said health officials estimate the R number associated with the new variant may be well over 2, and that there are now confirmed cases in nine of Scotland’s 14 health board areas, “suggesting that community transmission is becoming more widespread, and possibly more sustained, across the country”. Underlining the significance of this speed of increase, Sturgeon warned: The sheer weight of numbers of people who could be infected as a result of increased transmissibility and some immune evasion will create this pressure even if the disease the new variant causes in individuals is no more severe than Delta. The UK Health Security Agency has announced that the number of confirmed Omicron cases in the UK has gone up by 101 since yesterday and is now 437. That is a 30% increase. The spread of Omicron is expected to reach its peak by the end of next month, the Welsh health minister Eluned Morgan has said. She told a press briefing in Cardiff: We are expecting a significant wave of Omicron to hit Wales. The modelling suggests it will reach its peak by around the end of January, which is why there is an urgency in terms of getting people vaccinated and boosters done as soon as possible. Morgan said health boards are again setting up more vaccination centres, including walk-in and drive-through clinics with longer opening hours. Local government officials, firefighters and students are to provide support to the clinics and Morgan called for volunteers to come forward. No new restrictions have been introduced in Wales in response to the new variant, but the first minister, Mark Drakeford, is due to announce the Labour-controlled government’s latest coronavirus review on Friday. The Welsh Conservatives are worried that the government could extend its vaccine passport scheme (which currently affects settings such as nighclubs) to other hospitality businesses. Shadow health minister Russell George said: The possibility of extending vaccine passports to hospitality business is a slap in the face for one of the worst-affected sectors of the pandemic. They are coercive, ineffective, anti-business, and have no evidence base whatsoever. Keir Starmer has said that people are “very, very upset” by reports that No 10 staff broke lockdown rules last Christmas and that the Downing Street claims to the contrary are meaningless. He told the BBC that there should be “no more of these games about ‘we were following the rules’, all these words that don’t mean anything”. He went on: Be honest, own up. Very many people are very, very upset by this because while all the rest of the country was in lockdown, not seeing loved ones, the people who lost people in that period now know that there was a knees-up and a booze-up in Downing Street, and even now the prime minister can’t just be honest. So I say to him: Be honest, own up. We don’t need a criminal investigation, we need a prime minister who is honest about it. And here are the other lines from Boris Johnson’s pooled TV interview. Johnson said the prisons strategy announced today was intended to reduce reoffending. He said: When young people, and it’s almost invariably young men, end up in in prison, that cannot be a dead end for them. And we want to stop the drugs coming in. So we’re putting in a lot of money for scanners, but we also want them to come out with more qualifications and more self-esteem about their chances in the future. So basic English and maths and opportunities to learn things ... like painting and decorating and other skills that they can use so that they have a passport for their skills when they get out of prison. Now, at the moment, recidivism is running at 70%. But for the protection of the public, to make our streets safer, we’ve got to get those numbers down, make sure that people get out of prison and get into jobs. There is a summary of the strategy here, and here is the prisons stragegy white paper (pdf) published today. He dismissed claims that booster vaccines were not being rolled out fast enough. The Telegraph today splashed on a story saying that “the booster rollout vaccinated fewer people over the weekend than it did before ministers promised to put it ‘on steroids’”. But Johnson claimed the government was ahead of its own timetable. He claimed that the UK’s booster programme was “the fastest in Europe” and that it has delivered more booster jabs than in any comparable country. But it could go faster, he said. He said he did not think it was acceptable that some people were still waiting for power to be restored after Storm Arwen. “Too many people have spent too long without power,” he said. He said he had been told by those involved in restoring electricity that they had faced “massive technical difficulties”, partly because equipment froze. But that was no consolation to those affected, he said. We need to learn the lessons for the future and make sure that we have better resilience against storms of this kind. We haven’t seen a storm as violent as Storm Arwen for a long time. It’s likely to happen again, we have got to make sure that we protect people against it. Although Boris Johnson would not deny that a party took place at No 10 last Christmas, he was willing in his TV interview to give a robust denial to the claim that he personally intervened to order the rescue of dogs from Kabul in August. (See 11.15am.) That was “complete nonsense”, he said. Johnson went on to praise the evacuation effort generally. It was “one of the outstanding military achievements of the last 50 years or more”, he claimed. Boris Johnson has given a TV interview on a visit to a prison this morning, and for what may be the seventh day in a row (the story broke last Wednesday) he faced questions about the Downing Street party last Christmas. Yesterday the PM’s spokesman claimed the event did not constitute a party. But asked today if he was personally saying that what happened was not a party, particularly in the light of the new reports saying people were asked to bring “secret Santa” presents (see 12.07pm), Johnson did not repeat that claim. Instead, in line with what he said at PMQs last week, when he first refused to deny a party took place, he replied: What I can tell you is that all the guidelines were observed, continue to be observed. And what I can also tell you is that we’re getting on with the job as we have been throughout of dealing with the priorities of the people, particularly fighting crime. Asked again if this was or was not a party, Johnson repeated the point about the guidelines being followed at all times. Asked if he had investigated that point personally, Johnson replied: I have satisfied myself that the guidelines were followed at all times. Here are the main points from the Downing Street lobby briefing. The PM’s spokesman strongly denied a claim from a Foreign Office official that Boris Johnson ordered the rescue of dogs from Kabul. (See 12.25pm.) The spokesman said the decision to allow a chartered flight to evacuate animals from a charity run by a Briton in the city did not distract from the effort to evacuate people. He said: We are confident that at all times we prioritised people over animals. We continued to evacuate people right up until the last possible moment ... The approach we took [in] regards to that charter flight in no way distracted from that commitment. In his evidence (pdf) to the foreign affairs committee, the Foreign Office whistleblower Raphael Marshall claims the government “transported animals which were not at risk of harm at the direct expense of evacuating British nationals and people at risk of imminent murder”. (See 10.38am.) Johnson told cabinet that the Omicron variant is more transmissible than Delta, the spokesman said. (See 12.40pm.) The spokesman stood by his claim from yesterday that there was no Christmas party in Downing Street last December. Asked if he wanted to revise his position in the light of the latest report saying staff were invited to the party at least a week in advance (see 12.07pm), the spokesman said he did not have anything more to add. The spokesman did not rule out the UK ordering a diplomatic boycott of the Winter Olympics in China. Asked if the UK would be following the US, which has announced such a boycott, the spokesman said that a decision had not yet been made on government attendance at the Olympics and that a decision would be announced “in due course”. This is from the Telegraph’s Lucy Fisher. The spokesman said that 539 homes were still waiting for power to be restored following Storm Arwen 11 days ago. Asked what the PM felt about such a long wait, the spokesman said: It’s obviously unacceptable that these homes, these families are without power, we’ve seen the situation improve but that will not be of help to those who are still facing this challenge. At cabinet this morning Boris Johnson told his ministers that the Omicron variant is more transmissible than Delta, which is currently the dominant variant in the UK. The No 10 cabinet readout says: The prime minister said it was too early to draw conclusions on the characteristics of Omicron but that early indications were that it was more transmissible than Delta. Further measures were introduced this week to help slow transmission and further seeding of the variant, and the prime minister reiterated that booster vaccines remain our best defence against new and existing variants, with the NHS on course to meet the target of offering a booster to all adults by the end of January. Johnson’s comment will not have surprised ministers who have been reading the papers, because over the past week the evidence to back this up has been getting stronger and stronger. The Downing Street lobby briefing has just finished, and the prime minister’s spokesman has strongly denied the claim from the Foreign Office whistleblower that Boris Johnson intervened to ensure that dogs from a rescue home run by a Briton in Kabul were rescued. (See 11.15am.) Asked about the claim from Raphael Marshall , the spokesman said: It’s entirely untrue. At no point did the prime minister intervene. We have always prioritised people over animals, as we said both during [the airlift] and subsequently. Asked if the PM intervened to help Paul “Pen” Farthing and staff at his Nowzad animal charity to get out, the spokesman replied: No, he didn’t instruct officials to take any particular course of action on that issue. As you know, this was agreed by the defence secretary. Clearance for Pen Farthing’s flight was sponsored by the UK. Asked if the PM instructed ministers, the spokesman denied that too, and he said the PM’s focus was on saving and evacuating people. The spokesman also insisted that the PM’s wife, Carrie, who is an animal rights campaigner, was not involved. Asked if she shared her views with officials in any way, the spokesman said she did not. I will post more from the briefing soon. In the Times (paywall) today Oliver Wright says the Downing Street Christmas party last year (the one that No 10 claims wasn’t a party, and did not breach lockdown rules) was organised at least a week in advance, via WhatsApp. Wright says: The party last year is understood to have been organised via a WhatsApp group with staff asked to bring “Secret Santa” presents. Some of those present also wore Christmas jumpers. About 30 people are understood to have attended the event. Some staff working in other parts of the building are said to have joined in the festivities later in an “impromptu” way ... Two sources have confirmed that the December 18 event did take place, with one saying it that it had been organised in advance. “Of course it was premeditated because everyone came with Secret Santa presents. It was arranged at least a week in advance via WhatsApp with a follow-up email.” They added that there was a “proper spread” of food that people had brought along with alcohol. “The majority of people there were civil servants with a few special advisers and others there,” the source added. “But it was mostly officials.” Jenny Jones, the Green party peer, has written to the Independent Office for Police Conduct asking for an investigation on the grounds that, if there was a party, the police on duty at Downing Street must have known about it, and therefore played a role in facilitating an illegal gathering. In his Today programme interview this morning Dominic Raab, the justice secretary, strongly played down a report in the Times yesterday claiming the government wants to make it easier for ministers to overrule judicial review decisions that go against them. Asked if it was true he was planning to limit the power of judges to order the government to obey the law, Raab replied: “No.” Asked about claims the government wanted to have an annual “interpretation bill” to allow judicial review decisions to be overruled, he replied: “I don’t even recognise that title.” Here are a few of the (very many) Twitter tributes to Harriet Harman, following her announcement that she is standing down as an MP at the next election. (See 9.36am.) From Keir Starmer, the Labour leader From Ed Miliband, the former leader From Tom Watson, the former deputy leader From Labour MP Jess Phillips From the Labour MP Sarah Champion Amanda Spielman, head of the Ofsted schools inspectorate, has said England risks a repeat of cases such as Arthur Labinjo-Hughes, the six-year-old abused and murdered in his own home last year, if schools and social services are disrupted by future lockdowns, my colleague Richard Adams reports. In his memo (pdf) for the foreign affairs committee, Raphael Marshall, the Foreign Office whistleblower, says Boris Johnson ordered officials to help ensure that Paul “Pen” Farthing, a former Royal Marine who ran a dog charity in Kabul called Nowzad, was able to evacuate his animals. Marshall says: We received an instruction from the prime minister to use considerable capacity to transport Nowzad’s animals. But Marshall does not elaborate on the PM’s involvement in his memo. Elsewhere he says that Wendy Morton, a Foreign Office minister, intervened and asked for help with the Nowzad evacuation. Over the summer there were suspicions that Johnson was involved in the decision to help Nowzad (a decision that angered Ben Wallace, the defence secretary) because his wife, Carrie, is a passionate animal lover. But No 10 said at the time that neither Johnson nor his wife were involved. Emily Thornberry, the shadow atttorney general and a former shadow foreign secretary, has said Dominic Raab should resign because of the failings at the Foreign Office documented by the whistleblower Raphael Marshall. She told Times Radio: It sounds complete chaos. But responsibility goes to the top and what we have at the moment is we had the former foreign secretary training around the television and the radio studios, not being prepared to take any responsibility for this at all. That I’m afraid is yet another example of the poor character of Dominic Raab. I really think that he should consider his position. “Consider his position” is Westminster terminology for resign. Thornberry does not mean Raab should have a good think about whether he is in the right job, and then decide he is. But given that Raab has already left the Foreign Office (in what was seen as a demotion), calling for him to quit now is unusual. And here is what Dominic Raab said this morning when asked about some of the specific criticisms in the lengthy memo (pdf) from the Foreign Office whistleblower, Raphael Marshall. Number of Afghans who failed to receive help What Marshall says: I estimate between 75,000 and 150,000 people (including dependents) applied for evacuation under the LOTR scheme [leave outside the rules scheme - a scheme for Afghans whose lives were at risk and who did not qualify for the Afghan relocations and assistance policy (ARAP), which helped Afghans who had worked for the British]. The vast majority of these applicants feared their lives were at risk as a result of their connection to the UK and the West and were therefore eligible for evacuation. I estimate fewer than 5% of these people have received any assistance. It is clear that some of those left behind have since been murdered by the Taliban. What Raab says: Asked if he recognised the 5% figure, Raab said: I don’t. But what is certainly true is that we had a lot of people rushing to get out of Afghanistan for all sorts of reasons. And I think it’s right that we had a process in place to check two things: one, that we were helping those at genuine risk of persecution, or British nationals or people who had worked for the British government. And secondly, making sure that we didn’t allow anyone to come into the UK who might present a threat to the UK. And it was important to have a process to make those decisions swiftly but also accurately. Prioritising animals over humans What Marshall says: I believe that British soldiers were put at risk in order to bring [the dog charity] Nowzad’s animals into the airport. It has been reported that British soldiers ventured into the crowd around Kabul airport to clear the way for Nowzad’s vehicles. At this point, the crowd was estimated to exceed 25,000 people, with many Taliban fighters present. There were many reports of people being crushed to death. On 26 August, 13 US Marines and around 170 civilians were murdered by an Isis-K suicide bomber in the same area of the airport. In these circumstances, any task which involved British soldiers venturing into the crowd presented a meaningful risk to the soldiers. I understand that an American animal charity is still operating in Kabul managed by an American. I understand the animals and staff of this charity have not been subject to any mistreatment by the Taliban. I understand that far from being harassed by the Taliban, this charity has been able to hire members of the Taliban. This vindicates the MoD and FCDO’s belief that neither Nowzad’s animals nor its staff were at risk from the Taliban. HMG therefore transported animals which were not at risk of harm at the direct expense of evacuating British nationals and people at risk of imminent murder, including interpreters who had served with the British Army. What Raab says: That’s just not accurate. We did not put the welfare of animals above individuals. Asked if Marshall was lying about this, Raab said: I am not accusing anyone of lying. I am just correcting the facts. Desk officers taking key decisions What Marshall says: Marshall said at certain points desk officers [relatively junior officials] took key decisions relating to who would get help. He says: At this point two colleagues (I believe a D6/G7/Team Leader and a C4/HEO/Desk Officer respectively) further narrowed down the list in line with a senior civil servant’s instructions. These were committed people and I am sure they carried out this task with integrity. However it is unclear on what basis they made these decisions. What Raab says: The suggestion that junior desk officers were making decisions is just not correct. There’s a difference between processing and deciding, so I’m afraid I don’t accept that characterisation. Time taken to take decisions What Marshall says: To address some of the numerous requests for the reconsideration of particular cases we received, the Crisis Centre adopted a system of submitting exceptional cases to the foreign secretary for approval. We therefore wrote notes or submissions on a series of individual cases which arose for the foreign secretary’s approval. It took several hours for the foreign secretary to engage on any of these notes. What Raab says: On the charge it took several hours to make decisions, we’re not talking about days, it’s not been suggested weeks, but several hours to make sure we had the facts, and that, as between myself, the home secretary and the defence secretary, decisions were made and actually I would suggest that’s a reasonably swift turnaround. Staffing shortages What Marshall says: Marshall has a whole section in his paper with the heading “inadequate staffing”. At one point he said: On the afternoon of Saturday 21 August, I was the only person monitoring and processing emails in the Afghan special cases inbox. No emails from after early Friday afternoon had been read at that point. The number of unread emails was already in the high thousands, I believe above 5,000, and increasing constantly. What Raab says: I think the inherent challenge of getting factual questions in relation to undocumented people applying for the three different schemes that were available - that is inherent. I don’t think having extra staff in London would have particularly made that easier. The challenge was deciphering the facts on the ground, as well as the second operational challenge, which was making sure we could get to the airport in Kabul, safe passage, given the very difficult conditions there. Asked about Marshall working on his own, Raab said: It certainly wouldn’t be correct to say that he was the only person working on it. We had a thousand people working. Of course, they would do it on a rota shift, but the Foreign Office were working night and day, but of course this was a joint operation because the claims were coming through in relation to three separate schemes and the Home Office, the MoD was working with the Foreign Office. I think the cross-Whitehall effort was extensive. And at another point Raab said: Well over 1,000 Foreign Office staff were working often night and day on rota system … as well as the troops on the ground in Afghanistan under incredible operational pressures. I would point to the fact that in just two weeks, 15,000 people were evacuated. I don’t think in living memory we’ve seen an operation on that scale and certainly in relation to this one, no other country bar the United States evacuated more. How Raab wanted information presented What Marshall says: It took several hours for the foreign secretary to engage on any of these notes. In the circumstances, I am not sure why. The foreign secretary then replied through his private office to say that he could not decide on individual cases and he would need all the cases set out in a well-presented table to make decisions. I understand that he or his private office had commented that as a lawyer he could not take information without the full facts in a table. We therefore reformatted the table and sent it back to the foreign secretary. What Raab says: In terms of presentation, of course with the volume of claims coming in I make no apology for saying I needed the clear facts that each case presented precisely so we can make swift decisions. The memo from Raphael Marshall, a former official at the Foreign Office about how the FCDO (Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, as it is now) handled the withdrawal from Afghanistan is particularly powerful because it is long, detailed, and calmly and rationally argued. You can read it in full here (pdf). Although Dominic Raab, who was foreign secretary at the time, is disputing many of the claims in the document, he is not dismissing the whole thing out of hand. Speaking on the Today programme, he accepted that there were lessons to be learned from the operation. But he also argued that, in general, Marshall was not taking enough account of the “facts on the ground”. He said: Do I also want to say that some of the criticism seems rather dislocated from the facts on the ground - the operational pressures that with the takeover of the Taliban, unexpected around the world, both our teams in Afghanistan, military, Home Office, Foreign Office, all doing a great job, working very closely together, coupled with the crisis centre in London? Yeah, I do think that not enough recognition has been given to quite how difficult it was. Harriet Harman, who was Labour’s deputy leader from 2007 and 2015 and who served as interim party leader after Gordon Brown and Ed Miliband both resigned, has announced that she is standing down from parliament. She has also posted a nice Twitter thread on what has changed during her time in parliament here. Although Harman never held particularly high office in government, her record as a campaigner is remarkable and it is hard to think of any MP in parliament now who has been linked with pushing through so much transformative, progressive change. I’ll post more on her departure later. Good morning. It is a difficult day for Dominic Raab, the deputy prime minister and justice secretary, because a former official has given the Commons foreign affairs committee a shocking account of how the Foreign Office handled the evacuation of Afghanistan when Raab was foreign secretary. My colleague Patrick Wintour has the story here. And my colleague Aubrey Allegretti has summarises the whistleblower’s main accusations here. Commenting on the evidence, set out in this 40-page memo (pdf), Tom Tugendhat, the Conservative chair of the foreign affairs committee, said: These allegations are serious and go to the heart of the failures of leadership around the Afghan disaster, which we have seen throughout this inquiry. These failures betrayed our friends and allies and squandered decades of British and Nato effort. The evidence we’ve heard alleges dysfunction within the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office and substantial failings throughout the Afghanistan evacuation effort. Raab has been giving interviews this morning, and he has rejected some – but by no means all – of the claims made in the memo. Asked on the Today programme if the description of the Foreign Office as dysfunctional and chaotic under his leadership was unfair and untrue, Raab replied: “What I would say is it’s inaccurate in certain respects.” He also told Sky News that he did not think the problems with the handling of the evacuation from Afghanistan led to his being demoted in the subsequent reshuffle. I will post more from his interviews shortly. Here is the agenda for the day 9.30am: Boris Johnson chairs cabinet. 10am: Tracey Crouch, the former sports minister, gives evidence to the Commons culture committee about her fan-led review of football governance. 11.30am: Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, takes questions in the Commons. 11.30am: Downing Street holds its lobby briefing. After 12.45pm: MPs resume their debate on the nationality and borders bill. 2.20pm: Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, gives a statement to MSPs about Covid. 3pm: Sir Philip Barton, head of the Foreign Office, and other senior diplomats give evidence to the Commons foreign affairs committee about Afghanistan. 3.30pm: Alok Sharma, president of Cop26, gives evidence to the environmental audit committee. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comIn terms of quintessential New York experiences, ordering a bagel with cream cheese (not toasted, particularly if the bagel is fresh out of the oven) tops the list. But now, bagel shop patrons are beginning to have problems securing one half of their orders. A cream cheese shortage is throwing New York City’s bagel shops across all five boroughs into a frenzy, leaving some of the city’s top bagel spots, including Tompkins Square Bagels in the East Village and Absolute Bagels on the Upper West Side, with only enough schmear in stock to last a few days, the New York Times reports. The Upper West Side’s Zabar’s has enough cream cheese to last only the next 10 days. These shops typically go through thousands of pounds of cream cheese every couple of weeks, a cadence being threatened by the cream cheese shortage. Store owners who found themselves in dire straits are crossing state lines in pursuit of the decadent dairy item, begging their distributors for more product and resorting to dealing with cases of individually wrapped three-pound cream cheese sticks instead. According to the Times, the national supply chain difficulties are the culprit threatening the bagel habits of New Yorkers and tourists alike. Philadelphia, the Kraft Heinz brand that many New York bagel shops use as the base for their cream cheese, just can’t keep up with the demand. In pursuit of understanding the cream cheese shortage, we visited a number of New York City bagel establishments – classic Manhattan delis, Brooklyn stalwarts and a bodega – to see whether they are simply overdoing the amount they put in each bagel and how supply chain problems have affected them. The first establishment on our list: a classic New York stalwart, a plain bagel with scallion schmear from Russ &amp; Daughters. We ordered our bagel at the 107-year-old shop’s counter on Houston Street and didn’t notice a marked decrease in the availability of cream cheese. In fact, there was about half an inch of cream cheese – enough that this reporter had to scrape off a fair amount before taking a bite. News of the cream cheese shortage had immediately spawned debate on social media about the sometimes dangerous levels of cream cheese found on the average bagel in the city. “Have they considered not putting a pound on each bagel?” Joel Weirtheimer, a former associate staff secretary for Barack Obama, tweeted. “Let’s be real: the cream cheese shortage is entirely self-inflicted from NYC bagel shops loading each bagel with a pound of cream cheese,” historian Jake Anbinder tweeted. These bystanders aren’t alone in their criticism. Others have observed this trend over the years. In an article for Serious Eats in 2014, writer Max Falkowitz took cream cheese samples from six New York City bagel shops and found a range from 0.7 ounces, at Black Seed in Brooklyn, to 3.9 ounces, at Brooklyn Bagel in Manhattan. Absolute Bagel had 2.5 ounces, and outgoing Mayor Bill de Blasio’s favorite, Bagel Hole, served 1.7 ounces of cream cheese. One bagel shop that seems to be having no trouble keeping a healthy amount of schmear on their bagels is Ess-a-bagel, located on Third Avenue. The sesame bagel with scallion cream cheese we picked up from Ess-a-bagel this week had roughly ¾ of an inch of cream cheese nestled between the bagel halves, a hefty amount of dairy for even the strongest stomach. Following my important bagel jaunt to Manhattan, I turned my attention to some Brooklyn bagel shops. Olde Brooklyn Bagel Shoppe, my neighborhood shop on Vanderbilt Avenue in Prospect Heights, was out of a couple varieties of cream cheese when I visited, but nobody could tell me if it was strictly supply chain-related. I left with my plain bagel with scallion cream cheese (at some point in this lo-fi experiment I decided I should adhere as closely as possible to something resembling consistency – for science) and came home to measure the cream cheese, as one does. Though no bagel shop I visited demonstrated the urgent scarcity in the Times story, Olde Brooklyn Bagel Shoppe’s paltry cream cheese offering – about a quarter of an inch of the spread – was the most concerning bellwether I saw. A spokesperson for Kraft Heinz, which owns the Philadelphia brand, provided a quite vague explanation of the cream cheese shortage to the Times: “We continue to see elevated and sustained demand across a number of categories where we compete … As more people continue to eat breakfast at home and use cream cheese as an ingredient in easy desserts, we expect to see this trend continue.” Cream cheese’s roots aren’t actually in New York City, but rather in upstate New York. In the 1870s, a farmer named William Lawrence was making Neufchatel cheese – a rich French cheese. But a grocer called Park &amp; Tilford approached him and asked if he could make an even more decadent cheese that they could sell for more money. “He’s curdled the milk, pressed all the liquid out, and now he puts cream into it. What does he call it? He calls it cream cheese,” said Jeffrey A Marx, a rabbi at the Santa Monica Synagogue who has written extensively about the history of cream cheese, to Mashable. Cream cheese began as a decadent, upscale invention, and it sold for $0.30 a pound in 1889 (for comparison, Muenster sold for $0.13 a pound, Marx wrote). In present-day Brooklyn, where a pound of cream cheese costs somewhere between $5 and $8, I moved on to Bagel Pub, a bagel spot in Park Slope and Crown Heights that I tend to avoid specifically because of how much cream cheese it uses on its bagels. A few tubs of cream cheese were missing from the display case, but it didn’t matter for my bagel, as you can see: The fine folks at Bagel Pub had slathered more than an inch of cream cheese on my bagel – more cream cheese than I could ever feasibly eat with a bagel. The last stop on my New York City cream cheese welfare tour: my corner bodega. The guys there apologized when they had to substitute plain cream cheese for my requested scallion – seemingly the only real victim of the cream cheese supply chain I noted all day. The bagel was unremarkable, but with just under half an inch of cream cheese for $1.50, who could ever really complain? A solution to the crisis – make your own cream cheese If the cream cheese shortage does become dire enough that you get the urge to make your own from scratch, the good news is you probably have everything you need to make it in your kitchen already: whole milk, lemon juice and salt. There are many different recipes that will help you arrive at a decent alternative to your beloved bagel shop’s cream cheese, but in essence, it comes down to a few short steps. Begin by pouring your milk into a saucepan. Heat the milk and bring it to a boil over medium-high heat. Don’t let the milk boil for too long. As soon as it starts to boil, add the lemon juice and turn off the heat. The milk will naturally curdle for a few minutes. This looks like curds forming, and a light yellow liquid will separate from the curds. After a few minutes, pour the curdled milk through a cheesecloth and a sieve. This will strain out the liquid whey. Pour cold water over the sieve to rinse the curds. Squeeze the curds to drain any last drop of the whey. Put the strained milk curds into a food processor or blender, add salt and blend. After a minute or two, you’ll have a light and fluffy cream cheese – just like the bagel shop.The International Olympic Committee (IOC) has said that it respects the United States’ decision to diplomatically boycott the forthcoming Beijing Winter Olympics, while defending its “quiet diplomacy” in handling the case of Chinese tennis player, Peng Shuai. “We always ask for as much respect as possible and least possible interference from the political world,” said Juan Antonio Samaranch Jr, the IOC’s coordination commission chief for the Beijing Winter Olympics. “We have to be reciprocal. We respect the political decisions taken by political bodies.” The Biden administration on Monday announced a diplomatic boycott of the Games in response to what it called “ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity in Xinjiang and other human rights abuses”. American athletes, however, are still expected to compete. China accused the US of “political posturing and manipulation” and tried to discredit the decision by claiming that American diplomats had not even been invited to Beijing in the first place. “The US should stop politicising sports, and stop disrupting and undermining the Beijing Winter Olympics, lest it should affect bilateral dialogue and cooperation in important areas and international and regional issues,” foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian warned. The move sparked a new round of disputes between the world’s two largest economies and prompted Beijing to warn on Tuesday that Washington will “pay a price” for its decision. The US last staged a full boycott of the Olympics during the cold war in 1980, when the former president Jimmy Carter snubbed the Moscow summer games along with 64 other countries and territories, after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan the previous year. The Soviet Union, in turn, protested against the US’s move by boycotting the 1984 Los Angeles summer Olympics with its allies. The IOC’s response to the US’s decision came 55 days before the Winter Olympics take place in February in Beijing. Earlier, the president of the IOC, Thomas Bach, said that his organisation cannot be expected to solve problems that politicians themselves have failed to clear up. “Expecting that Olympic Games can fundamentally change a country, its political system or its laws, is a completely exaggerated expectation,” said Bach, a German national. “The Olympics cannot solve problems that generations of politicians have not solved.” The growing calls to boycott the Winter Olympics come at a time when China’s relationship with many western capitals continues to deteriorate over Beijing’s treatment of its Uyghur population, and, more recently, one of its highest-profile tennis stars, Peng Shuai. The IOC in the past few weeks held two calls with the Chinese athlete, whose November essay on China’s social media platform Weibo sparked a huge debate outside the country. In the now-censored lengthy post, she accused a retired senior official of having coerced her into sex. The IOC’s approach, which it dubbed as “quiet diplomacy” or “silent diplomacy”, has been criticised by human rights organisations. They alleged that the organisation was engaged in a “publicity stunt” for Beijing. “I hugely disagree,” said Samaranch in response to a journalist’s question about his organisation’s handling of the Peng incident on Tuesday. “Everybody should be concentrating on the wellbeing of Peng Shuai and not trying to use this for any other purposes.” He added: “We did that silent diplomacy in Afghanistan, and it paid off beautifully for many many people … Don’t write off the silent diplomacy. It’s a very powerful tool.”A whistleblower guard who worked at the controversial immigration detention centre Brook House has told a public inquiry into abuses there that staff were “radicalised” into being racist because of a toxic culture. The public inquiry was launched after a BBC Panorama programme in September 2017 used undercover filming to expose a culture of abuse and humiliation of immigration detainees at the Home Office removal centre near Gatwick, run by the contractor G4S. Owen Syred, who worked at the centre for more than a decade, both as a detention custody officer and a welfare officer, told the inquiry on Tuesday that he had raised concerns about racism, violence, a lack of skills to deal with vulnerable people with complex problems, and an “us and them” culture between staff and detainees. He described one officer whose attitude changed after he started work at the centre. At first he had been polite and got along with everyone but then became a different person, Syred said. “Some staff got conditioned, almost like radicalised into stereotyping nationalities,” he said. He added that some staff either became racist after working at Brook House or, if they were racist already, became even more so. Syred told the inquiry that he saw former staff post on Facebook that they were members of the far-right groups Britain First or Knights Templar. “I do believe there were certain staff radicalised into being racist,” he said. One example of racism he cited was an officer who said: “I bloody hate this lot. No wonder I’m racist.” When a staff member was seen eating plantain crisps, Syred said, another officer had commented: “They are crisps for [N-word].” A third officer had said he didn’t care if he was racist, Syred told the inquiry. When Syred reported racist incidents in 2014 he was accused of being a grass and a snitch. He had notes stuck on his locker saying “N-lover” and “grass”. He told the inquiry staff had penalised him for caring about the detainees and referred to him in a derogatory way as “a cuddly care bear”. On one occasion, after he had eaten lunch with some detainees, he had been asked: “Why are you sitting with these animals?” Drug use and smuggling were rife and Syred said he believed some officers may have been involved. He said a detainee had offered him £25,000 to collect drugs from a restaurant in a nearby town and bring them into the detention centre. In 2017, he said, he saw a popular and “loud” guard punching a detainee – who was already successfully restrained – two or three times in the face. He said he had been fearful of reporting the attack because of the earlier bullying and intimidation campaign against him for being a “grass”. The inquiry is focusing on the period between April and August 2017 and scrutinising the culture and attitudes among staff. After the Panorama broadcast, 10 members of staff were dismissed or resigned. Despite a police investigation no prosecutions were brought but two former detainees successfully argued for a full independent investigation. Serco took over the running of Brook House from G4S in May 2020. Callum Tulley, a guard at the centre, approached the BBC about his concerns and then filmed undercover at the centre. He recorded one G4S officer throttling a detainee, digging his fingers into the man’s neck and whispering in his ear: “Don’t move, you fucking piece of shit, I’m going to put you to fucking sleep.” G4S said after the Panorama revelations that an internal investigation was under way into the conduct of staff members shown in the programme. It said additional safeguards were being put in place to protect detainees, including extending the use of body-worn cameras to de-escalate potentially violent situations, appointing whistleblowing guardians on each wing of the centre to encourage staff to raise concerns, and increasing the frequency of random searches to detect drugs. The inquiry continues.Magnus Carlsen has all but retained his world title after defeating Russia’s Ian Nepomniachtchi for the third time in four games in the ninth encounter of their showdown on Tuesday in Dubai, opening a commanding 6-3 margin in the best-of-14 match with five contests remaining. The cracks that have emerged in the challenger’s veneer since Carlsen drew first blood with a psychologically taxing 7hr 45min epic on Friday – the longest game in the recognised 135-year history of world championship matchplay – culminated in a spectacular self-destruction on Tuesday as Nepomniachtchi made an extraordinary blunder in the middlegame that immediately pointed his Norwegian opponent towards a straightforward win in just under four hours. “Pressure gets to everybody,” the 31-year-old Carlsen said afterwards. “As I said before, no style points awarded. I’ll take it. It was a tough game in which I was under pressure both on the board and on the clock. Just to turn it around like that was unexpected.” Nepomniachtchi, playing with the favourable white pieces, arrived at the Dubai Exhibition Centre having shorn off his signature man bun on Monday’s rest day and started things off with a fresh opening to match his remade appearance. Opting for an English (1 c4) after playing the closed Ruy Lopez in each of his previous four white games, the Agincourt Defence followed (1 ... e6 2 g3 d5 3 Bg2) before the position entered rare territory after only five moves (4 ... Nc6 5 O-O Bc5). The position quickly transposed into a more mainstream line (6 d3 Nf6). But after 7 Nbd2 a5 8 Nb3, Carlsen found himself more than 20 minutes behind on the clock facing a complex position with no easy solutions. Nepomniachtchi’s first buckle came with 15 bxa3, which failed to press his early advantages by allowing Carlsen to recapture immediately and avoid the forced lines of the alternative. That he made the move in less than five minutes while enjoying more than a half-hour edge on the clock will only stoke a recurring criticism throughout this match: that he has been too hasty and impatient in the crucial moments. Chess engines tracking the game evaluated the position as dead even over the next series of moves though Nepomniachtchi appeared to have the better attacking chances with a mounting time advantage. The queens came off the board after Carlsen played the predicted 24 Qxe1+ and Nepomniachtchi recaptured (25 Rxe1), followed by 25 ... h5 26 Bxb7 Ra4. That was when Nepomniachtchi missed an elementary tactic with 27 c5?, a sensational blunder which trapped white’s bishop and sealed his doom. Carlsen, visibly relieved by the stroke of good fortune, took less than three minutes before playing the natural 27 ... c6. “You work a whole lifetime for one shot and this is what happens on the biggest scene,” the three-time British champion David Howell lamented from the commentary booth. “He’s probably never blundered like this in his whole career. It’s just so sad.” Within the hour it was finished after Nepomniachtchi resigned following Carlsen’s 39th move, ending his suffering after 3hr 51min. In the immediate aftermath Nepomniachtchi confessed he did not realise 27 c5 was a costly move until after Carlsen’s response. “Till [27 ... c6] was played I was quite happy,” he said. “Just some insanely bad luck. “I couldn’t imagine there is actually a way which exists to blunder in this position. The position was somewhere between slightly better and much better during most of the game ... It’s even funny there’s a way to blunder this position in one move. Who could know?” Entering the ninth game on Tuesday, the 31-year-old Nepomniachtchi was attempting to become only the third player in the centuries-spanning annals of world championship matches to win after trailing by two or more points. The others were Max Euwe, who trailed 5-2 against Alexander Alekhine before winning 15½-14½ in 1935, and Bobby Fischer, who trailed 2-0 against Boris Spassky before winning 12½-8½ in 1972. The task is that much taller after the shocking finish on Tuesday. Asked his thoughts on the state of the match with five games to go: “It’s worse than I expected.” Carlsen said the satisfaction of earning a win through hard work far exceeds having it handed to you by an opponent, but stopped short of expressing sympathy for his flailing opponent. “It’s the world championship,” he said. “Basically, you prefer to beat an opponent who’s playing at his very best. But if he’s not, you take it any day of the week.”Good morning. Before you Google Covid news, which was Australia’s top search in 2021, we have the latest on the Omicron variant in your morning mail today. Plus the details of a questionable Halloween outfit choice by an Andrew Lamming staffer and word on new music from former Silverchair frontman Daniel Johns. A staffer for federal MP Andrew Laming, Barclay McGain, has posed with a paintball-style toy assault rifle dressed as Kyle Rittenhouse for a delayed Halloween party. McGain posted the photo, in which he was dressed as the teenager who shot dead two Black Lives Matter protesters and was acquitted of all criminal charges, to social media with the caption: “Kyle Rittenhouse on neighbourhood watch duties in Brisbane’s south tonight.” McGain was sacked from his electorate officer position by Laming 18 months ago over a controversial schoolies video that denigrated Indigenous Australians. Six months later he was rehired by Laming. A Sydney GP who was left tens of millions of dollars by a patient has denied striking a deal with the man to keep him out of hospital if the doctor was included in his will, during civil proceedings in the New South Wales supreme court. The court heard Raymond McClure altered his will twice in the five months before he died with Dr Peter Alexakis eventually left 90% of his estate worth more than $30m. Previous wills made the Salvation Army and other individuals the benefactors of McClure’s estate. The Salvation Army’s legal secretary, Gary Masters, is challenging the validity of the final will, arguing that it was executed in suspicious circumstances and that Alexakis had undue influence over McClure. Alexakis says he had no knowledge McClure included him in the will and that he never discussed the extent of his estate with his former patient. Scientists say they have identified a “stealth” version of Omicron that cannot be distinguished from other variants using PCR tests. Researchers say it is too early to know whether the new form of Omicron will spread in the same way as the standard Omicron variant, but the WHO says the variant is “already everywhere” and travel bans will not stop its spread, as 43 countries in the European region impose bans. Australia Covid news dominated Australia’s Google searches over the past 12 months, but sports weren’t far from mind as the nation’s favoured non-pandemic internet search, according to Google data. Consumers using cryptocurrency exchanges and buy now, pay later services could be protected under the largest reform to Australia’s payments system in 25 years. The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, is promising a “comprehensive payments and crypto-asset reform plan” that could result in better regulation. New South Wales police have sought to confiscate and auction a station wagon belonging to a climate activist under the Proceeds of Crime Act. Blockade Australia says the 26-year-old had been living in the car when she was arrested in Newcastle. Anthony Albanese is prepared to override local branches to determine who will run in the key marginal electorate of Parramatta, amid allegations of unresolved branch-stacking in the seat. Two dozen Iraqi interpreters who helped Australian soldiers say they have been abandoned in their homeland by the Australian government. They say their applications to Australia have stalled and they have not heard from the Australian government for more than a year. The world French police have arrested a former member of the Saudi royal guard, Khalid Aedh al-Otaibi, for his suspected involvement in the murder of journalist Jamal Khashoggi. Donald Trump’s plan to launch “Truth Social” early next year may have hit a roadblock. The US regulators issued a request for information on the deal for the social media company that plans to challenge Twitter and Facebook. A swift reprisal package against Russia must be prepared now in case it invades Ukraine, the Latvian foreign minister has said. An estimated 100,000 Russian troops have gathered within striking distance of the borders. The “disastrous” way in which plastic is used in farming across the world is threatening food safety and potentially human health, according the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organization. A German court has convicted a 67-year-old electrician of assault for removing the testicles of several men at their request, causing one person to die. The defendant had initially also been charged with murder by omission but prosecutors later dropped that charge. Recommended reads “I know I have a tendency to go missing but I’m back now,” writes Daniel Johns in a letter to his fans announcing a new album after seven years. He described the upcoming album, FutureNever, set for release on 1 April 2022, as “a place where your past, present and future collide” and where “the quantum of your past experiences become your superpower”. Johns says the success of his tell-all Spotify podcast, Who Is Daniel Johns?, “helped me make peace with my past and I’m ready to tackle this new world bravely.” The Proposition is a grisly, sweat-stained tale of outback violence and colonial oppression that has lost none of its power in the 16 years since its release, writes Adam Fleet. The second feature film written by the musician Nick Cave “presents a compelling dilemma for our antihero and a nuanced view of characters who don’t fit into pigeonholes of ‘good’ or ‘bad’. In so doing, The Proposition is able to make a much bigger point about the realities of life during colonial rule in the 1880s.” Listen When they work, environmental offsets are supposed to prevent new roads, buildings and other major infrastructure from impacting negatively on the environment. But Guardian Australia has exposed serious concerns about the NSW offsets system, triggering multiple inquiries. In this episode of Full Story, environment reporter Lisa Cox explains to Jane Lee how Australia’s environmental offsets policy, which was designed to protect Australian wildlife, ended up failing it. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. The Q-League is a far cry from the refugee camps where some of its players learned to play football using scrunched up plastic bags. Guardian Australia’s sport editor, Mike Hytner, introduces this story about the inclusiveness of sport and a player’s memory of holding a real football for the first time for today’s Australia Reads. Listen to the best of Guardian Australia’s journalism on Australia Reads podcast on Wednesday, Friday and Sunday. Subscribe for free onApple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Novak Djokovic has been named in the Serbian team for January’s season-opening ATP Cup in Sydney, significantly increasing the likelihood he will play in the Australian Open. Media roundup A federal government scheme to entice doctors and nurses to the bush would see their university debts wiped if they meet certain criteria, the Daily Telegraph reports. An administrative error means the Northern Territory will not appoint a permanent treaty commissioner to replace Mick Dodson before the commission hands down its final report next year, reports the NT News. Coming up The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, will address the National Press Club. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.AirPods are bad, people. I’ve said it for years. In 2016, when Apple first debuted the overpriced accessories, I wrote that wireless headphones were like tampons without strings – missing the crucial feature that helps you find them when you need to. As the years have gone by, I’ve clung steadfastly to my wired headphone sets. (I say headphone sets, plural, because I need two pairs, one to plug into the headphone jack in my laptop and one to plug into the non-headphone jack in my iPhone. I frequently think that the people I can’t hear on Zoom calls are on mute when I actually just have the wrong pair of earbuds in my ears. I don’t care; I won’t change.) Now, all the smartest tech and security people are saying it too: wired headphones are simply better than wireless headphones. This moment of appreciation for the humble wired earbud (I still prefer the Apple version, which at $19 a pop come in at just over 10% of the cost of the third generation AirPods) comes courtesy of a peculiarly nasty dispatch from Politico about Kamala Harris’s preference for wired headphones over wireless ones. “Kamala Harris is Bluetooth-phobic,” read the headline of the piece, which went on to report that Harris uses wired headphones with her mobile phone because she “felt” and “believes” that Bluetooth headphones are a security threat. The piece cites an unnamed source who describes her aversion as “a bit paranoid” and questions whether “someone who travels with the nuclear football” should risk “spending time untangling her headphone wires”. But it fails to cite a cybersecurity expert, who could have told its authors that Bluetooth’s security vulnerability is not so much a “feeling” as a “reality” and that “someone who travels with the nuclear football” has a slightly more complicated threat model than the average iPhone user. (None of the three reporters bylined on the piece responded to my query about whether they had consulted any security researchers.) Bluetooth technology has been around since the 1990s, and while its security has improved over the years, it remains vulnerable to “man in the middle attacks”, cybersecurity researcher and writer Kim Crawley told me. That means that an attacker could intercept and decrypt the signal between the phone and the Bluetooth device, allowing them to listen in to whatever audio is being transmitted. “If Kamala Harris is using wired earbuds, then the communications going between her phone and her ears can’t be intercepted there,” said Crawley. “I would presume that Ms Harris is privy to a lot of top secret and classified information and that top secret and classified information could be going through her phone, so no I don’t think that’s overly paranoid.” Bluetooth signals are encrypted, but just like a lock on a door, encryption is a “barrier”, not a guarantee, Crawley said. Locks, after all, can be broken. Harris’s calls might still be vulnerable to interception at a different point (such as through the mobile phone network), but by eschewing wireless headphones, she is eliminating one possible “attack surface”, in cybersecurity lingo. Considering that a Bluetooth signal can extend 100m from the device and that an attacker might just look like a random person playing with her phone, using wired headphones is a pretty sensible precaution for a person with access to highly sensitive information and reason to believe they might be the target of attacks. This doesn’t mean that regular people have to abandon their AirPods, Crawley said. While some “high security computing environments” bar the use of any Bluetooth devices, including keyboards or computer mice, cybersecurity decisions should generally be tailored to your individual needs and vulnerabilities. “If there’s a man-in-the-middle attack and the only result is the cyber-attacker knows we like listening to the Spice Girls, that’s not a big problem,” Crawley said. My own aversion to AirPods is not the result of any high level threat modelling exercise (though the ever present anxiety of losing two exorbitantly expensive items does represent a threat to my sense of security). I just have a healthy skepticism of new products described as revolutionary by raging capitalists (something that served me well during my six years as a tech reporter) and a Boomerish aversion to many things new. I’ve managed to maintain this stance for long enough that wired headphones have achieved a certain level of retro cool, according to the Wall Street Journal, which last month reported on the rash of “fashionable young celebrities” who have been spotted “strutting around town with blatantly corded headphones”. This has provided me with what may just be the purest joy a single and childless 38-year-old woman can hope for in this life: the joy of being proven right. • This article was amended on 8 December 2021. An earlier version described Bluetooth technology as “having been around since the late 1980s”, rather than the 1990s.It’s getting to be something of a habit. Every morning a minister gets sent out to face the national media and every morning he or she crashes and burns. For much of the last week it’s been the No 10 party everyone but No 10 seems to know took place that’s been the problem. Tuesday’s disaster, though, was a welcome change for Boris Johnson. It was a disaster almost all of Dominic Raab’s own making. In his newly demoted role of justice secretary, Raab had hoped to be talking about a new “get tough” prisons policy. Instead he was subjected to a stream of questions about his laissez-faire approach to helping Afghans escape to the UK while in charge of the Foreign Office after the release of Raphael Marshall’s whistleblowing report to the foreign affairs committee. Raab is on a short fuse at the best of times – just check out the unidentified bodies in the Thames – and you could sense the anger vein pulsing through the airwaves as Nick Robinson gave him the run around on Radio 4’s Today programme. How come we had only repatriated 15,000 Afghans? Raab bristled. That was actually quite a lot, he said. More than any other country except the US. Robinson wondered if he was dealing with an idiot. That was because we had many more people to whom we had promised help. And we had only managed to get a fraction out of the country. It all went downhill from there. Raab was adamant that most Afghans couldn’t be allowed into the UK because they didn’t have the right documentation. Largely because we hadn’t supplied it. And he was making no apologies for having wanted the spreadsheet of applicants correctly filled in because it was quite hard to read under the glare of the sun on a Cretan beach when the sea was closed and he didn’t want to make mistakes. Two to three hours to make a decision sounded quite reasonable when you were a bit pissed after a couple of lunchtime mojitos. Plus it was absurd to suggest Marshall would have been left to read all the emails on his own. There was always one other person around to do the photocopying. “So what lessons do you think you’ve learned?” Robinson asked for the seventh time in seven minutes. Raab couldn’t think of any. Other than not to be volunteered to do the government’s dirty work again any time soon. A decision that was reinforced when he turned up in the Sky studios to be asked by Kay Burley why he thought he had been sacked as foreign secretary if he had handled the withdrawal from Afghanistan so brilliantly. Boris telling him he needed a new challenge didn’t sound quite so convincing now he came to think about it. Not necessarily to Raab’s advantage, it became all too clear that Dom was by no means the only senior member of the Foreign Office team to be dozing on the job, when the foreign affairs committee took evidence from Laurie Bristow, the former ambassador to Afghanistan, and Philip Barton, the top civil servant in the Foreign Office. While Bristow came across as diligent and prepared to go the extra mile, Barton was just a walking disaster area. A total shambles. To call him unimpressive really doesn’t begin to do him justice. If he really is the best our civil service can produce it’s a wonder we haven’t gone to war with almost everyone. Out of carelessness, if nothing else. Tom Tugendhat, the committee chair, opened with some tough questions on Marshall’s leaked document. How many people had the Foreign Office expected to evacuate from Afghanistan? 7,000, Barton replied confidently. He was unable to account for why the UK had managed to airlift 15,000 to safety while still leaving up to 10 times that number behind. Then there was very little for which he could offer an explanation. Thousands of emails unanswered? Just normal Foreign Office practice. Did the committee have any idea how many emails the FO got each day? You couldn’t possibly expect staff to answer them all and still get to knock off at five o’clock every afternoon. What followed was a cross-party pile on. A very cross party. There was no split on party lines: each committee member was furious about what had been leaked to them. Barton soon made things worse by telling everyone that he had only come back from holiday on the 26 August – 11 days after the fall of Kabul. On reflection, he said, he wouldn’t make the same mistake again. But he didn’t think it would have made any difference if he had come back. Partly because he was so useless and partly because he was so forgettable, staff had no idea who he was. Though he could assure everyone the crisis centre had been adequately staffed at all times. How he knew, given he wasn’t there, was never explained. Then we came to the mystery of how the stray dogs managed to get the last flight out of Kabul. The rumours were that the order had come direct from the prime minister’s wife via No 10. How was this possible, asked Tory Alicia Kearns. How could some animals get priority over people? This wasn’t what had happened, said Barton, who was by now reduced to shambling free association. No prime minister, minister or civil servant had chartered the plane. The Dogs of War had emailed London of their own accord to make the booking. And yes, it was a shame that some of those who wanted to be evacuated hadn’t shown the same level of initiative. The soldiers had questioned the dogs on their way into the airport, but been reassured when Gen Cockapoo had barked the necessary orders. How had the dogs found their long walk to freedom? Ruff! Labour’s Chris Bryant injected an overdose of reality. He had just seen a copy of a letter sent by Trudy Harrison, the prime minister’s private secretary, to Pen Farthing which placed Johnson front and centre of the decision to evacuate the mutts. It was almost as though a denial from No 10 was proof that something had happened. As with the parties for which ITV had just obtained video proof of No 10 staff joking about how to deny them. It was two gotcha moments that encapsulated the bankruptcy at the heart of this government. In any normal world there would be a spate of resignations. Starting with Johnson, Raab and Barton. Barton mumbled something about not knowing anything about the thing he appeared to be covering up. Bryant merely repeated what was in the letter and Barton fell silent. This was about the high point of his testimony. It was as if he had taken psychotropic drugs that had short-circuited his two remaining brain cells and from then on he could only repeat himself in ever more defensive and staccato sentences. “On reflection,” he mumbled. “You’re beginning to sound platitudinous,” Tugendhat observed. Which was being kind. The reality was far worse. It had actually been a stroke of luck that Johnson, Raab, Barton and his opposite numbers in the defence department and the Home Office had been on hols at the same time. If they’d all been in the UK, who knows how many more Afghans would have needlessly died. John Crace and Zoe Williams will be live on stage in London at a Guardian Live event on 13 December. Join the conversation online by booking tickets here. A Farewell to Calm by John Crace (Guardian Faber, £9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The splashiest new venue in Paris fashion, the setting for a Chanel catwalk show bedazzled with pearls and sequins, is a workshop that celebrates the old-fashioned art of craft-made clothes that last a lifetime. Designer Virginie Viard took only the briefest of bows at Chanel’s Métiers d’art show. Instead the spotlight fell on the 600 embroiderers, pleaters, goldsmiths and other artisans who work at the state of the art building, le19M, where it was held. Victoire, a machinist in her early 20s, gave a pre-show demonstration of Chanel’s trademark quilted stitching while Marina, a jewellery maker, talked show guests through the creation of a pair of the brand’s double-C earrings. Fashion made at le19M will be beyond the budget of all but the wealthiest consumers but the principle of trendless clothing that is made to last, which seemed an anachronism on the verge of extinction while the industry was in its imperial phase of unbridled expansion, is once more in step with the spirit of the times. And a show event that highlights the talents of those behind the scenes – a contrast to when Karl Lagerfeld was Chanel’s larger-than-life frontman – reflects a sustainability-influenced shift in the industry to considering how clothes are made, as well as how they look. “When you think of a fashion atelier, you imagine something old,” said Bruno Pavlovsky, Chanel’s president of fashion, before the show. “We wanted to build somewhere where young people would want to work, so we tried not to make it boring.” An exoskeleton of white concrete pylons wrap around the seven-storey building like a giant web of silk threads and the courtyard garden is modishly accessorised with beehives and nesting boxes. Pavlovsky believes that recruiting a new generation to learn skills sidelined by the rise of mass manufacturing is essential to futureproofing fashion. The workshops will take commissions from other top houses including Valentino, Balenciaga and arch-rival Dior as well as from Chanel. Le19M is named both after one of Coco Chanel’s lucky numbers and after its 19th arrondissement location in a Paris suburb. Chanel tends to fetishise a haughty, narrow vision of Parisian chic, but Viard seems to be nudging away from snobbishness into an aesthetic that acknowledges the Paris beyond Haussman’s boulevards. Viard said she wanted the Métiers d’art collection to be “metropolitan but sophisticated” and asked the rapper MC Solaar (real name Claude M’Barali), who grew up in the neighbouring area of Saint-Denis, to write an accompanying text. The celebrated tweed jackets came as bomber jackets, worn with culottes that looked like basketball shorts. There were bleached jeans, and a tracksuit embroidered with the Chanel double-C. Chanel this week faced a brutal social media backlash after TikTok influencers roasted the brand for the disappointing contents of a £600 advent calendar. “Unboxing” videos displaying Chanel stickers, temporary tattoos and plastic snow globes went viral, and outrage spread to Instagram, where under a Chanel post of a film trailing the Métiers d’art show, one commenter asked if the film was funded by advent calendar sales. “Perhaps we made a mistake,” admitted Pavlovsky. “We are taking the matter very seriously.” Chanel have previously shown Métiers d’art collections in New York, Moscow, Edinburgh and Dubai, but with this show concentrated on the brand’s French identity. With travel restrictions tightening once again, it seems globetrotting does not speak to the zeitgeist.Three weighing-room valets who gave evidence last week to the disciplinary hearing in which Robbie Dunne is accused of bullying and harassing his fellow rider Bryony Frost between February and September last year refused to work for Frost when she took two rides at Fontwell Park on Tuesday. Graham Piper, Lewis Piper and Mark Sinfield gave evidence to the hearing over a confrontation between the two riders at Southwell last September after a race in which Dunne’s mount, Cillian’s Well, suffered a fatal injury. During the incident, Dunne is alleged to have “promised” Frost that he would put her “through a wing [of a fence]” when riding against her in the future. Their apparent boycott of Britain’s most successful female rider, who told the hearing last week that she felt “isolated” in the weighing room after making a formal complaint against Dunne, emerged when Chris Maude, a former jockey and now master valet who employs all three men, gave evidence on Tuesday. Asked by Louis Weston QC, who is presenting the British Horseracing Authority’s case against Dunne, if he was aware that the valets had refused to work for Frost at Fontwell, Maude replied: “I did, yes. I think they’re upset that it’s been thought and been in the press that they condone any sort of bullying behaviour.” He added: “I think they were very upset that their names have been in the press and they’ve found the whole thing quite harrowing to be honest. So they said they would rather not work for her today.” Earlier on Tuesday, Dunne himself gave evidence in his defence, including his account of the confrontation at Southwell as well as several more incidents over a seven-month period in 2020 which the BHA suggests amount to a targeted campaign of bullying and harassment. Dunne told the hearing that no complaints had been made against him until 8 September 2020, a day after he allegedly received a phone call in which a threat was made to “break his legs” if he did not alter his behaviour towards Frost. He also suggested in his witness statement to the hearing that an incident at Stratford in July 2020, when he was seen to remonstrate with Frost as horses were pulling up after a race, was the first time he had confronted her and that previously his relationship with her had been “good or perfect”. However, Weston suggested that Dunne’s targeting of Frost predated the Stratford incident, and asked him about a tweet he sent shortly before the Virtual Grand National in April 2020, a simulation to replace the abandoned Grand National at Aintree in which Frost had been due to ride Yala Enki. The tweet read: “If Yala Enki wins this cartoon race, wonder will the interview be as far fetched as they do be in the real race?” Weston repeatedly asked Dunne why he had “targeted” Yala Enki out of the 40 horses in the race, and while the jockey admitted it had been “unprofessional” to send the tweet, he did not say why he had done so. Eventually, Weston said: “Try harder. May I suggest you’re lying about it? Why did you do it?” Dunne replied: “I’ve said it was unprofessional, I’ve said it was inappropriate.” Weston responded: “It’s not unprofessional, you were bullying her.” After watching a video of the fall at Southwell in which Cillian’s Well was killed, Dunne said Frost’s mount, Wisecracker, “comes straight across my horse” and “causes my horse to fall, fatally injured”. He insisted that when he subsequently told Frost he would put her through the wing of a fence, it “wasn’t a threat, it was a figure of speech”, adding that it “was not a threat to physically harm her”. The former champion jockey Richard Johnson also gave evidence to the hearing on Tuesday, telling the panel he had witnessed the subsequent confrontation between the two and that he “did not remember” Dunne threatening to put Frost through a wing. “It’s a phrase I’ve heard lots of times in the heat of the moment,” Johnson said, “and never seen anyone do.”HarperCollins will pull a planned book by former CNN anchor Chris Cuomo, the publisher announced Tuesday. The book, titled Deep Denial, was to be released in the fall of 2022 through Custom House, an imprint of William Morrow. “Custom House does not intend to publish the Chris Cuomo book,” said a William Morrow spokesperson, according to the Hollywood Reporter. The reversal comes days after CNN fired Cuomo after an investigation into assistance he provided his brother, former New York Governor Andrew Cuomo, to fight the accusations of sexual misconduct that ended in the governor’s resignation in August 2021. Chris Cuomo was suspended, and later fired, by CNN last week after the New York State attorney general, Letitia James, released documentation showing that the host of Cuomo Prime Time pressed sources for information about his brother’s accusers, corresponded with the governor’s staff and helped shape the governor’s responses to the charges. “This is not how I want my time at CNN to end but I have already told you why and how I helped my brother,” he said in a statement. “So let me now say as disappointing as this is, I could not be more proud of the team at Cuomo Prime Time and the work we did.” The investigation by James’s office found that Andrew Cuomo sexually harassed at least 11 women. On Sunday evening, hours after the firing, Chris Cuomo faced his own allegation of workplace sexual harassment. The attorney Debra Katz said her client alleged “serious sexual misconduct” and had contacted CNN about the allegation before Cuomo’s firing. On Monday, Cuomo announced that he would also step back from his SiriusXM radio show, citing the need to focus on his family. According to a description by the publisher, the book was intended to be a “provocative analysis of the harsh truths that the pandemic and Trump years have exposed about America – about our strength and our character – and a roadmap of the work needed to make our ideals match reality”.A leaked letter suggests Boris Johnson and the Foreign Office may have covered up the prime minister’s involvement in airlifting more than 150 dogs and cats from Afghanistan, a senior MP has said. On Tuesday it emerged that the charity worker Pen Farthing received a letter from Johnson’s parliamentary secretary saying Farthing, his staff and the animals could be rescued from Kabul amid the Taliban takeover in August, when thousands of Afghans with UK connections were also trying to flee. The letter, published on Twitter by LBC’s Theo Usherwood, was signed Trudy Harrison, MP for Copeland and parliamentary private secretary to the prime minister, and says: “I have received confirmation … that you, your staff and their dependents are permitted to travel.” All 68 people were to be provided with a place on a RAF plane, it continued, while the animals could be “evacuated on a separate, chartered flight”. Earlier, Johnson’s spokesperson denied any intervention by the prime minister after claims made by a Foreign Office diplomat-turned-whistleblower about the chaotic evacuation, including the animal airlift which triggered claims pets were prioritised over people. “At no point did the prime minister intervene,” Johnson’s spokesperson said. “We have always prioritised people over animals, as we said both during and subsequently.” Responding to the letter, No 10 insisted: “This was an operational decision … This letter was nothing to do with Ms Harrison’s role as the PM’s PPS, she was acting in her capacity as a constituency MP.” Earlier in the day, Johnson had insisted he did not personally intervene to force Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, to let the rescue go ahead, describing the claims as “complete nonsense”. His spokesperson also denied any involvement by Carrie Johnson, who Farthing’s allies had been in contact with. Harrison’s letter was intended to be shown to British soldiers guarding access to RAF planes in Kabul as thousands of Afghans were desperate to be evacuated to the UK. On Tuesday the foreign affairs select committee concluded a hearing on Afghanistan after the whistleblower testimony of former civil servant Raphael Marshall, who also accused Johnson of issuing “an instruction” to ensure that 173 dogs and cats looked after by Nowzad were rescued. Chris Bryant, a Labour MP, suggested there had been a concerted attempt to “cover up” Johnson’s personal intervention. He read out Farthing’s letter to the senior Foreign Office civil servants who had spent the past hour defending the Afghanistan withdrawal and insisted no animals were prioritised over humans. “This doesn’t equate with what you’ve told us, does it?” Bryant said. Philip Barton, the FCDO’s most senior civil servant, insisted he had not meant to mislead MPs, telling them: “We’ve set out in good faith our understanding of the position. I’m not aware of the letter you’re talking about, I’m very happy to look at it but we have not set out this afternoon to mislead you.” But Bryant suggested the committee had been told a different version of events. He said: “The PM’s fingers are all over this, aren’t they? And you’re just trying – I’m hesitant to use the words ‘cover up’ – but that’s what it feels like.” The exchanges follow a day of claim and counterclaim over the issue. Downing Street has consistently denied the prime minister or his wife had become personally involved, although allies of Farthing, a former royal marine running the Nowzad animal charity, said they believed Wallace had been overruled by Johnson. Dominic Dyer, an animal rights campaigner working with Pen Farthing and his animals from Afghanistan, said he was confident “pressure had been brought to bear” by Johnson to allow the airlift to go ahead despite MoD objections. The intensive lobbying of No 10 had also included texting the prime minister’s wife with updates “every few days”, Dyer said. Dyer describes himself as a friend of Carrie Johnson, who has a longstanding interest in animal rights campaigns. Wallace had been blocking the airlift of Farthing, staff at the charity and the animals, arguing their rescue could not be a priority when the military were scrambling to airlift thousands of others at risk. That changed suddenly when Wallace announced a surprise U-turn in a tweet at 1.33am on 25 August. Dyer said that could only have come about after an intervention from No 10. “I’ve been around politics a long time. You don’t get a situation where the secretary of state changes his view and puts out a tweet at 1.33am unless pressure has been brought to bear. I believe the PM got involved,” the campaigner said. The story behind the controversial rescue of Farthing has come back in focus in the light of Marshall’s testimony to the foreign affairs select committee, released overnight. In it Marshall wrote that the US and UK militaries were taking “extreme measures” to preserve limited evacuation capacity at Kabul airport on 25 August. “In this context, we received an instruction from the prime minister to use considerable capacity to transport Nowzad’s animals,” Marshall wrote, a decision that he said meant “British soldiers were put at risk” to help the evacuation go ahead. “The protection of domestic animals was not a UK war aim in Afghanistan,” Marshall added in his testimony.If Manchester City get beaten in a Champions League dead rubber and nobody is there to see it, did it really happen? Certainly that will be the only crumb of comfort for Pep Guardiola as he debriefs this silent shambles, in which his half-interested side were serially cut open, Kyle Walker managed to get himself suspended for the last-16 and the only flicker of experimentation was a pointless three minutes given to Cole Palmer at the end. Normally City are peerless when the stakes are at their lowest. How do you think they won all those League Cups? But here they seemed to get sucked into a perfect vortex of disinterest: some combination of the situation and the empty stadium and the bitter cold and the fact that Leipzig still needed a result to seal third place and qualify for the Europa League. Few City players distinguished themselves here. Zack Steffen was good in goal. Riyad Mahrez scored a late consolation. But the centre-halves were poor, the midfield curiously underpowered and Kevin de Bruyne some way off the pace, even if he could still have snatched a point with a rasping shot at the death. “In the first half we lacked rhythm, but the second half was much better,” Guardiola argued. “One or two mistakes, they punished us. In general we made an incredible group stage. We qualified with one game left in a tough group, so we are more than satisfied.” With City already guaranteed top spot in the group, a certain churn and rotation was inevitable. João Cancelo, Bernardo Silva, Ederson and Rodri were all rested. And yet the team Guardiola named was still unnervingly strong, an XI of established full internationals. De Bruyne returned in midfield, with Phil Foden and Mahrez either side of Jack Grealish up front. The message to City’s impressive band of youngsters was clear enough. This is still the Champions League. You earn this. No freebies, and no fans either. The RB Arena was closed to the public in light of Germany’s alarming rise in Covid cases, and though City established themselves as the kings of pandemic football last season they were a little sleepy here. Leipzig may be at something of a crossroads at the minute, with coach Jesse Marsch sacked at the weekend and the club lying 11th in the Bundesliga, but here their movement was crisp and sharp. In the sublime Dominik Szoboszlai, as well as their spirited defensive resistance in the second half, there remains plenty here to build on. On 23 minutes they found a way through. It was an aimless-looking goal-kick from Peter Gulacsi, but City were slow on the second ball and in a flash Konrad Laimer had set Szoboszlai clear with a delightful swerving through-pass. Szoboszlai has been described as Hungary’s most talented footballer since Ferenc Puskas, although the playmaker is yet to really set the Bundesliga aflame since his move in January. Here, though, his talent was in full evidence: the clever run, the turn of pace, the quick feet to take the ball around Steffen and finish into an empty net. City began to string some moves together as the half went on, but they still looked brittle in defensive transition. Emil Forsberg could have made it 2-0 within seconds of the restart. André Silva certainly should seven minutes before half-time. Raheem Sterling replaced Foden at the break, with Grealish switching to the left and Ilkay Gündogan pushing up, but there was still precious little intensity to go with their usual possession and territory. With 20 minutes left, John Stones was unwisely drawn towards the ball, Forsberg burst clear and Silva finished with men queueing up to shoot. That was probably the moment when Guardiola realised he should probably have spent his Tuesday evening curled up with a box set. Even the sight of Mahrez heading in Oleksandr Zinchenko’s cross from close range failed to move him. As the game leaked away the futility of the whole enterprise seemed to dawn on City all at once. With eight minutes left Walker was sent off for a childish hack on Szoboszlai. “A red card, definitely,” Guardiola admitted afterwards. Still, inexplicably, James McAtee and Roméo Lavia continued to shiver on the bench. Palmer was restricted to a single touch of the ball. And yet despite everything, City might yet have nicked a point through Grealish and De Bruyne, who both saw shots drift agonisingly wide. It was a reminder, if needed, that even when they are quite bad, City are never really that bad. This was a nightmarish evening, but not one you feel will leave any real scars. After all, the hard work had already been done. Besides, if you are going to implode in calamity, you may as well do it in a game like this.It has come to the point where Boris Johnson and No 10’s denials that an event took place have diminishing credibility. All the evidence points to a party having taken place in Downing Street on 18 December, when London was subject to restrictions on indoor gathering. Testimony from many sources says No 10 staff held a party that day, with a Secret Santa, refreshments and games. A video has now emerged of aides joking about the gathering and its lack of social distancing. But Johnson’s official spokesperson was adamant on Monday. “There was no Christmas party. Covid rules have been followed at all times.” Johnson himself says he is “satisfied” that no rules were broken. The same gulf between reality and No 10’s doublespeak is evident in the case of the rescue of Pen Farthing’s animals from Afghanistan. A whistleblowing Foreign Office civil servant has given evidence that the prime minister was involved in ordering the dogs to be rescued instead of humans, potentially depriving people of life-saving spaces on a plane. Johnson and No 10 were adamant the idea that he or his wife, Carrie Johnson, ordered that decision was “utter nonsense”. But within hours a letter emerged from Johnson’s parliamentary private secretary, Trudy Harrison – his closest MP aide – giving Farthing authorisation to proceed with evacuation of his staff and animals. And, as ever, it is the appearance of cover-ups that has made things worse for No 10, with people close to the events pushed to speak out by the sense of untruthfulness emanating from Downing Street. The multiple leaks from within the civil service are also a sign that all is not well in Johnson’s administration, with deep discontent in Whitehall. Even Johnson’s supporters would concede he has a chequered relationship with the truth, stretching back to his days as a young journalist during which he was sacked for fabricating a quote. In 2004, Michael Howard sacked him from the shadow cabinet after he lied about an affair. Johnson reportedly told Howard: “It’s my private life. I have the right to lie about my private life.” Since becoming prime minister, there have been a string of occasions on which Downing Street’s integrity has been challenged. Among the many examples was the furore over whether the prime minister lied to the Queen about his reasons for proroguing parliament – an allegation which he denied. Then came Johnson’s reported quote that he would rather “let the bodies pile high in their thousands” than order another lockdown. And while Downing Street insisted the allegation was untrue, many media outlets – BBC, ITV and Daily Mail – reported it all the same, citing sources who were allegedly in the room when the statement was made. And there is Wallpapergate: the ongoing saga of who financed the £58,000 in lavish renovations to Johnson’s No 11 flat, with the prime minister accused of having been evasive over how the bill was paid. Johnson insisted he had stumped up – but it later emerged that money was loaned by the Conservative party and subsequently by the millionaire donor and Tory peer Lord Brownlow. The Electoral Commission is investigating. Aides in Downing Street will now be agonising over whether this latest story about the Christmas party has the dreaded quality of “cut through” with the public. They believe the public is not that bothered about how the prime minister funded his flat, or whether he made a comment about Matt Hancock being “fucking hopeless”. But, like the Barnard Castle affair, where Johnson’s aide Dominic Cummings was found to have gone on a drive during lockdown to test his eyesight, and Hancock’s resignation for having an affair when socialising was banned, this story seems to contain a strong element of hypocrisy. It is the sense that the rules did not apply to Johnson and those around him, and their efforts to dupe the public about what really happened, that could leave an enduring sense of rancour.