Click here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.Click here to access the print version. Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Try telling Collin Morikawa that the Hero World Challenge is little more than an end-of-season cash-grab for invited stars of golf. Morikawa is just 18 holes from capping a wonderful year, in which he won his maiden Open championship and the European Tour’s order of merit, by reaching No 1 in the world rankings for the first time. Morikawa arrived in the Bahamas knowing only victory would take him to this cherished position. He used round three to demonstrate his appetite for the challenge. A 64 afforded the 24-year-old a five-shot lead at 18 under par, with Brooks Koepka leading what for now at least looks a futile charge. Morikawa, who got engaged here earlier in tournament week, is of a mind to end 2021 on yet another high. He is not, however, even close to admitting victory is within his grasp. “On this course, if there’s not a lot of wind, a lot of guys out here can make a lot of birdies early on,” said Morikawa. “I just have to go out and just play the way I have been and be ready by hole one and play all the way through. Nothing’s going to be a gimme tomorrow. “I don’t know if ‘comfortable’ is the word, it’s just exciting. You love being in these spots and you don’t get them every week. You wish you did, but when you do, you want to take advantage of them, so hopefully we can take advantage tomorrow. “I called my coach this morning because yesterday the driver wasn’t working. I figured out a little thing on the range and it still wasn’t working great but I found something on 16, just something that I can use for tomorrow, and everything else feels pretty good from there.” The opposition have been duly warned. Morikawa’s round was kick-started by an eagle three at the 3rd. Further shots were collected at the 4th, 9th, 10th, 11th, 14th and 15th. It was hard to believe this is his competitive debut at Albany. At the last, where Morikawa appeared in minor trouble, he executed a glorious bunker shot to leave a tap-in for par. “Five back, so I’ve got to do something,” Koepka admitted. “It’s always nice to be in the last group, but I have still got to play good.” Koepka would be closer to the leader, but for a double bogey at the par three 8th. Patrick Reed and Viktor Hovland each posted 67 to move to 12 under par. Sam Burns and Daniel Berger are on the same score, the former having produced a painful double bogey of his own at the 18th. Bryson DeChambeau, who led going into day three, mumped and moaned his way to a 73 in Morikawa’s company. DeChambeau suddenly trails by eight. The English duo of Tyrrell Hatton and Matt Fitzpatrick are minus nine and minus seven respectively. Rory McIlroy was chugging along at six under for the tournament when he reached the 11th tee. What happened next will not feature in any McIlroy highlights reel. He carved his tee shot to the right, and a lost ball was the result. Shot three from the tee found the fairway but the Northern Irishman proceeded to pull his fourth into rocky ground. McIlroy chipped short of the green and subsequently over the putting surface. Add in a third wedge shot and two putts and McIlroy finally returned an unseemly nine. He later signed for a 75, meaning a minus five total. The Christmas break cannot come soon enough for him. Not so for Tiger Woods. The tournament host, who has been at Albany all week, appeared at the bottom of the practice range on Saturday afternoon where he hit a variety of shots, including with a driver. A relaxed Woods signed autographs and posed for pictures with fans thereafter. Speculation is rising that Woods, who was seriously injured in a car crash in February, could make an unlikely playing comeback alongside his son, Charlie, at this month’s PNC Championship in Orlando.After 178 years of history, mutual insurer LV= faces a crunch moment this week, when its members decide whether to sell to US private equity firm Bain Capital. In a deal worth £530m that was first mooted a year ago, the battle for control of the firm once known as Liverpool Victoria will come to a head on Friday when its 1.1 million members cast their votes in a poll that could lead to the demutualisation of one of Britain’s oldest and largest customer-owned businesses. While the board of LV= insists that selling will protect the firm’s future – and is in the best interest of members – the tussle has caused political waves and caught the mood of wider changes in British society. By the end of this week, Britain may have one less mutual firm, a change that will highlight the trend towards an increasingly one-dimensional economy, where ownership of companies and wealth is concentrated in ever fewer hands. It’s a shift summed up by the tale of LV=. It was set up during the reign of Queen Victoria to help Liverpool’s working class pay for costly funerals, in a rejection of the economic status quo of the time, according to Joe Fortune, general secretary of the Co-operative party. “Given that trajectory, a sale to Bain Capital would be an incredibly sad moment for all those interested in the culture of the mutual movement,” he said. “We know the spread of ownership creates a more equal economy. “It’s important to have mutuals owned by millions of ordinary members who have a say over the decisions that business makes – decisions that take a longer-term look, aren’t motivated by short-term profit and have members’ interests at heart.” In recent decades the mutual sector has been whittled down, notably in the 1990s as building societies scrapped deeper links with their customers to embark on the pursuit of profit. This culminated in the 2008 financial crisis, when debt-laded ex-mutuals such as HBOS and Northern Rock collapsed spectacularly. Despite relatively broad cross-party support for alternative models of company ownership, few mutual giants remain: supermarkets-to-funeral service Co-Op Group and Nationwide building society are among the biggest. It’s fair to say that LV=’s members haven’t always been kept as well-informed about the proposed sale to Bain Capital as its mutual principles might suggest. City watchdog the Financial Conduct Authority has challenged the company about its engagement with its members. Prompted by the political and media noise around the deal, the board has made greater efforts to restate the benefits of the transaction and justify its decision to reject approaches by Royal London, a rival mutual insurer. The ballot will require three-quarters of voting members to back the Bain plan, with each of those 1.1 million members getting £100 in exchange. A smaller group of about 271,000 “with-profits” members would also be in line for enhancements and bonuses from a total pot of £533m – about £2,000 each, on top of the £100. The results will be announced on Friday afternoon. In this saga over its control, LV= has considered 12 bids since a strategic review last year concluded that the business lacked scale, had an insufficiently strong capital structure, and was badly in need of investment. The board made the case that carrying on without change might not work well for the firm. LV= was faced with putting member payouts at risk by investing its own capital, or selling to a bidder with deep pockets who could take those steps instead. The board said the choice of Bain Capital had not been made lightly, given the firm’s heritage, but it was the “right choice because it saves the future of LV=”. That’s as may be, but demutualisation means that after almost two centuries of history, a vital characteristic of the firm will vanish.Standing on an embankment knee deep in kikuyu grass, Stephen Osborn points over his alluvial plains to his potato crop. He’s expecting to get 12 tonnes of potatoes per acre this year. Stephen and his twin brother, Roger, are vegetable growers from Pitnacree, a highly fertile agricultural area surrounded by the rapidly expanding New South Wales Hunter Valley city of Maitland. The Osborn family have grown produce on their 120-hectare (300-acre) farm for the last 80 years, but now fear that potential changes to water-sharing rules could close their business. These fears have been sparked because the 10-year water-sharing plan that governs irrigators like the Osborns is coming to an end, with a new draft being prepared. In preparation for its release, the water division of the NSW Department of Planning, Industry and the Environment (DPIE) has notified irrigators of a proposed cease to pump rule which may replace the water-sharing plan. The current plan covers an extensive area, stretching from the Liverpool Ranges to the Newcastle coastline. Water managed under the current plan provides flows to the Ramsar-listed Hunter Estuary wetlands. Concerns around environmental water reaching these wetlands have prompted the DPIE to introduce a new ruling to protect environmental flows. For the Hunter Estuary, the environmental flow starts at the top of the catchment, comes through tidal pool areas and eventually enters the wetlands and then goes out to the ocean. In the replacement plan, the DPIE is seeking to put in place environmental flow rules to ensure enough water passes through the tidal pool to the estuaries during dry times. Environmental flow rules are normally in the form of cease to pump rulings. In tidal pool water sources, where water levels are based on tides, cease to pump rules are determined by salinity levels. These levels are measured by the electrical conductivity (EC) of water. In September this year, the DPIE proposed a cease to pump rule when the EC at Green Rocks, at Duckenfield near Maitland, reaches 4,000 EC, for all irrigators from the Hunter tidal pool. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter A review of this proposal showed that if this cease to pump ruling was enacted in 2019, no pumping in the whole of the Hunter tidal pool would have been allowed for 260 days of the year. Under the current plan there are three tidal pool water sources in the Hunter Estuary – the Wallis Creek, Paterson River and the Hunter River tidal pools. Presently, there are 204 water licences on all three tidal water pools. Tidal pools are the freshwater areas at the top of an estuary, which are impacted by both freshwater and saltwater. They are unique because the amount of water remains the same but the salinity of the water fluctuates dramatically. Irrigator Julia Wokes says that although her property is tidal, it is not saline. “I am further upstream, so having a cease to pump rule based on just one number denies the historical use of the river and the businesses that are based on it.” Wokes has irrigated from the Paterson tidal pool for the past 16 years, which has sustained her cattle-breeding enterprise and boutique fern nursery. Wokes laments the potential loss of productivity and fears the highly productive Hunter land will become “sterilised” without water. “You will not only lose profitability, but also farming expertise, which is inextricably linked to land,” Wokes says. Farmer and cafe owner Jesse Clarke runs Phoenix Park Farm, located to the east of Maitland on the fertile flood plains of the Hunter River. Offering a paddock to plate model, Clarke fears that the cease to pump ruling could dramatically impact his current farming operation. Adopting a form of agri-tourism, Clarke invites his customers to the farm, where they can pick up weekly chemical-free vegetable boxes, and access the on-farm Hutch Cafe. “With the veggie boxes and running the cafe, having a variety of produce is paramount, but without water security it will be almost impossible and we will have to scale back,” Clarke says. Scaling back for Clarke would mean producing less vegetables and resorting to just growing lucerne for hay, an outcome that would limit the availability of locally grown produce within the Maitland community. Describing the cease to pump ruling as a “one size fits all”, Dr Cameron Archer, the former principal of Tocal Agricultural College in Paterson, questioned the logic behind the proposal. He says that in the past producers have “self-regulated because no one is going to put saline water on their crop or pastures, they will simply cease to pump based on the salinity levels at their pump”. Tocal college provides practical agriculture, conservation and land management learning facilities on its 2,150-hectare (5,350-acre) campus and irrigates 80 to 120 hectares (200 to 300 acres) from the Paterson tidal pool. “[Without] the confidence to invest in irrigation, Tocal will see a decline in income for the farm and a decline in the effectiveness of the farm as a place for student education,” Archer says. He says “improvements should be made in the measurement and management of water, because an arbitrary cease to pump won’t achieve better outcomes for all users”. Dave Miller, a NSW-based water-sharing consultant, also states that “metering as well as extraction limits should be fundamental to all water-sharing plans”. In 2009, when the current water-sharing plan was established, it included an extraction limit, which was supposed to be the sustainable limit for extracting water from unregulated river systems. Miller says that such limits are “meaningless, as pumping from unregulated rivers is not often metered so no one really has a clue how much water is being extracted”. He goes on to explain that the problem has been apparent for over 20 years. “Until metering becomes mandatory for all unregulated river water users, extraction limits cannot be properly implemented,” Miller says. New metering rules are to come into effect for coastal regions on 1 December 2023. The Osborn family have been outliers in this field, supporting the use of metering for the last 10 years. The family installed meters on all their pumps, back when the current water-sharing plan was enacted. “We read the meters every year, and pass the data on to the water department, so we all know exactly how much water we use,” Stephen Osborn says. During the height of the 2019-20 drought, they used 330 of their 800 megalitre water licence. Over many years, the Osborns have been increasing the carbon level in their soils, to improve water retention. They sow green manure crops of peas, oats and forage sorghum to increase organic matter, and thus soil carbon. The Osborns say the rich alluvial plains are vital to provide food for the Hunter’s growing population. They also explain that self-regulation in any tidal pool is central, particularly when it comes to vegetable production, as they are sensitive to salinity. Developing a better understanding of how the Hunter Estuary will function in the future is vitally important from an environmental perspective, as well as for all other water users. Dr William Glamore, an associate professor at the Water Research Laboratory at the UNSW, has spent the last 15 years with his team working on a computer simulation model which uses data to see how water moves in the Hunter Estuary. The modelling has observed that parts of the estuary are exceedingly degraded, and any more stress on the river system will likely exacerbate the situation. “We need to stop the nutrients coming off the system, stop the erosion, and try to use nature-based solutions,” Glamore says. Guardian Australia contacted the office of the NSW water minister, Melinda Pavey, to ask why one location within the Hunter tidal pool was selected as the trigger for the cease to pump rule, and if other tidal pools in coastal catchments were also likely to see similar rules in their replacement plans. No reply was given. The draft replacement plan is due in December, with the date for the new water-sharing plan proposed for July 2022. Once gazetted under the Water Management Act 2000, the plans have legal effect for 10 years. Sophie Nichols is a Hunter Valley-based journalist. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityThe emergence of the Omicron variant shows that the world is “closer to the start of the pandemic than the end”, one of Britain’s most senior scientific figures has warned, as he lamented a lack of political leadership over Covid. Sir Jeremy Farrar, the director of the Wellcome Trust who stepped down as a government scientific adviser last month, said the progress in combatting Covid-19 since its emergence was “being squandered”. Writing in the Observer, he said rich countries had been taking “a very blinkered domestic focus, lulled into thinking that the worst of the pandemic was behind us”. He said while he was cautiously hopeful that current vaccines would protect against severe illness from Omicron, that may not be true for future variants. “The longer this virus continues to spread in largely unvaccinated populations globally, the more likely it is that a variant that can overcome our vaccines and treatments will emerge,” he writes. “If that happens, we could be close to square one. “This political drift and lack of leadership is prolonging the pandemic for everyone, with governments unwilling to really address inequitable access to the vaccines, tests and treatment. There have been wonderful speeches, warm words, but not the actions needed to ensure fair access to what we know works and would bring the pandemic to a close.” He said that the urgent action needed had not changed – “wearing masks indoors, increasing testing, social distancing, isolating if positive (with support to do so) and vaccination will all help to drive down transmission and protect against illness.” Farrar’s intervention came as a major charity raised concerns about the government’s booster jab campaign, which it sees as the best current method of combating the virus. Caroline Abrahams, charity director at Age UK, said the programme was “frankly in a mess”. She said: “It’s way behind where it should be, and to hear this week that as many as one in five care home residents have not yet had their boosters was nothing short of alarming.” She spoke out after some targets for GPs were suspended to allow them to concentrate on administering jabs. Routine health checks for the over-75s and for new patients may be deferred under the new guidance. “Against this context we agree that the top priority now is to turbo-charge the booster programme, to ensure as many older and vulnerable people as possible get their jabs, and fast,” said Abrahams. “In the end this situation is another demonstration of how underpowered our GP system has become. Unless and until we invest more heavily in it we will continue to see these hard choices arising whenever a crisis comes along, and that’s certainly not in any one’s interests, least of all older people’s.” Sajid Javid, the health secretary, called on all eligible people to have a booster before spending time with family this Christmas. “It’s absolutely crucial that everybody who is eligible gets their booster jab to top up their immunity before spending time with loved ones,” he said. “While our brilliant scientists learn more about the new Omicron variant, we need to do everything we can to strengthen our defences, and vaccines are the best way to do that.” On Saturday, Downing Street announced that it was introducing pre-departure tests for people travelling to the UK. From 4am on Tuesday, travellers will have to complete a lateral flow or PCR test 48 hours before entering the country. Nigeria has been added to the red list, and from 4am on Monday arrivals will have to quarantine in hotels. Officials said the moves came as evidence emerged that the Omicron strain had been reported in more than 40 countries, with apparent community transmission in places such as Norway. They also said there was evidence that the incubation period was shorter than for other variants. Labour had been pushing for the introduction of the tests. A Downing Street source said that new evidence about the spread of the variant and its characteristics had driven the decision. It will cause further frustration for the travel industry, which has been heavily affected by Covid restrictions. The sudden spread of Omicron has dismayed many scientists. “What has really surprised me has been the rapidity of the increase in numbers of cases being reported from South Africa,” said Prof François Balloux of University College London. “Cases are doubling at a rate I have never seen before. It is very worrying.” Early estimates have suggested this rise is being driven by the fact that the Omicron variant can infect between three and six times as many people as Delta, over the same time period. It is an alarming figure that has been balanced by early reports which have suggested the variant is, at present, less likely to lead to hospitalisation. However, scientists last week warned caution should be taken with such data. “It is already a tight situation. Even if Omicron is less likely to cause severe illness, it may still cause more hospitalisations and put further strain on the health service, because so many more people will become infected,” said Prof Rowland Kao, of Edinburgh University. There is also evidence that more than one in four (27%) British workers would turn up for work with symptoms of the Omicron variant because they needed the money, including 23% of those whose job puts them at increased risk of infection. Also, 16% of workers say they would be able to work from home, but are not allowed to by their employer, according to polling for the Royal Society for Arts, Manufacturers and Commerce (RSA). Just 31% say they would get support from their employer beyond statutory sick pay. “To secure the economic recovery, workers must be economically secure,” said Anthony Painter, RSA’s chief research officer. “In the short term, we need to see an ‘auto-furlough’ system and more generous sick pay, but long term, both the Conservatives and Labour must spell out how they will address the deep economic insecurity Covid has only exposed.” Saturday saw further demonstrations in Europe against various governments’ coronavirus measures. In Austria, the first country in the EU to announce that it is to make vaccination against Covid mandatory, more than 40,000 joined a protest in Vienna. The Dutch city of Utrecht saw several thousand demonstrate against restrictions that were introduced last weekend. Protesters carried banners reading “Medical Freedom Now!”. Many protesters denounced what they see as increasing pressure from the Dutch government to get vaccinated if they want to participate in regular society. In Frankfurt, Germany, police broke up a demonstration of several hundred people for failing to wear masks or maintain social distancing, using batons and pepper spray after they were attacked by a group of protesters. In Berlin, small groups gathered to protest after a large demonstration was banned.Australian children aged five to 11 could receive the Pfizer vaccine against Covid as soon as 10 January, following provisional approval by the country’s drugs regulator. The Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) green light, announced by the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, on Sunday will likely be followed by an independent recommendation from the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) to use the vaccine in that age group. Hunt told reporters the provisional approval was “about keeping our kids safe, keeping our families safe, keeping all Australians safe”. “From 10 January, Australian children will have access to Pfizer vaccines, and it is recommended for children right across Australia,” he said in Melbourne. Hunt said the TGA was also considering children’s doses of Moderna, the other mRNA vaccine, and will form a view on that “in the coming weeks”. The head of the TGA, Prof John Skerritt, said the Pfizer vaccine had been “extensively clinically tested” including a trial of 2,500 children aged five to 11. “The response of the body, the immune response, was identical to that in young adults,” he said. “There were … no safety problems identified in those trials. The children had some of the same things that adults get – tiredness, sore arms, headache and so forth – but these tended to be brief and fairly short-lived.” Skerritt said the children’s Pfizer was the “same vaccine” but “formulated differently for children” – using one-third of an adult dose. “It will be in a different colour, it will be in a vial that will have an orange cap to distinguish it from the adult ones, which are grey or purple.” Skerritt said there were 2.3 million Australian children in the five to 11 age group and currently one-fifth of all Covid cases were in the under-12 group. That “may actually be higher for the Omicron variant”, he said. Skerritt said while “most kids” got a mild infection from Covid, about one in 3,000 developed a multi-system inflammatory condition and “can end up being very sick for months”. After a slow start due to inadequate supplies of Pfizer and the blood clot warning applied to AstraZeneca, Australia’s vaccination program has recovered to world-leading rates. Hunt said 92.8% of Australians aged 16 and over have now had a first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine and 88% were double-dosed. Since vaccinations were opened to the 12 to 15 age group in September, more than three quarters (76.7%) in that cohort have received a first dose while two-thirds (67.8%) have had two doses. Despite the improvement, Indigenous Australians still lag others in their rates of vaccination. Hunt said on Sunday the addition of children aged five to 11 to the vaccine program should not change the national reopening plan which was based on vaccination targets in the adult population.The federal treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, has conceded the Liberal party has “got to do more” to recruit women as he signalled the government would take action against sexual harassment in parliament before the end of the year. The deputy Liberal leader made the comments on ABC’s Insiders program on Sunday where he also raised the prospect of the Coalition in opposition blocking Labor’s 43% emissions reduction target for 2030. Australia’s sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, on Tuesday recommended a significant overhaul of federal parliament’s toxic workplace culture after handing down her landmark report that found one in three staffers interviewed had been sexually harassed. The report also focused attention on the Liberal party’s failure to achieve equal representation of women in parliament without quotas, despite adopting targets of 50% in some states including New South Wales. On Sunday, Frydenberg said 38% of MPs and senators in federal parliament were women. In the Liberal party, although representation in the lower house is closer to a quarter, half of the party’s senators are women. “There’s been progress – 25 years ago, about 20% of the parliamentarians were women. Ten years ago it was 30%,” he said. “Today we’re approaching 40%. We’ve made progress … we’ve got to do more.” Frydenberg said it was “not right” the Victorian Liberal party continued to preselect men in winnable seats such as Casey and Menzies, where Liberal incumbents Tony Smith and Kevin Andrews are resigning. He cited the fact senator Sarah Henderson is top of the Victorian Liberal ticket, and the party has preselected women to contest the marginal Labor seats of Dunkley and Corangamite. Asked if the harassment detailed by Jenkins was familiar to him, Frydenberg replied “not to that extent”, saying that beyond several “very concerning allegations” what Jenkins found was a “normalised culture of misconduct”. “That is completely unacceptable. In any workplace, let alone the nation’s workplace. “The Australian people have a right to expect that we are leaders and that we hold ourselves to the highest of standards. And the best practice. So we have to get on with acting on this Kate Jenkins report.” Frydenberg said the prime minister, Scott Morrison, had already acted by seeking advice from his department, revealing that cabinet would consider a response “before the year-end”. “We’ll be taking action on all the recommendations,” the treasurer said. “We’re absolutely leaning into this. This is a multiparty process. This is our chance to draw a line in the sand and say to the Australian people, we will be better than we have been.” Earlier, Frydenberg raised the alarm about Labor’s 2030 climate target despite the fact a 43% emissions reduction is less ambitious than the target of several Liberal-National state governments and many business groups. Frydenberg said Labor was looking to legislate its target, which they would do “in partnership with the Greens”, meaning 43% was just a “first bid” that could be increased after the election. “At the end of the day, we’ve got our target, 26-28% by 2030, but we’re on track for a 35% reduction,” he said. Asked if the Coalition would block Labor’s target if it were in opposition, Frydenberg replied: “We’re not about to support Labor’s policy. We’ve got our own policy and that’s what we’re looking to implement.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Frydenberg faces a difficult election campaign to hold his inner-Melbourne seat of Kooyong where action against climate change is popular, while also seeking to keep Labor in opposition by winning votes in regional areas that fear the impact of more stringent emissions cuts. Frydenberg attacked Labor’s policy for utilising the safeguards mechanism – a cap on emissions of the biggest polluters that was implemented by the Abbott Coalition government. He said it was intended to prevent emissions growing but “wasn’t meant to be this stick to mandate, to push these industrial players to force them to reduce their emissions by a certain amount”. This would “punish” large industrial companies “regardless of their growth, regardless of their plans for expanding their presence”, he claimed. Frydenberg said the mid-year economic update would forecast growth in Australia, citing estimates of up to 5.5% growth in 2022. “We’re starting to see workforce shortages which will have some positive impact on wages,” he said. Earlier, the deputy Labor leader, Richard Marles, told Sky News that Labor had proposed “a sensible proposition” that would reduce electricity prices, create jobs and reduce emissions. Marles said the 43% emissions reduction figure had been selected after looking for “practical measures we could take that we knew Australia would be willing to support” then determining “where that took the numbers”. Marles noted the safeguard mechanism was “their [the Coalition’s] creation”, and all Labor had done was adopt the Business Council of Australia’s recommendation to lower the baseline of emissions over time. Marles rejected the proposition the policy could cost Labor the election, or that it faced a tradeoff between inner-city environmentally conscious voters and regional voters more concerned about job security.Sky News host Peta Credlin has issued a four-minute on-air apology for incorrectly linking Melbourne’s South Sudanese community to a 2020 Covid outbreak and making other harmful comments. Credlin’s latest apology – which follows a previous attempt last year – comes almost 18 months after the offending statements were broadcast on 26 June 2020. “In June last year, while commenting on the Covid-19 pandemic, the escalation of new infections in Victoria, and various public health measures, I incorrectly linked the South Sudanese community to a cluster of cases that had developed following an end-of-Ramadan dinner in Melbourne’s northern suburbs,” Credlin told viewers on Friday night. “This was factually wrong, and I again deeply regret the error. On the basis of that error, I made various other statements that I accept have caused genuine hurt and offence to South Sudanese community members. It was not my intention. “My statements were understood to mean that the South Sudanese community had been reckless, irresponsible, or even deliberate, in breaching social distancing requirements, that the community had failed to adapt its cultural practices like other Australians, and that this was putting Australians at risk. I do not believe there was any truth to those inferences.” Credlin last year claimed the state government’s health orders hadn’t reached the South Sudanese community because many of its members didn’t understand English. “This just underscores why new migrants need to urgently learn English ... so that they can quickly become part of mainstream Australian society,” Credlin said at the time. She claimed while South Sudanese migrants could speak Dinka many – especially women – could not read it because they were banned from attending school in their homeland. The Society of South Sudanese Professionals refuted Credlin’s comments in a statement at the time describing them as a “serious assault on South Sudanese Victorians”. “Communication within the community is also strong and people are as aware of the social distancing restrictions as everyone else in Australia,” the organisation wrote in a statement. The organisation clarified that “women and girls are not banned from attending schools in South Sudan,” adding that “the war and other factors meant many children were unable to go to school, but this was not ideological and not something the migrant community has continued in Australia”. The News Corp Australia-owned Sky News was forced to issue an apology for the segment on 28 June 2020 following a backlash over Credlin’s report. “Peta Credlin and Sky News Australia accept these comments were inaccurate and sincerely apologise for any offence caused by the remarks which have been removed from all platforms,” the network said in a written statement. Credlin also broadcast an apology on the 29 June. The apologies were similarly met with backlash. On Friday, Credlin said that, since meeting with members of the South Sudanese community, she had come to realise her original apology was “too limited and caused further offence which was not my intention”. In her Friday apology, Credlin clarified that the South Sudanese community was not involved with the end-of-Ramadan cluster and “indeed more than 93% of South Sudanese-born members of the community are Christian, not Muslim”. “The South Sudanese community’s compliance with Covid restrictions is not affected by a lack of English language skills. Although I said that 15% of the Sudanese-born community speak virtually no English and that many South Sudanese, especially women, were banned from attending school in their former homeland, what the statistics actually show is that the overwhelming majority, 96.5% of South Sudanese-born migrants, speak some English, with around 84% speaking only English or speaking English well or very well,” Credlin said. “The statistics also show that a large proportion of South Sudanese-born migrants are educated. I also was not clear that I was using statistics of South Sudanese-born migrants, and did not mention that many members of the community were born in Australia, educated here and read, write and speak English perfectly well. Some South Sudanese women felt I particularly singled them out for unfounded criticism, which I deeply regret.” During the original broadcast last June, Credlin also claimed that 32% of South Sudanese-born migrants were officially unemployed and that 70% earned less than $800 a week. On Friday, Credlin said she failed to acknowledge in 2020 that the same ABS data showed a majority of all Victorians earned less than $800 a week. “Lastly I implied that the culture of the South Sudanese community is about getting membership, unemployment, and an inability to speak Australia’s national language, to the point of not even knowing about social distancing. That was deeply offensive,” Credlin admitted. “I extend to the South Sudanese community my sincerest apologies for these errors, and the hurt, humiliation and offence caused by the broadcast.” Credlin said that Sky News would be running news stories in the coming months to give a voice “to the positive contributions many South Sudanese Victorians make to the broader community, as well as those within the South Sudanese community”. A Sky News spokesperson said on Sunday the channel and Credlin had issued an apology in 2020 soon after the segment went to air. “Following a separate and more recent complaint over the same broadcast, Sky News and Peta Credlin engaged in extensive consultation with other South Sudanese community members. Peta Credlin made a further apology on last Friday’s episode of Credlin as soon as agreement was reached.”While Scott Morrison raced around the Bathurst 1000 track on Sunday, the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, and his deputy attacked the prime minister and his larrikin persona – “ScoMo” – as inauthentic and not fit to lead the country. Albanese offered Australians “renewal not revolution” at his first pre-election rally in the Sydney marginal seat of Reid, while Morrison engaged in a photo op, one of many we can expect from both leaders during the unofficial summer campaign ahead of the 2022 election due by May. For Albanese, after two and a half years of offering a small target on everything from income tax cuts to the pandemic response, the time had come to fatten the pig before market day, unveiling two new major policies on emissions reduction and tertiary education in the past three days. For Morrison, speaking with legendary driver Mark Skaife in the cabin of a Ford Mustang, Sunday’s outing was about generating the sort of imagery that made swing voters feel he was one of them – which helped the Coalition to a come from behind victory in 2019. Morrison later visited the Forbes State Emergency Service to hear about progress recovering from recent floods, accusing his opponent of “politicking in the inner city” when asked if the flurry of activity meant the election campaign was underway. Albanese sought to contrast Labor’s vision for “A Better Future” (its election slogan) with “a government that is simply spent and a prime minister whose tank is on empty”. Albanese promised an agenda that would be “ambitious” but “just as importantly, affordable [and] achievable” in a speech pitched at undecided voters who Morrison is courting by warning against the risk of changing government. Albanese suggested Labor supporters ask undecided voters “do you really think this government led by Scott Morrison and Barnaby Joyce will get better in its fourth term” to encourage them to believe “Australia can be better”. As well as arguing against “another three years of division and inaction”, Albanese and his deputy, Richard Marles, targeted Morrison over his relationship with the truth. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In his warm-up speech, Marles used the words “lie” or “liar” 24 times, levelling the accusation at the prime minister over his trip “to Hawaii while Australia was burning”, to the way he succeeded Malcolm Turnbull, to the cancellation of the French submarine contract, “lies about Labor’s policies” and “lies about lying”. While Albanese was more measured in tone, the Labor leader argued Morrison was “a prime minister who has no regard for what he said yesterday, so you should have no regard for what he says today.” Albanese referred to some of Morrison’s lowest points as prime minister – during the black summer bushfires and the vaccination rollout – by declaring “in tough times, every one of us has to ‘hold a hose’” and “when it comes to skills and knowledge, it is a race”. “I won’t run and hide from responsibility,” he said. “I won’t go missing when the going gets tough. I think leadership is about facing up to problems and looking for solutions. Actually, I don’t think. I know.” Marles said Morrison was “completely full of it”, arguing his trademark imagery including “the baseball cap, the Sharks scarf, the cringey, corny slogans” were examples of an inauthentic identity: “ScoMo.” “You know who came up with that nickname? He did. This guy gave a nickname to himself. Everything about Scott Morrison is fake. It’s all made up.” Marles accused Morrison of not having “a single memory of the Cronulla Sharks that predates his Liberal preselection – because that’s precisely when he picked up that scarf.” “He never tells the truth – that he switched codes and switched teams, that the Sharks is an affectation not a passion, because it suits him politically.” By contrast, Albanese supports the Rabbitohs “not for political purposes ... it’s just him”, Marles said. On Sunday, Labor announced $1.2bn for 20,000 extra university places and free access to 465,000 Tafe places, following its promise on Friday of a 43% cut to greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 in a bid to create jobs and lower electricity prices. The deputy Liberal leader, Josh Frydenberg, argued on ABC’s Insiders on Sunday that Labor couldn’t be trusted, because in government the Greens would bid up the ask on emissions reduction. Albanese sought to reassure voters: “Labor has announced exactly one energy policy and it is the one we will implement in government.” The reason the rally focused so much on character is that the election will be less about the specifics of the policy offerings and more about whether voters believe Labor can deliver it in a way that won’t harm them through higher taxes or broken promises. The opposition believes the best way to win an election fought on the question “Who do you trust?” is to cast doubt on Morrison’s character. To convince voters that despite the Sharks scarf the PM is not like you – he is pretending for the cameras.Felipe Mora and Santiago Moreno scored and the Portland Timbers advanced to the MLS Cup final with a 2-0 victory over Real Salt Lake in the Western Conference final on Saturday. Fourth-seeded Portland will host the winner of Sunday’s Eastern Conference final between the Philadelphia Union and NYCFC on Saturday. It is the first time that the Timbers have hosted the league championship. The Timbers, who won the MLS Cup in 2015, also went to the final in 2018 but fell to Atlanta United. “It was a very strong performance. The guys were motivated,” Timbers coach Giovanni Savarese said. “They understood the moment that was at stake and they performed very well today.” Seventh-seeded Real Salt Lake had appeared in the MLS Cup final three times, winning the title in 2009. It was the team’s fifth trip to the conference finals since joining the league in 2005. Salt Lake had won all three previous playoff matches against the Timbers, including the last meeting in 2019 when RSL won 2-1 at home in the opening round. But the Timbers swept Salt Lake in their three meetings during the regular season, outscoring their opponent 12-4 in the three matches. RSL advanced to the conference final with a 2-1 victory at Sporting Kansas City. The team was undefeated in its previous four straight road matches. “I couldn’t be more proud of being a part of this group. Nobody gave us a shot when the season started. And no one gave us a shot in the playoffs either,” RSL interim coach Pablo Mastroeni said. “So to have the the mental toughness to overcome the perception of who we are, is fantastic. And so you can always look at things from either perspective, but I couldn’t be more proud of the effort and commitment of this group that I was able to lead.” Mastroeni rallied RSL after he was promoted to interim coach when Freddy Juarez unexpectedly departed in August for a position with the Seattle Sounders. The Timbers downed top-seeded Colorado 1-0 on the road in the conference semifinals. Portland went up early with Mora’s goal in the fifth minute. RSL defender Aaron Herrera tried to clear the ball from out in front of the goal, but it fell to Mora, who scored. It was Mora’s 12th goal this year. The Timbers added an insurance goal in the 61st minute. Moreno’s right-footed blast from atop the penalty area hit the post then caromed off the back of RSL goalkeeper David Ochoa. “A lot of happiness,” Mora said about heading to the championship game. “We’ve done a lot of hard work this year and it was important for us to get this win.” Portland goalkeeper Steve Clark finished with three saves in the shutout. The Timbers were without Dairon Asprilla because of a red card in the semifinal win over the Rapids. The availability of Portland’s Sebastian Blanco was uncertain because of a hamstring injury against the Rapids, but he was available as a sub. Blanco has seven goals and seven assists this season. Keeping Blanco out of Saturday’s game gave him more rest before the final. “It’s definitely very important for us to be home,” Mora said about hosting the title game. “Just being with our fans here, they make us feel great at home. So that’s going to be really important to play in the final.” RSL saw the return of captain Albert Rusnak, who missed the past two games because of the league’s health and safety protocol. Rusnak has 11 goals this season.The deputy prime minister’s office has confirmed there was “an incident” at the Nationals Christmas drinks after it was reported senator Sam McMahon allegedly took several “swings” at the party’s federal director, Jonathan Hawkes. Sky News reported that McMahon allegedly attempted to punch Hawkes, taking three or four swings at him at a Canberra pub on Thursday evening at the event attended by Nationals MPs and staffers. A spokesperson for Barnaby Joyce told Guardian Australia: “The deputy prime minister has been advised there was an incident at the Christmas party on Thursday night.” “A contrite apology has been given and accepted,” the spokesperson said. “Both parties have explicitly said they want this to be the end of the issue and, out of respect for them, this will be adhered to by our office.” One Nationals MP told Guardian Australia the behaviour was “not conduct becoming of a member of parliament” but “the two have made up and the leader is happy with that”. In June, McMahon denied allegations she was drunk in the Senate. At the time, a spokesperson said she was “unwell” and that unnamed sources claiming she was drunk were attempting to “dislodge senator McMahon before preselection”. Days later, Country Liberal and Alice Springs deputy mayor, Jacinta Price, defeated McMahon in a preselection battle for the top of the Senate ticket, likely guaranteeing Price a seat at the next election. McMahon voted for Joyce in the June leadership spill in which he replaced Michael McCormack as Nationals leader. Joyce has publicly credited her for advocating in government to ensure the Northern Territory retains two lower house seats. On 22 November, McMahon was one of five Coalition senators to cross the floor and vote for a One Nation bill banning vaccine mandates – contradicting the Morrison government’s aged care vaccine mandate and state government public health orders. In the final sitting fortnight, McMahon threatened – but did not carry out the threat – to withhold her vote unless her bill to allow the territories to legislate on euthanasia was debated. Guardian Australia has contacted McMahon and Hawkes for comment.Perhaps the most important job that the state has is to protect children at risk of harm and abuse. Yet children’s social care is facing a mounting crisis that gets far less exposure than that confronting the NHS or even adult social care. Local councils, which are responsible for child protection, are having to provide for vulnerable youngsters against a backdrop of rising need, reduced funding from central government and a shortage of long-term foster and residential care places, many of which are overpriced by the private sector. All this affects the quality of support that is available for children who need it the most. Children in need of help and protection from local councils because they are at risk – and the smaller group of children in care, for whom the council has parental responsibility – deserve the very best that the state has to offer. The awful fate of six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes shows the tragic costs when the state fails. In England, more than six in 10 children are in care because they have experienced parental abuse or neglect. A further 14% are in care because parenting capacity in their family is chronically inadequate and 8% because of acute family stress, where a temporary crisis has diminished parenting capacity and their needs are not being met. While taking a child into care is never the preferred option if a child’s family can be successfully supported to provide a safe home, research shows a move into care can be associated with better outcomes for children at serious risk. However, there are mounting pressures on the system as a result of growing numbers of children in care. The overall child population has grown over the past decade but, even allowing for this, there has been a 6% increase in the rate of children entering care in the past five years. This is partly due to an increase in the numbers of unaccompanied child refugees in recent years, some of whom are, disgracefully, housed in hotels with minimal adult supervision, but also by a sharp rise in the number of teenagers being taken into care, who often have more complex needs than younger children. Despite this rising demand, local authorities have seen their central government funding drastically cut by almost 60% in the past decade. Councils have been expected to make up for this reduction by relying more heavily on receipts from council tax and business rates. This means councils in less affluent areas, with higher levels of need for children and adult social services and from people who are homeless have seen their overall budgets fall by more than wealthier areas. This has forced them to cut their spending on the early intervention services such as children’s centres, parenting support and domestic abuse services that, if run well, can help reduce pressure on the care system by preventing escalations to crisis point. At the same time, spending on acute services such as child protection and care placements has been forced up. Councils in England have increased budgeted spending on children’s social care by £1.1bn in the past two years yet last year eight in 10 ended up overspending their budgets by £800m collectively. The National Audit Office warned earlier this year that 25 councils are on the cusp of bankruptcy. What makes this situation even worse is that the costs of providing children’s social care have soared in recent years, driven by the privatisation of children’s care. Three- quarters of children’s homes are now privately run, compared to 40% 20 years ago and about a third of children are placed in foster care using private agencies. The Competition and Markets Authority published an interim report on the availability and price of children’s care a few weeks ago. It found that private care homes and foster agencies are making significant profit out of the system: for children’s homes, the average weekly price was £3,800, with an average profit margin of 23%; for fostering agencies, the average weekly price of a placement was about £820 a week, with an average operating profit margin of 19%. It is obscene that one pound in every five that English councils are spending on private care is banked as profit, particularly given the growing role of private equity in buying up children’s homes and foster care agencies. These profits are partly driven by a shortage of appropriate places and the weak negotiating position of councils. And, as we report today, new research by the Fostering Network has highlighted that out of 99 fostering services that responded to its survey all but six reported having a shortage of foster carers. These shortages generate an unacceptable level of instability in the care system: the charity Become highlights that more than one in 10 children in care have experienced three or more placements in the past year. More than 12,000 children in care are split up from their siblings and too many children and young people have been put up in unregulated accommodation with minimal adult support, which remains legal for those aged 16 and 17 despite efforts by campaigners to get it banned for all children. One in six children in care lives more than 20 miles from home. All this is compounded by the poor quality of children’s services. Half of council children’s services have been rated inadequate or require improvement by Ofsted; this is an improvement from a few years ago but it falls far short of the standards that vulnerable children deserve. This has consequences. Ofsted found significant problems with Solihull council’s child protection services just months before the death of Arthur Labinjo-Hughes last year. It seems nothing short of wicked that some of the most vulnerable children in the country are being forced to bear the brunt of the past decade of spending cuts, while private companies pocket inflated profits from running children’s homes and foster agencies. Children’s services urgently need better resourcing, but the whole system needs a rethink.Equality, a well-funded education system and a strong welfare state are the secret to the success of the world’s happiest nation, according to Finland’s prime minister. In a rare interview with foreign media, Sanna Marin – who briefly became the youngest world leader when she became prime minister of the Nordic nation in 2019 at the age of 34 – said Finland was committed to preserving its generous welfare state in an “environmentally sustainable way”, and saw the development and export of green technology as the key to its future prosperity. Marin said the country “wanted to do better when it comes to equality”, after being named the happiest country in the world in April by the UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network, which asks people to rate their contentment on a 10-point scale. Marin rode a wave of popularity during the pandemic for her assured management of the crisis; in the nation of 5.5 million people, only about 1,300 have died from the virus. But cracks within her five-party coalition - all headed by female leaders - are beginning to show. A poll last week by Finland’s national public broadcasting company YLE showed the opposition liberal-conservative National Coalition party as the most popular party followed by the right-wing populist Finns party, with Marin’s Social Democrats in third place. In recent weeks, she has faced down a speculative vote of no-confidence from opposition parties seeking to close the 800-mile border to asylum seekers, after Belarus launched what the EU condemned as a “hybrid attack” by sending asylum seekers to the borders of Poland, Latvia and Lithuania. But Marin said there was no problem at the Finnish border. “We have to say this is not acceptable. We’re condemning the actions of Belarus. But at the same time we have to make sure that people’s human rights are respected in this situation,” she said. Asked if she thought future governments would continue to push for equality, despite the disparity between her liberal government and more right-wing opposition parties, she said: “I think so. Because it’s work that’s ongoing. We have always worked for equality in Finland, and I think it’s also important in the future, and not only the equality of men and women, or the genders, but also the equality of minority groups in society. “We have to make sure that structures don’t act as barriers to people. So there are many things to do.” A recent legislative flurry saw education made compulsory until the age of 18. A new parental leave system that is expected to come into effect next August will increase the time allowed to be used by fathers from 54 days to a minimum of 97 days. “The idea would be that mothers and fathers would spend the same amount of time at home with their small children, so that both can have the same opportunities in their career, but also so that we can [narrow] the gender pay gap,” said Marin. Marin also reiterated her commitment to ending homelessness in Finland, where the Housing First approach has helped reduce street homelessness, and aims to eliminate it by 2027. It’s a model that has attracted attention from UK politicians. But funding for three pilots in this country based on Housing First launched in 2018 is set to run out next year, and MPs have warned that they now face a “cliff-edge of support”. Marin said long-term investment in Housing First was important progress, but that there was still work to do. “There are still people without homes, and we still have problems, especially in the bigger cities. But we have also made progress,” she said. “The Housing First model is a very important one, but of course we also need solutions from the healthcare system, from the social security system, and employment. We have to make sure that we’re treating people as whole individuals.” Finland has pledged to become carbon neutral by 2035, 15 years ahead of the EU target. Marin said that while climate change was the biggest challenge facing the country, it could also be “a big opportunity” for Finnish companies. “We want to make the transformation in a way that actually benefits ordinary people,” she said. “Because if we don’t get people on board, then there’s nothing we can do.” A commitment to a fairer and more equal society would continue the work of “many generations” of politicians, added Marin, who is herself from a low-income background. “The biggest issue, of course, is that they have built a welfare society in Finland: that people like me, coming from quite a modest background, have had the opportunities in life to go to study, to go to university, to have a chance in life to make their own future,” she said. “So I think all the decisions, the hard work that people before me have done to build our society is important – the real work to be done now is to make sure that we continue to promote equal opportunities.”So, what was your most controversial event of the past week? The Christmas knees-up last year in Downing Street? Protocols are for little people. The continuing and increasingly tiresome rumbles within the house of Windsor? A period of silence from all interested parties would be welcome. Sorry, but it was none of those. The most bitterly contested issue was how to pronounce Omicron. Classicists favour emphasis on the second syllable. The BBC and the World Health Organization plump for stressing the first syllable, on the other hand. One thing I think we can all agree on is that it is not as Channel 4 News’ Jon Snow had it last week - “Oh-my-crone”. I am, as always, happy to stand corrected. Now, what does the phrase “visitor-friendly experience” mean to you? I ask because the refurbishment of the fire-ravaged Notre Dame cathedral includes plans to welcome visitors, upon its completion, with modern art and dignified lighting to achieve just such an effect. Critics have condemned this as the Disneyfication of a most noble and thrilling building, and I couldn’t agree more. Cathedrals are not theme parks or bouncy play areas. They were conceived as places of wonderment and awe, to uplift the soul and make us feel small at the same time, to remind us of our place on Earth. Don’t you find the world of academe is getting sillier and sillier? Last week, the University of Aberdeen added to the litany of trigger warnings for nervous Nelly undergraduates. My favourite was: “Includes depictions of murder, death, betrayal and kidnapping.” I would’ve thought the title of the book under discussion - Kidnapped - gave the game away. • Jonathan Bouquet is an Observer columnistYou Don’t Know Me 9pm, BBC One “I’ve done some bad things in my life; you’re gonna know about a lot of them by the time that we’re through.” In the slow-burning opener of this four-part crime drama, damning evidence suggests Hero (Samuel Adewunmi) is guilty of murder. Adamant he’ll prove the charge wrong, he recalls his own version of events. As with most extraordinary stories, it all begins with a boy meeting a girl – but then she disappears. All episodes will be available on iPlayer afterwards. Hollie Richardson Doctor Who: Flux 6.20pm, BBC One We’ve reached the concluding episode of the Flux storyline, which sees the forces of darkness in complete control. How will Jodie Whittaker’s Time Lord save the day? There are three special episodes to come with Whittaker in 2022 before the new Doctor is revealed. HR Mike Leigh: This Cultural Life 8pm, BBC Four Tonight, film and theatre director Mike Leigh – known for Abigail’s Party, Vera Drake and more – talks to John Wilson about his early life in Salford and his discovery of world cinema in the 1960s. HR I’m a Celebrity Get Me Out of Here! 9pm, ITV The reality endurance test enters its last full week, still trying to soldier on without the man who would surely have been the linchpin of the series had he stayed: Richard Madeley. You can, however, expect a few twists and tricks before next weekend’s final. Jack Seale Close to Me 9pm, Channel 4 Buckle up: the penultimate episode rewinds a year before the fall, this time from the perspective of slippery Rob (Christopher Eccleston). We start to make sense of a series that has been somewhat ridiculous and cringeworthy at times – yet guiltily compelling. HR Other, Like Me: The Oral History of COUM Transmissions and Throbbing Gristle 10.35pm, BBC Four Neil Andrew Megson and Christine Carol Newby might not be household names, and their stage personas – Genesis P-Orridge and Cosey Fanni Tutti – might not be on everyone’s playlist. But their performance art collective and band would become among the most influential artistic statements ever. A profile of uncompromising creativity. Ali Catterall Film choice The Wife, 11.10pm, BBC Two When Glenn Close was nominated a seventh time for an Oscar for this 2017 drama, many thought this would be the one for the win. Sadly it wasn’t to be, but Björn Runge’s fine film revolves round her subtle performance. She plays Joan Castleman, married for years to womanising, narcissistic novelist Joe (a marvellously insufferable Jonathan Pryce) who has just been awarded the 1992 Nobel prize in literature. As they visit Stockholm for the ceremony, secrets from the past about his and her creative lives seep to the surface. Close is simply mesmerising here, her face revealing flickers of discomfort, sadness, anger – until the dutiful spouse character she invented sticks in her throat once too often. Simon Wardell Live sport Women’s FA Cup Final: Arsenal v Chelsea 1.30pm, BBC One.Action from Wembley, with BBC women’s footballer of the year Vivianne Miedema (pictured) leading the line for Arsenal. Premiership Rugby Union Leicester Tigers v Harlequins 2pm, BT Sport 2The league pace-setters take on the champions at Welford Road. F1: Saudi Arabian Grand Prix 5.25pm, Sky Sports Main Event.The penultimate race of the season at the Jeddah Corniche Circuit.Biddenden Late Harvest Ortega, Kent, England 2018 (£122, biddendenvineyards.com) “One-hundred-and-twenty-two pounds for an English wine?” It’s a question that is easy to imagine arising just as a mouthful of said wine is being sprayed to all corners in incredulous rage: “You what mate?” I’m not going to get too distracted by issues of value or fairness here. Suffice to say once you’ve got beyond a certain threshold (roughly £25) there’s very little logic to wine pricing. Above that, it’s not about quality per se, it’s about reputation, scarcity, image. But that doesn’t mean a wine cannot be worth that much to someone. If the wine has something unique about it, and you happen to have the money and inclination to spend on it, then who am I to judge. I will, however, say that I tasted Biddenden’s Kentish dessert wine, made from their speciality grape variety Ortega, before I knew the price, and found it’s combination of fresh tropical and English apple fruit, electric acidity, silk-sheet texture and endless length very special indeed. Weingut Joh Jos. Prüm Wehlener Sonnenuhr Kabinett, Mosel, Germany 2018 (from £26.95, corneyandbarrow.com; bbr.com; howardripley.com) Part of the Biddenden Ortega’s attraction for me is that it provides some evidence to support a long-held conviction of mine: that the UK has even greater potential for relatively delicate (the Biddenden has just 10% alcohol) sweet wines in a German style than it does for champagne-alikes. Given that the sparkling wine category is one of the most popular and fastest growing all over the world, and that sweet wine sales have been declining for years, I can understand why most ambitious English winemakers are sticking to the fizz. All the same, if I were to start my own English venture I would be sorely tempted to adapt a German model, planting riesling, and aiming to take advantage of the cool English climate to create wines with the filigree detail, steel-thread acidity, and cushion of sweet exotic fruit that you find in a classic old school, semi-sweet kabinett riesling from the Mosel Valley such as Weingut Joh Jos. Prüm’s. Booths Sauternes, Bordeaux, France 2017 (£14.50, 37.5cl, booths.co.uk) Another underrated and it seems to me seldom-drunk great sweet wine style is the one made from a blend of the semillon and sauvignon blanc grape varieties in Bordeaux’s Sauternes sub-region. This is sweet wine in a much richer, thicker, more golden and viscous style than Biddenden’s ortega or Prüm’s riesling kabinett. It’s an example of a widespread art of dessert winemaking that depends on the development of so-called noble rot, or Botrytis cinerea, a fungus that grows on the grapes, concentrating the sugars and flavours and acidity in the grapes. The results can be glorious, with notes of marmalade and toffee and cystallised fruits – all of which are found in the benchmark example stocked by the smart northern supermarket Booths; in the flat-out gorgeous, incredible value, multi-vintage blend Ulysse Sauternes (£9.95, 37.5cl, thewinesociety.com); and, with slightly less intensity but still working very well with blue cheese and even the sweetest desserts, Tesco Finest Sauternes 2018 (£12, 37.5cl). Follow David Williams on Twitter @DaveydaibachThe young gray wolf who took experts and enthusiasts on a thousand-mile journey across California died last month, ending a trek that brought hope and inspiration to many during a time of ecological collapse. The travels of the young male through the state were a rare occurrence: he was the first wolf from Oregon’s White River pack to come to California and possibly the first gray wolf in nearly a century to be spotted so far south. The wolf, known as OR-93, was born in Oregon in 2019 in the White River pack. The pack is managed by the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs. A tribal biologist had collared OR-93 in June 2020 when he was just 14 months old – not fully mature but nearly ready to look for a mate – and took a photo of him, looking regal and languid after effects of the tranquilizer wore out. OR-93 first entered California on the last day of January 2020, dipping his paws into Modoc county. Historically, gray wolves were found throughout California, but they were probably extirpated from the state in the 1920s. In 2014, officials listed gray wolves as endangered under the California Endangered Species Act, making them illegal to hunt, trap, harass or harm. After his sojourn in California, OR-93 zagged back to Oregon, returning once more to California at the end of February. He moved remarkably fast, Weiss says, padding around 16 counties between the first week in February and the end of March. He traveled more than 935 air miles (straight miles on a map), over three months in search of a mate and territory. After reaching Yosemite national park, the wolf made a remarkable decision: he made a hard turn west and crossed the Central Valley of California – which means he somehow crossed three of the state’s busiest roads – Highway 99, Interstate 5 and Highway 101. “How he did that is anyone’s guess,” says Amaroq Weiss, a wolf advocate with the Center for Biological Diversity. He may have found routes to cross under the highways through creek and river crossings, or he may have actually made his way across the road – which he would have had to do in the dead of night because the roads are so busy. By 5 April, he had made it to San Luis Obispo county, on the central coast of California. At this point, his radio collar stopped working (researchers still do not know why). Some wolf fans worried that he had died, but then tiny signal flares went up again and again: proof of life for OR-93. A farmer’s trail camera near a water trough captured a grainy picture of a wolf with a collar in May. In late September, three separate people spotted a wolf with a purple collar in Ventura county – one even captured video of him on a cellphone. “This wolf, he will go the distance,” said Weiss. When a driver called in a dead wolf on the side of Interstate 5 in November, it sent a shock wave through the wolf community. Authorities quickly identified OR-93 through his bright purple radio collar, and an investigation and necropsy results determined he died from trauma consistent with vehicular strike. Looking at the place where OR-93 was killed, Weiss wonders if the wolf was headed back to Oregon to find a mate, after having struck out in California. November and December is the time when wolves are looking most aggressively for a mate – they prefer to be coupled up before mating season comes in February. Maybe the lone wolf realized he couldn’t find what he needed in California and decided to head back home. OR-93’s days were probably driven by his nose, says Weiss. Scents may have sent him along a creek where he could have pushed aside rocks with his nose and played with fish or frogs – or his nose could have taken him to scents left behind by other wildlife, maybe finding bear scat and rolling in it to mask his smell so deer wouldn’t know he was approaching. Smells may have even evoked memories of his home in Oregon. “I think a day in the life of a wolf is pretty much an adventure,” says Weiss. “A search that’s broken up by exploring new things you come across.” Since OR-93 was successful in finding prey and living a wolf existence deep into California, it shows that others could do the same, says Jordan Traverso, deputy director of communications, education and outreach for the California department of fish and wildlife. “He’s like the first pioneer – but if one wolf can do it, it can be done. All of California is a historical wolf habitat and we like the things that belong here to be here.” Traverso adds that given wolves’ stealth, it is possible other individuals are eking out an existence in parts of California where people would never expect to see them. The territory OR-93 crossed is impressive, but it also highlights the habitat wolf conservationists hope will sustain the creatures. “It’s almost as if he had the map that we’ve drawn, the lands that remain suitable with habitat in California,” says Bethany Cotton, conservation director with Cascadia Wildlands. “Instinctively he knew where he could survive in the state and that is really impressive and hopeful.” His death also highlights the need for wildlife overpasses and underpasses – safe ways to get around impenetrable ribbons of asphalt ripping through the state. Whether wolves will thrive also depends on the policies of the state they roam in, Cotton says. The Trump administration removed federal protections for wolves in 2020, returning their management to individual states. “We’ve unfortunately had a really negative turn in Oregon and in Montana and Idaho and other states that are aggressively managing the species,” says Cotton. “And Idaho and Montana are allowing for hunting seasons and trapping seasons that could kill up to 90% of the population. So when you reduce those populations, they’re much less likely to go ahead and disperse and go into unoccupied habitats further away.” The situation is a strong argument for why wildlife shouldn’t be managed state by state because those borders are invisible to the wildlife, she says. “Wildlife travel according to ecosystems, not arbitrary political boundaries that humans have drawn on maps.” The epic journeys of individual animals like OR-93 help humans understand wolves better, Cotton says. “We can recognize on a human scale how far he traveled looking for a partner and looking for a place to call home. It really does help us recognize that they just aren’t too different from us: these are animals looking for a good place to live and food to eat and families and we just need to let them be.”Damian Green sneers at “more delicately minded Observer readers” who refuse to see the light of “post-Brexit, Tory-voting Britain, Boris’s Britain” (“France and Britain must not allow the diplomatic disaster to continue”, News). He obviously thinks we should be more tough-minded in our response to refugees drowning in the Channel. The assertion that refugees find Britain more attractive because of Brexit is both delusional and insulting. This country’s historical reputation for fair dealing and kindness, our rejection of tyranny and corruption, which is surely the reason people seek asylum here, is currently being trashed by the very government Green supports. His article offered no fresh insights and merely parroted the Priti Patel line of blaming “criminal gangs” preying on “vulnerable people”. He ignores the fact that it is the government’s refusal to provide viable, legal routes for refugees that lets such criminality thrive. The article by Mark Townsend on the same page (“Patel blames the ‘evil’ gangs. On the front line, they know different”, Analysis) shows what a simplistic and self-serving view this is of a complex situation. Graham Tyrrell Edinburgh Damian Green’s description of those attempting to enter the UK in search of asylum omits to mention that the number involved is in fact truly minuscule compared with applications for asylum throughout the rest of Europe or that most of the tiny number who do wish to come here have a special reason for doing so, be it language or family connection. Anthony Menzies London W4 A coalition could succeed If Keir Starmer is the pragmatic realist that he claims to be, he needs to follow the advice of Best for Britain and form an electoral alliance with the Lib Dems and Greens to stand a chance of beating the Tories (“Cooperate in key seats to beat Tories, parties told”, News). Even with Boris Johnson’s tenure rapidly unravelling, the loss of dozens of Scottish seats over several years and a hostile rightwing press means that Labour will still be defeated. An alliance does not have to be a negative, cynical, electoral calculation. He could take inspiration from the new German “traffic light” coalition government and the brilliant way that Clive Lewis and Caroline Lucas work together on climate justice. There is more that unites the centre-left parties than divides them in terms of constitutional change (proportional representation, federalism and a senate to replace the House of Lords), a radical green revolution, tackling inequality and pro-Europeanism. William Keegan (“Even Macron hopes Brexit Britain will come to its senses”, Business) is surely right when he says it is no good Labour trying to make Brexit work because it never can work and the majority can now see what a dreadful rightwing con-trick it has turned out to be. Philip Wood Kidlington, Oxfordshire Johnson’s innate inequality Nick Cohen argues a strong case (“Why do we Britons still genuflect before age-old class caricatures?”, Comment), but he is wrong about Boris Johnson in one respect. He is not an empty vessel. He is committed to a view of society in which privilege and inequality are good; it reflects natural intelligence or so he believes. Shake the cornflake box and the clever ones – like him – rise to the top. The poor are there because that is their place. He also believes in the “great man” theory of history and for some reason, he thinks he’s one of them. Dr Lorna Chessum Brighton Nazi Germany and the Crash Torsten Bell notes that the banking crisis in Weimar Germany in 1931 triggered a bank run and contributed to rising Nazi support (“A banking crisis isn’t just bad for business, it can poison politics”, Comment). Discussions of the 1929 Wall Street Crash seldom give sufficient attention to the grievous knock-on consequences for Germany and subsequent world history. From about the mid-1920s, Germany began to build its economy towards a state of stability and had attained growing prosperity for its citizens. This was largely owing to great investment from US banks that, as a consequence of the Crash, rushed to pull the plug overnight. The country was tipped into crisis and, yes, the poisonous politics that resulted in panicked support for that arch chancer, Adolf Hitler. Michael Trevallion Birmingham Exeter College’s woes The article by Rowan Moore celebrating the completion of Exeter College’s Cohen Quad hides a much sadder story, New Review. The site in Walton Street was once the proud home of Ruskin College, “whose only-fairly-good 1913 facade and part of its flanking wall have been retained”. The 19th-century institution that brought thousands of adult trade unionists to study cheek by jowl with privileged Oxford undergraduates thrived until the Thatcher government, as part of its war on the unions, ruthlessly cut funding. Since that time, the college has suffered from a lack of Department for Education comprehension of its unique offer and mission and with adult education funding frozen by the Cameron government for the decade after 2010, Ruskin was forced to sell the Walton Street building to Exeter College. The decline does not stop there. Costly and mismanaged “merger schemes” have wasted time and money and the college has floundered into administration with its whole future in doubt. So much for levelling up. Michael Burns New Malden, London Greeks had a gift for it How opportune to have Natalie Haynes responding to the significance of the Roman mosaic at Rutland with scenes from Homer (“The Iliad’s epic power endures… even in Rutland”, Focus). She quotes Aeschylus, saying that his tragedies are slices from the banquet of Homer. At their best, the Greeks are indeed always timely as well as timeless. With his radical compassion and feminism, Euripides always blazes a trail. Geoff Coombe Cambridge Moved to tears Chris Riddell frequently makes me laugh (often bitterly). “The tragedy in the Channel” (Comment cartoon) is the first time he has made me weep. Geoff Brace NorwichHow much longer can we stand the rat race, asked the Observer Magazine of 6 September 1970 (‘Build-up to Doomsday’)? By the end of the 20th century more than half the world’s population will be crowded into claustrophobic urban concentrations. London could fuse with south coast towns (well, Brighton is known as London-by-the-Sea) and with Reading and Oxford. And Calcutta may have a population of 36-66 million. All predictions of Gordon Rattray Taylor, author of The Doomsday Book: Can the World Survive? In 1970, each person in the UK was on average about 150 yards from his nearest neighbour. ‘By the year 2000,’ wrote Rattray Taylor, ‘the distance will be 120 yards and by 2070 it’ll be 60 yards.’ But for poor Mrs Gladys Hyman, who lived next to Heathrow, it wasn’t the neighbours that concerned her but the jumbo jets. ‘It is difficult to carry on a conversation with someone in the same room,’ she said, no doubt with phenomenal understatement. Rattray Taylor went on to note that the attraction of psychedelic drugs could be because ‘they restore a sense of personal space to people who feel hemmed in’. Or: if you can’t take a trip, take a trip. The future would bring ‘analogue foods’ spun from soya bean and ‘an automated kitchen will cook everything under punchcard instructions in microwave ovens’. Pretty accurate that, though less so that by 2000 ‘we’ll have eliminated the pot and pan’. Rattray Taylor quoted the Foreign Policy Association’s forecast for 2018: ‘From the depths of the jungle we shall be able to telephone home, thanks to satellites, while the 1,000-seater supersonic transports crash past overhead. Behavioural technology will make sure we enjoy this nightmare and the distant doctor will diagnose your depression from afar.’ But how long will it take for the pills to arrive?Unalome by Graeme Cheevers, 36 Kelvingrove Street, Finnieston, Glasgow G3 7RZ (0141 501 0553). Three courses à la carte £80, tasting menu £90, wines from £34 At the start of our dinner at Unalome by Graeme Cheevers, which is an awful lot of syllables for just one restaurant name, our waiter announces solemnly that before we are allowed to see the menu, we will be brought some canapés “to entice the palate”. I’m sure my spirits are meant to soar at this; instead, they sag. I’m not really sure I need my palate enticed. It’s fine as it is, thank you. Nevertheless, there is enticement in my future. The first two canapés are solid enough: there’s a warm cheese gougère with a liquid centre, and a doughy miniature brioche bun, pelted with truffles and Ibérico ham. The third canapé, a crisp pastry tube filled with foie gras mousse and decorated with tiny leaves, is presented on a bowl of pebbles, as if someone dropped it in the gravelled car park of a country house hotel. The mere use of an ingredient that I expect to be prohibited soon on grounds of animal cruelty tells us exactly where we are: wading through lakes of self-conscious, sod-you luxury. For emphasis, the website describes this restaurant as “the ultimate dining experience”. That takes the cliché “hostage to fortune” and adds go-faster stripes, turbo injection and one of those huge, redundant aerofoils that men desperately overcompensating for something put on the arse end of their Ford Escorts. Were the claim to be true, I’d never need to eat in a restaurant again after having eaten here. For the record, I do need to eat in a restaurant again. It’s all a little overheated and sweaty palmed. Even the name Unalome is grandiose. It refers to a lovely Buddhist symbol of curls and spirals which, according to various definitions, represents nothing less than the entirety of human existence or the very path we take in life. That’s an awful lot for three courses plus canapés and a pre-dessert to live up to, even at £80 a head. Or £90 if you go for the meat or vegetarian tasting menu. But then the ambition here really is not small. Shortly after news of the launch broke in the restaurant world (in November 2020), I received an email from someone involved with the business, breathlessly telling me this may well be the place that would bring a Michelin star back to Glasgow, as if that would somehow make the city a better place. Nowhere is improved by having Michelin-starred restaurants. Nor is it a lesser place for not having one. What it comes down to is this: chef Graeme Cheevers has twice held a Michelin star, first at Martin Wishart’s restaurant by Loch Lomond, then at the lovely Isle of Eriska Hotel. Now he has opened here and he has similar ambitions. Obviously, the man can cook. One of the three available starters features two plump langoustine, with cloud-like gnudi – think gnocchi only made with ricotta rather than potato – and a soothingly rich, creamy sauce, the flavours boosted with sansho pepper and the citrus burst of finger lime. A main course saddle of venison is on point and comes with a deep, sticky jus and a silky pumpkin purée. I am particularly taken by a foamed pre-dessert of lime and passion fruit with galangal and lemon curd. The pre-enticed palate is fully cleansed. All of this is solid, neo-classical cooking. Which is exactly what you would expect at this price. But there are eye-widening weirdnesses. Another starter brings sweet, sticky slices of marinated scallop with the forest-floor flavours of puréed mushroom and hazelnut below, and a spritz of clementine above. For decoration there is silver leaf because, well, it’s the ultimate dining experience and all that, even though, as with that nice Mr Salt Bae’s gold-leafed steaks, it serves no purpose. But that silver leaf does have a visual impact. This is meant to be a seafood dish. Instead, the combination of silver foil, nuts, citrus and sweetness is firing off thoughts of cornershop chocolate confectionary. It’s plain odd. The roasted cauliflower on a main course cod dish is pleasing but the fish itself, presented as a cylinder, is a little mushy. Of our two desserts, the winner is the chestnut parfait with Windsor apple and a sharp apple mousse. It tastes soothingly of autumn. Less successful is a pear and caramel tart. It’s pretty but seems to have been over set to become curiously rubbery. Some of these points may seem like pedantry. Certainly, whining about the sourdough being served cold could be taken as such, so I won’t mention that. But the rest of it is merely holding the restaurant to its own standards. Talking of which: what’s up with the room? Unalome occupies a set of interlocking spaces in a big-boned sandstone building. Effort has gone into the design. There are leather banquettes, parquet floors and honeyed panelling. They’ve done all of this. Then they’ve left the big light on. It’s both brightly and flatly lit. It doesn’t feel like a space in which to linger even though, given the minimum requirement to have three courses, you must. Have I once again broken my promise not to publish negative reviews? Well yes, I suppose I have, but for the same reason I did so last time. Unalome is expensive. Our bill, with a pre-dinner drink each, a £46 bottle of albariño from the very lowest reaches of the list and service, was £250. That’s a lot of anyone’s money anywhere, which creates expectations, and telling us you are great, really is not the same as being great. I will not pretend. My appetite for this sort of self-consciously ambitious restaurant with its tasting menus and flummery has waned. I do not want to sit in hushed dining rooms, sparsely occupied by muttering people on their best behaviour, waiting to be enticed and wowed. I decided, given its own pre-publicity, to give this one a go. Perhaps that was my mistake. Below Unalome, in the building’s lower ground space, is a 15-year-old bar called Big Slope, where they serve a vegan-friendly menu of pizzas, burgers and the like. I could see the cheery, grinning faces of the clientele through the windows inside as I left. They all seemed to have had a much better night out than me. News bites A new café will open in London’s Mayfair this month, providing in-work training for adults with learning difficulties. Fair Shot Café, a collaboration with West London College and Action on Disability, has been founded by Bianca Tavella, who raised £300,000 in private funding for the venture during the pandemic. She has also secured favourable terms on the site on South Moulton Street from landlords Grosvenor Britain and Ireland. Visit fairshot.co.uk. The 25-strong Rosa’s Thai restaurant chain has launched a range of retail products, including a green curry, a red curry and a massaman curry paste, alongside chilli oils and a satay sauce. The products cost between £3.95 and £5.95 and are available to purchase in the restaurants and online in gift packs for delivery nationwide. The lower ground floor space of the Mandarin Oriental Hotel in London’s Knightsbridge which, for 10 years, was occupied by Bar Boulud until the contract came to an end last October, is to get a new restaurant. The Aubrey is being described as an izakaya, the Japanese term for a pub or inn where the food comes alongside the drinks, and will be a sibling to a restaurant of the same name at the Mandarin Oriental in Hong Kong. Expect a menu of sushi, sashimi, maki rolls, tempura and really quite enthusiastic prices. At mandarinoriental.com. • This article was amended on 6 December 2021. An earlier version did not account for the fact that Cail Bruich won a Michelin star in January 2021 becoming the first restaurant in Glasgow to get such an accolade for 18 years. Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1The question I met Tom online. We have now been dating for nearly two years, sometimes on Zoom as we live three hours away from each other. This is long-term relationship potential – except, from my side, for one thing. I am a deeply sexually alive person. Sex is an immense joy to me. Not only the explicit physical acts of it, but also the sharing, the play, all the openness and openheartedness. Tom is divorced and I suspect has not had much sexual experience. I think he is sexually repressed. I have always been open with him about wanting our relationship to become fully sexual. It never has been. Tom has a serious heart condition and wants everything we have, minus a full sexual relationship, for fear of his heart, although his doctor has given him the green light and said he’s fine to use Viagra. It troubles me that Tom responds to my talking about wanting a full sexual relationship in offhand ways, uncaring about my needs and wishes – in every other way he’s the person I have been waiting for. It seems like a no-brainer: I should leave. But we are compatible in every way other than this, including intellectually. We are both in our early 70s – when it’s far from easy to find a compatible partner. The grief of not having sex again would be immense, plus maybe underlying resentment would likely erode my regard for him. I fantasise about finding a part-time lover, to live that part of who I am, while being with Tom for the rest of my life in every other way. Would Tom go for it? Maybe, but I doubt it. Philippa’s answer I do believe that someone who does not want to have sex should not be pressured into it. Yes, this might be heartbreaking and frustrating for their partner, but we are each responsible for caring for our own bodies and discovering what we each need. You talk about yourself as a sexual person and wanting a sexual relationship in general, but you don’t really talk about your sexual attraction to Tom in particular. If I were Tom, I might sense that you wanted to make love, but perhaps not necessarily to me and this would put me off. No one wants to feel used. Of course, this is conjecture on my part, but I flag it up in case it may be relevant. He is, you say, uncaring about your needs and wishes, but only around the subject of sex. Perhaps you are being uncaring about his boundary around this as well. Calling him “repressed” could be being callous, too, though I know you are not being so purposefully. The partner relationships we have could be seen in phases. They look a bit like this: 1. Pre-sexual, not co-habitating 2. Sexual, not co-habitating 3. Sexual, co-habitating 4. Post-sexual, co-habitating Tom may have got to stage 4, and you have not. He may want to want you as his significant other, but he doesn’t want to have sex. It’s as though, for whatever reason, he’s over that. The reason he has given is health. It’s unfair on him for me to speculate further. The trouble when we are given reasons instead of feelings for a decision is that we can argue with the reason, but really, it’s his feeling. He just doesn’t want to. That needs respecting. Your solution: “I fantasise about finding a part-time lover, to live that part of who I am, while being with Tom for the rest of my life in every other way.” Maybe this will be your solution. It seems unfortunate for you that you be put into stage 4 when you could do with a bit of stage 2 or 3. You cannot reason with someone about not wanting to have sex: that is pressurising them and it isn’t right. And you are not ready to forego sex. Talk about your proposed solution with Tom and see what he thinks. Maybe you can be very close friends, always in each other’s lives, but not necessarily partners. You don’t have to cut him out of your life. On the other hand, you don’t know how this relationship will pan out; you might find after you have weaned yourself off it that you don’t miss sex as much as you thought you would. Companionship, in the end, is what most people probably need even more than sex. A compatible companion needs treasuring. Life is far from perfect, but “we are compatible in every way other than this, including intellectually…” For that, you could give yourself a score of 8/10, which is pretty close to perfect. And if you could have a lover on the side as well, a person who feels OK about being used and happy to use you in return, well then you might be getting close to a 10. I wonder what Tom would think. I wonder whether you will ask him. Conventionality does not suit everyone. We must find our own way through life sometimes. If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.uk Philippa Perry and Bernardine Evaristo will be live on stage in London at a Guardian Live event on 6 December. Join the conversation in-person or online, book tickets hereAngry villagers who set fire to army vehicles are among more than a dozen civilians killed by soldiers in India’s remote north-east region along the border with Myanmar. An army officer said soldiers fired at a truck, killing six labourers returning home from work, after receiving intelligence about a movement of insurgents in the area. As villagers reacted by burning two army vehicles, the soldiers fired at them, killing seven more people, the officer said, adding that one soldier was also killed in the clash. Nagaland police officer Sandeep M Tamgadge told AFP that the situation in the district was “very tense right now”, with nine other civilians wounded in the second incident now being treated in local hospitals. Nagaland state’s top elected official, Neiphiu Rio, ordered a probe into the killings, which occurred on Saturday: “The unfortunate incident leading to the killing of civilians at Oting is highly condemnable.” Insurgents often cross into Myanmar after attacking Indian government forces in the remote area. Nyamtow Konyak, a local community leader, said those killed were coalminers returning home from work. India’s home minister Amit Shah expressed anguish over the “unfortunate incident” and said the state government would investigate the killings. The army officer said the soldiers had laid an ambush for a week following intelligence that insurgents were planning to attack soldiers in the area, 250 miles (400km) east of Gauhati, the capital of Assam state. “The cause of the unfortunate loss of lives is being investigated at the highest level and appropriate action will be taken as per the course of law,” a statement from the army said. There are dozens of ethnic insurgent groups in India’s remote north-east whose demands range from independent homelands to maximum autonomy within India. With Reuters and Associated PressTurn on the radio or television in France, and it is gloom and doom from the first morning headline to the last late bulletin. France is in terminal decline, we are told, mostly by rightwing presidential hopefuls engaged in a competition over who can utter the darkest, direst warnings of a future in which they are not voted into the Elysée palace next April. Declinism is à la mode; bleak is the new black. These purveyors of nostalgia and what the French call morosité are driving the country into one of its periodic existential crises with a rallying cry plagiarised from Donald Trump that only they can “make France great again”. “What we are hearing is about decline, how things were better before, how France has lost its place in the world … it’s a photofit of pessimism,” said social scientist Antoine Bristielle of the prestigious Jean-Jaurès Foundation. “We now have 75% of the country that believes France has declined, and this decline is irreversible. And it’s not just that they believe it was better before but that it will be even worse in future.” The far-right political pundit turned presidential candidate Éric Zemmour, whose 2014 book The French Suicide lamented the loss of the country’s “soul”, is the country’s pessimist-in-chief. Zemmour argues that France has been declining since the defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo and espouses the far-right “great replacement” conspiracy theory that Muslim immigrants are replacing the native population. Bristielle said: “If we look at how people voted in 2017, there is a correlation between this idea of decline and pessimism and the [political] extremes, particularly the extreme right. Éric Zemmour is promoting the fantasy of Napoleon and the Trente Glorieuses [the 30-year economic boom after the second world war] and the idea that if you don’t vote for him then the situation, which is catastrophic, will be even more so.” He added that, despite the rightwing discourse saturating the French airwaves, polls consistently show people’s top election priorities are spending power and the environment. “The real worry is the inability of other political parties to show a more attractive future and to reassure the population,” Bristielle said. “This pessimism is central to building the combat in the extreme right. It’s like Make America Great Again. We can see clear parallels between Zemmour and Trump. And at the moment, this message from the right is all we are hearing.” However there is, as Emmanuel Macron is fond of saying, en même temps [at the same time] a striking paradox; out on the streets, people are far from downcast. Bars and restaurants are buzzing, shops are still in business – unlike many on British high streets – and far from being gloomy, the French have been telling pollsters they are happy. “In the world after the Covid crisis, the French have returned to what is essential,” said pollsters Elabe, whose Baromètre des Territoires 2021 survey last month suggested that while 60% are convinced the country is in a bad way, 78% are content. “Of course, there has been illness, victims, deaths, suffering … but finally, this situation has made us rediscover, revisit the ingredients of happiness.” These essentials, the pollsters suggested, were not “totems of consumer society” like smartphones and nice cars that now “seem almost derisory”. Claudia Senik, an economist at the Paris School of Economics and director of the Wellbeing Observatory, which maps the highs and lows of French morale, agrees: “It’s true the French are often gloomy, but now I would say it’s party time. People remember the last year [of Covid] as terrible so they are happy now. It’s a cycle but we are now in the happy phase. “We can follow the fluctuations of happiness, life satisfaction and optimism and right now … it’s really the high life in terms of satisfaction. People are working, consumers are spending and it feels very dynamic.” Not all the French are happy. The gilets jaunes [yellow vest] protesters have resurfaced after the Covid lockdowns, clashing with police, and French residents of Guadeloupe rioted, looted and set up street barricades recently in protest at coronavirus restrictions. There are plenty of reasons for the French to be cheerful, despite rising energy prices, supply chain delays, a drop in industrial production and a new surge in Covid cases. Unemployment has dropped, jobs are being created, the economy is expected to grow by 6% this year, the standard of living is rising, and after two lockdowns people have savings to spend for Christmas. Senik says the French have an ambivalent attitude towards happiness, “always dreaming of something better”. Asked to explain how 75% say France is in decline yet 78% say they are happy, Jérôme Fourquet, from pollsters IFOP, said: “It’s a paradox that we find in all opinion polls: when the French are questioned about the future of the country, we are often record-holders in terms of gloom; when questioned about their personal situation, things are fine.” “There is a gap between a highly invested individual sphere and a struggling capacity for collective projection. Until recently, the French were kept under the illusion that we were one of the great powers of the world. There is a gap between the memory of a very powerful Gaullist France and the reality of a France that has now become a middle power, which is troubling our citizens.” Gaël Brulé, an author and researcher into happiness, said: “One of the [many] paradoxes of French happiness lies in the fact that it is evoked in the collective but lived in solitude. “Covid has accelerated this trend and acted for others as an eye-opener, forcing central and metaphysical questions into the heart of our lives: Why am I doing this? What is the purpose of life? What is my place?” he told Marianne magazine. The French have been turning to a well-known antidote to the blues, according to newspaper reports. Chocolate is currently enjoying an unprecedented boom to “chase away the melancholy”.The first Sunday of the last month of the year. The darkest days. The winter solstice is at 15.59, 21 December, when the North Pole is tilted furthest from the sun, hanging over the Tropic of Capricorn. Btw, my constant source: Lia Leendertz’s essential Almanac, because I find it comforting to know when the sun and moon rise and set and what time’s high tide near my childhood home. It’s a perfect Christmas present. Even better when bought from your local bookshop. Anyway, time to (mostly) down tools. Hang a few bird feeders if you haven’t already. They’ll thank you for it and it’s a joy to see. A source of fresh water would be good, too, if possible. It’s the month for some armchair gardening. To perhaps look back over the year. Think about what worked and what didn’t do so well. What you might try differently in 2022. Time to think about seed. I will scour favoured catalogues and seed sites. Attempt to be more ruthless with some of the more ancient out-of-date packets I keep almost as totems. I tell myself I will find a home for them on the plot sometime. I’ll also try to make more sense of the various dishes of drying seed dotted throughout the house. The envelopes, the paper bags of many sizes stashed on shelves and in cupboards. Currently needing sorting and cleaning: two paper sacks of Hopi Red amaranth heads, another of deep crimson orache. There are bulging bags of poppy, calendula and nasturtium seed I’ll share with Kala for her garden, even though she has been collecting her own through the year. Some, we’ll take with us to the summerhouse as we reclaim more borders there. Note that none of this includes the peas and beans, chard and beet seed we saved. Or the cake tin stuffed with packets of salad and other leafy crops. It’s hopeless. An addiction. Perhaps Howard will stage an intervention. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.comWe said that “Cambridge University became the first UK institution to officially repatriate a Benin bronze”. To clarify: it was Jesus College, Cambridge, which is a college of the university but a legally separate institution (“Victorians buried truth of atrocities in the plundering of Benin bronzes”, 21 November, page 19). A book review referred to a poem about a statue of Clio in the US Capitol and said it was written in 1851 by President John Adams. In fact it was written in 1840 by former President John Quincy Adams (“Witness to the last days of a would-be dictator”, 28 November, New Review, page 38). Edward Powys Mathers, the Observer’s cryptic crossword setter in the 1920s and 1930s, wrote poems that were accompanied by illustrations of lesbian figures, but he did not draw these illustrations himself, as an article said (“I took on Torquemada’s fiendish literary puzzle. And yes, it was torture”, 28 November, page 50). Other recently amended articles include: With Covid studies, the quality of the evidence matters Love at first sip breathes new life into an ancient Piedmont home The week in TV: Crime; Dopesick; Tiger King 2; Bridget Riley: Painting the Line Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736Vladimir Putin is an old-fashioned sort of guy. He yearns for the days when the Soviet Union was a great power. He still views western democracies as adversaries, to be confounded whenever possible. And he has never reconciled to the post-Soviet loss of cold war-era satellite republics in eastern Europe. This is especially true of Ukraine. The Russian view that Ukraine is stolen territory to which it has a natural right has roots in tsarist times and before. Ukrainians (and Belarusians) were habitually called “little Russians”. Indigenous narratives stress a common history and common faith indissolubly linking two brotherly eastern Slavic races. Putin has repeatedly stated that “Russians and Ukrainians are one people”. Conveniently forgotten is 19th-century imperial oppression that included a ban on Ukraine’s language. In 1918, after the Russian Revolution, Ukraine declared its independence, only to have it swiftly snuffed out. In the 1930s, a man-made “terror famine”, known as the Holodomor, killed more than 7 million mostly ethnic Ukrainians and is now officially viewed as a Soviet genocide. Despite all this, Putin views modern Ukraine’s bid for closer ties to the EU and Nato as a betrayal. This attitude recalls that of 1950s France towards Algeria and of 19th-century England towards Ireland. Yet he also appears to be genuinely fearful that Kyiv’s westwards lurch, encouraged and exploited by the US and allies, poses a threat to Russia. Understanding a little of this shared history is essential to understanding why current tensions on Ukraine’s borders have the potential to explode into a European war. In 2014, in response to the revolution that toppled Ukraine’s pro-Moscow president, Putin invaded and annexed Crimea and began a proxy separatist conflict in the Donbas region. The failure of peace efforts, championed by Germany’s Angela Merkel, led directly to today’s crisis. By stationing more than 90,000 troops and heavy weapons around Ukraine’s borders, Putin may be trying to push Kyiv and the west into a permanent settlement, the lifting of sanctions and formal recognition of Crimea’s new status. But he has other motives, too. Moscow has always objected to Nato’s post-1990 eastwards expansion, especially into Poland and the Baltic republics. He would like to reverse the alliance’s recent deployments there of troops and missiles. He’d like US and UK arms sales to Kyiv, and talk of Ukraine’s bright “Euro-Atlantic future”, to stop. Adept at leveraging Russia’s relatively weak geo-strategic position to his advantage, Putin also senses an opportunity. The US debacle in Afghanistan, after similar American failures of will over Syria, Crimea and Georgia, may have convinced him that another adventure in Ukraine could ultimately yield positive dividends while avoiding serious military consequences. In this, unfortunately, he may not be far wrong. The US president, Joe Biden, has issued a series of tough-sounding warnings. He says he will talk directly to the Russian leader soon. Meanwhile, he boasted last week, he has prepared “the most comprehensive and meaningful set of initiatives to make it very, very difficult for Mr Putin to go ahead and do what people are worried he’s going to do”. What this piece of Biden-speak means, in practical terms, is that the US plans to punish Russia economically and in other ways if it attacks Ukraine – but there will be no overt military response. Nato will not ride to the rescue; there will be no wider conflict. As Putin knows, Biden is in the business of ending wars, not starting them. It’s his promise to American voters. And anyway, he’s focused on China and Covid. Seen this way, the crisis marks a very dangerous moment for Ukraine – and the credibility of the western alliance. The foreign secretary Liz Truss’s jingoistic blather about defending the “frontier of freedom” is actually a confession of impotence. Putin may be about to commit another act of daylight robbery. And, truly, who’s to stop him?Ministers have agreed a secrecy clause in any dispute with the drugs manufacturer Pfizer over Britain’s Covid vaccine supply. Large portions of the government’s contracts with the company over the supply of 189m vaccine doses have been redacted and any arbitration proceedings will be kept secret. The revelation comes as Pfizer is accused by a former senior US health official of “war profiteering’’ during the pandemic. In a Channel 4 Dispatches investigation to be broadcast this week, Tom Frieden, who was director of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention under Barack Obama, said: “If you’re just focusing on maximising your profits and you’re a vaccine manufacturer … you are war profiteering.” Zain Rizvi, research director at Public Citizen, a US consumer advocacy organisation which has examined Pfizer’s global vaccine contracts, said: “There is a wall of secrecy surrounding these contracts and it’s unacceptable, particularly in a public health crisis.” Rizvi said the UK needed to explain why it had agreed to secret arbitration proceedings. He said: “It’s the only high-income country we have seen that has agreed to this provision. It allows pharmaceutical companies to bypass domestic legal processes. “The UK government has allowed the drug firms to call the shots. How did we end up in a situation where a handful of drug firms were able to exert so much control over the most powerful governments in the world? It points to a broken system.” Pfizer has won plaudits for its vaccine delivery programme, but the US multinational faces growing scrutiny over the scale of its profits and the proportion of doses it has delivered to low-income countries. While AstraZeneca agreed to sell its vaccine at cost during the pandemic, Pfizer wanted to secure its profits. The Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine, which now has the brand name Comirnaty, will be one of the most lucrative drugs in pharmaceutical history. The Channel 4 investigation reveals analysis by one biological engineering expert claiming the Pfizer vaccine costs just 76p to manufacture for each shot. It is reportedly being sold for £22 a dose to the UK government. The estimated manufacturing costs do not include research, distribution and other costs, but Pfizer says its profit margin as a percentage before tax are in the “high-20s”. Pfizer expects to deliver 2.3bn vaccines this year with predicted revenues of $36bn (£26.3bn). A report last month by the People’s Vaccine Alliance, a coalition of organisations including aid charities, said Pfizer and other drug firms have sold the majority of doses to rich countries, leaving low-income countries “out in the cold” . Only 2% of people in low-income countries had been fully vaccinated against coronavirus. Drug firms should suspend intellectual property rights for Covid-19 vaccines, tests, treatments and other medical tools. Pfizer has faced increased scrutiny allegations of excessive global profits after its partner, the biotechnology company BioNTech, announced in September 2020 it was to receive up to €375m (£320m) from the German government to fund vaccine development. Anna Marriott, Oxfam’s health policy manager, said: “It is deplorable that billions of people around the world are being denied vaccines so that pharmaceutical companies can make obscene profits. Given that public investment was crucial to vaccine development, it’s incomprehensible that pharma monopolies are being prioritised over people’s lives.” Pfizer has to date pledged 40m doses out of global production to Covax, the UN-backed initiative delivering vaccines for low income countries. This is less than 2% of its global production for 2021. The firm says it aims to deliver at least two billion doses to low- and middle-income countries by the end of 2022. Pfizer said vaccine production was the “biggest scale-up” in the firm’s history and it was proud to have delivered more than 2bn vaccines to 162 countries. It supplied low-income countries on a not-for-profit price and all other countries were being offered the vaccine at a significantly discounted price. The company added: “The pandemic has highlighted the extraordinary value that a vibrant private sector can deliver to society.” It said confidentiality agreements were standard practice. The estimated cost of manufacturing the vaccine by a biological engineering expert was grossly inaccurate and meaningless because it did not reflect the true costs of bringing the vaccine to patients, including clinical studies, increased manufacturing efforts and global distribution. The government said its vaccine contracts were commercially sensitive and it could not disclose any further details. BioNTech did not respond to a request for comment. Vaccine Wars: The Truth About Pfizer is on Channel 4 at 7.30pm on FridayThe police famously tried to shut down the Beatles’s rooftop concert on 30 January 1969, over concerns of breach of the peace, in what was to be the band’s final public performance. Now a further backstage drama has emerged with the revelation that Paul McCartney afterwards used his charm to stop a police officer from arresting their road manager and confidant, Mal Evans. Kenneth Womack, one of the world’s foremost Beatles scholars, told the Observer: “It turns out that Mal was actually arrested that day but managed to get out of it only when Paul went into PR mode and changed the copper’s mind after the show.” It is among behind-the-scenes revelations in Evans’s previously unpublished diaries, manuscripts and photographs to which Womack has been given unprecedented access for a major biography. For decades, the mystery surrounding his trove of unreleased material has left Beatles fans and music historians longing for a glimpse into the life and times of this devoted friend from the group’s inner circle. Evans himself had written his memoir, titled Living the Beatles’s Legend, which he planned to submit for publication in the mid-1970s, with the written permission of the Beatles. But he died before he was able do this. Evans was killed in 1976, aged 40, in a tragic shooting by the Los Angeles police. Now his children, Gary and Julie, have made his documents available to Womack, who said: “Since Mal’s death, the Beatles’s world has always been abuzz about his diaries and his manuscripts. For the first time, they will be published.” The material reveals what really happened at the rooftop concert, which is the big climax of Peter Jackson’s new Get Back docuseries. Womack added that Evans, with his assistant Kevin Harrington, had created the makeshift stage on the roof of the Beatles’s Apple Corps HQ in Savile Row: “The police demand that they turn down the sound or stop the concert. They tell Mal they intend to arrest the Beatles. At that point, Mal turns off George Harrison’s amplifier. Of course, George is very unhappy with that and barks at Mal. As Jackson’s Get Back documentary shows, the Beatles performed a brief, stilted version of Get Back, and then the concert was essentially over.” Of the police’s threat to arrest the Beatles, Evans wrote in his diary: “I felt that this would have been a silly thing to let happen and, making an effort to keep the peace, I switched off the power, starting with George’s amplifier, just as they were about to break into a new number. Then George got a right cob on. I put the amp back on. They played that last number and finished.” He added: “On the way up to the roof, they arrested me, with one of the policemen putting me in his book. Paul, being the public relations man that he is, apologised to the police and got me off the hook.” Womack said fans of the Beatles will be astonished by the diaries and other material: “Being there for nearly every minute of all of their sessions, having struggled with them on those world tours, Mal understood they were crafting a musical legacy that was something extraordinarily special.” The Beatles, in turn, valued his loyalty. Womack is professor of English and popular music at Monmouth University, New Jersey, and author or editor of 40 books, including The Cambridge Companion to the Beatles and The Beatles Encyclopedia: Everything Fab Four. Yet even he has found plenty that he did not know. On reading the diaries, he was “overcome with emotion”. “Mal is showing them in their unguarded moments,” he said. “You have to be a genius to write A Day in the Life [considered one of the best Lennon-McCartney collaborations], but they’re real people. It’s a real story with highs and lows and fantastic moments of success and heartbreaking moments.” Womack’s biography of Evans will be published in 2023, followed by a fully illustrated offering from the family’s archives in 2024.The graphic testimony presented to jurors in Ghislaine Maxwell’s criminal sex abuse trial last week seemed at times to mesh and then detach from broader theories – criminal, conspiratorial or both – about the nature of Jeffrey Epstein’s world. Whether prosecutors and defense attorneys are successful in separating criminal conspiracy from the conspiracy theories that run through the entire Epstein-Maxwell narrative may determine how the criminal complaint against the 59-year-old former British socialite is ultimately resolved. For the prosecution, their case against Maxwell is to separate the criminal charges she faces from broader conspiracy theories about wealth and power that envelop the dark legend of disgraced financier and sex trafficker Epstein. For Maxwell’s defense, the task may be to entangle Maxwell so deeply in Epstein’s shadow that jurors are simply unable to find her guilty. Both sides are battling preconceptions about wealth, power, privilege and sex – and where those spin off into the sort of conspiracies that have no place in this trial or, arguably, in any kind of reality except, perhaps, that of political extremists. But, when it comes to Epstein, and the wild web of powerful people he was connected to, there is no easy way to escape the conspiracy theorists. “Many people have come to me with wild conspiracy theories about this case,” said Lisa Bloom, the victims’ rights attorney, outside the Manhattan courthouse that has become a scene for Q-Anon demonstrations. “Of course, the Q-Anon people are crazy – they think Democrats eat babies – they’re nuts. But if you’d told me 10 years ago that Jeffrey Epstein had on his plane Donald Trump, Bill Clinton, Kevin Spacey, Chris Tucker and Prince Andrew I would have said you’re crazy. Turns out that’s true.” Class too, plays a role. In an early indication of how Maxwell’s defense counsel intends to play its hand, her team tried to undercut one of the first witnesses, “Jane”, by challenging her account of where she lived in Palm Beach and whether her gated community was attached to a “country club”. The implication was clear: jurors were being asked to believe that “Jane” came from better circumstances than she had described and was thus more knowing than indicated. “I don’t think I’ve ever had a case where a witness was always consistent in what they described,” Wendy J Murphy, a former Massachusetts prosecutor who teaches a course on sexual violence law at New England Law Boston, said. “In fact, I’d be nervous if they were because it comes across as parented and contrived.” While witness credibility is important, Murphy adds, “this case is about a widespread scheme of criminal conduct – really it’s organized crime. There’s so much corroboration and proof that this enterprise existed you don’t have to put as much stock in the credibility of individual victims.” But the question of how much of the overall Epstein-Maxwell story is salient to jurors and how much is too wild to believe is likely to be a concern for prosecutors, Murphy says. “The jurors’ job is to make sense of what they’re hearing,” Murphy said. “But when you’re talking about very unusual behavior at a very high level, most jurors won’t be comfortable thinking that influential people are inclined to do horrible things. And that, Murphy says, plays to the defense. “Ninety-nine per cent of jurors have no way to identify with the victim so it feels so uncomfortable to believe that it happened. They’d rather find reasonable doubt because it feels better to them about how the world works.” At the same time, she points out, the central theme of the charges against Maxwell – sex trafficking – is an accepted truth accruing to Epstein. “Jurors may think Maxwell was involved in something horrendous because she was involved with Epstein who is guilty because he’s dead,” Murphy suggested, and her defense’s argument that she might not have been prosecuted had Epstein lived would then fail to elicit sympathy. “Nobody cares,” Murphy points out. Few stories in recent years since 9/11 or the death of Diana, Princess of Wales have acquired as much conspiratorial baggage as Jeffrey Epstein, his alleged enablers and figures within their milieu. Most notorious among them, promoted by his own family, is that Epstein was murdered and not, as records suggest, successful in a second suicide attempt in a poorly run detention center. At the time, even elected officials, including the outgoing New York mayor, Bill de Blasio, said they did not understand how Epstein, facing multiple accusations of sexual abuse and sex trafficking, had managed to die by suicide. “It’s just too convenient,” De Blasio said. “It’s too many pieces happening simultaneously that don’t fit.” But it’s Maxwell, not Epstein, who is on trial, though Maxwell has consistently claimed that she is being tried as a substitute for the government’s failure to bring Epstein before a jury. “The charges against Ghislaine Maxwell are for things that Jeffrey Epstein did, but she is not Jeffrey Epstein,” Maxwell’s lawyer, Bobbi Sternheim, said in opening statements. But whether the trial can begin to parse the conspiracy that the government claims against Maxwell from the broader conspiracy theories around Epstein and his circle of bankers, politicians, scientists and social figures is hard to determine. Stephan Lewandowsky, a professor at the University of Bristol who has written widely on conspiracy theories, notes that the objects of such thinking nearly always attach to wealth and power of the type that Epstein personified and that perhaps Maxwell can hide behind. “I can’t think of a conspiracy theory that wouldn’t involve somebody famous or well-known, because no one cares about your grandmother or your cousin down the road. A conspiracy theory about someone no one has heard of isn’t going to be very attractive. You need a famous person as a place-marker,” he said. And these are conspiratorial times. Outside the court last week, Q-Anon sympathizers again revived ideas around Pizzagate, the baseless 2016 notion that Democrats around the Clintons were abusing children in a pizza parlor owned by a Democratic party fundraiser. “It’s all reminiscent of an age-old conspiracy theory known as antisemitism,” says Lewandowsky. “Abuse or sacrifice of children is very often part-political conspiracy theory.” It is in Maxwell’s interest to put Epstein on trial – and he cannot answer for even the most outlandish claims about him and his circle.What does Sunday feel like? Calmness. I wake up naturally, no alarm. Monday to Friday, I’m up at 7am to make breakfast and do the school run. We live in the English countryside: rolling hills, fields, farmland. I love being surrounded by nature. Even when it’s raining I just watch the clouds. Do you cook? We normally have a long brunch with local produce – I like making my mother’s apple pancakes. That and pasta bolognese are about the only things I can cook. Drinking is seasonal: summer is perfect for a rosé; red wine, cheese and a game of cards is my absolute favourite winter afternoon. Any exercise? A long walk with the dogs, rain or shine. We play table tennis, croquet and swim as a family. I might do an online class with my eldest daughter. During the week, I tend to find excuses not to meditate or work out. How do you have fun? Sometimes I watch my husband and son battle it out playing backgammon and chess. In the summer, we spend the whole day outside. If we’re all up for it, we end the evening with karaoke and more wine. Sundays as a kid? I grew up in a small town near the Rhine. My dad would open my curtains loudly and insist on having breakfast as a family. In the afternoons he’d take us to the forest. Me and my siblings weren’t always keen, but could be persuaded with the promise of a kid’s malt beer at a pub. Now I’m the one making my children walk. Sunday nights? After a long bath with salts, a mask and candles, I quickly brush my teeth to make sure I don’t open a bag of caramel Cadbury buttons (I’m obsessed). I watch Friends. Since lockdown I’m addicted; I never had the time to watch in the 90s as I was always working late. I’m catching up now. Captivate! Fashion Photography from the 90s edited by Claudia Schiffer is published by Prestel, £49.99. The accompanying exhibition is at Kunstpalast Düsseldorf until 9 JanuaryPublic opinion on abortion in the US has changed little since 1973, when the supreme court in effect legalized the procedure nationally in its ruling on the case Roe v Wade. According to Gallup, which has the longest-running poll on the issue, about four in five Americans believe abortion should be legal, at least in some circumstances. Yet the politics of abortion have opened deep divisions in the last five decades, which have only grown more profound in recent years of polarization. In 2021, state legislators have passed dozens of restrictions to abortion access, making it the most hostile year to abortion rights on record. This schism played out in the US supreme court on Wednesday, when the new conservative-dominated bench heard oral arguments in the case of Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, the most important abortion rights case since Roe. In somber arguments, justices questioned whether the state of Mississippi should be allowed to ban nearly all abortions at 15 weeks gestation, nine weeks earlier than the current accepted limit. While the ruling, expected by the end of June next year, is far from a foregone conclusion, justices in the conservative majority appeared to signal their support for severely restricting abortion access, a right Americans have exercised for two generations. The divisive question among the conservative majority appeared to be whether abortion should be restricted to earlier than 15 weeks, weakening Roe, or if the precedent set in Roe should be overturned entirely. Summarizing Mississippi’s argument, the conservative justice Brett Kavanaugh, who was controversially nominated to the court by Donald Trump in 2018, said “the constitution is neither pro-life nor pro-choice … and leaves the issue to the people to resolve in the democratic process.” If the issue is returned to the states, 26 states would be “certain or likely” to ban or severely restrict abortion access. *** The religious right in the US has been laying the foundations of this decisive challenge to abortion rights for years. According to historians and researchers, it has taken decades of political machinations for the campaign to reach this zenith. The movement has intersected with nearly every major issue in American politics for the last five decades, from segregation to welfare reform to campaign finance. The conservative anti-abortion movement “was a kind of historical accident”, said Randall Balmer, a professor of American religious history at Dartmouth University and author of the recently released book Bad Faith: Race and the Rise of the Religious Right. It wasn’t until Republican strategists sought to “deflect attention away from the real narrative”, which Balmer argues was racial integration, “and to advocate on behalf of the fetus”, that largely apolitical evangelical Christians and Catholics would be united within the Republican party. Balmer argues that advocacy was nascent in 1969. Although the supreme court decision in Brown v Board of Education called for an end to racial segregation in schools in 1954, many schools continued de facto segregation 14 years later. Then, the supreme court weighed in again, and ordered schools to integrate “immediately”. This prompted white southerners to form “segregation academies”, whites-only private Christian schools which registered as tax-exempt non-profit charities. African American parents in Mississippi sued, arguing this was taxpayer-subsidized discrimination. They won, and in 1971, tax authorities revoked the non-profit status of 111 segregated private schools. In Balmer’s view, revoking the non-profit status of segregated private schools catalyzed evangelical Christian leaders, but even in the early 1970s defense of racial segregation was not a populist message. However, defense of the fetus could be. Republican operations began to test abortion as a vessel for the collective anxieties of evangelical Christians, and Roe as a shorthand for government intrusion into the family after the sexual revolution of the 1960s. Eventually, abortion became the reason for evangelicals to deny the Democratic president Jimmy Carter, himself an evangelical Christian, a second term. Evangelical opposition to abortion “wasn’t an anti-abortion movement per se”, said Elmer L Rumminger, an administrator at the then whites-only Christian college Bob Jones University, said in Balmer’s book. “For me it was government intrusion into private education.” At the same time, the anti-feminist Republican activist Phyllis Schlafly was connecting anxiety about women’s changing roles in society with abortion. In a 1972 essay, she described the feminist movement as “anti-family, anti-children, and pro-abortion,” and the writing of contemporaneous feminists as “a series of sharp-tongued, high-pitched whining complaints by unmarried women”. By the 1978 midterm congressional elections, Paul Weyrich, one of the architects of modern conservatism, was testing abortion as a campaign issue with evangelical Christians with a small fund from the Republican National Committee. Roman Catholic volunteers distributed hundreds of thousands of leaflets in church parking lots in Iowa, New Hampshire and Minnesota, and their efforts prevailed. Four anti-abortion Republicans ousted Democrats. The groundwork laid by Schlafly and Weyrich made “Roe shorthand for a host of worries about sex equality and sexuality”, wrote Mary Ziegler, a law professor at Florida State University and author of After Roe: The Lost History of the Abortion Debate. “Even as late as August 1980, the Reagan-Bush campaign wasn’t certain abortion would work for them as a political issue,” said Balmer. However, as Reagan sailed to victory, he was carried in part by religious voters hooked on the promise of a constitutional amendment to ban abortion. When a constitutional amendment failed, a new strategy took hold: control the supreme court. Historians said segregation was only one part of a complex and multifaceted movement, which has long seen itself as a human rights campaign. By the 1970s, “there was an anti-abortion movement which was influential and pretty effective in the states that was ready for the new right to work with,” said Ziegler. In the coming years, Reagan would recast the politics of reproduction through a new racist prism, as he introduced the mythical stereotype of the “welfare queen”. The image allowed politicians to portray “all single mothers as persons of color and all persons of color as dependent on public assistance”, wrote the reproductive rights activists Loretta Ross and Rickie Solinger in their 2017 book Reproductive Justice: An Introduction. The image divorced family wellbeing and welfare support from abortion access and rights. Thus, the “broad middle ground” of issues that anti-abortion and pro-choice voters agreed on became “firmly partisan”, said Laura Briggs, author of How All Politics Became Reproductive Politics, and professor and chair of women, gender and sexuality studies at University of Massachusetts, Amherst. *** By the 1990s, anti-abortion activists had professionalized. So called “right to life” organizations rallied the base, and religious law firms dedicated themselves to fighting abortion in courts. The supreme court weighed in on abortion again in 1992, in another watershed case called Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v Casey. The case allowed states to restrict abortion, as long as such restrictions did not create an “undue burden” on the right to abortion and served the purpose of either protecting the woman’s health or unborn life. States hostile to abortion passed “Trap” laws, or targeted regulations of abortion providers, which required abortion clinics to become the “functional equivalents of hospitals”, according to legal scholars. States instituted 24-hour waiting periods for abortion, state-mandated inaccurate information and invasive sonograms. Many clinics went out of business as they struggled to meet the expensive new requirements, and pregnant people struggled to obtain abortions as they had to travel further and spend more to find a provider. These laws would also play an outsized role in the Dobbs hearing. Conservative justices debated whether they could keep the “undue burden” standard while jettisoning a central tenet of Roe, that women can terminate a pregnancy until a fetus can survive outside the womb, or “viability”. “Why is 15 weeks not enough time?” asked Chief Justice John Roberts, a conservative, in the hearings. The politics of reproduction spurred new debates on acceptable restrictions on birth control, stem cell research and sex education during the George W Bush administration. But it was the election of Barack Obama, America’s first Black president, that supercharged Republican opposition. In 2010, the Tea Party swept the midterm elections. More extreme candidates entered Congress and statehouses through the practice of challenging incumbents in districts gerrymandered to be reliably Republican. And, in a decision not typically thought of as an anti-abortion victory, the chief counsel for National Right to Life successfully argued a supreme court case that would unleash vast sums of dark money into American elections – Citizens United v Federal Election Commission. “The anti-abortion movement, over time with other conservative allies, worked to change things like the rules of campaign finance for the conservative movement,” said Ziegler. “Anti-abortion lawyers played an integral part in cases like Citizens United.” By the time Donald Trump ran for president, evangelical Protestants had become more anti-abortion than the Catholic voters who were once the bedrock of anti-abortion advocacy. Seventy-seven per cent of white evangelical Christians say the procedure should be illegal, compared with just 43% of Catholics, according to the Pew Research Center. Trump harnessed the anger of white evangelicals for a victory in 2016, with a mix of hardline anti-abortion politicsand xenophobic nativism. Trump abandoned his 1999 stance as “very pro-choice”, saying there should be “punishment” for women who have abortions, and promised to nominate conservative supreme court justices who would “automatically” overturn Roe v Wade. Today, overwhelmingly white “Christian nationalist” voters believe their religion should be privileged in public life, a goal to be attained “by any means necessary”, according to social researchers such as Indiana University associate professor Andrew Whitehead. *** Supreme court decisions are notoriously difficult to predict, but abortion rights activists believe Wednesday’s hearing shows that conservative justices are ready to significantly weaken or perhaps overturn Roe v Wade. If that happens, young, poor people of color will disproportionately suffer, forced to carry unwanted pregnancies to term. Such an outcome is so severe human rights advocates have said state abortion bans would violate United Nations conventions against torture and place the US in the company of a shrinking number of countries with abortion bans. On Wednesday, the court’s three outnumbered liberal justices argued neither the science, the enormous consequences of pregnancy nor the American polity had changed since the court last decided a watershed abortion rights case. But, because of the work of anti-abortion politicians, the makeup of the court’s bench had. “Will this institution survive the stench that this creates in the public perception that the constitution and its reading are just political acts?” asked the liberal justice Sonia Sotomayor. “I don’t see how it is possible.” This article was amended on 6 December 2021 to correct a nameAll-night city rest centres – with staff rooms, canteens and toilets – would provide food-delivery drivers, sex workers and cleaners with “dignity” and shelter from bad weather, a thinktank has said. In a new report, Autonomy called on employers to work with local authorities to fund safe spaces for workers to visit at night between shifts and during quiet periods. The rapid rise of the gig economy has left many workers without easy access to staff rooms, toilets, and opportunities to meet each other. With an increasing reliance on home deliveries due to pandemic restrictions, there are particular concerns over the treatment of drivers, who are often foreign nationals of colour working zero-hour contracts. Many fast-food delivery drivers congregate on city streets near busy pick-up zones in between shifts and for breaks, where they can be exposed to poor weather and aggressive passersby. Some are ordered to wait hundreds of metres away from restaurants until the order is ready. The report found that one-in-nine employees in the UK now work at night, the highest proportion since records began. Many are denied equal access to services available to daytime workers, such as childcare, healthcare and common indoor facilities to relax, store belongings, access healthy food and use the toilet. These services would be provided in the rest centres funded by employers but “autonomously” operated, and the measures would help “revert the exploitation of night-time workers and democratise the night-time economy,” the report said. Will Stronge, director of research at Autonomy, said: “The UK has witnessed an explosion of precarious gig economy night-time work but without any infrastructure put in place to cater for these workers. The pandemic has shone a spotlight on unfair and precarious working practices and night-time workers are suffering from a basic lack of dignity with nowhere to go at night.” A delivery driver in London told the Observer that couriers can face harassment on the streets and that rest centres could provide sanctuary. “Everyone wants food delivered but there’s nowhere for us to go,” he said on condition of anonymity due to fears of losing work. “We don’t just blink out of existence when we’re not delivering. I have a pregnant wife and two kids at home depending on me standing out in the cold.” However, he said food outlets also had to fundamentally change the way they treat drivers. “Some restaurants won’t allow us to wait inside and will make us wait outside in the cold and the rain,” he said. “That’s not respect.” A spokesperson for the Independent Workers Union of Great Britain said that food delivery app companies have transformed the landscape of work in recent years, and suggested it has led to a degradation of standards for workers. “They have not provided any kind of infrastructure to accommodate their workers, and riders have been made to bear all the responsibility for the difficulties of constantly working in public space,” he said. Night work is more precarious than day work, and the report said that workers on zero-hour contracts are twice as likely to work night shifts than other workers. In London, twice as many workers in the night time economy earn below the city’s living wage compared with daytime occupations, it added. “24-hour rest centres would provide safety and respite for night-time workers, and the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, should work with night-time employers to introduce them in London,” Stronge added.Women in prison are five times more likely to have a stillbirth and twice as likely to give birth to a premature baby that needs special care, new data collected by the Observer shows. Following two baby deaths in prisons since 2019 there have been increasing concerns about safety for pregnant women and their babies. Figures obtained through freedom of information requests made to 11 NHS trusts serving women’s prisons in England show 28% of the babies born to women serving a custodial sentence between 2015 and 2019 were admitted to a neonatal unit afterwards – double the national figure, according to data from the National Neonatal Research Database. Of the 125 births for which additional data was supplied, one in seven babies had a low birth weight – double the rate in the general population. Stillbirths were at a rate of 20.9 per 1,000 births, compared with 4.2. The findings come as the House of Lords prepares to vote this week on proposed changes to bail and sentencing laws that would improve the rights of pregnant women and mothers facing criminal charges. One woman, known only as Anita, who was six months pregnant when she was arrested, gave birth while on remand and said her son would never have spent the first weeks of his life behind bars had she initially been granted bail: “Every pregnant woman is offered a single cell but I refused as my biggest worry was giving birth on my own behind a locked door,” she said. A report published in September examined the circumstances of a baby’s death at Bronzefield prison in Surrey where an 18-year-old was left to give birth alone in her cell. Research shows one in 10 women who give birth during a prison stay do so there or on their way to hospital. When Anita rang her cell bell at 5.30am when she went into labour the guards said they would send somebody. It was only during the morning rounds at 7.30am that a nurse was called. She was transferred to hospital at 10.30am. Anita said: “Despite being in active labour the guards would not remove my handcuffs and ignored me when I asked them to call the baby’s father and my mum – who were eventually contacted by a doctor.” After her son was born, Anita wanted to breastfeed but instead asked for a bottle because the male prison guard would not leave her side and she felt uncomfortable. “It’s just degrading. It’s meant to be the happiest moment of your life but there you are being taken back – cuffed and with my son in a car seat,” she said. Her solicitor later made a successful bail application and Anita was released on an electronic tag before being sentenced. She spent time on a mother and baby unit and was released just before her son’s first birthday. He suffered from bronchiolitis and during their time in prison he was taken to hospital 11 times. Anita said: “Prison is simply not a safe place for pregnant women or children.” Kate Paradine, chief executive of Women in Prison, said: “When a parent goes to prison it disrupts children’s lives and damages mental health, with nine in 10 children forced to leave their home when their mother is imprisoned. “Homelessness, instability and trauma are just some of the consequences. Sentencing guidelines already acknowledge these devastating effects but there is clear evidence these aren’t being accurately or consistently applied.” If amendments to the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill are passed, judges will be required to state how the best interests of a child or unborn baby are considered when sentencing a pregnant woman or primary carer. “Currently the court looks at the woman in the dock and her children are invisible,” says Harriet Harman, Labour MP and chair of the joint committee on human rights, which drafted the amendments. Harman, who oversaw a 2019 report on the the right to family life, said: “We have signed up to the rights of the child being paramount and yet we trample all over those rights when it comes to the children of women in prison.” Responding to the data on stillbirths she said: “The findings are shocking and shaming but not surprising.” A higher rate of drug and alcohol problems within prisons than in the general public could be one of many contributing factors to the poorer birth outcomes. The government’s own impact assessment for the bill’s measures indicate that 74% of women serving short sentences of up to 12 months had a drug misuse need. Prisons are extremely stressful and traumatising environments that can affect a mother’s pregnancy, said Paradine. She explained: “For pregnant women who arrive in prison with pre-existing mental health needs, these are amplified and can be a cause of toxic stress that can affect the baby’s development.” Janey Starling, co-director of the campaign group Level Up, said changes to bail and sentencing laws were long overdue: “Prison will never be a safe place for pregnant women and new mothers, and the government must change the law to stop their imprisonment.” The group has set up a petition in coalition with Women in Prison and Birth Companions. An NHS spokesperson said: “The latest data shows rates of stillbirth overall have reduced by more than one fifth since 2013 – but any baby lost to a stillbirth is one too many. In England, the NHS is continuing to take steps to reduce stillbirths and neonatal deaths as well as working to ensure pregnant women in secure environments receive high quality, safe care.”Chris Bryant has been Labour MP for Rhondda since 2001. He is chair of the committees on standards and privileges. He spoke out against the government’s attempt to save Owen Paterson from parliamentary sanction, and has led the initiative to resolve the issue of MPs’ second jobs. A decade ago you were on the Observer’s end-of-year headline-makers list, along with Tom Watson and Louise Mensch, for your work on phone-hacking. They have both since resigned as MPs. Has the stress ever been such that you’ve thought about resigning yourself? Yes, I have loads of times, not so much resigning in a huff as going to do something else. I remember back in 2004, having lunch with James Purnell and Siôn Simon. I was the one who wanted to go and they were “no, no, you must stay”. And they’re no longer MPs. I notice that perseverance is [the Cambridge Dictionary’s] word of the year. How do you think the Owen Paterson story and the subsequent sleaze allegations have left MPs in the public estimation? Well, polling always says that we’re just above pigeons and just below rats. But if you ask what people think of their local MP, it tends to be rather higher. We’ve had two MPs murdered in the past five years and I think a lot of people are conscious of how sour politics can be. Nearly everyone I meet in a social situation says: “Oh my God, I wouldn’t want your job.” I think there’s a self-fulfilling prophecy in this, which is if we keep saying all MPs are rubbish, then eventually only rubbish people will apply to be MPs. Where do you think the line should be drawn on this issue of second jobs? I think the only issue that really matters is conflict of interest. And that was the problem [with Owen Paterson]. That he used his position as an MP to gain a benefit for the companies who were employing him. And that’s where I rest because nearly every other thing people have come up with, whether you do it from hours or pay or whatever, is virtually unenforceable. I mean, I write books. I’ve never had a single constituent complain about me writing books, not least because they’re all about parliament. And, of course, some MPs are ministers. Is that a second job or not? It’s really about whether it’s a conflict of interest. We hear a lot about MPs not “breaking the rules”, but if an MP is spending more time and earning far more money in their nominal second job than in their first, isn’t that ethically wrong? We’ve always had a set of principles in public life, they’ve been known since the 1990s as the Nolan principles, and one of them is selflessness. Of course, you have a right to a private life and some time off and work-life balance, but people expect you to throw yourself wholeheartedly into the business of being an MP. But what does that mean if you have childcare responsibilities or a parent with dementia? There are 650 ways of being an MP and the last thing I would want is identikit MPs. At the moment, allegations of sleaze are focused on Tory MPs. If it is a Tory problem, is that good for Labour or bad for politics? Anything that is bad for politics is bad for Labour. When I was a child, I thought if I was going to be a gay man I’d be lonely all my life and never be in a settled relationship. Politics has changed that. And, likewise, I’m fighting for [better care for those with] acquired brain injury, which affects 1.4 million people. You need the parliamentary democratic process to achieve those kinds of changes. If everybody says parliament is a waste of space, because it’s full of people with their snouts in the trough, that’s not going to encourage them to vote Labour. It’s just going to make people reject democratic politics.Sometimes, a news report is so horrific you know it will haunt you forever. So it is with the story of Arthur Labinjo-Hughes, the six-year-old tortured to death by his stepmother and father. Starved, poisoned with salt, forced to stand for 14 hours at a time and subjected to punishment beatings: Arthur went from a happy, healthy young boy to a child broken by abuse within months of moving in with his stepmother. Experts have worried about the impact of the pandemic on child abuse: more children at home with abusive parents and without the safety valve of school and fewer interactions with extended family. But a shocking thing about this case is that several loving relatives raised the alarm with social services, the police and his school. Arthur was old enough to talk about what was happening to him and he did. But his voice and the anxieties of the adults around him went unheeded; a social worker concluded after a brief visit that there were no concerns. The review of what went wrong is yet to be published but there is no doubt Arthur was catastrophically failed. It may seem jarring to move straight from the distressing details of his case to the lessons for the system in which it happened. But we must. Every time a horrific case of child abuse surfaces – Victoria Climbié, Peter Connolly, Daniel Pelka, Keanu Williams – the immediate reaction is “never again”, only for the public gaze to slip away. Sentiment swings wildly between “more must be done” and emotive newspaper campaigns against over-interventionist services. This oversimplified narrative fails children, but it takes place even among those who should know better. There is no decision more intrusive that the state can make than to remove a child from his or her parents. These high stakes impede the sophisticated conversation about child protection that is needed. Arthur’s case involved unusual levels of cruelty, but last year alone there were 482 serious incidents reported where a child died or experienced serious harm and abuse or neglect was known or suspected. Thirteen children died as a result of filicide, 22 from physical abuse and 20 related to maltreatment. Serious harm and abuse are not one-off incidents – they are the product of escalating patterns of behaviour. More of these deaths should be preventable. If there is no state decision more intrusive than removing children, then there are few public service jobs that are as difficult or highly skilled as social work. Social workers have to make finely balanced risk assessments about what is in a child’s best interests with unthinkably huge consequences. Reducing this to box-ticking or simple rules is a recipe for bad decision-making. Social work involves supporting families to provide the best possible home for their child, but also investigating parents suspected of harming or neglecting their child. Sometimes, it will be obvious, sometimes not. As Lord Laming pointed out in his 2009 review of child protection after the death of Peter Connolly, abusive parents can be incredibly deceptive in appealing to social workers’ natural sympathies. It is wrongheaded to look at raw numbers of children in care – as many do – to argue that the state is too interventionist. There are big variations in numbers between different councils with similar deprivation profiles. Low rates of children in care can be a sign that children’s services are performing excellently, as in Leeds, where a decade-long early-intervention plan means there is less need to take children into care. But they can also be a sign of councils with no such plans are missing children seriously at risk. It takes outstanding leadership to move from the latter to the former. Yet a simple system-wide narrative that suggests there is too much intervention – the head of the government’s review of social care, Josh MacAlister, recently spoke of the “runaway train” of child protection investigations – risks signalling that councils should show restraint. That jars with the many professionals who say, in their experience, too many children are left in abusive situations for too long. Martin Barrow, an experienced foster carer told me that carers in his network are seeing children coming to them with increasing levels of need in the last five to 10 years. Two other factors shape local decision-making. The first is the strain on the system as a result of shrinking resources. How can social workers do their jobs well when some have caseloads of 30 or more? Cuts to other support services over the last decade – mental health services, domestic abuse services, substance abuse services – have put more children at risk. That is a political choice. Second, there are some well-meaning but misplaced beliefs in some parts of the profession that can undermine timely intervention. There is the idea that care is to be avoided at all costs because it is detrimental to a child’s interests. There is so much about the care system that needs to be improved: the shortage of foster carers, the lack of stability for children and young people, the cliff edges as support drops off as they get older. But the very poor outcomes experienced by children in care highlighted by the care review’s interim report must be put in the context of the very poor outcomes suffered by children experiencing neglect and abuse in their family home. In fact, evidence suggests that a timely move into care is associated with better educational outcomes. What’s more, there can be a very human sense of overoptimism in social workers that abusive and neglectful parents can do better if only given a bit more time and support. Of course as much should be done as possible to enable parents to provide a safe home for their children. But this is often expensive, intensive work, not the light-touch support group you might think from reading some reports and it is not always appropriate. Research on returning children to the care of their parents suggests that, in too many cases, it is to the detriment of the child. There is a danger that a laudable emphasis on early intervention moves into emphasising a parent’s support needs over a child’s safety. The sad truth that underpins child protection is that the wish to support parents and to protect the child are not always in harmony. • Sonia Sodha is an Observer columnistFor a group of TV anchors and reporters, the team at Fox News are keen scribblers. Often with co-writers, former host Bill O’Reilly writes of assassinations and Brian Kilmeade authors histories. Bret Baier is chief political anchor but has also written several books as a “reporter of history”. Now comes a biography of Ulysses S Grant which focuses on the grave constitutional crisis following the disputed election of 1876. Magnanimous in civil war victory, Grant was elected in 1868 on the theme of “Let us have peace”. By the nation’s centennial eight years later, Americans had wearied of scandals, economic troubles and federal troops in the south, seeking to enforce to some degree the new civil rights of Black Americans, notably the vote. In 1874, Democrats took the House. Now they wanted the presidency. They nominated the New York governor, Samuel Tilden, a moderate nevertheless supported in the south. The Republicans picked Rutherford Hayes of Ohio. It was a bitter campaign, filled with threats of violence, each side playing to its base. Tilden performed surprisingly well in the north, winning his home state and four others. Hayes winning Indiana and Connecticut alone would have prevented the subsequent controversy. He did not, but he did win Louisiana, South Carolina and Florida, southern states with Republican governors. Hayes needed all three states to win. “Self-appointed Democratic counters”, however, submitted results for Tilden. As Grant said: “Everything now depends on a fair count.” Tensions ran high, with rumors of southern militia marching on Washington and US troops on standby. Baier writes that Grant “had influence, and he decided to use it to expedite a fair result – even if that result required sacrificing his own achievements”. Grant knew that to be seen to be fair, the result must “appeal to [the people’s] sense of justice”. For that, both parties had to agree – and the south had to support Hayes. At Grant’s insistence, an electoral commission was formed, the deciding vote given to the supreme court justice Joseph Bradley. Bradley chose to support the states’ official electoral certifications. Hayes won. Tilden did not pursue extraordinary means to ensure victory, stopping a bribery effort in his favor. But the battle was not over. Grant believed Louisiana’s certificate was probably fraudulent, and there was bedlam in Congress. Grant favored compromise and Edward Burke of Louisiana effectively proposed a trade: Hayes for the presidency, Democrats for the disputed governorships of Louisiana and South Carolina. A separate group of Republicans – acting without Grant – then promised Democrats Hayes would withdraw troops from the south. In return, Democrats would agree that Hayes was duly elected, along with vague and worthless promises to respect Black rights. At this point, Baier writes, “the nation breathed a sigh of relief”. Baier clearly admires Grant – and there is much to admire. Though betrayed by false friends, as president Grant exercised his office with firmness where necessary and with a passionate desire to inspire Americans towards greater unity. Political inexperience cost him dearly. But what of the big issue? Did Grant really put an end to Reconstruction and consign Black Americans to nearly a century under Jim Crow? Hayes had shown a willingness to end Reconstruction. Tilden would certainly have done so. Grant strongly supported Black suffrage and kept troops in the south to ensure the rights of people increasingly threatened by armed violence. He sent troops to an area of South Carolina especially marked by Klan violence and vigorously promoted and enforced an anti-Klan act. He sent troops to Louisiana to enforce voting rights and secured passage of the 1875 Civil Rights Act. Nonetheless, the supreme court reduced Black rights, and as Baier writes, “the country no longer supported the use of federal troops”. Grant had his army but had lost his people. He promoted a compromise in 1877 not from any desire to abandon the Black community but from the painful realization that America had tired of the journey. Whether Hayes or Tilden had been elected, Reconstruction was over and a more painful era in the south was about to begin. The problem wasn’t Grant, but that America was not ready to live up to its promises. ••• Baier begins and ends his book with the events of 6 January 2021. “What happens,” he asks, “when the fairness of an election is in doubt, when the freedom of the people is constrained, and when the divisions on the public square strangle the process? “What can we learn from the healing mission of our 18th president that might show us a path towards union?” Baier answers the second question only implicitly. He echoes the historical consensus that the “sad and inescapable truth is that there was no way of knowing the right verdict”. True in 1877. Clearly not in 2021. After Appomattox, the Confederate general James Longstreet, a friend of Grant, asked “Why do men fight who were born to be brothers?” The answer frequently involves failures of political leadership. Baier writes that Grant “knew that in times of great national conflict there are only two choices – to stand for division or to stand for peace”. Grant used his power for good, to promote national unity. Donald Trump did not say the words or take the actions that Grant did during an equally if not more severe challenge to democracy. Baier misses an opportunity for Grant-like firmness in not asking why Trump failed to call on his supporters to accept the result. Rather than simply speaking of America’s strength and resilience, why not point out directly the contrast with a president who stood for division? In 2021, the national sigh of relief did not come until after noon on inauguration day, as President Biden took the oath. The danger persists, and not every president is Gen Grant. To Rescue the Republic is published in the US by Custom HouseIn 1967, Caroline Baker, who had been working as a secretary to Shirley Conran on the Observer, took a job with the fashion editor Molly Parkin at Nova, the iconoclastic women’s magazine. Parkin left soon after Baker arrived, and Baker took over, having never done a fashion shoot in her life. Over the following years she developed a distinctive look that rebelled against the stereotypes of the industry. “I didn’t want to be this pretty girl, this toy for men,” she writes in an introduction to a new book celebrating her career, Rebel Stylist: Caroline Baker – The Woman Who Invented Street Fashion. Instead of using clothes from design houses, Baker started searching elsewhere for the material for her fashion pages, using oversized menswear from secondhand shops, fitted with belts and braces, army surplus, leg-warmers and tights from ballet suppliers, chefs’ clothing, school blazers, hospital gowns and pyjamas. Her street style set the tone for punk fashion – Baker went on to work with Vivienne Westwood – and the liberated androgyny of the 1980s and beyond. One inspiration for this look was Charlie Chaplin, “his chaotic way of dressing”. This picture, included in the book, is from a Nova shoot by the photographer Sarah Moon, styled by Baker, made not long before Nova’s demise in 1975. Moon was one of few female fashion photographers at the time, and she and Baker made a series of features together that reimagined film nostalgia through a female lens. They went to Brighton to do the Chaplin pictures. “Sarah wanted two little children and an old car… you planned your fashion shoot like a mini-film,” Baker recalls. Chaplin’s capacious silhouette had a practical as well as an aesthetic allure. “I always felt so jealous that men were so lucky to have pockets.” She decided women should have them, too. • Rebel Stylist is published by ACC Art Books (£35) Anthony Broadwater, a 61-year-old resident of Syracuse, New York state, and former marine, was exonerated last week of the brutal rape, assault and robbery of best-selling author Alice Sebold. He was convicted in 1982. Sebold was savagely attacked while walking home from a friend’s house late one night. Five months later, Sebold said she saw her attacker in Syracuse town centre. Broadwater was arrested, placed in a police lineup, tried and convicted. He spent more than 16 years in prison and a further 23 years as a registered sex offender. His exoneration would probably not have come about but for a strange and unusual series of events linked to my role as executive producer on the film adaptation of Sebold’s bestselling book, Lucky, her memoir about the attack. When I first reviewed the book as a part of my preparations for the film, less than a year ago, I realised there were serious questions regarding the guilt of the man Sebold named in the book as Gregory Madison, the pseudonym she gave Anthony Broadwater. On my first reading of the book, the portion regarding Sebold’s attempted identification of her assailant at a police lineup disturbed me. Broadwater was suspect number four in the police lineup, and Sebold selected suspect number five as her attacker. Sebold writes in Lucky, “I placed my X in the number-five box. I had marked the wrong one.” Sebold further wrote, “Number four and five looked like identical twins.” Sebold’s failure to identify her attacker should have been the end of the case, with Broadwater released. But it was not. Even with the lack of identification, the district attorney still took Broadwater to trial and he was convicted. This miscarriage of justice seemed obvious, and I pointed it out to my production team colleagues. I was assured that the publisher had fact-checked and vetted the book, so I should have confidence in the source material. However, as time went on, other aspects of the production raised red flags for me, such as the insistence of director Karen Moncrieff on changing the race of the actor playing Broadwater from a black actor to a white actor. Moncrieff’s reasoning was that she wanted to dispel the racial stereotype of a black man raping a white woman, but as the actual perpetrator had been African-American, this did not make sense to me. Perhaps she had misgivings herself about the case, and wanted to make the film version as removed as possible from the book, to “fictionalise” it, as it were. As executive producer, I refused to continue funding the project. I then hired Dan Myers, a private investigator in Syracuse, and within 48 hours we knew Gregory Madison’s real name, and the basic facts behind the case. It quickly became clear that he was innocent of the crime for which he was accused and had spent many years in prison. This case has received a good deal of media attention, and one question I am asked on a regular basis is who’s to blame? Is it Sebold, the American justice system or both? I do not believe that Sebold, as an 18-year-old rape victim, bears any blame. She was doing the best she could, being guided by an unethical and unscrupulous assistant district attorney. But I do have questions about the 39-year-old Sebold who wrote Lucky. Before she wrote the book, she had reviewed the entire district attorney’s file, including the photo of the police lineup. Would she not have realised, in retrospect, that suspects four and five were not similar in appearance? Wouldn’t she have had the opportunity to speak up at that time, to address her error, and vindicate her supposed attacker? Without question, what Sebold endured on the night of 8 May 1981 was awful, unacceptable and tragic. But isn’t it equally tragic that she could have known, in the mid-1990s, that he was almost certainly not her attacker and could have tried to free him? The American justice system obviously also failed Sebold and Broadwater. The assistant district attorney should never have allowed a case in which the victim could not identify the suspect to go to trial. It is not only a failure by that individual, but by every law enforcement and legal professional involved in that case. God knows how many other times such a travesty has happened across America. There is one other culprit that I believe bears some responsibility – and that is the media. Sebold had been interviewed countless times about Lucky, and about her later bestselling novel The Lovely Bones (which was also turned into a film). Broadwater’s innocence had been hiding in plain sight. Any one of the many journalists interviewing Sebold could have pushed back on what was, at face value, an absurd story. A rape victim identifies the wrong suspect in a police lineup and the case goes to trial and the man goes to prison. How does not one reporter stop and say, “Wait a minute – this doesn’t sound right?” My common sense told me something was wrong with the story. That the obvious truth had been ignored raises the bigger question: how widespread is this? I also have to admit that I could understand something of what Broadwater has been through – as I am myself a convicted felon, having served time for a bank fraud case and been disbarred from practising law, my original profession. I told him when we met: “I, too, have been incarcerated. I know what it’s like.” Thankfully, Broadwater, a person who refused to give up and refused to confess to a crime he did not commit, is not broken. The same, sadly, cannot be said of the US justice system and the media and entertainment industry that simply did not scrutinise Sebold’s story sufficiently. Timothy Mucciante’s Red Badge Films is producing a documentary about the Anthony Broadwater case called Unlucky.A prominent political activist has allegedly been threatened in his Sydney home by three men who appeared to try to force their way inside before fleeing when police were called. Paddy Gibson, an activist with the Solidarity socialist movement and a researcher at University of Technology Sydney, said he was at home with his partner when he heard loud banging on his door about 7.30pm on Saturday night. One of the men demanded that “Paddy” come outside, but when Gibson replied he wasn’t home, the man and two others appeared to try to force their way inside. The trio kicked at the door, smashed a window and damaged a security screen before leaving, Gibson told Guardian Australia, with the incident lasting about five minutes. New South Wales police officers arrived about 30 minutes later, Gibson said. He told the officers he had seen two of the men wearing t-shirts featuring the Eureka flag and he believed he was targeted because of his activism. He did not recognise the men who he described as “skinheads”. He did not believe they were armed. Gibson has previously received death threats via email, social media and phone messages, with these threats escalating when he became involved in organising Black Lives Matter marches last year, but he had not previously been confronted at home. He reported the previous threats to NSW police, but it is understood their investigation into these threats had been suspended. Gibson’s children were not home at the time of Saturday’s incident, he said. “I really thought they were coming into the house to hurt us. It was very scary that it was half an hour before the police turned up.” Gibson was not aware of any specific recent activist work he had done which may have motivated the violence. While anti-lockdown protesters, some of whom have joined forces with far-right groups, have targeted politicians at their homes in Victoria and shared politicians’ home addresses on social media, Gibson does not believe his address had been circulated prior to the incident. The Solidarity movement opposes lockdowns and vaccine mandates but has been critical of those in the far-right who have attempted to co-opt the anti-lockdown movement to further their own agenda. Gibson said he was “constantly active” on social media in relation to issues including Aboriginal deaths in custody and the trade union movement. But the men who attended his house gave no indication of why he had been targeted. The NSW Greens MP, David Shoebridge, said the incident showed an increasingly toxic political discourse could have real-life consequences. “This is a really deeply troubling escalation of political violence, which there must be zero tolerance for in Australia,” he said on Sunday. “I’m calling on the police to rapidly and urgently resource this investigation and bring these criminals to justice.” A NSW police spokesperson said detectives were investigating a report of “malicious damage” and officers had attended the house on Saturday night to establish a crime scene. The spokesperson did not comment on how long it had taken officers to attend or whether the incident was being investigated as an act of political violence.Christmas preparations are in full swing, and for some recent “parents” that means special food shopping. This might be meals made from Suffolk duck, grass-reared lamb or venison. Some will be looking for botanical ingredients, such as marigold petals and burdock root. Others will buy their “baby” their first “Christmas pudding” from Ocado. These shoppers are not just any parents – they are pet parents, a UK consumer group that is inspiring a revolution in the animal food industry. During the pandemic, pet ownership boomed in Britain, with more than three million households buying a new animal. Research by US animal food company Mars Petcare found that 32% of new dog owners and 42% of new cat owners had no previous experience as “pet parents”. This has created a unique opportunity for pet food brands and startup companies to sell new types of food. “In recent years, animals have been perceived increasingly as family members,” says Manasi Uttekar, analyst at Fortune Business Insights. “Thus, owners buy pet food the same way as they shop and consider their own food. They look for products that are highly nutritious and sourced sustainably. They look for the label of natural, organic, minimally processed or raw.” Pet food by post is a growing offshoot of this revolution, with companies delivering tailored menus to owners’ doors. One such firm is Katkin, which specialises in freshly cooked food for cats. “We’re now finding out the truth of what’s in our pets’ food, and how it’s made,” says Nikki O’Farrell, who co-founded the firm with her brother, Brett, in 2018. “So we’re looking for companies who really care about and truly design for our cats.” The UK also has the largest share of pet food launches in Europe that include ethical and environmental claims. Today, 33% of new brands have recyclable packaging. Pet foods containing Marine Stewardship Council sustainable seafood have grown by 57% in the UK in the past five years. “New startup the Pack offer vegan dog food,” says Uttekar, “and Lily’s Kitchen is launching one soon.” Purina, one of the world’s biggest pet food manufacturers, had two big new launches in Europe for 2020: organic cat food and insect-based food. Many companies also focus on bugs. When pet owners decide to cut down on meat in their own diets, some apparently look for ways to reduce meat for their animals too. A 2020 study on the environmental carbon pawprint of pets found food manufacturing created greenhouse gas emissions equivalent to total emissions from countries such as Mozambique or the Philippines. Pet parenting is expected to grow as more millennials become owners and spend on pet service and accessories – especially Christmas treats – and the market has been quick to respond. Ocado is stocking Christmas puddings for dogs for the first time this year – made from biscuits with a yoghurt topping – and specialist companies offer a range of festive cakes for dogs and sushi and venison for cats. There are also special Christmas cranberry and sweet potato chew sticks for the vegan dog in your life. Christmas might be about extra treats, but as O’Farrell points out, pet parents just want the best of the smörgåsbord of animal food on offer. “This isn’t luxury we’re talking about, this isn’t spoiling your cat: this is a necessity for a healthy, happy pet.” • The headline and introduction to this article were amended on 5 December 2021 to clarify that they were referring to Christmas puddings made specifically for dogs. The puddings made for human consumption are unsafe for dogs.You can’t put a price on principles, but there have always been plenty of people willing to try. In the 1980s, when the sporting boycott of apartheid South Africa was holding relatively firm, the casino operators of Sun City would try to lure global sports stars to play one-off exhibition matches that broke the ban. John McEnroe, then at the height of his rebellious powers, turned down one such pay cheque, aged 24, with the memorable observation that “I’ve got better ways of earning a million bucks.” In the context of the money commanded by today’s stars, the bribe offered to McEnroe may sound trivial; it’s worth remembering that in 1983 the single million-dollar evening’s work would have been 10 times what he banked for winning that year’s Wimbledon. There were, of course, plenty of players willing to take the cash – McEnroe’s rivals, Jimmy Connors and Ivan Lendl, went for $400,000 and $300,000 respectively. Arthur Ashe, the black American tennis legend and anti-apartheid campaigner, used to try to dissuade anyone offered what he called Sun City’s “guilt premium”. One group were always the hardest to convince, Ashe recalled: “Golfers have their heads in the sand, all of ’em. They’re all 5ft 11, blond, rightwing republicans. They don’t give a damn.” When, as in the past couple of weeks, there has been talk of sporting boycotts on political grounds, it is the example of the South Africa ban that is most relevant, not least because of those life-changing incentives that were rejected. The apparently disturbing treatment of the tennis player Peng Shuai since her allegations of sexual abuse against a leading Communist party official has personalised the horrific human rights abuses of the Chinese government, just as the world’s broadcasters prepare to kowtow to Beijing’s hosting of the 2022 Winter Olympics in February. In the context of the general reluctance to sanction the biggest market on Earth, the Women’s Tennis Association’s determined stance to boycott tournaments in China until the safety of Peng Shuai is properly established is a rare example of an organisation willing to put its money where its mouth is. (The WTA’s protest will cost it many millions of yuan in sponsorship). It also makes the International Olympic Committee, which appeared all too willing to take President Xi Jinping at his word over staged interviews with Peng Shuai, look predictably craven. Such is the poisonous love triangle between global sport and global money and repressive governments that comparable ethical conflicts are now routinely built into the sporting calendar. One of the questions facing all athletes and competitors is: which battles are worth fighting? Lewis Hamilton has been among the most vocal of current sporting heroes in promoting Black Lives Matter. Today, in Saudi Arabia, he will race for the F1 world championship wearing a rainbow coloured helmet in support of LGBTQ+ rights in a country where same-sex relationships can carry the death penalty. That loud and proud commitment is admirable, but it has also been notable that Hamilton, one of the world’s elite influencers, has so far had nothing to say about his Mercedes team’s new sponsor, Kingspan, the industrial insulation manufacturer that has been implicated in the ongoing Grenfell Tower fire inquiry. Hamilton has in the past Instagrammed his support for the Grenfell survivors, many of whom now feel understandably betrayed by his team’s lucrative association with Kingspan. No doubt, if he does come to address the issue, Hamilton will suggest that he has little control over which names Mercedes opts to plaster over his car (and, if he started down that route, he might add, he would certainly have cause to examine the history of Petronas, his team’s principle sponsor.) What his silence on Kingspan does do, however, is invite critics to shout hypocrite. Michael Gove was not slow in making that charge against Hamilton’s team, demanding that Mercedes reconsider its deal. It is, again, telling which culture wars the politicians choose to wage. While Gove may have found the time to make insinuations about the double standards of perhaps the most high-profile black sportsman in this country, he had nothing at all to say when faced, for example, with the news that the murderous Saudi royal family were buying up Newcastle United FC (no doubt sensing, in silence, an easy win for his “levelling-up” plans). Such is the ubiquity of sport, such is the attraction of “sportwashing” to toxic regimes and dubious corporations, that no armchair fan is quite immune to these kinds of ethical dilemmas. How many season tickets have been returned to Newcastle’s St James’ Park in the name of the murdered Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi? Or, on a lesser scale, how many Christmas stockings will contain replica shirts that make every fan a walking advert for offshore betting companies? Every sports fan has principles until an oligarch throws money at their team. It is usually at that point that they voice the argument that sport should not be the single blunt instrument with which to hold rogue states or corporations to account. Or, rather, that it represents a priceless source of soft power, “quiet diplomacy” in Lord Coe’s slightly sinister phrase about Peng Shuai’s predicament. There is merit in those arguments but it is worth holding in mind, too, that these were the same formulations used by those who went to apartheid South Africa – the golfers and the tennis players and the rebel cricket tourists – just as they were pocketing their “guilt premium”. In an age of gesture politics, one thing the past couple of weeks has emphasised is that, at the very least, ethics do not always need to dissolve in the face of financial penalty. Sport has come to enjoy the grand political gesture almost as much as the sponsors’ millions. Taking the knee is one laudable thing but taking a hit in your own or your organisation’s pay packet to protest about something you believe in will always carry a more powerful weight. Sometimes, as the WTA has tried to assert, as John McEnroe and Arthur Ashe once asserted, genuine symbolic power lies in simply insisting: our principles are not for sale. • This article was amended on 6 December 2021. A reference to yen has been changed to yuan; and Kingspan predominantly manufactures insulation, not cladding as suggested in an earlier version. • Tim Adams is an Observer columnistNo fans, no form book, no tour games, no trash talk, no grand swooping narrative arcs to be completed – no real idea what might happen next. There may have been more stripped back, low pulse preludes to an Ashes series than the weeks leading up to Wednesday midnight UK time, and day one at a damp, slightly wary Gabba. But none that spring to mind. And certainly none in the past three decades, the digital years, during which Test cricket’s premium series has become a steroid-fed leisure brand: tourism magnet TV rights beano, not to mention maker of legends, definer of careers, fuel for score-settling books and all the rest. Well, not this time. Fast-forward to the current Covid-shadowed tour and the architecture of this whole scene feels very different. It’s raining in Brisbane. Australia’s captain is nice. David Warner is no longer the Attack Dog or The Reverend or even the Attack Reverend. No one, at the time of writing, has accused Joe Root of having the eyes of a frightened baby marmoset, to the extent the most interesting chat coming out of the Australian camp is the suggestion Steve Smith has tinkered very slightly with his grip (“It’s slightly more open”). Frankly, the whole thing may be cancelled tomorrow anyway. There will be some disquiet at this sense of anti-drama, the absence of that old familiar Ashes tinsel, dug out around this time of year like your favourite homemade papier-mache reindeer. Test cricket seems a more diminished property with every passing month. Things falls apart. The Ashes must hold. But there is another side to this. Two pop-up teams in the most unforgiving format, with stripped-back plans, no baggage, no weight of expectations, just a punkish, come-as-you-are feel. Welcome to the Ashes lite. It may just turn out to be quite refreshing. There is a startling swiftness to the schedule, a 42-day yomp around five, possibly four cities, with the full flight-coach-pack-unpack disruption in between. Take out 25 days of play, plus travel, recovery times, Christmas, the odd moment of glazed and foot-weary family time and there really is nowhere to hide or retrench or refine your game. Press start – then don’t blink until it’s over. In this context predicting what is about to happen seems a bit pointless. It isn’t hard to picture a scenario where Australia run away with it from day one and take another four or five nil, the whole thing over two weeks into the tour. Pat Cummins, Josh Hazlewood, Mitchell Starc or – more excitingly – Jhye Richardson could run through England in a session and a half, at any time, on any day. There is also the possibility England turn up this time and not because there is any real coherence to the team, any sense of masterplans being hatched. But simply because nothing feels set, everyone is undercooked. The pitches will (we hear) be slow, the air damp, the ball pink in Adelaide. Among their crew of pressed-men and might-still-bes England do also have three higher-level cricketers. Plus, you can delete the usual migrainous levels of pressure. Winning or not winning the Ashes doe not feel like the most pressing issue facing English cricket. There has been a slightly hopeful tendency to compare this England tour party to the 1986-87 group, who also arrived with little in the way of form. But there are key differences. That tour spanned 63 days and included three proper warm-up games, by the end of which Ian Botham was already filling the sponsor’s energy drink bottle with lager shandy for the on-fields breaks, the pace bowling had found its range and, internally, there was a quiet sense of momentum. The most intriguing part is the lack of plans and systems on either side. There is none of the usual fevered planning here, no set shape to be stress-tested. We remember, for example, the Tall Tour, 2013-14, when England took Steve Finn, Boyd Rankin, Chris Tremlett, Stuart Broad and a small phone mast, forgetting that it was skill and reverse swing that did the job four years earlier. This time the main seam bowlers are 31, 32, 35 and 39 years old, all subtle variations on the idea of right arm fast-medium. The batting is a rag-bag of hopefuls. Ten players are on their first Ashes tour. Otherwise, this is a squad full of weird angles. Dawid Malan: classy, elegant, high-grade: but also, well, why? Ollie Pope. Nice, neat lines. Is he actually any good? Do they really need not one, not two but three tall right-arm back of a length 81-85mph seam bowlers? And how about Jos Buttler, the most mindbogglingly talented lukewarm and forgettable Test player England has produced? Pressure off, a new IPL deal in the bag, a first and last chance in Australia. This could be the tour where Buttler nails it. It is here, with half the places in the team up for grabs, that England have a chance to become interesting. Why not take a few informed gambles? There have been whispers for more than a year that Ben Stokes should bat No 3. And why not? His defensive technique is excellent. The scoreboard will move. It looks better already. Root at four, Malan at five, Jonny Bairstow at six, Buttler seven. There is power there, and unspent ambition. As for the bowling, why not go all in with the hand you have? Locals say the pitches have got slower, that there will be damp around. Why not just give into it, embrace your destiny and play a full hand of thirtysomething, low-eighties accuracy merchants. Attack with the bat, be stingy with the ball. And while we are at it go after Nathan Lyon, who has barely played in the past 18 months. Why not to ping him back over his head the moment he comes on? These are after all the no-context Ashes. There is a freedom here. Something will have to change. Because notwithstanding all that brittle optimism the default situation is an Australia win, possibly quite a comfortable one. Their squad has a greater depth of genuine quality. Australia have three good batsmen to England’s two (one on his way back). They have a better pace attack. Their team also looks fun. Richardson may have to wait, but he bowls a delicious high-pace away swinger. Warner is good again. Usman Khawaja is back. Cameron Green is a thrilling talent, all poise and physical splendour, but starved of the chance to progress in the past year and still, somehow, without a Test wicket despite bowling 88mph 6ft 7in away-swingers. Marnus Labuschagne is still averaging 60. Smith, well, he’s changed that grip you know. Then there’s the culture issues. One agreeable side of the Tim Paine’s dick-pic implosion saga is that it does mean there will not be any Paine. Cummins is a grownup, an all-time great cricketer in the making and a genuinely magnificent all-round specimen, one of those human-astronaut types who just seem to be breathing a different air. Cummins versus Root: this is proper, however you cut it, and a reminder, however rushed and sweaty the prep, that this is still the same premium substance. • This article was amended on 5 December 2021 to correct a misspelling of Usman Khawaja’s surname as “Kawaja”. It was further amended on 6 December 2021 to correct the start time of the first Test.Ministers are facing demands for a comprehensive overhaul of foster care after Britain’s most comprehensive assessment of the service revealed low morale, funding shortfalls and poor support has fuelled a critical shortage of carers. Only a handful of fostering services across the UK now say they have the types of carers they need to meet the demand for fostering places in their area, while the pressures on the system mean that little more than half of foster carers said they could currently recommend the role to others. The stark findings on the state of fostering, shared exclusively with the Observer, are revealed in the largest survey of carers and services of its kind. It reveals a system under strain, resulting in mismatches between carers and the children they are asked to look after. Only 53% of the thousands of foster carers who took part said they had been given enough information about the children in their care. The survey also identified increasing mental health challenges among carers, who were often asked to take on more than their experience and expertise suggested they could reasonably manage without further training and support. More than 3,300 foster carers looking after well over 5,000 children responded to the Fostering Network charity survey. It also involved 99 fostering services, representing more than a fifth of the sector. It claims the government has neglected foster carers, who have been provided with inadequate funds to meet the needs of the children they look after. Meanwhile, the lack of a retainer given to those who were not currently looking after children meant that carers were lost. Those who remained in the system were asked to take on more children, often without the relevant information about their needs and background. All but six of the 99 services that were included in the report said they had a shortage of foster carers in their local population. The pressures within the system, and the lack of availability of foster families, resulted in some children living a long way from family, friends and school or being separated from their siblings. The findings follow similar warnings from local government, which recently said that up to 95,000 vulnerable children would end up in council care by 2025 because of a lack of alternatives such as foster families. Several council bosses privately said that the state of children’s social care was now the greatest emergency they face. Some also warned that the fees paid to private fostering agencies were far too high. Wider concerns about the treatment of children in care have prompted a government review and a probe by the competition regulator into child residential care. Many in the sector believe that homes are built in cheap areas by private providers, which is taking vulnerable children away from their support networks and into the arms of gangs and criminality. The Competitition and Markets Authority’s interim findings also said that the largest private providers could be earning high profits in a dysfunctional market. Roughly three-quarters of the 97,000 children looked after in the UK are being cared for by foster families. However, the Fostering Network’s 2021 State of the Nation’s Foster Care report found that independent scrutiny over where children were being placed was not routine, meaning that placements may not be in the best interest of the child. “Governments have neglected foster care,” said the Fostering Network’s chief executive, Kevin Williams. “The saddest thing is that we’ve known about these issues for some time, and they don’t seem to be getting any better. We absolutely recognise that there is a crisis today in foster care in terms of the recruitment and retention of foster carers. “Foster carers tell us quite clearly that the reason they foster is because they want to help children. When over a third of foster carers say that the allowance they receive isn’t sufficient to fund the child in their care, that’s really saying that the government is relying on the goodwill of foster carers to supplement the state. That cannot be right. He added: “If local authorities are not properly funded, then actually they cannot fund foster care properly. Foster carers are not treated and valued and respected for the skills that they bring. These are really complex roles.” He called on governments across the UK to undertake a comprehensive review of the minimum levels of fostering allowances. Over a third of foster carers said their allowances do not meet the full cost of looking after a child. Some revealed that minimum allowances, established in England, Northern Ireland and Wales, were not being met. Some 70% of foster carers said they do not receive any retainer payments in between fostering. A government spokesperson said: “Foster carers make a lifelong difference to the lives of vulnerable children, and the State of the Nation report is an important reminder of this. Every child deserves a stable, secure and loving home, which is why we’re continuing to work with the Fostering Network on important initiatives such as its Mockingbird programme, which offers peer-to-peer support for fosters, and we have provided over £8m to help children’s services to embed this across the country.” ‘To give the support children need, we have to go into our own pockets’ For all the pressures the fostering system is facing, carers are clear about one thing: there are moments that make it hugely rewarding. “When you have a child in your care and at first they’re afraid to give you a cuddle, but three or four months down the road, they just run into your arms – you know you’re doing all right,” said Sarah Jones, 57, from south Wales, who has been fostering for almost seven years. She and her wife had experience of working with vulnerable young people and went to Foster Wales. “They snapped us right up,” she said. The support networks around a child being fostered are hugely important, but carers often bear the burden of ensuring those they look after have access to help. “It is left to the foster carer to carry the load,” said Jones. “I think that’s why we see high turnover … That’s why we see carers who are burnt out. We do this job 24/7. And we do it with love. Just like any other professional, we need to be adequately supported.” Sue Stepney, 63, from Peterborough, said she and her husband took up fostering a decade ago after her children grew up. She agreed there was a status problem for foster carers. “I just don’t think foster carers are recognised as a workforce that is highly skilled in what they do,” she said, adding that it was clear that the system was under pressure in terms of overall places. “We’re full at the moment. We have six placed with us. But the minute you do have room, you are asked to take more.” Both women said the financial support they received did not meet the costs of the care; Jones said children in foster care benefited from activities that weren’t covered by funding. “To give the kind of support children need, we go into our own pockets,” she says. “We’re really lucky: my partner has a great job. But foster carers need more.” The pressures become more obvious at times of crisis. “While everything’s going OK, that’s fine,” said Stepney. “But the minute there are any struggles … the support is not great. Sometimes you have to fight really hard to get the support children need.” Just like Jones, though, Stepney is in no doubt about the rewards that come with the role. “When the children first come to you, they don’t feel they’ve got a future,” she said. “But after a while, they’re talking about what they want to do when they’re grown up and talking about going to college and university. Then you feel you’ve really made a difference.”At No 17 Noble Street, running off the high street in Wem, Shropshire, is the modest house in which the great 19th-century radical essayist William Hazlitt grew up. Nearly everything about Wem is modest, including the faded stone that commemorates Hazlitt’s inhabitance. But perhaps this son of Wem should be more openly celebrated in the place where he spent his formative years. After all, Hazlitt defined a Tory as someone who “cries long life to the conqueror, and is ever strong upon the stronger side – the side of corruption and prerogative”. And North Shropshire is a constituency that has been represented by Conservatives ever since Hazlitt’s day. What’s more, the most recent incumbent, Owen Paterson, had to resign following allegations of breaching parliamentary advocacy rules. There is a byelection on 16 December to find his successor. Alas, no one mentioned the great man in Wem – Hazlitt, that is, not Paterson – when asked their opinion of politicians. It says something about the esteem in which our rulers are held, following stories about David Cameron’s lucrative lobbying and how PPE contracts were handed out, that the most common response was a knowing guffaw, as if they had been solicited on what they thought about extramarital sex. “Ha ha!” said Peter Partridge, when the question was put to him. “Well in my case it’s going slowly downwards.” In this, Partridge is out of step with public opinion on the issue, which is going rapidly downwards, according to research carried out by the Institute for Public Policy Research. Of course politicians have always been a handy target for public discontent, but being an MP was also once seen as a job commanding respect, particularly in rural communities like North Shropshire, where the elected representative frequently occupied a position of social distinction. There was little of that kind of reverence on display in Wem. Nor was there much surprise about Paterson. “My response was ‘huh’,” said Helen Walton, shrugging her shoulders with weary indifference, as though her expectations were too low to be disappointed. However, she expressed a certain embarrassment that the allegations concerned her local MP. One of the confusing things about the public’s attitude towards politicians is that while they get a low score in general, people tend to rate their local MP more highly. I was reminded of this paradox by a woman who didn’t want to give her name but said that although she had little faith in politicians in general, she thought Paterson was “a man of integrity”, and had simply been trying to pass on important information for the benefit of all. But it’s the benefit to himself – as much as £500,000 paid for consultancy work by Randox and Lynn’s Country Foods, in addition to his salary as an MP – that tends to trouble people. I say trouble, but that’s not quite the right word, because so many people I spoke to in Wem and nearby Whitchurch believe that “they’re all up to it”. One woman called Patricia said she was a lifelong Conservative voter and she thought Paterson’s actions were typical of all MPs, “but at the end of the day, they’re only looking after their families”. Many people seemed to process the fact of Paterson’s personal enrichment by assigning venality as a standard characteristic of all politicians. It’s this sense of being guilty by association that frustrates those many MPs who are scrupulous about not exploiting their position for personal gain. Mark Peplinski, who works in the packaging business, was in town with his partner Emma Walton to get a booster jab. He said his children, who live in London, were sceptical about all politicians: “But I don’t really believe people go into politics to make money,” he said. “If that’s what you’re after, you wouldn’t choose politics. On the whole I think people go into politics for the right reasons but, you know, power corrupts.” It was Boris Johnson’s attitudes to rule-breaking, he thought, that had helped empower those looking to cash in on their position. Most people, it turned out, had only a sketchy sense of the case against Paterson, but what many cite as greater cause for concern was the revelation that No 10 held a Christmas party last year in apparent contravention of the Covid rules. It was the double standard that riled them rather than the misuse of public office. It was notable that not a single person said Paterson’s actions would change the way they voted. But the byelection has nonetheless attracted the usual array of “colourful” figures – the Monster Raving Loony party and at least two candidates who are running on an anti-immigration platform, despite (or perhaps because of) the overwhelming whiteness of North Shropshire. The Liberal Democrats are said to fancy their chances of staging one of their periodic spectacular gains. But while that may make headlines for a day, it will do little to change a political system and culture that appears to be fast losing its appeal to the voting public. How to rebuild belief in our politics and politicians is both an urgent and long-term task. For anyone looking at what it may involve in North Shropshire and elsewhere, it’s worth bearing in mind something else Hazlitt said. “The love of liberty is the love of others: the love of power is the love of ourselves.” Maybe we’ve seen a little too much self-love in our political class of late.Style and substance Always distinctive, it’s hard to go wrong with some of the new offerings from PhilosophyFootball.com. Manchester United fans will balk but Liverpool supporters will love the limited edition shirt celebrating their 5-0 victory at Old Trafford in October. There’s a glorious bicycle wheel-shaped tribute to Mark Cavendish equalling Eddie Merckx’s 34 Tour de France stage wins and Emma Raducanu’s US Open victory is also celebrated. With the Ashes beginning this week, salute one of England’s greatest batting cameos, Jack Leach’s undefeated one at Headingley in 2019 from PunkCricket.com with a delightfully minimalist batting wagon wheel. Cyclists looking to make a fashion statement will find a wealth of brilliant designs at Paria.com. This Yorkshire-based company has teamed up with local designers to create genuinely striking gear. The women’s jerseys in particular are eye-catching but also functional, warm and well-designed for a perfect fit. Gadgets and gear Make standing spectating an altogether more relaxing experience with the Campster portable chair from Sitpack.com. An inventive and comfortable design, it weighs 940g and folds down to the size of 1.25-litre bottle. For walking to any match, the Thunder GTX hiking shoes from Hotter.com are a fine choice. Of sturdy Gore-Tex construction, they are waterproof and durable, yet very comfy to wear. Stay warm with the sumptuous merino wool leggings and top base layers from HellyHansen.com. Providing great insulation without being bulky, they are moisture wicking and breathable, ideal for any activity. Pair them on the links with something from Soundergolf.com, who endeavour to bring a fresh approach to the sport’s fashion and their navy socks are a treat for the feet. If that’s not enough to keep the cold at bay, family business Glencroftcountrywear.co.uk’s Clapdale jumper is made in Yorkshire with British wool, looks great and is a delight, slim and snug beneath a winter coat. All of which can be accessorised with the Icebreaker Flexi Chute snood from Wiggle.co.uk. Soft and warm it’s a merino wool treat for the neck. If out and about cycling ensure maximum visibility with one of the marvellous jackets from Provizsports.com. Their Reflect 360 CRS Plus looks great, is waterproof and warm but most importantly completely reflective. Coated with minuscule glass beads, at night the jacket reflects light as an unmissable, bright beacon. Serious cyclists will also appreciate the well-designed, light but nicely padded Castelli Entrata V gloves from Probikekit.co.uk. For any activity that requires attention to the surroundings, the Aeropex open ear, bone conduction headphones are perfect. The top-end for listening on the go, they use conduction through the cheekbones to transmit sound vibrations directly to the inner ear, instead of earpieces in the ear drum. The sound quality is superb but crucially the wearer is not cut off from external stimuli. Fitness and form Committing to making a New Year exercise effort is superbly served by Polar.com’s Vantage M2 multisport watch. The fitness tracker boasts a more stylish look than many rivals and is a comprehensive package for making a healthy step up. With a built-in wrist heart monitor and GPS it provides a remarkable array of tracking facilities, including 130 different sport profiles and programmes that are broken down on its app in detail. The GPS and the heart monitor are solid and the Fitspark option suggesting custom workouts learned from activity is a great tool. The battery life is also good and it makes for an impressive, thorough and competitively priced device. Cheaper as an entry point, the Polar Ignite 2 boasts similar features and the Fitspark system but on a sleeker model. Ideal as an all-round option for anyone about to make fitness a priority Put the trackers to good use with proper footwear. For stability and support across a wide range of distances the Swiss company ON delivers an exemplary ride with their Cloudstratus trainer. Designed for easy to mid-tempo running there is comfort here with a smooth easy pace, little jarring and an elegant, form-fitting upper. For performance gains the 361europe.com Meraki 4 is the latest iteration of a hugely popular trainer. An all-rounder, light and responsive it delivers a very smooth and well‑cushioned experience. With a dual-density midsole it’s easy on the foot, comfortable out of the box at a very competitive price. Combine both with the Enertor.com Energy Run Socks. Neatly designed they are light with an energy knit band that flexes thorough the step. Equally innovative, the CXPofficial.com Core underwear features a multi-panelled and deep waistband to distribute pressure evenly, they are lightweight, durable and a pleasure to wear. As is the marvellous Maaree.com Solidarity high-impact sports bra. It features a curved fabric band over the top of the breasts to stabilise upward motion when exercising. It’s a clever idea, designed and built to last through the rigours of real exercise. Leggings made from organically grown bamboo by Boody.co.uk are also a marvellous addition to any gym kit. They are fully sustainable, with the Active full length boasting a sharp design, while the high waist iteration looks great, has a stretchy cut to fit perfectly and handy pockets. They act as a great base layer with thermo-regulating and moisture-wicking properties and are delightfully soft to the touch. For maximum benefit from competing and exercising, the Skinscompression.com compression wear looks great and has a solid scientific basis for its design. The Series Three is perfect for medium-level activity, aiding blood flow and recovery and enjoys a smart, svelte look. Fun games and unique For a truly personal gift, Sarah Pennell of Pegboarders.com brings beauty and function to her exquisite, hanging showcase boards. Handmade and engraved from sustainable birch plywood they are an arresting sight using pegs and shelving for display and storage. Sarah will build any design – football trophies, motor racing circuits, effectively any sporting motif of choice and have personal details etched into them. A real eye-catcher and truly elegant, they bring charming life to any wall. Similarly striking, Tom White of racecutz.co.uk hand makes, beautiful, laser cut motor racing tracks from around the world. They come with stainless steel wall mounts that sets the circuit off from the wall, a distinctive and innovative feature. There is also intriguing art for football fans from Prezzybox.com. Their football ground prints are stylistic, graphic representations of championship and league grounds. Similarly their Subbuteo team prints, a selection of classic line-ups rendered as flick-to-kick figures is a novel take. Toast the new year in with the selection of football team-themed vodka and gin from Bohemianbrands.co.uk. There is a selection of clubs, the booze is a high-end tipple but the bottles, particularly the crystal range, boast glorious glitzy club badges. Budding young players will have terrific fun with the Kicker ball from Smythstoys.com, a clever idea aimed at kids not yet graduated to a full match ball. The light panels are designed to allow players to put swerve and bend on with ease. Equally fun is the Footy airflow ball at Bigpotato.co.uk. Made of modular plastic panels it folds up and can be taken anywhere for an impromptu kickabout, a great idea. Finally for football-mad kids stuck indoors, Johnlewis.com has Brainbox Football, an entertaining memory game based around the players and histories of English clubs that is easy to pick up and fun to play.Three major issues will determine the magnitude of the impact of the new Omicron variant of the Covid virus will have on the nation and the rest of the planet. What is the transmissibility of this new Covid variant? How good is it at evading the antibodies and T-cells that make up a person’s immune defences? What are the chances it will trigger severe illness that could lead to the hospitalisation, and possibly death, of an infected person? Scientists are struggling to find definitive answers to these critically important questions, although evidence already suggests Omicron has the potential to cause serious disruption. “The situation is very finely tuned and could go in many different directions,” says Prof Rowland Kao of Edinburgh University. Where has the virus been detected? The Omicron variant has now been detected in 38 countries, although no deaths have yet been reported in any of these nations, according to the World Health Organization. The US and Australia have become the latest countries to confirm locally transmitted – as opposed to imported – cases of the variant. On Friday, the UK Health Security Agency announced that 75 more cases of the Covid-19 Omicron variant had been identified in England, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 104. As a result of Omicron, many nations that were already suffering from soaring numbers of Covid-19 cases caused by the Delta variant have imposed new lockdown measures and travel restrictions. How fast is the variant spreading? Omicron has spread rapidly in South Africa, to the alarm of researchers worldwide. On 1 December, the country recorded 8,561 cases compared with a total of 3,402 reported on 26 November. In mid-November, only a few hundred cases were noted. South Africa’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) in Johannesburg confirmed that Omicron is spreading quickly. Tom Wenseleers, an evolutionary biologist at the Catholic University of Leuven in Belgium, estimates that Omicron can infect three to six times as many people as Delta, over the same time period. “That’s a huge advantage for the virus — but not for us,” he told the journal Nature. When the Delta variant began its rapid spread in the UK, case numbers doubled roughly every five days. Scientists are now carefully monitoring Omicron cases to determine how swiftly the variant is affecting the population of Britain. How easily does the variant evade the body’s anti-virus defences? On this question, scientists are clear. Evidence indicates that Omicron has an advantage over other variants in bypassing the immune system. “From what we have learned so far, we can be fairly confident that – compared with other variants – Omicron tends to be better able to reinfect people who have been previously infected and received some protection against Covid-19,” said Prof Francois Balloux, director of the Genetics Institute at University College London. “That is pretty clear and was anticipated from the mutational changes we have pinpointed in its protein structure. These make it more difficult for antibodies to neutralise the virus.” This point was backed by Simon Clarke of Reading University. “There is no indication as to how this immune evasion happens, although it can be presumed to be because of decreased antibody binding to Omicron’s mutated spike protein. But decreased T-cell immunity cannot be excluded as a possible contributory factor.” If the power of previous infection to protect people is reduced, how might vaccines fare against the variant? If previous questions raised fairly worrying responses from scientists, most are more optimistic about the power of jabs to safeguard people from Omicron. “It is extremely unlikely this variant will evade vaccines completely,” said Prof Peter Openshaw of Imperial College London. “The vaccines we have are remarkably effective against a range of other variants but we need more lab and real world data to determine the degree of protection in those vaccinated.” How likely is infection with Omicron to lead to hospitalisation or death? This is the most difficult question to answer because Omicron has not been known for long enough to determine its ability to cause serious illness. However, early evidence does give some grounds for optimism. “The number of cases of Omicron infections does not seem to translate at this stage into the hospitalisation rates we would have expected with similar numbers of cases of Alpha or other variants,” said Balloux. However, even if this reduction in serious risk proves correct, it is balanced by the variant’s apparent ability to infect more people. “We could still get high levels of hospitalisations, and that in turn would put pressure on a nation’s health service.” How might people in high-risk groups be affected by Omicron? Again, it is too early to be sure how the variant might affect the elderly or other members of high-risk groups. However, some scientists have voiced concerns. “The big issue is the elderly population,” said Kao. “Over the past few months, this variant has been circulating in younger age groups, because they’re the ones who are relatively unprotected. However, the variant may shift its profile to infect more older people, who we know are more vulnerable to severe infection for the other variants. The reasoning is straightforward. If the variant is able to evade the immune response of young people, then the built-up immunity in the elderly – due to high levels of vaccination combined with natural infection – will be less meaningful. That, obviously, is a real worry. “Even before Omicron appeared, we were facing the danger that rising numbers of cases could overload the health service. It was so finely tuned. In addition, there is still a prospect of serious seasonal flu returning to increase the burden on hospitals. So any shift towards increased transmissibility, a shifting of age profiles, vaccine evasion, or more severe disease, will put us in a more dangerous situation. Short-term indicators will be helpful but it will probably be a little while before we are able to rule out worse scenarios.”Joe Biden looked out at an audience of government scientists last week and recognized a mask-wearing Anthony Fauci, his top adviser on the coronavirus. “I’ve seen more of Dr Fauci than my wife,” he joked. “Who’s president? Fauci!” The US president was visiting the frontline of the Covid-19 struggle, the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, where he unveiled a winter plan that includes a drive for vaccine boosters, free at-home testing and fresh requirements for international travelers. But even as Biden preached to the converted on Thursday, he faced a new political threat. The Omicron variant was spreading rapidly from state to state, trailing uncertainty in its wake. “We’re going to fight this variant with science and speed, not chaos and confusion,” he promised, “just like we beat back Covid-19 in the spring and more powerful Delta variant in the summer and fall.” Yet the Delta variant itself is far from beaten, underlining the perils of what may prove the defining issue of Biden’s presidency and the measure of its success or failure. He came into office promising to crush the coronavirus but, after at least one false dawn, that goal remains frustratingly elusive – and now Omicron could deliver another hammer blow. Indeed, Biden’s aura of competence took a hit over the summer, partly because of the chaotic withdrawal from Afghanistan, partly because the Delta variant appeared to catch him by surprise. Its persistence has made a mockery of his July declaration that Americans could soon declare independence from the virus. Laurie Garrett, an award-winning science writer, said: “I don’t think that anybody in the spring in the United States was operating with the correct level of alarm about the Delta variant. “I would forgive many leaders for having an inability to read the situation adequately and recognise how dangerous it was but, once it was clear that the Delta variant was far more contagious, everybody should have gone into high gear and I do think there was a slowness in response.” Biden’s swift travel bans on southern African countries in response to Omicron suggested a resolve to learn lessons from Delta; to some it looked like overcorrection. But the challenge this time is compounded by new extremes in the Republican party and rightwing media’s politicization of the pandemic. On Thursday, the president acknowledged: “It’s become a political issue, which is a sad, sad commentary. It shouldn’t be, but it has been.” His stated hope that the nation could now come together around his new plan will have struck some as optimistic to the point of naivety. Democrats accuse Biden’s opponents of weaponizing the virus and its variants against him with the long-term objective of denying him a second term. Eric Schultz, a communications strategist who worked in the Obama administration, told the Associated Press: “It’s clear that Republicans have decided that the fate of the Biden presidency is tied to Covid. And Republicans have chosen to be on the side of the virus.” Some Republicans have all but entrenched an anti-vaccination culture. Senators this week briefly threatened a government shutdown over mandates. Florida, Iowa, Kansas and Tennessee have extended benefits to workers who are fired or resigned over their employers’ vaccine requirements. Leslie Dach, chair of Protect Our Care, a healthcare pressure group, said: “They’re literally sacrificing the lives of their own voters on the altar of their personal politics. That’s just incontrovertibly true when you know that the death rate is 15 times higher and you see who is choosing not to be vaccinated in America. They’re basically meting out a death sentence for people.” It seems to be getting worse. A day after news broke about the Omicron variant, Ronny Jackson, a Republican congressman from Texas and former doctor to Donald Trump, floated a groundless conspiracy theory. He tweeted: “Here comes the MEV – the Midterm Election Variant. They NEED a reason to push unsolicited nationwide mail-in ballots. Democrats will do anything to CHEAT during an election – but we’re not going to let them!” Meanwhile, Lara Logan, a Fox News personality , compared Fauci to the Nazi doctor Josef Mengele, known as the Angel of Death for the experiments he carried out on prisoners at the Auschwitz death camp. Michael Bornstein, a survivor of Auschwitz, described the comments as “disgusting”. But Logan was not sanctioned by Fox News and, with Holocaust comparisons proliferating on rightwing social media, including even in merchandise, there are fears that America’s hyperpartisan atmosphere may have passed a point of no return, paralysing its Omicron response. Garrett, author of The Coming Plague: Newly Emerging Diseases in a World Out of Balance, warned: “There is no possibility of working together. If you were going to write a scenario that was perfect for a virus to spread rampantly, having the humans at the edge of civil war every five minutes would be a perfect scenario.” Despite these forces, the White House points to dramatic progress over the past year. Last Christmas less than 1% of adults were fully vaccinated; this Christmas that share will be 72%, including more than 86% of elderly people. More than 20 million children have been vaccinated – though under-fives still await approval – and 99% of schools are open. But the pandemic has proved a tenacious foe with renewed surges in Michigan and other midwestern states threatening to overwhelm hospitals. About 40 million adults refuse to get vaccinated. Take-up of boosters – more essential than ever due to Omicron – has been sluggish: more than 100 million eligible people have not yet received the shot. Masks, empty offices and unpredictability persist. The conflicting picture has left the president to juggle duelling messages, one encouraging a return to life as normal, the other urging continued precautions. There seems little prospect of a definitive ending or declaration of victory. Roughly 47% of Americans approve of Biden’s handling of the pandemic while 49% disapprove, according to a recent Washington Post/ABC News poll. Michael Steele, former chairman of the RNC, said he would award the president about five marks out of 10 so far. “Given the success they had early on in getting the vaccine programme put in place, shots in arms and all that, when the [Delta] variant hit it caught them flat-footed and took them by surprise. “The administration lost a lot of the gains it had made coming in the door because it shattered people’s confidence in their ability to not only handle what was going on but to actually know what was going on.” Steele, a longtime critic of Trump, noted that calculated attacks and obstruction from the right present a further obstacle to the nation’s recovery from the pandemic. “Biden doesn’t want to further politicize Covid and yet you have Republicans and that’s all they know how to do.” The situation, he added, is reminiscent of Barack Obama’s signature healthcare law, the Affordable Care Act, which Republicans spent years trying to repeal without offering a replacement. Bill Galston, a senior fellow at former policy adviser to Bill Clinton, awards Biden a more generous eight of out of 10 for his coronavirus approach to date. “The reason that’s two clicks short of 10 is that I think the White House really went astray in early July when it did everything but hang a mission accomplished banner over the subject. “As I recall, the president announced a summer of freedom. One of the things they have surely learned is that they’re at the mercy of events that they can neither foresee nor control in advance and so creating hopes that are then extinguished by events is really counterproductive.” More than 780,000 Americans have now died from Covid-19. This week, at a White House press briefing, the Fox News reporter Peter Doocy asked: “Whatever happened to President Biden’s promise to shut down the virus?” The press secretary, Jen Psaki, replied: “We’re working on it.”Otherworldly science fiction meets down-to-earth psychological realism in director and co-writer Michael Pearce’s impressive follow-up to 2017’s brilliant Beast. Boasting yet another standout performance by Riz Ahmed, the nuances of which are superbly amplified by Jed Kurzel’s slowly mutating score, this is a genre-hopping affair, balanced between tangible personal experience and growing paranoia, an affecting meld of inner and outer worlds in which family stresses and extraterrestrial spectres collide. Like Nic Roeg’s The Man Who Fell to Earth, to which this owes a tonal debt, Encounter opens with images of objects plummeting through the atmosphere toward our planet’s surface. From here we move to Blue Velvet-style closeups of insects, vividly illustrating alien microbes entering the ecosystem. Then we’re in Apocalypse Now territory, as Ahmed’s Malik Khan awakens in his hotel room. “This violence is endemic,” proclaims TV news coverage of a plague of rioting. “It’s like a disease that’s infecting a growing area.” A decorated marine, Malik is now deep in a secret-ops battle against microscopic space invaders – and it’s clearly getting under his skin. He hears bugs in the wall and obsessively covers himself in insect spray. One night he sneaks into his estranged wife’s home and gathers up his young sons, Jay and Bobby, telling them that they are going on a surprise road trip. “Why do you have pictures of monsters?” one child asks after rifling through his luggage. “They’re not monsters,” Malik replies. “They’re non-terrestrial micro-organisms”, invaders that live inside their hosts, controlling their actions. Apparently, the boys’ mum has already succumbed to these space spores, as has a cop who flags Malik down in the middle of the night, and in whose eyes he sees tell-tale signs of infection. There’s a strong strain of William Friedkin’s criminally underrated 2006 chiller Bug (from Tracy Letts’s stage play) in Pearce’s evocation of a scratchy threat that drives our protagonist to distraction. From the increasingly frenzied tempo of the bug-zapper on his sons’ porch to a closeup of their mother falling prey to a mosquito (“I’m getting eaten alive today”) and then mysteriously getting sick, it’s the little details that bite. As with any family road-trip movie, there is humour too. “It’s official – you’re both infected,” jokes Malik when his sons tell him to turn off the heavy metal blaring from his car radio, preferring the sounds of K-pop and Barbra Streisand. Meanwhile, in a parallel narrative, Octavia Spencer keeps things grounded as parole officer Hattie Hayes, a proud “benefit of the doubt” type who finds herself locked in a nightmarish world of “family annihilators” and suspected kidnappings when suited government agents come calling. At first, Encounter seems to be following in the footsteps of such M Night Shyamalan thrillers as Signs or The Happening – films in which an apocalypse starts quietly, before growing into a global cataclysm. But Pearce and Giri/Haji creator Joe Barton (who wrote the original speculative script) are more interested in interior narratives, subtly linking Malik’s current struggles with the PTSD-inducing scars of former battles. Having tried to protect his kids from their more dreadful purpose by selling this “rescue mission” as a game, Malik finds fairytales turning to reality. “You’re not a kid any more,” he tells Jay, “you can’t be”, suggesting that dire circumstances have already robbed his son of his childhood. Or perhaps it’s a growing awareness of their father’s fallibility that is the kids’ real wake-up call. The camaraderie of the Three Musketeers is invoked as the trio declare that “families take care of each other”, even as the cracks in Dad’s warrior armour are laid bare. Terrifically engaging and naturalistic performances from young actors Lucian-River Chauhan and Aditya Geddada add emotional weight, making this a family affair. Meanwhile, Beast cinematographer Benjamin Kračun, whom Pearce directed towards Invasion of the Body Snatchers and Paris, Texas as reference points, carefully delineates the film’s shifting perspectives, slipping between subjective and objective views, emphasising the alien elements of the story without ever losing sight of its core humanity. In cinemas now and on Amazon Prime Video from 10 DecemberIn August 2020, only days before the pilot episode of Mandy was set to be broadcast, Diane Morgan picked up her phone and prepared to call a bigwig at the BBC. “I’m really sorry,” she’d envisioned herself saying, “but there’s absolutely no way you can let this thing go out.” She was ready to beg – to offer whatever cash, bribe or bargain necessary. Nothing was off the table in her effort to ensure the refreshingly ridiculous, six-part comedy series she’d directed, starred in and scripted ever reached the nation’s TVs. This might sound strange: Morgan has quite the track record when it comes to shining on the small screen. She was elevated to cult sensation in 2013 while inhabiting her role as the simultaneously inept and insightful spoof interviewer Philomena Cunk: “How did Winston Churchill come to invent Tipp-Ex?” she asked one historian. Or: If horses used to be so good at drawing carriages, why are they no longer any good at art? From there, her deadpan demeanour landed her leading roles in the three seasons of the BBC’s much-loved Motherland – a nit-infested, school-gates sitcom of Sharon Horgan et al’s design – and Ricky Gervais’s After Life, too. Mandy, however, is different. For the first time in a long while, Morgan felt exposed. “Of course, I did,” she says. “I wrote and directed it; my face is all over it. Normally, I can blame the writers, the awful direction. But if this is rubbish, it’s me who has made a bad programme.” This was a character Morgan had created alone, and she had nowhere to hide. “I’d just done Liz in Motherland and Kath in After Life,” Morgan says, staring from across the table in a north London studio, her rescue dog, Bobby, next to her. “They were both low-key, laconic characters. Something in me just wanted to do something stupid, totally different for a change.” When she’d first been given a 15-minute slot on BBC Two, Morgan wanted to make something frivolous, and silly, almost cartoon-like. So she dreamed up Mandy Carter, a gives-no-shits antihero who smokes like a chimney; a woman who struggles as much to keep a hold of reality as she does her slurry of jobs. In an era of hefty and heartfelt, exposing comedy-dramas – Mae Martin’s Feel Good, Aisling Bea’s This Way Up, Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s Fleabag – Mandy falls into the genre of comedy of the absurd. During the pilot, Mandy lands a job as a stowaway tarantula spotter at a banana processing plant; she gets distracted, and somehow 17 people die. A stint working at a chicken shop sees her set the place on fire when her hair extensions get caught in an extractor fan while sneaking off for a fag. The storylines have only got more ludicrous. In the end, Morgan never made the phone call. Instead, she switched off her phone and pretended it just wasn’t happening. She refrained from reading reviews and refused to look at social media. It was only when Ben Caudell – her TV producer partner – assured her that responses were positive that she dared come out of her self-imposed cocoon. “I was just sitting across from him, yelling: ‘Don’t tell me! Fine, tell me! Is it bad? How bad?’” She felt physically sick. “No, he said, it’s good. Obviously there were a couple of lunatics who said they want their licence fees back. But you’re always going to get that.” Honestly? She never even considered the idea that execs would offer her a fully fledged series. And then another, and a Christmas special, both of which she’s here today to promote. “I don’t think the world needs another comedy drama right now,” she says, seriously. “Nothing is really comedy-comedy. If they’re not funny you can get away with it by just saying, ‘Yes, but that one was drama, actually.’ But also this is all I could come up with. And well, it’s just silly. I was fucked if people didn’t crack up.” There was nothing exceptional about Morgan’s childhood in Bolton, she says. Dad was a physiotherapist, mum raised the two kids and ran the home. “Should I skip to the interesting bits?” she asks. She’s not sure there were any. “I wasn’t beaten or anything, if that’s what you want. Is it?” The Morgan family’s love of comedy was all-consuming, almost obsessive. Theirs was a household that prized academic achievement far less than the ability to make people laugh. “If you could crack someone up,” she says, “that was really good. We’d all try to be the funny one. We’d all watch comedy shows together, record them and then pick them apart.” Until she found drama classes, school reports always noted that she was a quiet girl. Then at 15, she discovered that putting on funny voices was an easy way of winning friends. It was a revelation. Something clicked. She’s 46 now, but Morgan was certain she wanted to be a comic actor before her 16th birthday, inspired by the likes of Peter Sellers and Tony Hancock. When plonked in front of a careers adviser she didn’t get much support. “They responded as if I’d said my future lay in being a mermaid,” Morgan remembers, unforgivingly. “It was that weird to them. They didn’t know what to do.” It would be better, a teenage Morgan was assured, to give graphic design a shot. If she was still interested in performing a few years down the line, much better to get involved in some local am-dram. At her art school interview, her interviewer implied she seemed a little half-arsed. When asked what she would rather be doing, Morgan made it clear she quite fancied acting. The tutor passed Morgan back her papers, and told her to go and do that instead. “What a stupid thing for me to do in an interview,” Morgan says now, “but she was the first person who just told me to make it happen.” It took three years of slogging it out at auditions to finally secure a place at drama school. Meanwhile, she worked in sales (tea towels, to be specific), in a worming tablet factory and peeling chip-shop potatoes; somehow she managed to cling on to her post as a dental nurse after knocking out a patient’s crown while daydreaming on the job. Drama school rejections, meanwhile, were plentiful. And after meeting Maxine Peake at an ill-fated audition, the pair sparked up a friendship that buoyed each other. Morgan reckons she was turned down time after time for her displays of desperation: “I was like a Britain’s Got Talent contestant: almost crying, always shaking. I didn’t have a plan B and so I was consumed by fear. It was hell on earth, that time,” she says, almost shuddering while reliving it, “but it certainly gave me ideas for characters. And it makes you really want to make silly things, because you realise how important they are to people. I think that’s why I love comedy so much. You need stuff that cheers you up. Comedy did that when I was down.” Then one day, Morgan said to herself: “Do you know what? If they don’t want me, then fuck it. I didn’t know what I’d do but it wouldn’t be the end of the world.” She approached auditions with a whole new attitude. “When I let go, I immediately got accepted. It’s the way the world works.” Morgan landed a place at East 15 Acting School in Essex. On the first day, the class were asked to introduce themselves by writing a poem and drawing a self-portrait. She doesn’t remember much from her brief foray into poetry: “Why don’t you stay in Bolton and get a job at Asda, something something something and buying a Mazda.” “Some classes were pointless,” she says, “you know, throwing bean bags around. That sort of rubbish.” In one lesson, Morgan was instructed to hand a shoe to another pupil while telling the classmate how she felt. “I took the shoe and said I felt really angry that I’d wasted money doing this crap,” Morgan recalls. She was swiftly yelled at, and banned from coming back. Other parts of her course, she’s quick to add, proved more helpful. East 15 is, after all, a training ground for method actors; a place to perfect the character craft. “I don’t think it was as useful for me as doing standup,” she adds. “Comedy helps you find out what makes you interesting as a person. At drama school they try to get rid of those bits of you, rather than homing in on the weird qualities that I often exaggerate today.” After graduation, work in the business wasn’t forthcoming. She bagged herself a bit-part in Peter Kay’s Phoenix Nights after writing to him – “Dear Peter, I’m also from Bolton. Give me a job” – and a few low-key theatre gigs, but little else. So she turned to standup comedy. It felt, as Morgan puts it, like her only hope. It was here, on the circuit, that Morgan finally found her feet. “If you do it long enough,” she says, “you see what’s funny about you. With me? Well, I look very miserable. I’m not animated. I sound very down in the dumps. So I’d play on that, say I was having an awful time. And that worked.” From then, agents quickly started calling. Cunk was certainly the turning point. It gave her enough notoriety, she feels, to secure other work. “Then after a while it sort of snowballed,” she says. “It was gradual, not an overnight change.” Occasionally, she started to notice people would give her glances; stand on the street staring in her direction. “I used to think: ‘What the fuck is his problem? Who does he think he is, looking at me?’ And then I’d remember: ‘Diane, love, you’re on TV now.’” In Mandy, Morgan presents a character lovingly shaped by the women she grew up surrounded by. But Mandy’s a smoker and a drinker, and she gets done for benefits fraud. With heightened cultural sensitivities, was she ever worried some viewers might think she’d created a class caricature? “It’s funny,” she says, surprised. “To me that doesn’t even register. It doesn’t occur to me that I might be playing the ‘working class’ character. I mean, I am from a working-class background, even if I’m not now. “I suppose that’s something people have always been nervous about,” Morgan argues. “Well, middle-class people anyway. They were worried about it with Philomena Cunk.” When she first auditioned to play Cunk for Charlie Brooker’s Weekly Wipe, she was asked to read in a prim and proper RP voice. “They didn’t want her to be northern for exactly that reason,” Morgan believes. “They wanted her to be posh, because they already had Barry Shitpeas and he’s working class. They didn’t want another ‘stupid’ working-class character. But that’s not right.” At the end of the Cunk audition, Morgan successfully convinced the room to let her give her native Bolton accent a chance. Just as she predicted, everyone agreed the voice was right. “The thing is,” she says of characters like Cunk, Liz and Mandy, “they’re not stupid. They’re actually great people that you look at and want to be friends with, people you admire.” Lots of us look up to them, she reckons, because they don’t care what people think. That’s something we’d all like to feel, Morgan says, deep down. “It’s not usually working-class types who are concerned about all that stuff. I don’t know why we should get upset.” This might be less clear cut if she was from a different background. “I definitely think if I was very middle class and had a proper posh voice I couldn’t do a character like Mandy. Everyone would be up in arms that I was taking the piss out of the working classes. But it’s not, they’re full of love. They’re a part of who I am.” It has been a busy year for Morgan: what with new Mandy; new Motherland; new After Life. A break sounds enticing. “I’ve been pulled through the hedge backwards, I haven’t stopped,” she says, “which, of course, is great. Though I would really quite like a sit down, please.” With space to breathe, Morgan might think about what comes next. For a long time, she passed on offers to play straighter, more dramatic roles. She’s turned down more hard-hitting copper jobs than she cares to count. “I just couldn’t do it before,” she says, “I never fancied it.” Now, however, she’s ready for something a little more meaty. “I’d say yes if the right part came along. Just definitely not a copper. Or a podcast for that matter. I’m sick of them. There’s too many. Get them off.” As for Philomena Cunk? Like the rest of us, Morgan misses her. “She’s like a shield,” she says fondly, “a suit of armour. She can say anything, go anywhere, do no wrong.” Characters offer comfort, because for all the sharp wit and straight-faced sardonicism, she’s clearly invested in what she does. Because Diane Morgan takes comedy seriously. It’s no joke to her, this business of making people laugh. That’s why from time to time, she feels Cunk’s absence. “But then again, I can always walk around my house as her when I want to. And sometimes, I do.” If Morgan’s nerves start playing up again before Mandy’s imminent return to our screens, maybe that’s where you’ll find her. Not fretting or freaking out, but channelling her fearless, unflinching inner-Cunk in the kitchen, once again demanding to know why it is that humans cry when it’s definitely the onions that are getting hurt. We Wish You a Mandy Christmas airs on BBC Two over the festive period; series two of Mandy is coming in the new year on BBC Two. Catch up on series one on iPlayer nowFirst, the bad news. With unpredictable outbreaks still occurring around the world, and variants like Omicron raising questions about the virus’s contagiousness, we are very much still in a pandemic. The good news: while it’s difficult to predict the exact timing, most scientists agree that the Covid-19 pandemic will end and that the virus will become endemic. That means the virus will probably never be eliminated entirely, but as more people get vaccinated and become exposed to it, infections will eventually arise at a consistently low rate, and fewer people will become severely ill. An area where vaccination and booster rates are high will probably see endemicity sooner than a region with lower rates. What does that transition look like? In practical terms, there will be an announcement. The World Health Organization and local health agencies will officially declare the global pandemic over, a designation informed by certain biological and statistical benchmarks: the virus’s contagiousness, mortality rate, and power to overwhelm hospitals, to name a few. In some places, like the US and other wealthy nations with ready access to vaccines and antiviral treatments, endemicity could look a lot like the present: People emerging from despair, diners piling into restaurants, and vaccine cards being checked with decreasing rigor. But there could be other, more profound societal changes as well. To understand how daily life will change if Covid-19 becomes endemic, we can turn to history for a useful (if imperfect) guide. A shift in attitudes and behaviors People generally respond to epidemics with fear and panic, on the individual level and as a society. According to Charles Kenny, a director at the Center for Global Development and author of The Plague Cycle, these reactions reliably take shape in some now-recognizable ways: shutting down borders, sequestering the sick, and withdrawing from society. Until the advent of modern medicine, all people could do was hope (and pray) for outbreaks to subside on their own. When it became clear that a disease was inescapable –or endemic– societies would often make strides to reframe the illness as a regular part of life. This may also become true of Covid-19. Kenny’s book offers one potential preview. In 17th-century Japanese cities, attitudes about smallpox shifted as the disease became endemic; by then, most people had already been exposed as children and subsequently recovered. Once people accepted “that everyone’s going to get smallpox”, Kenny says, they ritualized and normalized it as a childhood milestone, making it a part of the “growing-up story”. It’s too soon to say how this process of normalization will unfold with regard to Covid. However, if infections turn out to become a normal part of the winter months, they may simply get absorbed into what’s known as cold and flu season. Much as with smallpox in Japanese cities, that change will be reflected in people’s language and day-to-day expectations. Already, some are beginning to use the term “Covid season”. Effective medical interventions also make it easier for societies to accept the thought of coexisting with illness. “My parents were terrified [of polio],” says Nancy Tomes, a history professor at Stony Brook University and author of The Gospel of Germs. Tomes, on the other hand, was a part of “the generation that went to the local high school and got the sugar cube,” referring to a common dispensation method for an orally administered polio vaccine. “We stopped worrying about polio after that,” Tomes says. Though Covid remains prevalent, the advent of effective vaccines swiftly altered the scope of its threat. In March, when just 9.2% of Americans were fully vaccinated, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention relaxed its social distancing guidance to allow immunised people to gather indoors. And on Thanksgiving, Joe Biden declared that the US was “back” from pandemic hibernation – despite the nearly 100,000 new Covid-19 cases still being confirmed each day. Finger-pointing and misinformation Unfortunately, history suggests that some negative pandemic-related behaviors tend to persist after a disease becomes endemic or is eliminated. One of these is the disproportionate targeting of groups perceived as “outsiders” within the dominant society. When the pandemic subsides, says Kenny, the social restrictions likely to remain “are the ones that affect minority groups”. Imposed in 1987, America’s xenophobic and homophobic travel ban on people with HIV lasted for 22 years. And today, people wrongfully associated with Covid, like those from Asia or Africa, are still being harassed and shut out despite the full understanding that the coronavirus isn’t discerning of race. A propensity for misinformation and conspiracy theories has also been associated with epidemics – “a shit show”, says Tomes, with a legacy “that goes all the way back to every epidemic that we have any written records of”. Some of these mistruths prove to have staying power. “There are still people who don’t believe that HIV causes AIDS,” she says. During pandemics, groups of people also become susceptible to developing extreme views on topics that stir up strong opinions – like vaccination and personal liberty – which they may not have initially held. Even once a pandemic has ended, that phenomenon of “group polarization” may remain “lingering in the background,” says Steven Taylor, a psychology professor at the University of British Columbia and author of The Psychology of Pandemics. That polarization is liable to “get stirred up again when something similar arises” in the future. Knowing what we can’t know (yet) Importantly, the return to normalcy won’t happen evenly across the globe. After people in wealthy nations ease into endemicity, those in the global south may continue to grapple with the coronavirus for a long time, as has been the case for a host of tropical diseases that have been all but forgotten in places like the US. Like all the infectious diseases that gripped the world before it, Sars-CoV-2 will hopefully fade into distant memory, for better or worse. This forgetfulness can bring relief, growth and recovery, but it could also leave us woefully unprepared for the next pandemic. The 1918 flu taught us that masking and social distancing could reduce deaths, says Kenny – a lesson that we relearned too late in 2020.Here’s the main stories on Sunday, 5 December: The prime minister, Scott Morrison, again says he thinks Australians have had a “gutful of governments in their lives”, repeating the phrase he used last month when commenting about anti-lockdown protests in Victoria; The former Gardening Australia host Peter Cundall has died, aged 94; Omicron cases climb in NSW, but Victorian premier Daniel Andrews say he does not expect his government, or that of his NSW counterpart Dominic Perrottet, will tighten restrictions despite the new variant; Australian children aged five to 11 are set to receive the Pfizer Covid vaccine from mid-January after the TGA grants provisional approval; and Victoria records 980 cases, seven deaths; NSW records 286 locally acquired Covid-19 cases, one death; the ACT records six new cases; with no new cases in Queensland, the Northern Territory or Western Australia (South Australia and Tasmania figures had not been updated). More reactions to the passing of Peter Cundall: Peter Cundall’s family have issued the following statement about his death: On Sun 5th of December 2021, Peter Cundall passed away peacefully after a short illness, surrounded by his family. Peter’s privacy, and the privacy of his family, is to be respected during this very sad time. Peter’s family does not wish to be contacted. While he was loved by many, as per Peter’s wishes, there will be a private cremation and no memorial services will be held. An obituary is to follow. Former ABC managing director Mark Scott has just posted this about the news of Peter Cundall’s passing: The ABC is reporting that Peter Cundall, the much-loved former host of Gardening Australia, died earlier today. Morrison was asked about doing two media events today, and whether the election campaign is already underway (he was on the track at the Bathurst 1000 earlier). He said he visited central NSW to see the flood damage and thank those who had volunteered, but noted: Someone else is campaigning and politicking back in the inner city, and we’re here out in central western New South Wales, listening carefully to the impact of these floods on their properties and on their futures. And it was great to be at Bathurst today, it wasn’t the first time I’ve been to Bathurst, it was great to be back at Bathurst, it was great to see everyone there, because that’s what we’ve been working towards. That’s what the premier and I particularly have been working towards. We’ve been working towards Australians getting their lives back. What we’re about is getting governments out of your lives, because I think Australians have had a gutful of governments in their lives in the past few years, and they’re looking forward to getting back in the driver’s seat, and I want to put Australians back in the driver’s seat. The “gutful” comments echo similar remarks Morrison made last month. Morrison on the Labor party’s $1.2bn proposal to fund skills training shortages in Tafes and universities: We already are putting that investment in, and you’ve got to remember it was Labor who ripped out $1.2bn out of school’s apprenticeships when they were in government, and they took 100,000 ... 100,000 apprenticeships out of work and out of the system, that’s their record. Labor is going to say a lot of things between now and the next election, they said they weren’t going to have a carbon tax last time, and they ended up putting one in. They saw electricity prices double on their watch, whereas under our government, electricity prices have been falling by over 3% on average every year over the last three years since I was elected at the last election. So you’ll hear a lot from Labor, there’ll be a lot of noise, but the only way you really understand what a Labor government will do is what they did last time they were in government. Morrison wraps it up fairly quickly. Standby and I’ll unpack all that a little more in a tic. Morrison also repeats his desire for “governments to get out of people’s lives”. Morrison is asked about the Labor party’s announcement today about an investment in skills training. He segues into talking about how Labor will make promises they may not keep, like the carbon tax. He also is asked whether it’s the start of the election campaign, given he has done two events today, and mentions someone else politicking in the “inner city”. Morrison is taking questions. He says partnerships with state governments will be very important when it comes to vaccinating 5-to 11-year-olds, given many of those children will attend schools. It is a tacit suggestion (as the Victorian premier Daniel Andrews said earlier) that school-based vaccination programs could be how the rollout for this age group occurs. Perrottet says the “constructive relationship” between the state and federal government over the past couple of years demonstrates they will also be able to work together to overcome the flood damage. He went to his first Bathurst today (with Morrison), and says he was thrilled that the high vaccination rate had allowed the event to happen. Morrison says the rural economy has to fire, so he hopes locals can recover quickly. He says: They have to get back on the front foot to grow the food and fibre...that the central west is famous for. He says 2021 is in the rear-vision mirror, and his government is like the “drivers at Bathurst” looking through the front windscreen to a future after the pandemic. Morrison is talking about his two previous visits to the central west, which were because of the drought and bushfires, and now it’s floods. He and Perrottet are joined by the local member and former Nationals leader Michael McCormack. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, and NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, are speaking to the media in Forbes, where they have visited flood damaged areas. I’m finishing up for today, so I will once again hand over the blog to Nino Bucci! The Bureau of Meteorology says there will be no flight interruptions caused by the eruption of a volcano in Indonesia. The eruption of Mt Semeru, which has killed at least 13 people, could have also caused havoc with the aviation industry. But meteorologist Sarah Scully said that unless it erupted again, it was not expected volcanic ash would cause any flights to be suspended. She said: Luckily the areas had fairly widespread showers and a tropical thunderstorm, which has washed the atmosphere of volcanic ash. Unless there’s another eruption, and we’ll be keeping a close eye on it ... the danger has passed. The Age’s state political reporter, Sumeyya Ilanbey, is reporting that the Victorian Liberal party state conference has passed a motion calling for the party to adopt a program to train, retain and mentor women. This comes after state conference voted down a motion opposing any kind of gender or other diversity quotas. Clover Moore has released a video celebrating her all but certain reelection to a fifth term as Lord Mayor of Sydney. Former prime minister Kevin Rudd has weighed in on Sky News host Peta Credlin’s apology to the South Sudanese community over incorrect reports she made last year. Police investigating a fatal stabbing outside a Perth nightclub have charged two men over a second attack which happened shortly before, AAP reports. Homicide squad detectives say they have charged a 23-year-old Aveley man with inflicting grievous bodily harm in relation to a stabbing at Northbridge on November 27. A 20-year-old Marangaroo man will also face court accused of being an accessory after the fact to the offence. The pair were expected to appear on Sunday in Perth Magistrates Court. Police say the incident is linked to another stabbing that occurred a few minutes later in which a 28-year-old man died. An 18-year-old has been charged over that attack, which happened during a brawl near the Republic nightclub. The victim was treated at the scene but died in hospital, while a man in his 20s was also treated for non-fatal stab wounds. Police said at the time those involved in the fighting were members of the local African community who were known to each other. As the major parties move into campaign mode, Amy Remeikis broke down which electorates may decide the next election. Read the full article here: Labor has ruled out governing with the Greens should neither major party receive a clear majority at the next election, AAP reports: Opposition leader Anthony Albanese believes his party’s climate change policy is a practical example of how Labor can bring Australians together after next year’s election. In what was described as Labor’s unofficial campaign launch, Albanese delivered a speech to the party faithful in Sydney on Sunday under the banner “A better future”. “We can put the climate wars behind us,” he promised. Just hours earlier, deputy Labor leader Richard Marles ruled out doing a deal with the Greens to form government should the upcoming election fail to produce a clear majority for either of the big parties. Prime minister Scott Morrison dragged up the possibility of a Labor-Greens coalition after the opposition released its long-awaited climate change policy last week... “This is Scott Morrison lying again,” Marles told the Sky News Sunday Agenda program. “We are seeking government in our own right. We are not going to enter into a coalition with the Greens. We have been making that clear from day one.” A sweet story from New South Wales: locals gathered this afternoon at Kings Cross in Sydney today at a rally to save the Metro-Minerva theatre. But, as some attendees pointed out, in true Kings Cross fashion it was less like a rally and more like a show. Clover Moore told the Guardian that climate action would be a big focus for her fifth term in office, with the goal of hitting net zero emissions in Sydney city by 2035. She said that more work would also be done to make Sydney more bike-friendly. “The pop-up Covid bike lanes were about connecting up the bike networks that we have been building since 2008, and we are now working to make those permanent,” she said. “In this term we also want to link up the network in the City of Sydney with surrounding suburbs”, Moore said, adding that she would like to see a regional bike network too. Asked whether this would be her last term as mayor, Moore laughed, explaining that “I am always asked that question at election, and I always say I will think about that at the time”. Hello everyone, it’s Justine here back on the blog. Thanks again to the brilliant Nino Bucci for bringing us all the news over the last few hours. As we reported earlier, Clover Moore looks set to secure an unprecedented fifth term as lord mayor of the City of Sydney. Moore told the Guardian this afternoon that she is “very excited about the result and grateful for the support we have had from the community”. While Moore had secured around 43% of the vote as of Saturday night, this is down from 58% in the 2016 election. But Moore said she “doesn’t accept” that there was a significant swing against her. There was an increased field of candidates ... and so far it shows I have received around 44% of the vote, and my two closest rivals have 16%. Moore also noted that the iVote remote votes have not yet been counted, and “a lot of our supporters did an iVote”. She said she thought the outcome so far is a “resounding success” given the difficulties surrounding this election, including the fact that it was postponed twice due to Covid-19 and that the iVote platform was down for a number of hours on voting day. And here’s Justine Landis-Hanley back to take care of you for a bit. Happy Sunday! AAP report that Queensland authorities are warning of flash flooding in already inundated parts of the state, with storms and hail predicted. Heavy rainfall, hail and strong winds are forecast for Sunday in southern parts of the state that have already been flooded, QFES commissioner Greg Leach told reporters on Sunday. Any of that rainfall coming down today could result in flash flooding events. Authorities have conducted seven swift water rescues, including saving a stranded motorist in Cecil Plains, while the State Emergency Service has responded to 27 calls for help in the last 24 hours. The Macintyre River reached 10.43 metres at Goondiwindi in the state’s south-west on Saturday before starting to recede overnight, and was at about 10.27 metres Sunday morning. It’s the biggest flood in a decade for the town, but has not reached the 2011 flood peak of 10.64 metres. Bureau of Meteorology forecaster Andy Barnes said the Macintyre River would remain above the major flood level throughout Sunday and Monday. Emergency services are now turning their attention to the towns of Cecil Plains, Surat, Condamine and Talwood, with the Goondiwindi mayor warning some properties downstream of the town could be cut off for a month. Mayor Lawrence Springborg said residents downstream of Goondiwindi towards Mungindi, will likely be isolated for a month. Resilience is being cut off by floodwaters for two weeks or more than a month, and these people survive that. Our friends over at AAP report that the ACT has confirmed a second case of the Omicron variant, a close contact of the previous reported individual. ACT Health reported six new Covid-19 cases on Sunday, bringing its total active caseload to 110. Of these, six are in hospital, two of which are in intensive care. ACT Health said: ACT Health can confirm that, based on whole genome sequencing in ACT residents, there are now two cases of the Omicron variant. The second Omicron case is a close contact of the previously reported individual. The Bureau of Meteorology plan to provide an update later this afternoon on the eruption of Mount Semeru in Indonesia, and the possible impact on flights. We will bring you news about that as it comes in. You can read more about the eruption in East Java here: In the interests of being NEUTRAL (check the spelling on the flyer), I should also point out that the Guardian has published the odd typo in our 200 years. Melbourne Demons fans, who missed their side break a 57-year AFL premiership drought in September when the grand final was relocated to Perth because of the Delta outbreak in Victoria, have flocked to the MCG to watch a replay of the game and see the cup. Greens leader Adam Bandt has returned a negative Covid test, after a staff member tested positive earlier this week. The Greens said in a statement: Aside from the staff member who has tested positive, the test results that have been returned for staff members who were in Canberra last week are also negative. NSW Health have just sent out the daily Covid bulletin. It confirms earlier news about 286 new cases of Covid-19, with 15 of those linked to the Omicron variant. Results on “further likely cases” are due later today. A man in his 60s from south-eastern Sydney has died, taking the NSW toll to 632. The man was fully vaccinated and had underlying health conditions. There are currently 148 Covid cases admitted to hospital, with 26 people in intensive care, five of whom require ventilation. The vaccination rate has climbed to 92.8% of people aged 16 and over, with 77.2% of those aged 12 to 15 fully vaccinated. Omicron variant outbreaks have been linked to Regents Park Christian School, Sydney Indoor Climbing Gym Villawood, and St Peter Chanel Catholic Primary School in Regents Park. All travellers arriving in NSW who have been in South Africa, Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Namibia, Eswatini and Malawi during the 14-day period before their arrival in NSW must enter hotel quarantine for 14 days, irrespective of their vaccination status. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, has finished speaking in Melbourne. Anthony Albanese has invited voters to draw a comparison with Scott Morrison in a speech ticking off some of his lowest moments as prime minister, including the statements “I don’t hold a hose” and “it’s not a race”. Albanese said: I also want to share with you the kind of prime minister I will be. To serve as prime minister of Australia is a rare privilege – but it is also a great responsibility. And that’s what I am determined to restore to our politics – a sense of responsibility, decency, and integrity. Of course, I can’t stand here today and promise you that I’ll get everything right. But I can promise you if I get something wrong – I’ll own up to it. I may not always be the smoothest talker – but I can promise you I’ll always tell it straight. I won’t run and hide from responsibility. I won’t go missing when the going gets tough. I think leadership is about facing up to problems and looking for solutions. Actually, I don’t think. I know. Andrews is being asked a few questions about his appearance on a somewhat obscure podcast. He says of the Victorian federal MPs (who he did not name) he criticised in the podcast because of how they responded to the pandemic that “some people are from Victoria but not for Victoria”. Anthony Albanese, speaking at a Labor rally, has argued the Morrison government has “nothing left to offer but scare campaigns” as it enters its “second decade”. Albanese has accused Morrison of choosing to “divide, to play politics, to pit Australians against each other” including “state against state”. Albanese on leadership: In tough times, every one of us has to hold a hose. On Morrison’s relationship with the truth, Albanese said: [He is] a prime minister who has no regard for what he said yesterday – so you should have no regard to what he says today. “The notion that we try and keep this out forever...that just doesn’t make sense,” Andrews says. He says he sympathises with Victorians who have family in South Australia and will no longer be able to see them for Christmas because of the Omicron restrictions. Andrews says on the tighter restrictions other states have brought in to tackle Omicron that he is not critical of these measures, but that Victoria will not take any steps to keep the variant out of the state. He said he was texting his NSW counterpart Dominic Perrottet yesterday and the pair agreed they would not be pursuing “Omicron zero”, given the high vaccination rates in the states, and the fact the variant appeared to be less serious. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, describes the TGA approval of Pfizer for children as an important next step. He says the state would be ready to roll the vaccines out in schools, if it aligned with the federal government’s approach. Anthony Albanese is addressing his first rally of the unofficial election campaign. The warm-up act was deputy leader, Richard Marles, who focused on two main attacks against the Coalition government: its long eight years in office; and Scott Morrison’s credibility. Marles used the words “lie” or “liar” dozens of times, criticising Morrison for “lying” about going to Hawaii, how he became prime minister, to world leaders (Emmanuel Macron) and “lying about lying”. Marles had a particular focus on the fact Morrison switched codes from rugby union to rugby league, and claimed he only picked up a Sharks scarf when he ran for Liberal preselection. Marles argued it was “dangerous” because a prime minister who is willing to “lie about who he is” will mislead Australians. The funding will allow 84,000 students to attend camps. “We’re really going to target those kids who were most impacted by the pandemic,” Merlino says. Victorian education minister James Merlino is pretty psyched. He says the package means 2022 will be the best school year ever. I still remember my year six camp. Andrews is up in Victoria. He is speaking about a $113m funding package for school camps. And $700,000 for swimming lessons. Which is fine I guess but perhaps a little anticlimactic? Sky News host Peta Credlin has issued a lengthy apology to Victoria’s South Sudanese community over comments she made linking them to a Covid-19 outbreak. Credlin apologised for claiming South Sudanese community members had spread infections last year during Ramadan dinners (the vast majority of South Sudanese are Christian) and that they did not speak English (Credlin clarifies during the apology that 84% of the community speak English at a very high level). She also said during the four-minute apology that the broadcaster was planning on working with the community on positive stories. Watch the apology here. That’s it from Palaszczuk (ABC has cut away). We’re still waiting for Victorian premier, Dan Andrews (he was due at 11am). Palaszczuk welcomes the announcement of Pfizer being made available for 5-11 year-old children, saying her niece is in that age group and has been pestering her about when she can get a jab. 78.1% of Queenslanders are now fully vaccinated, Palaszczuk says. In the meantime, here’s Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk. No new community cases in the state today. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, is running a little late. I’ll bring you updates once he shows. I’m handing the blog over to my brilliant colleague, Nino Bucci! He will be bringing you updates from Victorian premier Daniel Andrews’ press conference, which is expected to start in 10 minutes. There has been a lot of talk this morning about whether South Australia will close the state’s borders as the Omicron variant spreads in Australia. Our friends at AAP have the story: South Australian authorities are “extraordinarily concerned” about the presence of the Omicron Covid variant interstate, but will not make any immediate changes to the state’s borders. Premier Steven Marshall has instead indicated travellers from NSW, Victoria and the ACT could soon find themselves locked out of SA, only days after they were welcomed back for the first time in months. “It may become necessary. I hope it doesn’t,” he said in a press conference on Saturday, before SA reported five new cases. We would only do that if we wanted to make sure that we still enjoy a Christmas here in SA. This is a balancing act. Chief public health officer Prof Nicola Spurrier on Saturday morning recommended to the state’s Covid-19 directions committee that borders be shut. Clearly when you have something that is unknown, the lowest risk would be to try and keep it out for as long as possible. But instead the committee agreed to require all arrivals from NSW, Victoria and the ACT be tested upon arrival. They must isolate until a negative result is received – which currently takes about five hours, Marshall said – and be tested again on day six of their visit to SA. The new rules are in addition to a requirement for travellers from those parts of the country to present proof of a negative test undertaken up to 72 hours before their arrival. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews and deputy premier, James Merlino are expected make an announcement at 11am. We will be watching and bringing you updates as they happen. Federal health minister Greg Hunt said there are now 15 known cases of the Omicron variant in Australia. In a press conference announcing the Pfizer vaccine had received TGA approval for five to 11 year olds, Hunt said that the government is “reviewing daily and weekly travel restrictions” but that there are “no plans to change the current proposals”. Hunt said: But our message is very clear. Safety and medical advice first ... if the medical advice changes then we change the rules in accordance with that. Prof John Skerritt said that “early indications are that it provides a milder case of disease. Although usually there is a two-week lag to work out whether there are going to be cases of hospitalisation and severe disease. So that’s why the lead up here into Christmas and exercising caution is so important.” Skerritt added that the TGA is looking at how well vaccinations work against the Omicron variant. He reassured that, while we thought that we might need a new vaccine against the Delta variant, “the current vaccines held us in good stead”. Finally, Speers asked Frydenberg about the Jenkins inquiry into parliamentary culture handed down this week. Frydenberg said that “what Kate Jenkins said in this report was that there was a normalised culture of misconduct. That is completely unacceptable”. He added that the government will “be taking action on all the recommendations. We’re absolutely leaning into this”. Speers asked Frydenberg about that Liberal party is doing to ensure more women are elected to parliament, and whether the party should adopt a 50% target. There was a lot of back and forth, and Frydenberg pointed to the fact that the number one candidate on the Victorian Liberal party’s senate ballot is female. But the treasurer eventually admitted that “we’ve got to do more”. Speers asked Frydenberg about wages growth (or lack thereof). Speers: Wages have been relatively flat for the eight years you have been in government. Have you worked out why and how to fix it? Frydenberg: This is the key point. This is the key point, we saved more than 700,000 jobs. And as a result, unemployment now is at 5.2%, lower than when we came to government. Now, the way to get higher wages is to get a tighter labour market. We’re starting to see workforce shortages which will have some positive impact on wages ... we have the RBA forecasting, David, that unemployment will get down into the fours and sustainably be there, and we’ll be only the second time in the last 50 years that this has happened. So if you ask me, what has been the most significant economic achievement through this pandemic, it’s been saving jobs and getting the unemployment rate down, and avoiding the long-term unemployment we saw in Australia after the 80s and 90s recessions. Speers turned conversation to the government’s mid-year budget, asking Fryenberg whether the outlook for growth for the economy is stronger than at the last budget? Frydenberg: Well, yes. And I’m talking about for next year, obviously. We were hit by the Delta variant and it was something not forecast, have your two biggest states going into lockdown. But we have seen the OECD increase their economic outlook forAustralia. You have the RBA forecasting growth up to 5.5%. We’ll make those updates to our forecasts on MYEFO. Speers: You’ll be forecasting stronger growth? Frydenberg: We will be. Again that comes as a result of the fact that we now have one of the highest vaccination rates in the world, one of the lowest mortality rates in the world. The market is coming back strongly. We’ve seen 350,000 jobs since the start of September. Retail sales at the Black Friday sales was over $5bn. Federal treasurer Josh Frydenberg told David Speers on ABC Insiders this morning that he has spoken to South Australia premier Steven Marshall this morning and has been told that he is keeping his borders open, despite concerns around the Omicron variant in Australia. He’s taken that decision himself. He understands the importance of the economy of keeping those borders open. Let’s not forget, though, South Australia is the first non-Covid state to effectively reopen. So he’s watching it closely. As he should. Speers points out that members of the of the Australian industry group, the business council are backing Labor’s 43% emissions reductions target. Speers: Are you saying that business groups have got it wrong, Reputex have got it wrong, Liberal state governments have got it wrong, but you and Barnaby Joyce, and he’s the one who pushed you to your 2030 target, you’ve got it right? Frydenberg: We’ve got a 2050 goal as well. But we think we have got it right. Again, look at our track record. Emissions are down by more than 20% on 2005 levels. That’s ahead of Canada, that’s ahead of New Zealand, that’s ahead of the United States, a lot of other comparable countries. We have identified the new technologies, not tax, that we’re focusing on, hydrogen, carbon capture and storage, low cost solar. Speers: You’re happy to say to your constituents in Kooyong, these groups are all wrong, and Barnaby Joyce and you are right. Frydenberg: We’ve got the right plan, we’re going to see emissions down by up to 35% by 2030, we’re committed to net zero by 2050, this is an important environmental but also economic objective. I spoke quite publicly by the need from an economic perspective... Speers: Let’s look at the plan [Labor] do have on the table. This modelling has been done by RepuTex, they also advised the government on its target. It found the policy would create 640,000 new jobs, lower electricity bills. Are you suggesting they’ve got that wrong? Frydenberg: What I’m suggesting is the Labor party is using the safeguards mechanism. When we put it in 2016, it was designed to safeguard the emissions reductions we were getting from the Emissions Reduction Fund, and not see a growth in the emissions coming out of the large industrial players. It wasn’t meant to be this stick to mandate, to push these industrial players to force them to reduce their emissions by a certain amount... I’m saying that Labor is using the safeguards mechanism in away that would punish, force these large industrial companies, some of the biggest companies in Australia, regardless of their growth, regardless of their plans for expanding their presence. Frydenberg tells Speers that the Coalition, if in opposition, would vote against Labor’s emissions reduction target of 43% by 2030. We’re not about to support Labor’s policy. We’ve got our own policy and that’s what we’re looking to implement. But reducing emissions is an absolute focus for our government. We have deployed $20bn, we’ve got a technology investment road map, we’re ahead of other comparable countries, don’t look at what Labor says, look at what Labor does. They gave us a carbon tax. ABC Insiders host David Speers starts by asking what Frydenberg thinks of Labor’s recently announced climate policies, which includes an emissions reduction target of 43% by 2030. Speers points out that “the business council, the Australian industry group, they both backed Labor’s policy. Has business got it wrong?” Frydenberg starts by talking about the government’s commitment to net zero by 2050, before responding to Labor’s policy: ... what Labor has announced is simply a reheat of the target they took to the 2019 election which Anthony Albanese said was an actual mistake. Now, Labor can’t be trusted, David, on this important economic transition. The last time they had a go at climate policy, we got a doubling in electricity prices, we lost one in eight Australian jobs. Federal treasurer Josh Frydenberg is speaking on ABC Insiders. Clover Moore is set to secure an unprecedented fifth term as lord mayor of the City of Sydney following New South Wales council elections on Saturday, AAP reports. Moore, an independent, will speak to reporters at 11am in Sydney. By late on Saturday night, she was sitting on 43% of first preference votes, well ahead of her two nearest competitors, fellow independent Yvonne Weldon and Labor’s Linda Scott, who were both on 16%. The early results suggested a swing against Moore of nearly 15% – but that’s compared to her landslide win in 2016 when she won almost 58% of the vote.Moore has four decades of public service under her belt, 17 of them as Sydney’s lord mayor. “We have been able to achieve so much but we have a lot more to do,” she said on Saturday night. Moore’s plans include a council goal of net zero carbon emissions by 2035, growing green spaces across the city, improving access to social and affordable housing, and repairing the CBD’s economy and council’s own coffers post-Covid. The race to become Sydney’s mayor was one of more than 120 council elections across the state on Saturday. It was an all-female field in the City of Sydney with many of Moore’s opponents arguing it was time for change at Town Hall. Moore was first elected as lord mayor in 2004 which was 16 years after she was elected to state parliament in 1988. She managed both responsibilities until 2012 when new legislation forced her to choose between the roles. Hunt is asked whether states, like Queensland, will hold off opening state borders until at least 80% of kids aged five to 11 are vaccinated given today’s announcement. Hunt: There is no reason for that. The Doherty modelling was set out very clearly on the 80% rates for double dosed across the country for 16 plus, and what we have seen now is that in terms of the 12 to 15-year-olds, we have now had an extra 1.8 million vaccinations over and above the Doherty modelling. The Doherty modelling was based on an 80% national rate for double dosed and didn’t include 12 to 15-year-olds. Prof Skerritt has also explained why it is important for children to get vaccinated against Covid-19. A bit over a fifth of all cases of Covid are actually in the under 12s. Indeed, some of the early data with Omicron suggests it may actually be higher for the Omicron variant ... While most kids to get fairly mild infection and only a limited number end up in ICU, is great, there are bigger impacts. Unfortunately about one in 3,000 of the kids who get Covid actually end up with this funny immunological condition called multi-system inflammatory condition. Those kids can end up being very sick for months. It is not the same as long Covid but it has some things in common, and it has a whole range of symptoms where the kid is just not well. That is one of the things we are protecting against by vaccinating children... We do know that kids often transmit the virus back to their families. About two-thirds do, and at a lower rate they also transmit the virus within the broader school context. Prof John Skerritt has spoken more about the Covid-19 vaccine that will be administered to children aged five to 11. Skerritt says that this age group will be given one-third of the dose given to other age groups and that “often with vaccines you can offer a smaller dose for younger children”. He says their vaccine dose will be in a vial with an orange lid, rather than the adult doses while are in vials with grey or purple lids. Skerritt turned to speak about the safety and efficacy of the vaccine in children. It has extensively been clinically tested. It was tested in a trial of almost 2,500 children aged five to 11, and in the trial over 1,500 received vaccine. The response of the body, the immune response, was identical to that in young adults. More recently, there have actually been results published in one of the world’s top three medical journals, the New England Journal of Medicine. In that journal the result showed that 91% vaccine efficacy. Efficacy is essentially the same in adults as it is in this group, so we are confident the performance. There were no safety signals, as we call them, no safety problems identified in those trials. The children had some of the same things that adults get, tiredness, sore arms, headache and so forth, but these tended to be brief and fairly short lived. We are confident in the safety of this. Federal health minister Greg Hunt has praised the millions of Australians who have come forward to be vaccinated against Covid-19. He says that over 39.6 million Covid-19 vaccine doses have been administered in Australia. Currently, 92.8% of eligible Australians have received their first dose, and 88% are fully vaccinated. Since vaccines have been approved for 12-15 year olds, 76.7% of this age group have already received their first dose, and 67.8% are fully vaccinated. So Australian teenagers have stepped forward to be vaccinated. Hunt says that the TGA’s provisional approval of the Pfizer vaccine for children aged five to 11 is the first of four steps “focused on the safety and effectiveness of vaccinating children”. The second is the recommendation of Atagi. We are expecting that in the coming weeks. The third then is training in relation to the use of the Pfizer vaccine in paediatric cases or for children five to 11. And then finally it is the batch testing, which is done by the TGA. Our batch testing team, our TGA team, will be working right through Christmas, right through the new year and a provisional expectation at this stage is that we have been able to bring forward the commencement of the paediatric doses or the children’s doses to 10 January. Hunt: We announced today that the Therapeutic Goods Administration, Australia’s medical regulator, has approved access for five to 11-year-olds to the Pfizer vaccine. They have made a careful, thorough assessment, determined that it is safe and effective and that it is in the interests of children and Australians for children five to 11 to be vaccinated. Federal health minister Greg Hunt is speaking live from Canberra about the government’s plan to rollout Covid-19 vaccinations for children. Labor says it will fund up to 20,000 extra university places over 2022 and 2023, and provide access to 465,000 free Tafe places in nominated areas of skills shortages, if Anthony Albanese wins the next federal election. The new skills and higher education commitments, worth $1.2bn, will be unveiled by the Labor leader at a campaign-style rally in Sydney on Sunday. The Tafe initiative will cost $621m over the forward estimates, and the university commitment costs $481.7m. Read the full story here: Parliament House has been closed to the public after a staffer for Greens leader Adam Bandt reportedly tested positive for Covid-19. Bandt and the staffer were in Canberra for sitting week last week. The staffer tested positive for Covid-19 upon returning to Melbourne. A spokesperson for Bandt told ABC News that the Greens leader has “been tested and is isolating until he receives a result. He is fully vaccinated and not symptomatic”. The spokesperson added that other members of Bandt’s team have tested negative for Covid-19. It’s Justine Landis-Hanley here, bringing you the blog today, Sunday 5 December 2021. Let’s dive straight into some breaking news: The Therapeutic Goods Administration has provisionally approved Pfizer’s Covid-19 vaccine for children aged five to 11. The government will begin rolling out the vaccine to the approximately 2.3 million children in this age group from 10 January 2022, the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said in a statement this morning. The decision is subject to final considerations and recommendations from the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi). Children aged five to 11 will be given one-third of the dose approved for those aged 12 and over. Their vaccine dose will be clearly differentiated with an orange cap.Social workers need to be more sceptical and decisive when confronted by “manipulative and deceitful” parents, one of the UK’s leading child protection experts has urged following the torture and killing of Arthur Labinjo-Hughes at the hands of his stepmother and father. Martin Narey, a former head of children’s charity Barnardo’s and senior government adviser, said social services should view potentially abusive parents “more critically” and not shy away from taking children into care. Six-year-old Arthur from Solihull, West Midlands, was poisoned, starved and beaten during a campaign of abuse by stepmother Emma Tustin, 32, and his father Thomas Hughes, 29, during the weeks leading up to his death. On Friday, Hughes was sentenced to 21 years after being found guilty of manslaughter. Tustin was sentenced to life in prison with a minimum term of 29 years. On Saturday, the Attorney General’s Office said that the jail sentences of 29 years and 21 years, respectively, were to be reviewed to “determine whether they were too low”. The AGO has 28 days from the date of sentence to review a case, assess whether it falls under the Unduly Lenient Sentence scheme, and make a decision as to whether to refer a sentence to the Court of Appeal. A spokesperson said: “The attorney general’s thoughts are with those who loved Arthur. I can confirm that the sentences given to Emma Tustin and Thomas Hughes have been referred to the attorney general for review to determine whether they were too low.” Police bodycam footage, recorded moments after Tustin had inflicted the final fatal injuries, shows the unemployed mother of four repeatedly lying to cover up the schoolboy’s prolonged torture. Yet social workers, notified by Arthur’s grandmother of bruising to his shoulders, found “no safeguarding concerns” after visiting the boy two months before he was murdered. One believed Arthur was “very happy”. Narey, who has advised the government on adoption and other children’s issues, including the reform of social work education, said: “Social workers do an outstanding job generally, but some of them need to have more scepticism when they’re dealing with parents who are manipulative and deceitful.” He added that Arthur’s death exposed flaws in the current approach of social services, which, he said, placed an onus on working with parents instead of ensuring the child’s safety, if necessary by taking them into care. “One of the flaws is that everyone believes that taking a child into care is a negative step. Because the children in care are, for example, performing badly educationally. But that’s just a profound misunderstanding of what’s happening. Those children do badly in education and other areas because they’ve been neglected at home. “The evidence shows that for children who are in need, care has a positive effect,” said Narey, also a former head of the Prison Service in England and Wales and special adviser to Michael Gove when he was education secretary. Wendy Thorogood, director of the Association of Child Protection Professionals, also appeared to echo Narey’s call for greater awareness by social workers about the potential harm posed by manipulative parents. The child protection expert said: “I can’t comment on what they [the social workers] actually witnessed, but you have to remember he [Arthur] was at the hands of quite cruel people who could manipulate him, his environment and professionals.” She said that Arthur should have been a top priority for social services, but was somehow “missed”. Thorogood told Times Radio: “You would have expected them to actually look at his history, but unfortunately they go on what they see at the moment in time.” Meanwhile, Lord Laming, who led the public inquiry into the death of Victoria Climbié and reviewed the case of baby Peter Connelly, also called for changes to the system, stating that the training for social workers should be reviewed in the wake of Arthur’s murder. “I think the quality of the training of social work needs to be looked at again,” he said. Laming also warned that the financial cuts of the past decade had taken their toll. “The marked reduction in funding of local authorities in the last 10 years has had a real withdrawal from frontline services, and it’s become something of a crisis service, rather than a preventative service. “The whole organisation ought to focus on the frontline, on what’s happening to children, and making sure they intervene earlier rather than later and when it’s too late,” Laming told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme. David Jamieson, former West Midlands police and crime commissioner from 2014 to 2021, also said austerity had squeezed frontline public services in the region and that any lessons learned from the circumstances around Arthur’s murder ought to reflect that. An independent serious case review is looking into the case, particularly why at least three warnings from family members and teachers about Arthur’s welfare were ignored. The review is also likely to investigate the possible impact of lockdown, with Arthur’s abuse escalating after he and his father – who had sole custody after his mother was jailed two years ago for stabbing her partner to death – moved into Tustin’s home in March last year when Covid restrictions were first introduced. Coventry crown court heard how the couple orchestrated a “campaign of cruelty” in which the boy was isolated, forced to eat salt-laced meals and suffered 130 injuries. Tustin, 32, inflicted an unsurvivable brain injury on Arthur at her Solihull home on 17 June last year. Hughes, 29, a labourer, sent a text to Tustin 18 hours before the fatal assault that read: “Just end him.” Mr Justice Wall told the court that neither defendant had shown remorse and that their actions were “spiteful and sadistic”. Tustin’s own two children, he said, “lived a perfectly happy life in that house” yards from where Arthur was subjected to “unthinkable abuse”. CCTV from inside the couple’s home released by West Midlands Police on Friday shows them eating ice-cream as Arthur starved out of sight. Tustin has never revealed her motive for torturing and killing Arthur. She carried out the fatal assault while in sole care of Arthur, taking a photograph of the child on her phone as he lay dying, then sending the image to Hughes.Peter Cundall, the much-loved former host of the ABC television program Gardening Australia, has died aged 94. Cundall, who featured on the public broadcaster for almost five decades, died in Tasmania on Sunday. “On Sunday 5 December 2021, Peter Cundall passed away peacefully after a short illness, surrounded by his family,” his family said in a statement. “Peter’s privacy, and the privacy of his family, is to be respected during this very sad time. Peter’s family does not wish to be contacted. “While he was loved by many, as per Peter’s wishes, there will be a private cremation and no memorial services will be held.” His family have requested photographs of Cundall not be published “with this announcement”. Cundall hosted his last Gardening Australia program in 2008. But he continued his talkback radio segment until 2018 – a stint that had stretched back to the 1960s. Former ABC managing director Mark Scott was among those who paid tribute on Sunday describing Cundall as a “lovely, warm and generous man”. ABC news breakfast presenter Michael Rowland described it as a “sad day for all gardening lovers.” In announcing the end of his weekly talkback segment in 2018, Cundall said that when it started it was the first of its kind in the world. “All those years, as far as I’m concerned, it’s been the most marvellous privilege and such an honour to be able to be in this program,” he told the ABC. Cundall, who was born in Manchester, described his family to the ABC as “the poorest of the poor”, but said his childhood was “extraordinarily happy”. He started vegetable gardening as a child, and loved “messing about in the dirt”. He left school at the age of 12 to work, and was then conscripted into the British army. His military experience eventually helped him migrate to Australia, the ABC reported, and once his service ended, including fighting in the Korean war, he moved to Tasmania and started a gardening business in Launceston. That he was still involved in broadcasting about gardening into his 90s showed his “discipline and commitment and passion”, according to Costa Georgiadis, the current host of Gardening Australia. “To still be doing it over 90 years old – it is testament to his resolute discipline and heart really,” Georgiadis told startsat60.com in 2019. “He’s got a heart as big as it gets.” Cundall used to sign off his regular Saturday talkback show with “that’s your bloomin’ lot”. At the end of his last show, the ABC reported at the time, he said something else. “Remember, old gardeners never die, they just gradually turn into compost.”In more than half a century, only two men have taken Labour from opposition to government. You have to be over 40 to have voted in the 1997 election that rewarded Tony Blair with his first landslide. You have to be 78 or older to have voted in the 1964 election which put Harold Wilson in Number 10. It would repay Sir Keir Starmer and his recently refreshed shadow cabinet to study what these examples of rare Labour winners tell us about what it takes to be a successful opposition. One clue is in the job title. You have to oppose effectively. This does not simply amount to seizing every opportunity to expose and eviscerate the faults and follies of the prime minister and his cabinet. It also means exploiting those flaws in support of a pitiless account of why the incumbents are not fit to remain in government. Wilson relentlessly scorned the Tories of his day as a party out of touch and out of time. “Thirteen wasted years” was a label which stuck. Blair had the advantage of being opposition leader as John Major’s government slithered into a mire of sleaze and division, but that didn’t mean he just sat back and waited for power to drop into his lap. As Andrew Adonis reminds us in his excellent new book about the importance of leadership, Mr Blair was formidable at destroying the credibility of the incumbent. “Weak, weak, weak” and “I lead my party, he follows his” – the brutal phrases he used to dismantle the public reputation of his Tory opponent – “pierced Major to the political core”. The closest Sir Keir has come to something similar was in his party conference speech when he lambasted Boris Johnson as “a trivial man… a showman with nothing left to show… a trickster who has performed his one trick”. It is never enough to say things once when you are leader of the opposition. Sir Keir needs to be as unrelenting as his two successful predecessors were. The main prongs of his attack on the government have been to go after them on sleaze and incompetence. He’s had plenty of material to work with and it suits the prosecutorial style of a QC. Making competence the defining issue works well for Labour when the government is being very obviously incompetent, such as during the long periods of last year when its handling of many aspects of the pandemic was so terrible. Sir Keir then faltered when the government could claim credit, even if it was not wholly deserved, for the rapid rollout of the vaccination programme. At the most recent meeting of the shadow cabinet, several present argued that they ought to broaden the ways in which they go after the government. During the 20 months that Sir Keir has been Labour leader, the performance of the shadow cabinet has been good in parts and invisible in others. This reflected on them, but also on Sir Keir himself, because they were his picks in the first place. The comprehensive reshuffle he executed last week was long overdue. Too many of his previous frontbench greeted opportunities to make a splash not with dynamic enthusiasm, but quivering timidity. That was a big problem because a lot of the battle in opposition is seizing the attention of the public. The Labour leader sought to remedy that with a shake-up that replaced or moved all but five members of his senior team and elevated energetic personalities who are accomplished performers in the media. The consensus among both the Labour and Conservative MPs I have spoken to is that Sir Keir is now equipped with a much sharper top team. After the leader himself, three members of the shadow cabinet will be especially critical to whether Labour prospers or fails. Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, must fashion an approach to the economy that combines radicalism with credibility. Yvette Cooper, returning to the frontbench as shadow home secretary, has to build public confidence that Labour has the right answers on crime and immigration. Lisa Nandy will take on Michael Gove. Her central challenge is to make “levelling up” a winning issue for Labour. “That’s key to taking back those red wall seats,” remarks one of her colleagues. The new line-up faces a government in trouble on numerous fronts. Since the party conferences, the Tories have been beset with a clustermare of negative stories, most of them self-generated, including broken promises over high-speed rail and social care, a tax-hiking budget, the crisis in the Channel and now constantly contradictory advice about how people should or should not change their behaviour in response to the Omicron variant. The Owen Paterson affair and Johnson’s rambling digressions about Peppa Pig to the CBI have reinforced impressions of a sleazy government led by an unserious prime minister. The byelection in Old Bexley and Sidcup, which the Conservatives hung on to with a much reduced majority from a low turnout, tells us that there is discontent among those who voted Tory at the last election, even in territory that is historically very true blue and also very Brexity. Labour has improved on its diabolical position at the last general election, but still has a lot to do if it is to be confident of wiping out the Tory majority next time around, let alone pulling off the sensational scale of swing required to secure a majority for itself. The opinion polls have the two parties neck and neck. This is more encouraging for the government than it is for the opposition. Previous Labour leaders, among them Neil Kinnock and Ed Miliband, enjoyed substantial poll leads at the midterm point of the cycle only to be beaten at the subsequent election. Sir Keir’s refettled shadow cabinet is expected to bring more heft and bite to Labour as an attack machine, but that is only half the challenge. The other half is to turn Labour into a party that looks ready to govern. Voters can come to the conclusion that this government is deeply sleazy and highly incompetent and they will still re-elect the Tories if they are not convinced that Labour is making a superior offer. Here, the examples of Wilson and Blair are again instructive. Both successfully portrayed the Tories as representatives of a discredited status quo and Labour as the party of the future. Both had a narrative about modernising the country. Both promised a “new Britain”. There’s nothing so old as to promise to make things new – and no story as powerful if it can be told in an inspirational and plausible way. Wilson expressed his vision in the ambition to create a reinvigorated country “forged in the white heat of the technological revolution”. It didn’t exactly work out like that once he was in Number 10, but the magnetism of his narrative helped him get there. Blair was a maestro at distilling his mission into compelling slogans. “Education, education, education” and “tough on crime, tough on the causes of crime” left no one in doubt about what he was about. This is a non-trivial point. If you haven’t got the ideas and you can’t express them with a crispness and clarity that will cut through to voters, then you have no business being in modern politics. The most charitable thing to say about Sir Keir’s party is that framing and communicating a positive and persuasive account of what a Labour Britain would look like is still a work in progress. More than one recent study has reported that many voters either don’t know what Labour stands for or they think they know and don’t like it. An analysis of new research for the Tony Blair Institute by Peter Kellner, the Labour-sympathetic former president of YouGov, notes: “No successful opposition has been anything like as far from the winning post in the midterm period as the Labour party is today.” The study suggests that this can be improved but only if Labour can persuade voters that it is “competent, in touch and has a relevant agenda for improving everyday life”. The next election could be as soon as the spring of 2023, just 18 months away. “We’re getting past the point where just attacking the government is enough,” says one astute member of the shadow cabinet. “We’ve got to marry our critique of them with a vision of our own.” Being effective at taking apart the Tories is important, but not enough. The most critical challenge is to put together a convincing case that the country would be better served by a Labour government. Sir Keir can only hope to emulate Harold Wilson and Tony Blair if he and his new top team can do that. • This article was amended on 5 December 2021. People have to be 78 or older to have voted in the 1964 election, not 75 or older as stated in an earlier version, because the voting age was 21 at the time. • Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Commentator of the ObserverThe mighty forces that created our planet’s mountains in ancient days got some unexpected help, scientists have discovered. Their research shows some of Earth’s greatest ranges got a boost from primitive lifeforms whose remains lubricated movements of rock slabs and allowed them to pile up to form mountains. If it had not been for life on Earth, the surface of our planet would have been flatter and a lot more boring, say scientists at Aberdeen and Glasgow universities where the research was carried out. “Mountains are formed by slabs of rock piling up on each other,” said lead author Professor John Parnell of Aberdeen University. “But piling on that scale would have been impossible because of the friction between the rocks. Something had to help those rocks slide over each other.” Parnell and his colleagues have discovered that the source of this lubrication came from an explosion in the growth of primitive plankton around two billion years ago. This took place in the wake of a major climatic change that affected Earth and had a lasting effect on its surface. Plankton are microscopic plants that lie at the base of the marine food chain and are vital to the health of ocean life today. Their role in influencing our planet was even greater two billion years ago, however. “They sank quickly when they died and were buried to make a rock with unprecedented amounts of carbon, which was turned into graphite by heat and pressure,” said Parnell. “Graphite makes a great lubricant. Locks, hinges and zips all move more easily with graphite, and so do rocks,” he added. “Two billion years ago, it lubricated the piling up of mountain ranges. Tectonic plates caused rocks to push together, and the graphite laid down by plankton let those slabs slide over each other and build higher and higher piles. The end results were mountain ranges.” The crucial point about this discovery is that the interaction of geological forces and life on Earth was a two-way process. The former created the favourable conditions – such as the oceans – for life’s emergence and evolution. But Parnell and his colleagues, whose research has been published in the nature journal Communications Earth &amp; Environment, have shown the reverse was also true. Life on Earth influenced the geology of our planet. As Parnell put it: “Earth and its biosphere are intimately linked in ways not previously understood.” Parnell added that although many of the mountains made two billion years ago have worn down, evidence of their roots can still be seen in ranges in China, North America, Greenland, and Scandinavia. In Britain, evidence for this ancient lubricating of tectonic processes can still be seen in north-west Scotland – in Harris, Tiree and Gairloch, he added. Graphite clearly played an unexpected role in shaping our planet and is likely to continue making an impact in the near future, added study co-author Dr Connor Brolly, from Glasgow University. “Graphite buried in Earth’s crust is in high demand for future green technology, for use in items such as fuel cells and lithium ion batteries. “This two-billion-year-old event, which was responsible for shaping our natural world, now has the potential to play a key role in its preservation for future generations.” Parnell agrees: “Those plankton that died two billion years ago did not just help build the world’s first mountains. They might help us save the planet in future years.”Liberal democracy in the UK, and across the western world, is under strain. After the most recent sleaze scandal to have hit Westminster, our polling shows that almost two in three people see politicians as “out for themselves”. In 1944, when this question was first put to the public, only one in three shared this view. The leap of faith that voters make when they entrust a small group of people to govern on their behalf is extraordinarily powerful. It allows societies to make collective decisions democratically and efficiently – without the need to involve everyone, all the time. Yet it is also very fragile. Trust in politics is easily lost and hard to regain. But regain it we must. The decline of trust in politics in the UK and in other liberal democracies over recent decades is damaging society. It is both cause and consequence of the rise in support for populist parties, rhetoric and causes, as well as growing polarisation, seen most clearly in the UK on Brexit. Populist politicians have been far more successful at tapping into voters’ discontent with democratic politics in order to win power. From Donald Trump to Viktor Orbán, the populist right has proved its ability to channel people’s anger into illiberal policy agendas. Boris Johnson’s government has not gone as far as this group – but it is clearly drawing from the same playbook. The problem is that the solutions put forward by populist leaders – retreating into nativism, concentrating power centrally and combining big rhetoric on economic and social change with limited action – fundamentally fail to grapple with the underlying causes of our democratic malaise and further deepen democratic decline. Only a truly progressive reform agenda that seeks to increase both prosperity and justice simultaneously, and to renew representative democracy for the challenges of the future, can really allow people, in the words of the prime minister’s former chief of staff, Dominic Cummings, to “take back control”. Carys Roberts is executive director of the Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR)Christmas is coming, but this year there should be less wrapping paper and food going in the bin, as consumers plan to be more environmentally friendly. A survey from Tesco has found more than a third of people want to be more sustainable, and research from American Express suggests we are happy to spend more on gifts that are “green”. Michelle Ovens, founder of campaigning group Small Business Britain, says some consumers are now deciding to move away from heavy Black Friday-style discounts. “Consumers are looking more for value, and not just goods at any price – because that price might be the environment,” she says. So how can you change your normal shopping habits into more sustainable ones? Use independent shops One way is to stick to your local independent shops. As Sian Conway-Wood, author of Buy Better Consume Less, says, this allows money to stay in the local economy and leads to a more considered approach to spending, instead of responding to marketing from the large retailers. “The culture this is creating is of overconsumption. There is the idea that we want everything now, but to actually stop and break away from that sense of urgency – because that is a marketing tactic they use – you will find if you can’t get it tomorrow, do you still want it?,” she says. There are lots of websites that sell products from a range of independent sites with ethical priorities, so you don’t need to spend time tracking down different providers. “There are hundreds of smaller independents out there, who sell through marketplaces like eBay, Etsy and ourselves,” says James Service of Protect the Planet, a retailer of upcycled and eco-friendly giftware. “Choosing to buy through these bigger marketplaces can protect the consumer [against buying unsustainable products] while also supporting independent makers.” In the health and beauty area, the Detox Market describes itself as a “green beauty marketplace” with cruelty-free standards. Its “best of green beauty box”, which includes mascara, hair mask, serum, cleanser, eyeshadow palette and other products, comes in at £155. A set of five products from True Botanicals – a “non-toxic” skincare line – is priced at £130. Plastic Freedom specialises in plastic-free products such as a beard maintenance kit (£44) and a set of kitchen utensils and products (£61). Greenbeauty Market sells vegan, natural and organic products, and says it only works with independent brands. For clothing, Social Supermarket works with 100 different businesses that are assessed on their social and environmental standards. Ethical Superstore aims to find alternatives to everyday fashion items and has a supplier code of conduct. With mobile phones a frequent gift, Fairphone is a sustainable alternative to the big brands. Its latest model costs £499. The company aims to make phones from materials sourced as ethically as possible and that you can take apart and fix simply. “Greenwashing”, where companies make misleading claims about their environmental credentials, is an increasing problem, according to Service. “Buy from a reputable retailer who specialises in this area.” Ethical Consumer magazine rates companies on their sustainable and environmental credentials. It is also worth looking out for B Corp accreditation, which is given to companies that reach a set of environmental standards. Buy preowned The rise of the circular economy, the idea that products such as clothes and furniture are constantly reused and regenerated to reduce pollution, has led to number of new ways to shop for preworn clothes. Online charity retailer Thrift+ takes clothes donations and sells them online, with part of the profits going to charities. A two-piece Paul Smith suit is available for just over £30 and a Hugo Boss jacket for £22. Oxfam’s online shop has an LK Bennett woman’s heavyweight wool coat for £45 and a men’s Burberry blazer for £75. Homeless charity Shelter has a network of 100 stores. Online it features some high-end designer products, notably a pair of Stella McCartney platform shoes for £150 . Don’t stock up, buy less stuff The most sustainable way to approach Christmas is to simply buy less stuff, if anything at all. “The most sustainable option is that we don’t buy,” said Conway-Wood. One way is through “experiences”, be it tickets for events, days out or classes. Virgin is running “experience days” such as making botanical extracts from a wildflower meadow (£50) to a session of urban beekeeping in London (£84). Instead of plastic, chose pots As well as presents under the tree, many other traditions can also be done in a more sustainable way. The Woodland Trust says the most environmentally friendly Christmas tree is one with roots, which can be planted in the garden and brought in for next year. If you are buying a felled tree, it should have accreditation from the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC), which tells you that it has been grown sustainably and ethically. Another option is to rent a tree, which are replanted by the supplier during the year. One scheme – Rental Claus from the Primrose Vale Farm Shop in Cheltenham – delivers and collects the tree, with prices starting at £15-£45. Piles of wrapping paper will inevitably end up in the bin, so consumers should keep an eye on what can be recycled. Avoid anything with glitter or foil, or that has plastic on it. An expensive, but even more environmentally friendly option, is to buy tissue paper with seeds embedded in it which can be planted in the garden – sheets are available on Etsy for £18.84 for three. Don’t binge, eat less While turkey is the mainstay for the Christmas dinner, there are concerns about how soya linked to deforestation is used as livestock feed. The vast majority of soya is grown in Argentina and Brazil – where there are risks of deforestation as a result of its production – as well as the United States. Tim Martin, from non-profit Farm Wilder, says consumers aiming for a sustainable Christmas would be better off choosing venison shot in the wild in the UK. There is a need to cull deer at the moment, he says. At £20 for 1.5kg, it comes in at a reasonable price. The RSPCA has issued warnings against buying “reindeer food” for sprinkling in the back garden on Christmas Eve. The commercially bought packages often contain plastics or glitter which is bad for wildlife. Instead, making your own with seeds and oats, will do the trick. Or just leave out a carrot.It is less than a week since Lisa Nandy was reshuffled but she is already crystal clear about the importance of her new job. “It is the battleground on which the next general election will be fought,” she says. “It is also the battle for the future of the country.” Last Monday, Nandy, the MP for Wigan, who had started the day as shadow foreign secretary, took a call from Keir Starmer. “He rang and said, ‘You have been doing a fantastic job but we need you out facing the country, telling the story of the country that we can be’,” she tells the Observer. “His pitch was that we have to hold the Tories to account for their slogans and broken promises but we also have to show we have a story for every part of this country that matches the ambition of the people in it. It was a pretty irresistible offer.” Next day she took a call from the man she will shadow, Michael Gove, secretary of state for the sprawling Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities. It was a courtesy call before the two square up. Nandy appreciated the gesture but says it was unnecessary. She is super confident on the levelling-up brief, not only because of her northern roots but because she has been campaigning for years for a better deal for everyone in towns and areas such as Wigan, where traditional industries have disappeared and never been replaced. “The first thing I said to him is, ‘I want you to succeed, because I have skin in the game’. I said to him, ‘When you get it right you will have my full support but when you get it wrong there will be hell to play’.” And how did Gove react? “He said, ‘I know’ … but I think it is polite to tell people before you come for them on a national stage!” Nandy’s appointment, like several in Starmer’s reshuffle, has been well received in the party. The Tories are said to be more worried about the threat from the opposition benches. With the Tories and their leader seeming more vulnerable, it feels like Labour’s big chess pieces are in the right places on the board. Many of those shuffled upwards happen to be women, both experienced and up-and-coming: Yvette Cooper is now shadowing Priti Patel at the Home Office; Lucy Powell is taking on Nadine Dorries at the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport; and Bridget Phillipson will oppose Nadhim Zahawi at Education. Starmer has said since the reshuffle that Labour is now the party of Middle England after its move to the left under Jeremy Corbyn. Nandy, on the other hand, is thinking more about points of the compass. When she was asked on Sky News if Starmer had moved his team to the right, she took issue with the question. “I said you can keep all that right and left line … This is the Labour party moving north. We are getting it out of Westminster.” Gove’s department also deals with planning, housing, the future of the union, local government finance, fire safety and a lot else. A levelling-up white paper is expected early next year, so that is Nandy’s immediate focus. It was supposed to be out this month but, in a sign of the lack of detail behind the slogan, ministers have yet to agree what it should say. She bristles when asked about new structures and bodies she would put in place to deliver more power and resources to local areas. While she agrees with devolution and shifting more money to poorer areas, she feels the question is typical of one-size-fits-all Westminster attitudes. “This is always where Whitehall and Westminster start,” she says. “Do you need more metro mayors, do you need levelling-up boards in every community, do you need to change the funding structures? Actually, what you need is a different mindset, and that mindset is about the potential and ambition there is everywhere. That can only be unleashed if you go to these places and ask people what is there and what can be done to solve the problems. The answer is not the same for Dagenham as for Barnsley.” She insists she is not being evasive (she could be forgiven after less than a week in post) but says Westminster politicians and Whitehall always start at the wrong place when addressing issues they don’t feel in their bones. The challenge on levelling up is not, she says, about structures first and foremost. It is about being sensitive to how people feel in left-behind communities, their struggles and what they have lost, which in many cases is almost everything except their pride and their ambition. “There is growing anger”, she adds “about a settlement that has seen good jobs leaving many towns and villages. And with those jobs have gone opportunities for young people to stay and contribute to communities. It has also meant losing the spending power and the working-age populations that sustained our high streets, pubs, banks and post offices – and the bus networks that are commissioned on the basis of passenger numbers. It has left populations growing older in many of these places, often hundreds of miles from children and grandchildren, and they are, rightly, very angry.” She says people felt “disrespect” when politicians at Westminster (Starmer was one of them but she makes no mention of that) talked of a second Brexit referendum. This is what Nandy wants to address: the lack of understanding both of what has been lost but also of what remains. She thinks Westminster needs to feel it and get it before it can do anything about it. “The anger stems from a place of hope,” she says. “People are optimistic and ambitious for their own lives, families, communities but they want government to show the same ambition for them. Whitehall and Westminster tend not to see potential; they only see problems. Grimsby, Aberdeen, Wigan – they want a better future for their town.”Sometimes, a gas bill is not just a demand for payment – it is a secret weapon. And as millions of British voters see their bills spiral this spring they will find themselves in its crosshairs. Recently, three more energy supplies went bust – Bulb, Orbit Energy, Entice Energy – bringing the total number of suppliers that have failed to 24 in under 12 weeks. In October, European gas prices were six times higher than a year previously, which means suppliers must pay more for wholesale energy than they can sell it for under the government’s energy price cap. And in the spring, when the government raises the price cap, the few surviving companies will hike their prices to claw back the losses they made over the winter. It is a scary prospect, but readers trying to understand our cost-of-living crisis must look beyond the business pages to geopolitics. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, did not cause the global energy crisis, but he has used it to turn his country’s gas reserves into a loaded gun aimed at the west. He took one look at the conditions – a long winter, growing demand from India and China, the destruction of gas storage in countries such as the UK, maintenance backlogs in gas fields elsewhere– and seized his moment. And, in this instance, he had a specific aim in mind beyond his permanent desire to humiliate the west: to force European and German regulators to certify the now-completed Nord Stream 2 pipeline that will transport far greater quantities of gas under the Baltic Sea to Europe and provide valuable currency for a struggling Russian economy. Don’t expect more supply is his unsubtle message, unless you play ball on Nord Stream. Russia has form on using gas as a weapon. It twice shut off gas supplies to Ukraine and its western-friendly government in the 2000s. When Moldova elected a new pro-EU government this year, Gazprom dramatically hiked its charges and cut deliveries by a third, leading to the declaration of a state of emergency. This time, Putin didn’t even need to turn off the taps to put pressure on its rivals. Russia honoured its existing contracts, but simply refused to pump any more gas as European demand soared following the end of lockdowns. Far more dramatically than any number of Russian warships or bombers flying near British airspace, this underlined Putin’s message that Europe should be wary in its dealings with him. After all, he has his hand on Europe’s jugular. Putin’s tactics may not have worked in the short-term – Nordstream’s approval is currently suspended by German regulators and he ended up ordering the pumping of more gas. But he’s playing a long-game, and has struck fear in the heart of Europe’s politicians. British consumers have unwittingly found themselves playing a walk-on part in a revolution in geopolitics, one in which Putin has been a pioneer. Carl von Clausewitz called war the continuation of politics by other means. But in a nuclear age the price of war is unfathomable. That is why connectivity conflicts are becoming the “other means” of global politics. Countries are waging conflicts by manipulating the very things that link them together. Great power politics has become like a loveless marriage where the couple are unable to get divorced. And, as with an unhappy couple, it is the things they shared during the good times that become the means to harm. In a collapsing marriage, vindictive partners use the children, the dog and the holiday home to hurt each other. In geopolitics, it is gas, supply chains, finance, the movement of people, the internet and even problems such as Covid and climate being weaponised. Just look at the world’s response to Covid. Rather than working together to increase global supplies of vaccines, masks and gowns, countries such as China have used their stocks to bully others – 98 countries imposed export restrictions on PPE and medicines. When it comes to trade and finance, one of the reasons Putin wanted to fight against the west is the fact that his country has been under strict sanctions since he annexed Crimea in 2013. Sanctions have become a weapon of first resort with China targeting Japan, Russia sanctioning Turkey, and the USA listing over 800 entities in 2020 alone. Russia is one of many countries that have used the internet to interfere with other nations’ affairs. Between autumn 2016 and spring 2019, there were election interference attempts in 20 democracies representing 1.2 billion people – and that’s before we look at questions such as Cambridge Analytica. Even migrants are being turned into bullets. Witness Belarus’s dictator and his secret services who enticed refugees from the Middle East via Belarus into Poland and Lithuania, to put pressure on their governments. The academic Kelly Greenhill has documented over 75 occasions in the last few decades when countries from Cuba and Morocco to Libya and Turkey have used forced migration to achieve political, military or economic goals. We may be on the cusp of a new, silent pandemic. Like Covid-19, it is spreading across the planet exponentially, exploiting the cracks in our networked world and constantly mutating to evade our defences. But unlike the virus, which pits all of humanity against a disease, this new pandemic is being deliberately transmitted. It is not biological, but a set of toxic behaviours that are multiplying like a virus. The connections between people and countries are becoming weapons. It is connectivity itself that gives people the opportunity to fight, the reasons to compete, and the arsenal to deploy. Conventional wars have been receding for decades – more people now take their own lives than die in armed conflict every year. But that doesn’t mean we live in an age of peace. Academics who work on cyber issues were looking to describe the grey zone in which their world was immersed, where every day they saw millions of attacks that fell short of conventional war. They rehabilitated an Anglo-Saxon word: unpeace. And as violence spreads from the internet to trade, finance, migration and beyond, their word provides a perfect encapsulation of our condition. British gas customers are becoming familiar with an unstable, crisis-prone world of perpetual competition and endless attacks between competing powers. Welcome to the age of unpeace. • Mark Leonard is the director of the European Council on Foreign Relations (ECFR) and the author of The Age of Unpeace.During lockdown, these two titans of left-field US songcraft collaborated remotely with a vast roll call of other musicians, recording cover versions by fellow masters (Leonard Cohen, Yusuf Islam) as well as their labelmates. A smattering of reworked originals includes electrifying takes on Callahan’s Our Anniversary and Oldham’s Arise, Therefore; the talents involved range from Cretan lute player George Xylouris to Australian guitarist Mick Turner (Dirty Three). The majority of these 19 tracks are loose online; Blind Date Party corrals them for the artefact buyer. The voices of Callahan and Oldham provide a through line in what can occasionally be unexpected stylistic forays. Least best is a version of Billie Eilish’s Wish You Were Gay: High Llama Sean O’Hagan’s flippant, tinny beats point to a grave generational misunderstanding of digital pop. But almost everything else succeeds in having revelatory fun with old favourites or hitting the listener hard– or both. There are country songs about cocaine, and a loose take on Steely Dan, the tightest of bands. A chorus of dozens contributes to a moving cover of a Silver Jews song guided by the late David Berman’s partner and bandmate Cassie Berman.There’s been a lot of water under a few bridges in the almost 10 years since Sergei Polunin walked out of a rehearsal with Alina Cojocaru at the Royal Ballet and into his new life as ballet’s most notorious outlaw – a man who can more or less fill the Royal Albert Hall on the sheer pulling power of his name. The prodigious dancing that propelled him to this status – along with his rebellious, tattoo-loving, drug-taking reputation – has not been much seen in recent years, as he neglected his technique in pursuit of different careers. One of the best things about his London debut as Romeo in this new version of Romeo &amp; Juliet by another Royal Ballet alumnus, Johan Kobborg, is that he is reunited with his talent. His jumps are high and light, his feet sharp. The choreography is tailored to his skills, but he doesn’t look as effortful as he has in some recent outings. His charisma holds the stage. Another joy is that he is dancing with Cojocaru, looking ridiculously youthful for her 40 years, and with the fluid grace and ease that has always characterised her dancing. But Kobborg hasn’t given either of them quite enough to work with. There are some intelligent ideas in this chamber version of the story, which reshapes Prokofiev’s score to just 90 minutes. David Umemoto’s set, with constricting towers and steep staircases like an Escher illustration, pinions them into place; they push their backs against its walls, tiny figures trapped by circumstance. The music after Tybalt’s death is used for an expressionistic pas de deux, with Juliet in red, all the horror of the bloodshed and the waste of their thwarted love revealed by the ferocity of their movements. That encounter apart, though, Kobborg muffles the moments when they express their feelings; their meetings are full of small detail, but no big emotions. The steps are tender but not tragic. It all feels oddly muted.We are looking at universities with my eldest, an entirely new-to-me process since I never went. This has involved lots of trains, laughing and walking. So far the ones she thought she would like she hasn’t and the ones she thought she wouldn’t like, she has. A lesson there. At a campus university in the West Country I have the great idea of walking into town. The lecturers we speak to think this is a bad idea, the students a good one. Google Maps says it’s 47 minutes. We can do this. We set off hungry – never a good move – and the long, tree-lined avenue seems to lengthen continuously, like some hideous video game. Lunch, when we find it, seems more about survival than enjoyment. And I have found no shops selling chocolate. At the station to start the journey home (three trains and two tubes await us) my daughter bats away my hand as I consider buying peanut M&amp;Ms from the vending machine. But when we do get home something magical awaits us: the Christmas alfajores box from Sur Chocolates, £30. Six discs of pure chocolatey, biscuity pleasure: two white chocolate, two milk, two dark. The dark chocolate one has panettone flavouring so that, I decide, will be my favourite. The white chocolate one – with, it transpires, an inner heart of nutty ganache – I will eat first, because I won’t like it as much. This is a mistake because it is so good that the other two, although amazing, pale beside it. Another lesson learned. Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaBPromoting democracy worldwide is an admirable ambition, unless of course you are a bloody-minded dictator and serial human rights abuser like Myanmar’s top general, Min Aung Hlaing. This coup leader and junta boss prefers brute force to ballot boxes. While the US president, Joe Biden, hosts more than 100 countries at a virtual “summit for democracy” this week, Min Aung Hlaing and his Tatmadaw troops will be busy killing civilians for demanding democratic rights, launching merciless attacks on villagers they call “terrorists”. The contrast between what the US state department says the summit aims to do – counter authoritarianism, fight corruption, promote human rights – and the international community’s inability to do any of that in Myanmar could not be starker. Hong Kong, Sudan, Iran, Nicaragua – there are numerous examples of countries where democracy has been subverted or extinguished. Yet Myanmar stands out. After decades of repression, a democratic transition began in 2011. Progress was slow and imperfect. But there were elections and reforms. Political prisoners were released, free speech flourished. Then up popped Min Aung Hlaing, a thuggish throwback in a neatly pressed uniform, determined to protect the military’s power base and corrupt business interests. February’s coup, and the detention of elected leaders, led to huge street protests and increasing army violence. More than 1,100 people have since been killed and tens of thousands jailed or forced to flee. Armed resistance is growing, creating a many-fronted, Syria-like civil war. Myanmar is a textbook case of an aspiring democracy crushed underfoot by a tyrant. It symbolises the global struggle for political pluralism, progressive values, and supposedly universal rights that the democracy summit hopes to advance. It is also a litmus test. Will Biden’s well-intentioned waffle-fest, as critics characterise it, make any real difference? If democracy’s champions cannot resolve an open-and-shut case such as Myanmar, they may as well abandon their Zoom session and switch to PlayStation. Myanmar’s plight has exposed chronic weaknesses in an international, United Nations-based system that should, in theory, provide remedies. In June, for example, 119 countries backed a resolution in the UN general assembly strongly condemning the junta’s violence against civilians, demanding the release of political prisoners, including the National League for Democracy’s leader, Aung San Suu Kyi, and calling for an international arms embargo. More recently, the UN refused official recognition to Min Aung Hlaing’s regime, effectively denying its legitimacy. And more than 500 civil rights groups urged the security council to act to halt escalating violence in Chin state, a centre of resistance. Despite punitive media restrictions, resourceful local groups continue to report unfolding atrocities. Last week it emerged that thousands of civilians had fled deadly helicopter-led attacks in the Sagaing region, where villages have been set ablaze. Sagaing is another rallying point for groups loosely allied to the multi-ethnic, anti-regime People’s Defence Force. Pro-democracy opposition politicians (and British MPs) back an alternative national unity government (NUG). According to international investigators, recorded “widespread and systematic” junta assaults on civilians amount to crimes against humanity. UN special rapporteur Tom Andrews warns more “mass atrocity crimes” are likely. Growing chaos under military rule has also brought an economic slump, deepening poverty, and high Covid-19 infection rates. In an echo of the Rohingya genocide of 2017 – also Min Aung Hlaing’s handiwork – many Burmese have fled to India, Bangladesh and Thailand, where they often suffer hardship. And yet despite all that is known about the criminal nature of Min Aung Hlaing’s dictatorship, despite multiple accounts of murder, rape, torture and mass displacement, Myanmar’s agony goes unchecked. The US and EU have imposed limited sanctions. Jake Sullivan, Biden’s national security adviser, pledged support for the NUG. The habitually timid Association of Southeast Asian Nations took the unusual step of excluding Min Aung Hlaing from its latest leaders’ meeting. And a joint statement last week by the US, UK and others expressed “grave concern over reports of ongoing human rights violations... including sexual violence and torture”. But all this justified outrage will signify little or nothing unless Min Aung Hlaing and his henchmen are stopped in their tracks. Of that, sadly, there is precious little sign. As analyst Annabelle Heugas of the Konrad Adenauer Foundation notes, the explanation lies close to hand. China, Myanmar’s self-styled “big brother”, has a strategic interest in keeping a lid on a country where it has invested heavily and which falls within its notional “sphere of influence”. While not necessarily approving Min Aung Hlaing’s behaviour, Beijing’s provision of diplomatic cover and military hardware stems from pragmatic political and commercial calculations, Heugas wrote. Myanmar’s other big neighbour, India, worries that ostracising the junta would be a gift to its Chinese rival, so bites its tongue. Russia just wants to sell guns to the generals – and still does, because the UN’s arms embargo proposal is non-binding. Biden’s summit, and a face-to-face follow-up next year, will examine ways to boost democracy in places such as Myanmar. One rather limp suggestion is an international alliance to counter online disinformation. Evidently, there’s no magic wand. No amount of talking, or Asia-Pacific “pivots”, can alter geopolitical realities. In the post-Iraq, post-Afghanistan, post-intervention age, western democracies instinctively reject risky hard-power options – such as arming Myanmar’s opposition – especially where China or Russia are concerned. If the west cannot bring itself to guarantee Ukraine’s sovereign democracy, struggling for air on its doorstep, what hope has Myanmar? Min Aung Hlaing surely understands this. On Monday , a military-directed court is expected to sentence Aung San Suu Kyi, Myanmar’s elected leader, to jail on trumped-up charges. This smirking defiance, this gross injustice – this affront to democracy – is dismaying and disgusting. Yet like countless other crimes committed daily in Myanmar, it will almost certainly go unpunished.Nostalgia for idiosyncratic analogue film style is the simplest explanation for the recent giallo revival – but maybe there’s more to it than that. This most stylised of horror modes is perfect for our over-aestheticised age, so the newcomers – such as Berberian Sound Studio, Censor and Sound of Violence – make artists and viewers accessories to violence, often unleashed through that giallo mainstay, the power of the gaze. Set almost entirely in a tatty Montevideo rep cinema, Uruguayan slasher The Last Matinee joins this voyeuristic club, even if it ends up more in the raw than the refined camp. On a rainswept night in 1993, engineering student Ana (Luciana Grasso) insists on taking over projectionist duties for a screening of Frankenstein: Day of the Beast (an in-joke – it was released in 2011 and was directed by Ricardo Islas, who plays the killer here). She shuts herself in the booth, trying to ignore the inane banter of usher Mauricio (Pedro Duarte) – but neither have noticed a heavy-set trenchcoated bogeyman enter the auditorium to size up that night’s film faithful: three teenagers, an awkward couple on a first date, a flat-capped pensioner and a underage kid stowaway (Franco Durán). Director Maximiliano Contenti stages a slow-motion intro in full giallo pomp, as the killer and punters pitch up, and is sharp at conjuring the deep-pile ambience he will soon soak in gore. He is far less assured, though, at suspense, with painfully banal repartee between audience members constantly shattering the spell as it builds up to the main show. Contenti attempts some passing comment on the semantics of voyeurism – mostly blunt parallels between the horror on screen and in the theatre – but here does not achieve the sophistication of a film such as Censor. At least he rustles up a tense climax, with a commendably lurid conceit (pickled onions will be off the menu for a while). But The Last Matinee only manages to cut skin-deep. • The Last Matinee is on Arrow from 1 December.Kazuo Ishiguro Author of Klara and the Sun (Faber) The beautiful, horrible world of Mariana Enriquez, as glimpsed in The Dangers of Smoking in Bed (Granta), with its disturbed adolescents, ghosts, decaying ghouls, the sad and angry homeless of modern Argentina, is the most exciting discovery I’ve made in fiction for some time. Horrifying in another way, Jonathan Calvert and George Arbuthnott’s Failures of State (Mudlark) is a brilliantly presented indictment of the UK’s fumbling attempt to meet the Covid challenge. Read alongside Jeremy Farrar’s more personal Spike: The Virus v The People (Profile) and Michael Lewis’s compelling The Premonition (Allen Lane), we see a disturbing common trait emerging in our country and others: the unwillingness to prioritise people’s lives over ideas and ingrained structures. Bernardine Evaristo Author of Manifesto: On Never Giving Up (Hamish Hamilton) I have been deeply impressed by recent books that invite us to reconsider aspects of British and global history, culture and identity beyond the often distorted, dishonest and pumped-up myth-making that has long prevailed. History is an interpretation of the past and these three books, each one powerfully persuasive and offering new ways of seeing, are in conversation with each other. Empireland: How Imperialism Has Shaped Modern Britain (Penguin) by Sathnam Sanghera, The New Age of Empire: How Racism and Colonialism Still Rule the World (Allen Lane) by Kehinde Andrews and Green Unpleasant Land: Creative Responses to Rural England’s Colonial Connections (Peepal Tree Press) by Corinne Fowler. Damon Galgut Author of The Promise (Chatto &amp; Windus) I seldom read books when they first appear, but there were two slim volumes that especially impressed me this year. Burntcoat (Faber) by Sarah Hall is in the vanguard of a new genre of pandemic/lockdown fiction: the connections between isolation and creation are laid bare in a disquieting dystopia of the not-quite-now. Small Things Like These (Faber) by Claire Keegan, on the other hand, casts its gaze backward, to Ireland in 1985; its balance of crystalline language and moral seriousness makes it profoundly moving. Wole Soyinka Author of Chronicles From the Land of the Happiest People on Earth (Bloomsbury) I sometimes suspect that I was actually found abandoned in a tree, adopted and raised as a family secret. Amos Tutuola, Gabriel García Márquez, DO Fagunwa, Shahrnush Parsipur and other exponents of tree anthropomorphism are perhaps the outsiders in the know. Now they are joined by Elif Shafak in The Island of Missing Trees (Viking) with her integrative literary sensibility, and the genre sprang back on its feet, tender and savage by turns in a Greco-Turkish-Cypriot historic setting. The rigorous questioning of nation and identity, given my incessant preoccupations, made it a truly therapeutic literary meal. Colm Tóibín Author of The Magician (Viking) I enjoyed Hugo Hamilton’s The Pages (Fourth Estate), narrated with verve and ingenuity by an actual book, a novel by Joseph Roth, which got saved from the Nazi bonfire and then taken on a picaresque journey across the Atlantic and back to Germany. I also enjoyed the social historian Patrick Joyce’s Going to My Father’s House (Verso), a haunting meditation on Ireland and England, war and migration, Derry and Manchester. I admired the originality of his observations and his tone of melancholy, calm wisdom. I love John McAuliffe’s Selected Poems (Gallery) for the way that ordinary things are rendered and rhythm handled so deftly and artfully. Rachel Kushner Author of The Hard Crowd: Essays 2000–2020 (Jonathan Cape) My generation is very much marked by Dennis Cooper’s George Miles cycle: in the 1990s, everyone read these books; I was awed by them. For many years, Dennis took a break from novels to focus on theatre and film. He’s back with I Wished (Soho Press), which is classic Dennis Cooper: intricate, funny, destabilising and totally unforeseen. Wolfgang Hilbig is apparently one of the most acclaimed German writers, but was new to me. I’ll confess I fell for the blurb on the back of The Interim (Two Lines Press): the great László Krasznahorkai calls him “an artist of immense stature”. As soon as I started reading, I had to agree. This novel, translated by Isabel Fargo Cole, is comic and terrifying and profound. Elif Shafak Author of The Island of Missing Trees (Viking) This year, reading Anita Sethi’s I Belong Here (Bloomsbury) was an unforgettable journey. Sethi wrote this book after being the victim of a horrible racist attack on a train from Liverpool to Newcastle. The genius of the author is how she takes the narrative of hatred and discrimination hurled at her and turns it upside down by “going back to where she is from” – the landscapes of the north. Through long walks in nature as she finds a true sense of belonging, connectivity, renewal and hope, so do we, her readers. I found it not only deeply moving but also quietly transformative. Another read that stayed with me this year has been Kerri ní Dochartaigh’s fabulous Thin Places (Canongate). Born in Derry, at the height of the Troubles, the author’s voice is piercingly honest, movingly heartfelt. There is so much soul and knowledge and compassion, it gave me shivers. Sarah Hall Author of Burntcoat (Faber) Sea State (Fourth Estate) by Tabitha Lasley completely took me by surprise. Part memoir, part investigation into oil-rig culture, part critique of gender and class dynamics, it’s incredibly compelling, often dark as the drilled-for product. Lasley infiltrates this masculine offshore industry, with its dangers, profit and comradeship. She also explores female loneliness and desire, accommodation of a male-designed world and the spaces where women hold power. Reissued this year with impassioned praise from fellow authors such as Marlon James, Patricia Lockwood and Max Porter, Mrs Caliban (Faber) by Rachel Ingalls is a work of true verve and imagination. Along with her suburban housewife and lab-tested reptilian lover, Ingalls deftly, wittily and rather incredibly liberates readers from the awfulness of convention to a state where weirdness and otherness are beautiful and right. Meg Mason Author of Sorrow and Bliss (Weidenfeld and Nicolson) After the joy of discovering that one of your favourite authors has a new book out can follow a peculiar kind of anxiety, because what if you don’t like it as much as the others? I needn’t have worried with Rachel Cusk’s Second Place (Faber). It is stunning, in all senses. Assembly (Hamish Hamilton) by Natasha Brown left me winded for how clever and sad and beautiful and spare it was. Truly the perfect novel. And I adored Ann Patchett’s new essay collection, These Precious Days (Bloomsbury), which I read in November and will end the year by listening to her read, as audio. Because it’s Ann Patchett, one time through isn’t enough. Caleb Azumah Nelson Author of Open Water (Viking) This year, I loved Transcendent Kingdom (Viking) by Yaa Gyasi, the story of a family of four who travel from Ghana to Alabama to make a new life for themselves. Through the course of the novel, the family’s history begins to unfold, illuminating stories that have gone unspoken for generations. It’s a brilliant novel, with not a word out of place. I also really enjoyed Vanessa Onwuemezi’s Dark Neighbourhood (Fitzcarraldo), a collection of short stories from an unforgettable, searing voice. They occupy a hallucinatory landscape, often veering into the surreal, and each pulses with an electric energy. Lauren Groff Author of Matrix (Heinemann) I have been in headlong love with Patricia Lockwood’s hilarious and subversive mind since her memoir Priestdaddy, but her first novel, No One Is Talking About This (Bloomsbury), sent me reeling. Everything about this book, from its structure to its prose to the way it hits a reader unawares in the second half, is testament to Lockwood’s wicked genius. Everyone Knows Your Mother Is a Witch (Fourth Estate) by Rivka Galchen flew a bit under the radar, but it is a wise meditation on the kind of hysterical scapegoating we see so often in the age of the internet, though based on a historical fact: that the mother of astronomer Johannes Kepler was once accused of witchcraft. I loved this book intensely when I read it this summer and have thought of it nearly every day through this strange autumn. I’ve been thinking deeply about anagogical literature recently and very few living writers write so achingly toward God as Kaveh Akbar. Real faith, Akbar writes in Pilgrim Bell (Chatto &amp; Windus), “passes first through the body/ like an arrow”; each of the poems in this collection finds its target. Chibundu Onuzo Author of Sankofa (Virago) My favourite nonfiction book published in 2021 was Otegha Uwagba’s We Need to Talk About Money (Fourth Estate). It’s a memoir that shows how money has affected every stage of Uwagba’s life, from growing up on a council estate, to winning a scholarship to a private school, to negotiating her salary when she entered the workforce. Uwagba is particularly nuanced about class and race. My favourite novel published in 2021 was Our Lady of the Nile (Daunt) by Scholastique Mukasonga. It’s set in the 1980s, in a Rwandan girls boarding school. It follows all the girlish intrigues, of who is the most popular, who is the prettiest, but this is no Malory Towers. Looming in the background is the coming genocide. Both playful and sinister, this is an excellent read. Olivia Laing Author of Everybody: A Book About Freedom (Picador) Anyone with a mother ought to read My Phantoms by Gwendoline Riley (Granta), a novelist of uncompromising brilliance. It mines the same narrow, dangerous territory as Beryl Bainbridge and Ivy Compton-Burnett: the dysfunctional family unit. Riley homes in on the failing relationship between a mother and daughter, anatomised by way of astonishingly precise dialogue, alongside angular, razor-sharp sentences that delineate an entire emotional landscape. Ouch and wow. There’s a similar marvel of ventriloquism in Adam Mars-Jones’s Batlava Lake (Fitzcarraldo), a story about war and soldiers delivered by the hopeless, weirdly endearing Barry, which builds to a blindsiding final paragraph. Sunjeev Sahota Author of China Room (Harvill Secker) Barbara Ehrenreich is an incisive diagnostician of societies and in Had I Known: Collected Essays (Granta) she is clear-eyed on the ways in which the American working class has been politically abandoned and culturally demonised. Much of the analysis applies to our own country. On the novel front, I could not recommend more strongly Gwendoline Riley’s My Phantoms (Granta): flinty, bracing, exquisite. Anthony Doerr Author of Cloud Cuckoo Land (Fourth Estate) In The Dawn of Everything: A New History of Humanity (Allen Lane), David Graeber and David Wengrow offer an engrossing series of insights into how “the conventional narrative of human history is not only wrong, but quite needlessly dull”. They re-inject humanity into our distant forebears, suggesting that our prevailing story about human history – that not much innovation occurred in human societies until the invention of agriculture – is utterly wrong. I could have lived in the first hundred pages of Piranesi (Bloomsbury) by Susanna Clarke for ever. It’s a dream of a novel. Zorrie (Riverrun; published early next year) by Laird Hunt is a tender, glowing novel that is just as beautiful as Marilynne Robinson’s Gilead or Denis Johnson’s Train Dreams. Ferdinand Mount Author of Kiss Myself Goodbye: The Many Lives of Aunt Munca (Bloomsbury) These days, I seem to read mostly female novelists from the colder parts of North America. You can’t get much farther north than the Ontario of Mary Lawson’s icy, compelling stories of calamity and redemption. A Town Called Solace (Chatto) keeps you breathless with anxiety, then relief and finally even joy. I felt the same total engagement with Gill Hornby’s Miss Austen (Arrow). She reconstructs in beautifully simple detail the story of Jane Austen’s sister, Cassandra, and her struggle to protect Jane in life and death. It is also an unforgettable account of an unremembered life. Kehinde Andrews Author of The New Age of Empire (Allen Lane) David Harewood’s documentary Psychosis and Me was an eye-opener for his honesty in reflecting on his experiences in the mental health system. His book Maybe I Don’t Belong Here (Bluebird) is one of the most powerful testimonies to the impact of racism I have ever read. In a similar vein, Guilaine Kinouani’s Living While Black (Ebury) highlighted the severe problem of racism in the psychological professions that has hallmarked so much of our experiences in the UK, an unfortunate experience we have in common with our American cousins. I had been looking forward to learning more about one of the most important US civil rights activists Fannie Lou Hamer and Keisha Blain’s Until I Am Free (Beacon) did not disappoint. Ruth Ozeki Author of The Book of Form and Emptiness (Canongate) Double Blind (Harvill Secker) by Edward St Aubyn is about nature, science, rapacious capitalism, psychoanalysis and human folly, and it is both moving and so funny I had to stop every few pages to wipe tears from my eyes. Nobody’s Normal (WW Norton) by Roy Richard Grinker is a compassionate, well-researched chronicle of the historical stigmatisation of mental illness. Since “normal” is a social construct, why can’t we change it? I love how Katie Kitamura can channel a mind and in Intimacies (Vintage) it is the mind of an unnamed interpreter living in The Hague, interpreting for a former president on trial for war crimes. Monique Roffey Author of The Mermaid of Black Conch (Vintage) Still Life (Fourth Estate) by Sarah Winman gets my vote, not just for its mastery and sweep (Tuscany, the East End of London, war and beyond war, old gay ladies, young men) and the overarching theme of the power of love, but for its talking parrot as character, Claude. Claude gets some of the best lines. Also, Fortune (Peepal Tree Press), by Amanda Smyth, another historic novel, a clandestine love story set amid Trinidad’s early oil drilling years in the 1920s. I also loved English Pastoral: An Inheritance (Penguin) by James Rebanks, out in paperback this year. His family have farmed the same land for 600 years. We’ve lost so much, but Rebanks gives us solutions and myth-busts; a poignant and sad book we need in a time of climate emergency. Elizabeth Day Author of Magpie (Fourth Estate) My two favourite novels of the year were Sorrow and Bliss (Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson) by Meg Mason, for being hilarious, moving and utterly humane, and Damon Galgut’s The Promise (Chatto). The label “masterpiece” is far too liberally applied these days, but I did think Galgut’s book was deserving of it. In nonfiction, I enjoyed We Need to Talk About Money (Fourth Estate) by Otegha Uwagba, which challenged me to rethink my relationship with my finances and did so in a witty, intelligent and surprisingly touching way. John Boyne Author of The Echo Chamber (Doubleday) Kevin Power’s long-awaited second novel, White City (Scribner), was a triumph. There’s not enough humour in contemporary fiction but Power brought the laughs and the pathos to this account of a young Dubliner, reared with privilege, who gets involved in a dodgy land deal in the Balkans. In nonfiction, I was impressed by Helen Joyce’s Trans: When Ideology Meets Reality (Oneworld), a scholarly, compassionate and courageous examination of a subject that’s sparked an unhelpful civil war within the LGBTQ community. Unlike those of her online counterparts, Joyce’s arguments are well researched, soundly made and avoid the toxicity that mars so much conversation on this topic. Courttia Newland Author of A River Called Time (Canongate) Keeping the House (And Other Stories) by Tice Cin is a truly beautiful debut. A mistress of deftly sketched characters that become whole humans in a few lines, Cin tells stories of working-class, inner-city life steeped in truth, emotion and vulnerability. She is one of a new generation of writers who see the splendour of these streets and articulate it with great majesty. Jo Hamya’s Three Rooms (Vintage) is written in a classical style that’s no less incisive for its formality. From the first paragraph, I was hooked. Tension drips through every scene and Hamya depicts London so well. There’s quiet, raw power in this book and its author. Cathy Rentzenbrink Author of Everyone Is Still Alive (Phoenix) I like a novel to grab me and The Book of Form and Emptiness (Canongate) by Ruth Ozeki gave me very peculiar dreams for a long time, as though it did not want to release me to other things. I enjoyed the robust style of Empireland (Penguin) by Sathnam Sanghera, an illuminating examination of the “toxic cocktail of nostalgia and amnesia” that still hugely influences our life today. Erudite and reassuring, Four Thousand Weeks (Vintage) by Oliver Burkeman persuaded me to accept that my time on Earth is finite so I should therefore not fritter it away in overwork and overwhelm. SA Cosby Author of Razorblade Tears (Headline) Her Name Is Knight (Thomas &amp; Mercer) by Yasmin Angoe is a dazzling, suspenseful tale of international intrigue and revenge with a protagonist who is as deadly as she is beautiful. A feared assassin, Nena Knight soon finds her latest mission to be her most dangerous as it puts her life and her heart at risk. Arsenic and Adobo by Mia Manansala is a quirky, cosy mystery full of humour and heart with a clever heroine who is as talented in the kitchen as she is at a murder scene. A fantastic debut. The Heathens (Little, Brown) by Ace Atkins is pure, uncut, US southern noir with a modern social media twist. Few writers know the tortured soul of the south better than Atkins and he is at the top of his game here. Fintan O’Toole Author of We Don’t Know Ourselves: A Personal History of Ireland Since 1958 (Head of Zeus) Sally Rooney’s Beautiful World, Where Are You (Faber) has really stayed with me. For all its wit and style, it has a deep seriousness about the world. Rooney has an old-fashioned belief that the novel can be a place in which the question of how we should live is continually at play. Damon Galgut’s The Promise (Chatto) sustains the same moral purpose while being funny, angry and absurd all at once. Paul Muldoon had a remarkable year. His conversations with Paul McCartney for The Lyrics (Allen Lane) spark endlessly fascinating reflections on the relationship between life and creativity. And his new collection, Howdie-Skelp (Faber), is dazzling, moving, profound and playful. Jackie Kay Author of Bessie Smith (Faber) I loved Neil Bartlett’s Address Book (Inkandescent). It took me back to all the addresses I’ve lived in - the lesbian squat in Vauxhall, John le Carré’s house in Hampstead! Brilliantly written, interweaving seven different characters across various times, Bartlett’s precise storytelling pulled me in. I’m glad we have him. He is a pioneering chronicler of queer lives. Ian Duhig’s New and Selected Poems (Picador) is a must have, must read gathering of the best of his work. Always fascinating, Duhig is poetry’s best chronicler of both ordinary lives, strange lives. His eclectic and effervescent work draws on folklore and myth to tell the stories we never get to hear. Duhig is interested in everything. He makes his reader sit up and take stock. I was inspired by the beauty and the power of the fabulous collective 4 Brown Girls Who Write – their poetry reminds me of the strength and exhilaration of a collective voice. Beautifully produced by Rough Trade Books, each of the four poets produces a standalone pamphlet that comes to form part of an incredible whole. The perfect stocking pressie. I was touched by Michelle Zauner’s cathartic memoir about losing her mother, Crying in H Mart (Picador). Zauner writes about food, music, grief and love candidly, bravely. Chris Power Author of A Lonely Man (Faber) Two novels that stunned me this year involve characters overwhelmed by the force of another’s personality. The narrator of Gwendoline Riley’s My Phantoms (Granta) reckons with her parents, one dead, one ailing, who emerge as both spiteful and pitiable. Riley is an immensely talented writer whose sentences cut like knives and she doesn’t flinch when blade meets bone. Similarly dauntless, in Second Place (Faber), Rachel Cusk abandons the distinctive style of her Outline trilogy for a new voice. When M invites L, a painter she admires, to her remote coastal home, psychic combat ensues. It’s a profound book and a funny one, which hasn’t been mentioned enough. Megan Nolan Author of Acts of Desperation (Jonathan Cape) After the past few years, when even the most ignorant among us took to slinging around virology terms as though we knew what we were talking about, I’ve found myself drawn to accounts and oral histories of the Aids crisis. Let the Record Show (Farrar) by Sarah Schulman is profoundly moving, as most are, but also does the important work of reasserting the place of women and people of colour in the history of Act Up. Paul (Granta) by Daisy Lafarge is a mesmerising novel about a young woman’s trip to France and ensuing entanglement with a man whose grotesque secrets begin to surface. It moves at a pace it feels Lafarge invented herself. It’s enviably, coolly intelligent without ever becoming ironic or snide and just one more exposition of Lafarge’s many gifts following on from her poetry collection Life Without Air. Joshua Ferris Author of A Calling for Charlie Barnes (Viking) Three great pleasures for me this year came from reliable sources. Jo Ann Beard’s essays in Festival Days (Little, Brown) are some of her finest. Dana Spiotta’s novel Wayward (Virago) is razor-sharp on any number of things, above all the insoluble ravages of time. Then there were three writers new to me whose books were both reinvigorating and enlightening: Angélique Lalonde’s Glorious Frazzled Beings (Astoria), Miriam Toews’s Fight Night (Bloomsbury) and Casey Plett’s A Dream of a Woman (Arsenal Pulp Press). Lisa Taddeo Author of Animal (Bloomsbury) Magpie (Fourth Estate) by Elizabeth Day is that rare novel that moves and taunts like a thriller, but also envelops and comforts like Middlemarch. I didn’t want it to end, I wanted to read it in fancy bars for ever. As for The Right to Sex (Bloomsbury) by Amia Srinivasan, I cannot say enough about this book. How crucial. How brilliant. How absolutely gratifying to see a mind at work like Srinivisan’s, handling the profane and the erudite with equal clear, unflinching diamond prose. Sathnam Sanghera Author of Empireland (Viking) My novel of the year would be A Calling for Charlie Barnes (Viking) by Joshua Ferris, a hilarious skewering of the American Dream by the man who must be the funniest writer we have. I also really appreciated The Anarchy (Bloomsbury) by William Dalrymple, out in paperback this year, which does a great job explaining the East India Company, responsible, more than anything else, for Britain’s involvement in the subcontinent. And Imperial Nostalgia (Manchester University Press) by Peter Mitchell, which explains how the delusions of the Raj continue to shape our national psychology today. Joan Bakewell Author of The Tick of Two Clocks: A Tale of Moving On (Virago) The sensitivity of Susie Boyt’s story of family love, Loved and Missed (Little, Brown), wrings the heart: it shows tenderness to each, makes you care for all… a gentle masterpiece. The Promise (Chatto) by Damon Galgut is a remarkable tale of four generations of one South African family and of the country itself. Like his earlier books, which I have also enjoyed, it reveals him as a master of human complexity. No wonder it won the Booker. Mothering Sunday (Scribner) by Graham Swift was not published this year, I know, but was picked up by me at the secondhand stall of Didcot Parkway station. It’s now released as a film. Reading it, I discovered a total gem: not a word out of place, not a false sentiment. Can the film be as good? To order any of these books for a special price click on the titles or go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply Let us know what your favourite books of the year were in the comments below“How does it feel to be a white man?” Simeon was not a white man. He was an African American who had left his homeland to escape the ferocious racism every African American faced and sought shelter in Paris. There, he had got into a fight in a bar with an Algerian. The police threw the Algerian into jail. Simeon they let go. In Paris, it was the light-skinned Algerian who was treated like blacks back home, the dark-skinned American to whom the authorities show deference. “How does it feel to be a white man?” taunted the Algerian. Simeon is the central character in William Gardner Smith’s newly republished 1963 novel The Stone Face. Smith, like Simeon, like many black Americans in the middle decades of the last century, found in France a refuge from the segregation and bigotry that scarred America. “There is more freedom in one square block of Paris than there is in the entire United States of America!” claimed the novelist Richard Wright in his essay I Choose Exile. Unlike Wright, however, Smith became increasingly aware of the ambiguous place he occupied in French society. “We’re the n****** here,” an Algerian tells Simeon. African Americans may have felt free in France, but for others, freedom was as circumscribed as it was for blacks in America. The Stone Face can be clunky and didactic at times. Yet, as the American cultural critic Adam Shatz observes in the introduction to the new edition, it not only “resonates with contemporary concerns about privilege and identity”, but “its treatment of these questions is defiantly heterodox”. Having a white skin, Smith insists, is not always a sign of privilege; being black is not necessarily to be disadvantaged. Context is all-important. The novel is equally acute in its portrayal of France. A nation that prided itself on its universalist principles, that had embraced black Americans, but had, no less than America, constructed its own “n******”. I was reminded of The Stone Face while watching the almost simultaneous news from Paris last week of the honouring of Josephine Baker and the announcement by Éric Zemmour that he is standing in next year’s French presidential elections. Exposed here were both sides of France’s attitude to race. In an elaborate ceremony, Baker was afforded a place in the Panthéon, the Paris mausoleum where many of France’s greatest sons and daughters are buried. Born in St Louis, Missouri, in the 1906, at the height of Jim Crow apartheid, Baker was among the first African Americans to take refuge in France. After making her name as an entertainer at the Folies-Bergère, she joined the Resistance during the Second World War, before playing her part in the postwar civil rights struggle in America. For the French authorities, celebrating Baker was a means of extolling a form of colour-blind universalism while challenging perfidious Anglo-Saxon politics of identity. “Her cause was universalism,” President Macron told the Panthéon audience, her goal not “to define herself as black before defining herself as American or French”. Zemmour has a very different notion of what it is to be French. A writer, broadcaster and polemicist, Zemmour views French Muslims as “colonisers” and immigration as an “invasion”. He promotes the “Great Replacement theory”, which claims that whites are being deliberatelyreplaced by black and brown immigrants. Zemmour is Jewish but is sympathetic to the wartime Vichy regime that collaborated with the Nazis, insisting that it protected French Jews by allowing only foreign-born ones to be deported to Nazi concentration camps. This is a historical calumny, but even were it true, it would be a deeply immoral defence of Vichy. Zemmour belongs to a reactionary tradition that harks back to opponents of the French Revolution and views liberalism, secularism and cosmopolitanism as enemies of the social order and of true French values. The liberal universalist ethos is corrosive because, as the 19th-century novelist Maurice Barrès insisted, it seeks to “detach” French people “from the soil and from their social group, to take them out of their prejudices”. In Barrès’s day, Jews were the embodiment of everything the reactionaries despised – a people unrooted, un-French, liberal, cosmopolitan. Today, it is primarily Muslims who are seen as the enemy within. And not just by reactionaries but by many liberals, too; by many who would applaud the honouring of Josephine Baker and see themselves as standing within the universalist, republican tradition. “Zemmour’s ideas are extremist, racist and exclusionary,” Shatz observed in a recent essay, “but the groundwork for his rise was laid by mainstream intellectuals and politicians.” Intellectuals and politicians who have responded to the rise of the far right by embracing hardline rhetoric about immigration and the threat of Muslims to “our way of life” and, in so doing, providing even more fuel for reactionary ideas. The universalist belief that one should treat everyone as citizens, rather than as bearers of specific racial or cultural histories, is a valuable principle. In practice, however, French policy has entailed being blind to racism in the name of being “colour blind” and deeming certain groups, whether Jews or Muslims, as not belonging to the nation, the “Other” against which French national identity is defined. The Stone Face ends with the events of 17 October 1961, when a large demonstration in support of the Algerian independence struggle was met with unprecedented police brutality. Between 100 and 300 people are likely to have been killed, many after having been tortured. Dozens were thrown into the Seine, their bodies washing up on the banks in the following days. It was the bloodiest act of state repression of street protest in western Europe in modern times. Yet, until relatively recently, there was silence about it. Not until 2012 did a French president, François Hollande, even acknowledge the massacre. This year, on the 60th anniversary, President Macron called it an “unforgivable crime”. It is a silence that speaks of a universalism that refuses to be truly universal but finds succour from the exclusion of particular groups from the national body. And as long as it does so, it will provide cover for figures such as Zemmour. As William Gardner Smith reminded us half a century ago, one cannot challenge identity-based politics or embrace a universalist vision without challenging also the reality of racism and the politics of exclusion. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnistGetting into Berlin’s famous Berghain nightclub is a formidable task, even for some of the world’s best-known DJs. So they are unfazed by the challenge of persuading Unesco to grant heritage status to Berlin techno. The artists behind the Love Parade festival, DJs who pioneered the genre, and the impresarios of the German capital’s biggest clubs believe the backing of the UN body is vital for securing the future of the countercultural music genre. Techno’s pounding mechanical beats emerged in Detroit in the mid-1980s, and when the Berlin Wall fell, Berliners adopted the genre as the perfect soundtrack to reunification. The abandoned bunkers, power plants and factories in the east of the city swarmed with clubbers from both sides celebrating their freedom. Yet Covid and gentrification both threaten the survival of the “free, wild, creative Berlin,” according to Alan Oldham, the Detroit DJ who was part of the Underground Resistance collective and now lives in Berlin. “Unesco protection would go a long way towards maintaining that old spirit,” he told the Observer. “Legacy venues like Tresor and Berghain for example would be protected as cultural landmarks. “So many venues have closed in just the seven years I’ve lived here full time. In other cities, it would be the natural club cycle at work, but Berlin is a different kind of place, where the club and creative scenes are the currency of the city.” Oldham, whose 1980s radio show gave techno its first platform, is one of those backing the campaign by Rave the Planet, a group formed by Matthias Roeingh, better known as Dr Motte, the DJ who founded Love Parade. They are lobbying German authorities to apply for Unesco’s intangible cultural heritage (ICH) status for Berlin techno. ICH is more commonly granted to more obscure activities, such as Malawian Mwinoghe dancing or Slovakian bagpipe culture, but Jamaican reggae and India’s huge Kumbh Mela festival have been recognised, and Amsterdam’s Pride festival has been backed by the Dutch government. Recognising techno would open up access to government subsidies and other funding sources, and clubs would gain extra protection under town planning laws. “Unesco protection would help a lot towards establishing techno and club culture as a legitimate social force with historical value and worthy of government support, not just hedonistic, disposable club music and drugs,” Oldham said. “Eventually, my hometown Detroit could maybe also benefit.” Dimitri Hegemann, who founded Tresor – “the vault” – below a former department store in east Berlin, is another supporter. “After the fall of the Berlin Wall, techno transformed the city of Berlin,” he said. “East kids liked it, west kids liked it and they were bound together by it. It was a chance to try to something new, like after the second world war in Paris when Miles Davis came with cool jazz. “In 1989, 1990, people in the east countries, like Poland, they came to Tresor, and they didn’t speak English. This new generation of Detroit techno, Underground Resistance and so on, had no words. There were no stupid messages. It was just music we could dance to.” Techno is still part of the fabric of the city, according to Peter Kirn, a Berlin-based DJ and music producer . “You literally can hear this music thumping from all corners. It’s really just everywhere,” he said. “In other cities, people wouldn’t accept music that’s really hard or weird and full of synthesisers and really brutal, distorted drum machines. You can’t play that at peak hour in a club, let alone over lunch. And here it’s totally acceptable to play that over lunch.” He was initially sceptical about the Unesco bid, but has reconsidered. “I realised that it’s just like with any folk music – there’s always this kind of this clash between the sort of traditional and the experimental. The tension between those two things drives it forward.” Black Detroit artists such as Oldham and Juan Atkins were moving to Berlin because it offered better support than the US, both in terms of arts funding and matters such as health care, Kirn said. It is also the centre of electronic music, the home of Ableton and Native Instruments, which make the software and instruments behind most modern beats. “Techno has become a refuge for people who are marginalised and there’s a natural attraction to Berlin as a place which is more permissive, when you come from places that are less permissive,” Kirn said. “Berlin is on this fracture line between western Europe and eastern Europe. And even though a lot of the focus is on what that meant in the 90s, when the wall came down, there’s been less focus on what’s happening now – Georgia is in crisis, Poland is in crisis, Russia is in crisis. So people from all those places are looking to Berlin as a hub for some kind of radical social response.”American Rust (Sky Atlantic) | sky.com Positive (Sky Documentaries) | sky.com Britney (BBC One/BBC Three) | iPlayer Succession (Sky Atlantic) | sky.com It’s not a good sign when you’re watching a prestige Sky Atlantic nine-part, small-town US mystery starring actors of the calibre of Jeff Daniels (The Newsroom) and Maura Tierney (The Affair, ER), and your mind starts wandering with questions such as: “Why have they made Daniels resemble a greyed-out Deputy Dawg?” And: “If Tierney is supposed to be grindingly poor, why does she keep emerging from her trailer resembling a sub-Goop wellness advertorial?” This is the problem with American Rust, created by Dan Futterman, directed by, among others, John Dahl (The Last Seduction): it doesn’t hold the attention, meandering and sighing along as though it needs to kill time before a clapped-out Greyhound bus arrives. Daniels plays a local police chief and Iraq war veteran, trying to ease himself off medication in the fictional rust-belt town of Buell, Pennsylvania. We know that he’s (ping of characterisation xylophone!) His Own Man because, early on, he saunters off to shoot deer off-season. His attraction to seamstress Tierney leads him to protect her son (Alex Neustaedter), who’s implicated in a murder. By the fourth episode (all are streamable), it’s revealed who dunnit, but it’s hard to care because the victim (a former cop turned addict) is so sketchily drawn. It’s all very solid (you sense the Philip Meyer novel it was based on), but with the crime (seemingly) solved so early, I’m left wondering where American Rust can go. A late twist? More for the slag heap of dragged-out subplots: young gay guy leaves town; a sprawling wedding scene; the attempted unionisation of Tierney’s workplace, and so on. The inevitable comparison is with superior Sky Atlantic stablemate Mare of Easttown, but American Rust proves it’s not enough for established actors to plaid up beside abandoned steel mills. Viewers still need to feel threat, the sense that the wicked worst of human nature is prowling in the bushes. The docuseries Positive, from Sky Documentaries, marked World Aids Day and the 40th anniversary of the first recorded UK case. Directed by Grace Chapman in three parts, it travelled from 1981 through decades of prejudice and devastation to the present day of infected TikTokers valiantly spreading the world about PrEP (pre-exposure prophylaxis) and preventive care. The UK Aids story is immense and labyrinthine, and Positive should be commended for taking a wide-ranging approach. Against the backdrop of evolving times (Duran Duran, Princess Diana et al), a varied roster of interviewees included people with the disease, medics and scientists at London hospitals such as St Mary’s and St Thomas’s, organisations and activists (from the Terrence Higgins Trust to Act Up) and more, including the Rev Richard Coles, formerly of the Communards, and Michael Cashman, whose groundbreaking gay soap role inspired the infamous Sun headline “It’s Eastbenders”. Chapman’s series showed the diversity of HIV-positive people, including Emma Cole, who, on learning of her HIV status, bought herself a coffin because she thought she’d need it – later filling it with her vinyl music collection. Elsewhere, more defiance and humour proliferated: “Good heavens,” said Tony Whitehead, first chair of the Terrence Higgins Trust, of increasingly life-affirming Aids funerals, “if you want to throw a party, you want to ask gay men how to do it.” Watching Positive, it’s horrifically clear that what should have been handled as a clearcut mass public health catastrophe became a “gay plague” mandate for homophobia. Thus I wasn’t sure about then-health secretary Norman Fowler’s defence of the apocalyptic tombstone-chiselling “Don’t die of ignorance” Aids-awareness advertising campaign. Sure, it struck a chord, but it also “othered” gay people and weaponised stigma. New BBC Three sitcom pilot Britney started out at the Edinburgh fringe. It features real-life friends – co-writers and stars Charly Clive and Ellen Robertson – who first meet as schoolgirls, dramatically pledging lifelong loyalty to each other, including a plan to live together in London. As an adult, Clive returns from New York to confess that London is off the menu, and then discovers that she has a brain tumour. What almost feels like an offbeat, twentysomething take on Beaches is a true story, and one told with pitch-black wit, surrealism and silliness. As Clive gears up to confess about ducking out of the London plan, Robertson grins: “I know what you’re going to say – you want to live as close as humanly possible to a Rymans.” After Clive is diagnosed, she falls down an imaginary portal into a hell-style sinkhole in the garden. “Don’t,” she pleads with Robertson. “I’m one sincere hug away from having a breakdown.” Television dramatist Dennis Potter called his tumour Rupert after a certain Mr Murdoch, and here, Clive’s tumour appears as a bearded drag queen Britney Spears circa One More Time, snarling: “It’s Britney, bitch!” Brilliant. If Britney gets a full series, it needs to sharpen up gags and delivery, but there’s something very distinctive here. The latest instalment of Succession gave us outlier Kendall Roy’s 40th birthday party, a veritable bonfire of the inanities. Succession is superb at such set pieces, and this proved to be no exception. Despite desperately styling himself as the One True Roy, Kendall (Jeremy Strong) has spent the entire series floundering like a playful billionaire without the playfulness or the billions. A kind of Elon Musk with all the crazed entitlement but none of the space rockets. Thankfully, Kendall abandons his plan to be crucified at his own party, but the shindig still evolves into an equal parts gaudy and needy disaster, complete with a vagina tunnel to signal his manchild-birth. Other Roy siblings attend, primarily to chat up an obnoxious tech guru (Alexander Skarsgård), but also to mock Kendall and hand over a personally written birthday greeting from patriarch, Logan (Brian Cox): “Cash out and fuck off.” This series has turned out to be a tad slower than usual, but the first two built towards climactic, game-changing fireworks. With this hilarious, evil episode, it appears that someone found the season three matches. What else I’m watching The Apprentice Australia (BBC One) For those missing their Covid-cancelled UK Apprentice fix, this Australian celebrity version, featuring UK comic Ross Noble, has all the bling and even more rows. Alan Sugar tells the Australian stars that he has no idea who they are. Their faces! Attack on Pearl Harbour (Channel 5) A three-part documentary on the attack on Pearl Harbour on Sunday 7 December 1941 that changed the course of the second world war. Interviewees include a Japanese torpedo bomber who thought he would die that day and is now 103. The Office (BBC Two) To mark the 20th anniversary of The Office, the BBC is set to air all the episodes of the classic UK workplace sitcom, created by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant. Astonishing to think it’s two decades since that stapler went into the jelly.Our Yorkshire Farm, now in its fifth series, has been a surprise hit for Channel 5: it’s the broadcaster’s most popular show since 2016. It follows the adventures of 47-year-old Amanda Owen and her husband, Clive, on their 800-hectare (2,000-acre) hill farm, Ravenseat, overseeing a flock of 1,000 sheep (plus ponies, cows and dogs) and nine children. The no-nonsense Owen – who, according to legend, once gave birth at home without waking anyone up – has become the breakout star: she has amassed 183,000 followers on Twitter and has written four bestselling books. Her latest, Celebrating the Seasons With the Yorkshire Shepherdess, is a collection of stories, photographs and recipes. You didn’t grow up on a farm. Were there many teenagers in Huddersfield in the late 1980s who dreamed of being a shepherd? No. There was an element of rebellion, I suppose. It’s quite hard to rebel: you had the 80s, when you could do punk, and, in my time, it was being a goth. But when everybody’s doing it, it doesn’t really make that much of a statement. So I guess it was a way of ruffling a few feathers and upsetting everybody. Head off, go and live in a caravan in a farmyard somewhere and become a shepherd! So that’s what I did. What’s even weirder is that you have become famous as a shepherd. Would that have ever occurred to you? Absolutely never. Put it this way, if I was the life and soul of the party, and really enjoyed the company of lots of people, I wouldn’t have chosen to be [a shepherd]. So it absolutely is a turnaround like you would not believe. But all the things that you said – “famous” and all the rest of it, which makes me cringe – is farm diversification. The sheep make me a living, on a number of different levels. What’s behind the success of the show and your books? I can’t say that there was ever a moment I thought: “Right, this is how we’re going to get Ravenseat to make money.” It began with making cups of tea. A simple, simple thing. What do people want who come to visit us? They’re coming on foot, they’re on the coast-to-coast footpath, there’s 16,000 of them walking through the farm every year. They want a cup of tea and a conversation. So from that conversation comes the opportunity, when one of them happens to be scouting for a TV programme. That’s where it all began. And guess what I’ve been doing this morning? I’ve been baking scones and I’m leaving my daughter, who’s going back to university next week, making cups of tea. If they come to Ravenseat and there’s a great big sign up saying, “Sorry, I’m in Marbella,” that’s a problem, isn’t it? Your children all seem very unfazed by the cameras. It’s hardly the Yorkshire version of Keeping Up With the Kardashians, is it? They are so not bothered, but do you not think that we’re very mindful of that? The other day I bought a pair of Dr Martens and Raven, our eldest, noted that when she was a child, hers were secondhand and came off eBay. So she thought that that was maybe a difference that has happened post-programme. But honestly, that is how it is: they are very, very unaffected. In the book, you note that for 20 years you were either pregnant or breastfeeding. I’m really proud of that fact. When it comes to birth plans, there wasn’t a plan because you can’t make plans when you live where I do, as far away from the hospital. When it comes to breastfeeding, it wasn’t because I was being some kind of Earth mother, it was because I was lazy. Any thought of trying to sterilise anything just filled me with total horror. And if I was going to be out and about going around the fields, it made far more sense to have baby with me and a constant supply of warm milk that basically was under my jumper. What do you do to unwind? Swimming and going on the horse. I don’t head off for a spa day. The only kind of spa I know about is a Spar shop, so there you go. What about cultural things: TV, film or music? I’ve always listened to music, and the best thing is at Ravenseat you can turn that volume right up and nobody’s going to complain. I love Goldfrapp, electronica, a bit of trance. God, I sound like I’m so stuck in the past now. I don’t watch any TV at all. I just never think to switch the telly on. Even Clarkson’s Farm? I haven’t seen a single one of those. Not for any reason; it’s just because I don’t watch TV. But it must have been all right, because farmers liked it. Do you ever feel overwhelmed by what you have to fit into a day? Always. Every day, I look at an ideal world of how I’d quite like it to go and then I have a reality check and prioritise. There are certain things that have to happen, certain things that you’d quite like to happen, and certain things that you dream of happening, but never will, such as using the Hoover, tidying up, that kind of thing. You got an E in English GCSE, and now you write bestselling books. Is there a lesson there? Absolutely. Maybe if we go right back to the very beginning, it was a little two fingers up at stereotyping and telling people what they can’t do and what they can’t be. Whatever you do, there’s always going to be somebody who says: “That’s impossible. You can’t do that. You shouldn’t do that.” Whether that’s, I don’t know, wearing a pair of earrings while shepherding your sheep or committing the heinous crime of wearing mascara while trudging through the snow. Do it your way. As long as you’re doing a good job, and you’re true to yourself, it doesn’t matter. Celebrating the Seasons With the Yorkshire Shepherdess by Amanda Owen is published by Pan Macmillan (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyMy son is inconsolable, his jaw clenched, fists tight like little doughballs. We’re late leaving for nursery and he’s extremely upset, the kind of upset which, usually, I’d remedy by simply giving him whatever he wanted so we can be on our way. Unfortunately, as happens more frequently these days, the thing he wants does not exist. ‘Tomaaaaaato yoghurt,’ he screams, for the 10th time, ‘I want some tomaaaaato yoghurt.’ I tell him he can’t have tomato yoghurt, and for the following reasons. First, to the best of my knowledge, tomato yoghurt is not something that exists and is certainly not something to which he has become sufficiently acquainted that its denial should be provoking such a reaction. Furthermore, if tomato yoghurt did exist, I’d be willing to bet folding money that it would not find itself within the 1% of foodstuffs he actually likes, since he has never really enjoyed tomato in the first place. And finally, he’s already had a very sizeable breakfast of foods that a) he likes and b) have previously been recorded in the history of human civilisation. As usual, my words have no effect and he remains, both literally and figuratively, unmoved. He stands there welded to the spot, crying tears of rage, as if I, his doting father, am refusing him water or insulin. To some extent, this is better than those times I had to stop him from consuming actual, existing things around the house (toilet water and the soil from our plant pots). But in other ways, it’s worse. When he asks for something he’s not allowed to have, I know how to talk him down. But when he asks for entirely impossible things, it’s hard to know what to do. It was the same with his week-long obsession with ‘aeroplane bagels’, a foodstuff we think he may have experienced in a dream and which bears so little resemblance to standard, shop-bought bagels, that he felt forced to scream screamed in our faces any time they were offered in consolation. As always, I have to remind myself that he’s three, and therefore doesn’t know that there’s no such thing as tomato yoghurt, or aeroplane bagels, or milk burgers, or paint pies, but I can’t help being appalled by the strength of his futile conviction. It’s stressful and confusing to see him reduced to furious sobs at the thought of illogical, horrible food combinations, like a tired, confused Heston Blumenthal scrolling dejectedly through his drafts folder. At nursery, he runs into the arms of his carers with delight, as if finally freed from his growling dictator of a father. On the way home, I Google tomato yoghurt and find one Japanese stockist who bill it, somewhat winningly, as ‘the tomato yoghurt that makes tomato haters faint in agony’. I manage to resist the urge to buy it just to know what is in my son’s head or, if I’m honest, so we can feed it to him and have him admit his folly. Instead, I show it to my wife who says, ‘Huh, that’s funny, I was just telling him the other day that tomatoes were a fruit.’ ‘How wonderful,’ I say, clenching my own jaw. ‘You’re doing breakfast next time.’ Did Ye Hear Mammy Died? by Séamas O’Reilly is out now (Little, Brown, £16.99). Buy a copy from guardianbookshop at £14.78 Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeatsCampaigners are calling for new legal caps on “exorbitant” credit card interest rates, which have hit their highest levels for more than two decades. Bank of England figures reveal the average annual interest rates offered on credit cards has risen to 21.49%, compared with the base rate of just 0.1%. It is the highest average credit card rate since December 1998. Michael Donald, a former director of Visa UK and founder of the UK digital payment app ImageNPay, said it was hard for the financial industry to justify interest rates of above 20% when the base rate is at a historic low. He said: “If the Bank of England base rate is the lowest ever, how can you have a credit product which drives people further into indebtedness with the rates continually going up?” He said consumers should be examining whether they need to have any debt on a credit card when personal loans can be obtained with annual interest rates as low as 2.8%. The various payment options now available to consumers raised the question of whether it was time to “scrap the credit card”, he added In October 2001, credit card interest rates were 18.1%, while the bank base rate was 45 times higher than it is today at 4.5%. Financial experts say the credit card interest rate is also linked to the risk of consumers defaulting on payments. Consumers in the UK owe about £57.9bn on their credit cards, equivalent to about £2,080 per household, according to Bank of England data. The most recent figures from UK Finance, the financial industry trade association, show there were 334 million credit card transactions in August with a total spend of nearly £17bn. Victoria Sully, 36, from Newquay, Cornwall, who runs the Lylia Rose lifestyle blog, racked up £17,500 in credit card and store card debt in just two years after starting her theology degree at the University of Gloucestershire. She said: “I just got to the point where I couldn’t even make the minimum payments. I felt I was never going to get out of it and was going to have to go bankrupt. I felt really low and I didn’t really see a way out. It’s very easy to get quite addicted to spending and putting it on a credit card. It doesn’t feel like spending. We are tempted all the time because there are adverts everywhere.” Sully sought help from Citizens Advice and a debt management firm, which helped her with a repayment plan. She paid off her debts within five years and now provides online advice on managing finances. Lockdown offered a chance to save money for more affluent households, and about £14bn of credit card debt in the UK has been paid off since February last year. Charities, however, warn that some of the poorest households have resorted to credit cards to help pay for their living costs. Research published in October by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation found 4.4 million low-income households have had to take on new or increased borrowing through the pandemic. The annual percentage rate (APR) on cards for customers with a low credit score can be as high as 59.9%. Joe Cox, a senior policy adviser at the Jubilee Debt Campaign, a charity that campaigns against unjust debt, said: “We are in the grip of a household credit crisis and it’s concentrated on those on lower incomes whose position is worse than it was before the pandemic. They are being charged exorbitant rates.” Cox said the government should now impose the same financial restrictions on the credit card firms as on the providers of payday loans. The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) imposed new rules on payday lenders in 2014 under which they could never charge more in fees and interest than the amount borrowed. The Bank of England credit card lending data is a monthly weighted average interest rate based on the advertised APRs of the credit card lenders. The high credit card rates are also reflected in APR data published by Moneyfacts, the financial data firm, which recorded a rate of 26.4% in October, the highest rate since it started recording the figures in 2006. It also includes annual fees and other charges in its rates. UK Finance said: “Credit cards can be a useful way for people to manage their finances and spread the costs of large purchases. Pricing decisions are a matter for individual card providers, but base rate is only one of a number of factors which impacts the cost of most credit cards.” An FCA spokesperson said: “Our rules are helping tackle problem credit card debt. Credit card companies must help borrowers who have been in persistent debt for 36 months to repay their debt more quickly.”Lewis Hamilton has distanced himself from his Formula One team’s partnership deal with Kingspan, an insulation company linked to the Grenfell Tower fire, saying he had nothing to do with the decision. He also cast doubt on Kingspan branding remaining on his Mercedes car. Hamilton is competing for Mercedes at the Saudi Arabian grand prix this weekend, and a Kingspan logo appeared on his car for the first time during qualifying on Saturday. Speaking for the first time about the issue at a press conference after the qualifying session, Hamilton said: “It is not something that I feel I have to speak about publicly,” he said. “I had nothing to do with the team signing any of the sponsors. Tommy [Hilfiger] was the only one I probably brought to the team. “It was news to me when I heard the things that have happened this week and I was very aware and watching closely all the families affected by what happened there. We know there has been a huge outcry and an amazing amount of support by people in the community around there.” The Mercedes-AMG Petronas team principal, Toto Wolff, apologised to Grenfell survivors and bereaved relatives on Friday, and thanked the campaign group Grenfell United for an offer to meet after its condemnation of the deal with Kingspan. “It is really nothing to do with me and I know Toto is sorting it,” Hamilton said. He also suggested the Kingspan logo could be removed from his car. “Unfortunately my name is associated with it because it has been on my car, but whether that remains the same, we will see,” he said. The seven-time world champion has previously posted about the Grenfell Tower fire on his Instagram account. On the 2020 anniversary of the fire he said: “Remembering the 72 souls we lost and their loved ones, and everyone affected by this tragedy.” The housing secretary, Michael Gove, said on Thursday that the government could amend advertising rules for racing cars if Mercedes did not pull the partnership with Kingspan. The ongoing public inquiry into the 2017 fire is examining the firm’s involvement in the tragedy. It has heard how Kingspan changed the composition of its foam boards, that tests had shown they burned “like a raging inferno”, but that he company continued to use a previous test pass and sold them for use on buildings across the UK, including Grenfell. Kingspan’s K15 insulation was one of the products installed on Grenfell Tower during its refurbishment, although the majority of the insulation used on the west London tower block was made by another company. In a statement released on Friday, Kingspan said it “played no role in the design of the cladding system on Grenfell Tower, where its K15 product constituted approximately 5% of the insulation and was used as a substitute product without Kingspan’s knowledge in a system that was not compliant with the building’s regulations. “The new partnership with the Mercedes-AMG Petronas Formula One team reflects the ambitious sustainability targets of both organisations.”Bright yellow police tape fluttered in the breeze outside a restaurant just off the main strip in the Mexican resort town of Tulum, as the lights of a nearby police truck flashed blue and red. Troops in camouflage fatigues stood guard outside the deserted late-night eatery La Malquerida, “The Unloved” – the site of a gangland shooting that killed two female tourists and wounded another three holidaymakers. Anjali Ryot, an Indian travel blogger who lived in California and was on holiday celebrating her birthday, and German tourist Jennifer Henzold, died in the 20 October attack that is believed to have been launched by one of several local crime groups in an attempt to assert control over the area’s drug and extortion rackets. The attack made headlines around the world. But within days, the scene on Centaura Sur Street was back to normal: on a recent evening, restaurants were packed and the aromatic smell of the copal incense burned by street traders filled the air. Most tourists flocking to the Mayan Riviera are unaware that they are holidaying on a battlefield, said one local worker. “They’re chilling, but they’re in the middle of a war,” he said. The violence is not restricted to Tulum. Last month, guests at a resort 100km up the coast near Cancún rushed for cover after masked gunmen stormed a hotel beach by boat and opened fire, killing two suspected rivals. The two attacks are just the latest in a string of high-profile incidents along the Mayan Riviera that have put the crown jewel of the country’s tourism industry on edge. Tourists still flock to Tulum, drawn by its yoga retreats and Instagram-friendly white sand beaches and ancient Mayan ruins. The town, which in 2017 declared itself the world yoga capital, is also a fixture on the global DJ circuit. But the violence has prompted fears that it may follow the path Acapulco – a once-glamorous resort town now overwhelmed by drug violence. “Tulum is swiftly becoming very dangerous and could become another Mexican monster town,” warns Dr Rafael Barajas, president of Tulum’s citizen observatory. “Everyone is extremely upset about the violence. We’re looking at this, frightened, and wondering if it’s going to end.” Between January and September, Tulum saw 65 murders – an 80% rise on the same period last year. Visitors from Spain, Belize and Uruguay have been among those killed. On a recent afternoon, two gunshots rang out downtown but few people batted an eyelid – and a group of traditional musicians started performing nearby almost immediately. Meanwhile in Cancún, two Mexicans were killed and an American woman was wounded in June when gunmen opened fire from jet skis. The following month, a US firefighter was found dead in a resort hotel; local authorities maintain the holiday-maker was asphyxiated while crawling though a window but his family believe he was kidnapped and killed. Tourists appear mostly oblivious to the rising strife, as they often do not stay for long, but locals describe an atmosphere of fear and mistrust. In April, President Andrés Manuel López Obrador, known as Amlo, described the local police as “rotten” and they were replaced by state officers after a string of abuses including the death in custody of a Salvadoran refugee. Mexico’s government has announced plans to deploy a battalion of national guards to the region, and build a base in Tulum. But Amlo’s anti-crime strategy has failed to stop the bloodshed, and murder rates remain stubbornly high. The president has been criticized for his reliance on the military rather than reforming the police, who are often outgunned by warring crime factions. Local officials say that about 10 rival groups are fighting to control Tulum’s extortion rackets and the lucrative local drugs market. “We are facing an issue of supply and demand for drugs,” prosecutor Oscar Montes de Oca told local radio. Hoteliers have blamed growing demand for narcotics on a boom in festivals and parties, which continued throughout the pandemic. One bar worker said establishments face a choice of paying protection money, permitting drug sales on their premises, or shutting down The rapid growth of Tulum’s tourist industry has brought not just violence but starkly uneven development and serious environmental damage. “If we stay on this path there are going to be more and more shootings and people will continue to sell their places and leave,” said Karla Acevedo, spokesperson for a group of environmental activists, Sustainable Tulum. “Tulum has to decide what kind of destination it wants to be.” “Birds and mammals have been killed on the highways after fleeing big events in the jungle and loud music,” she adds. “Plus, we’re connected to the biggest underground freshwater system in the world and we’re polluting it because we don’t have proper sewers.” A new airport is expected to boost a tourism industry that brings in the majority of the state’s revenue. A record number of Americans reportedly visited the Quintana Roo region in 2020, with about 4 million tourists of all countries coming to Tulum each year. To cater for the growing demand, the building of new condominiums and luxury hotels proceeds apace – casting a growing shadow over adjacent shanty towns. “There’s a feeling you can do whatever you want to do when you come to a place like Tulum,” said Acevedo, of investors, tourists and criminals. “There is so much corruption and impunity; it’s generating a sense of chaos.” • This article was amended on 6 and 7 December 2021 to clarify which of the incidents took place in Cancún, and also to reflect that the cause of death of the US firefighter is disputed.Much thought has clearly gone into Ghislaine Maxwell’s in-court look, currently showing at New York’s Thurgood Marshall United States Courthouse. Observers have noted her transformation from wretched to confident, shambling to sharp – into a much glossier, demonstrative figure who hugs her lawyers and looks as if she might have sauntered in there by mistake. It has also been noted that she often wears her face mask beneath her nose. Regardless of the symbolic peril, the slipping Maxwell mask appears, contrasted with firmer fitting examples around her, close to being styled. And for anti-maskers, the way Ms Maxwell’s mask has a tendency to hover uselessly around her upper lip may strike them as just what they would do if they were compelled to wear one, but wanted to signal libertarian contempt. For the mask-compliant, the sight will be less appealing. Are her lawyers confident that Maxwell’s – masked – jury, which had to be certified free of anti-super-rich prejudice, is similarly relaxed on visible disregard for civic feeling? If the aim is simply to allow the court to capture as much Maxwell defiance as possible, these glimpses could come at a substantial cost in Trumpian, sociopathic or other associations. Even before academics identified a connection between anti-mask attitudes and the “dark triad” of personality traits (narcissism, Machiavellianism and psychopathy), research confirmed the depth of the divide between those who do and those who do not conform with pandemic restrictions. In the UK, a 2020 Demos study showed the polarisation to be far more bitter than for Brexit, with the majority who did not break lockdown rules saying they “hate, resent or think lockdown rule breakers are bad people”. On masks, more than half of British wearers had “severely negative attitudes” about non-wearers. Given this scale of disapproval, and additional figures showing that 80% of people supported mask wearing after “freedom day”, the enduring mask hostility among Tory MPs suggests problems beyond the irresponsibility and selfishness that informed Get Brexit Done. What possessed the 23 MPs, not all of them nonentities, who last week voted against introduction of a government measure intended to preserve, if not life, then Christmas? Of the 23, all but three were men; 20 were Conservative and three DUP. All but one were Brexiters, so no strangers to self-harm. But Brexit supporters may still be dying-averse. In contrast to the US, mask-wearing is not much, outside Westminster, of a political signal. A majority of Leave voters wanted, for instance, to keep masks compulsory on public transport. While it wins them a treasured place on the anti-mask team that includes Piers Corbyn, Nigel Farage, Radio 4’s death-defying libertarian Jonathan Sumption and a host of Spectator belligerents, some of last week’s Conservative rebels might still have considered how their show of resistance strikes civilians who don’t have a choice. The same goes for the prime minister, whose public mask aversion is such that he cannot, even while touring a hospital, tie nestling virtuously against his belly, bring himself to wear one. Nor could the proximity of David Attenborough at Cop26 persuade him. Though, since Johnson once planned to visit the Queen from the No 10 plague pit, it was probably nothing personal: being a nonagenarian offers no protection against the world’s most prominent – now Trump has gone – Covid vector. Plainly, for a vain exhibitionist being trailed around the country by his official photographer, the cost of face-covering will be higher for the prime minister than for a civilian. But the opposite also applies: on his avoidance of masks alone, even if nothing else were known about him, Johnson’s unfitness for office would be confirmed. Questions are being asked about his Christmas parties, when nobody else was allowed them. But why would a person who splutters publicly in nurses’ faces worry about Christmas party guidelines? High among the unexpected, non-health compensations of masks is their value as shorthand. At the same time as they impede communication, they offer, anywhere that people exhibit extreme non-compliance, a rapid non-verbal personality indicator that is rivalled only, I would argue, by manspreading. Of course there are many other single but baleful inducements to run for the hills – personalised number plates, not tipping, devotion to the works of Ayn Rand or Judith Butler – but these may take time to discover or may even, on rare occasions, be redeemable. Mask aversion once fell, just about, into that category. Last summer, anti-maskers could argue that they preferred the previous official guidance. Jenny Harries, now head of the UK Health Security Agency, had indeed treated the world’s mask-wearing nations to her superior, anti-mask theory in March 2020. “You can actually trap the virus in the mask and start breathing it in,” she said. Incredibly, or perhaps as a result if Johnson was involved, she was promoted. As evidence has mounted to back mask efficacy, Johnson, even with this stimulus to lead by example, has treated masks as if they were a lefty plot against his face. A masked audience watching Macbeth recently noticed that the prime minister, squished into a crowded little theatre, preferred to follow the on-stage psychopathy with his face uncovered. In doing so, he perhaps revealed more about himself than idiot contrariness. Low compliance with containment measures was directly associated in one study with “antisocial traits, especially lower levels of empathy and higher levels of callousness, deceitfulness and risk-taking”. Though it’s too late to save us from Johnson, the psychology of mask behaviour might help to screen out another leader who shouts, when discouraged: “Let the bodies pile high in their thousands.” Meanwhile, we may be getting closer to understanding the MPs who last week voted, in defiance of scientific advice and majority opinion, against protecting public health. Weren’t they once great respecters of majorities, even narrow ones? But it’s pointless to expect logic. Like the Macbeths, they simply couldn’t help themselves. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnistThe race is on to understand the new variant identified by scientists in South Africa and Botswana, dubbed Omicron (the next Greek letter was “nu”, but this could have been mistaken for “new”). Fears include greater spread, worse disease or reduced effectiveness of treatments and vaccines. Increased transmission can arise from two factors. First, there is an intrinsic advantage, with a heightened “basic reproduction number” R0; in a susceptible population, that is the average number of people each case infects, although after 20 months of pandemic this has become a notional concept. It was around 3 for the original wild-type virus, compared to around 6 for Delta and possibly rather more for Omicron. Second, a variant can show better evasion of existing immunity, whether from vaccination or past infection. Only one in four South Africans has had two doses of Covid-19 vaccines, but the country has already endured three major waves and an estimated 270,000 excess deaths since May 2020. Despite that wall of existing immunity, both confirmed cases and test positivity have surged. Such increased transmission could arise from different combinations of these two factors, but increased ability to evade immunity is concerning. There have been some claims that Omicron infections mean milder cases, but lags between infection and attending hospital make this difficult to assess rapidly and hospital admissions with positive tests are rising in Gauteng province. Like compounding interest, increased transmissibility means more cases generation after generation and even a reduced share going to hospital may still result in more admissions. And an extraordinarily rapid analysis indicates the risk of reinfection is substantially higher than in its first wave. With these possibilities, it is reasonable to be cautious while we wait for basic uncertainties to be resolved. Like Alpha, which spoiled last Christmas, the progress of the variant can be roughly monitored from its specific pattern of PCR test results and UKHSA reports that an army of scientists is already planning 20 studies. Soon this article will be ancient history. Judging the swift domination of the variant in South African sequences, the age of Omicron has begun. • David Spiegelhalter is chair of the Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence Communication at Cambridge. Anthony Masters is statistical ambassador for the Royal Statistical SocietyWhen Kathleen Stock opens the door she is friendly, but a little on edge. She has just had extra security installed at home, she explains, a reminder that a year in the eye of a toxic public storm has its price. She leads the way down stairs lined with cheerful children’s photographs (having come out as lesbian relatively late in life, 49-year-old Stock has two sons by a previous marriage; her wife, Laura, is expecting a baby in February) to make tea. Once settled on the sofa, she attempts to make sense of a rollercoaster of a year that began with an OBE for services to education and ended with her resignation as professor of philosophy from the Brighton-based University of Sussex, amid angry protests over her stance on gender and transgender rights. Along the way, she published Material Girls, her book explaining why she believes biological sex matters and cannot be changed, and had what she calls “a bit of a mini-breakdown”. “I’m excited in a weird way, excited about my future,” she says. There is relief, too, at escaping what she felt was an “aggressive, intimidating environment” at her workplace of 18 years. Interestingly, while some blamed the Sussex standoff on a generation of students unable to tolerate views they dislike, Stock tells a different story. “Most of the students I encounter are completely open-minded and even if they disagree with me, which I’m sure a lot of them do, they wouldn’t hold it against me as a personal character flaw.” The problem, she says, was her peers. Stock first became active in academic debates over what constitutes a woman, and what that implies for access to single-sex or lesbian spaces, four years ago. But the backlash really began with a 2018 interview she gave to the local paper in LGBT-friendly Brighton, arguing that while most trans women wouldn’t dream of harming anyone, they shouldn’t have unrestricted access to places where females undress or sleep because “many trans women are still males with male genitalia”, words some find instantly offensive. Under the LGBTQ+ charity Stonewall’s preferred definition of the term, denying a trans person’s stated identity is transphobic. Stock, however, insists she is doing no such thing; she supports trans people’s right to legal recognition of their identities and protection from discrimination, violence and harassment, she says, but doesn’t think that requires accepting people can literally change sex. “I don’t think womanhood is a category that gets changed even by surgery, let alone inner feelings – I think it’s to do with biology and sexual maturity – but that doesn’t mean I’ve got any ambitions to remove the laws that give people the right to an acquired gender in certain contexts.” Several Sussex colleagues publicly denounced her on social media, although strangely, she says, not to her face. “No peer ever said to me: ‘Look, I really object to what you’re saying and I’d like to discuss it with you.’ They immediately went to Defcon 1: ‘She’s a bigot… arguing for single-sex spaces is like the Jim Crow laws [that historically enforced racial segregation in the American south].’” She remains fascinated by the performative aspects of social media debate. “The important thing is to show your tribe that you have the right morals and you could show that by saying, ‘I’m not with her.’” Stock got used, she says, to being snubbed in corridors at Sussex. But the only time she becomes visibly distressed is describing a research talk she was due to give her department in April. Some graduate students organised a rival trans solidarity event, with a guest speaker critical of Stock, and 40 of her colleagues chose that event over her talk. She went off sick, unable to function. “It just got me. I can’t really even say why, but the things that get me are when it’s your tribe...” Yet she says she never really considered retreating. Instead, in May, she became a trustee of the controversial LGB Alliance charity, formed in protest at the consequences of Stonewall’s decision to campaign for trans as well as gay rights. Where does that defiance come from? “I was bullied a lot as a child, so I think I’ve got a high tolerance for it,” shrugs Stock, who grew up in Scotland as a “gawky, self-hating” teenager, the daughter of two English academics. Despite all the negative attention, Stock is adamant she doesn’t consider herself “silenced”; indeed, she refuses to be. But that isn’t, for her, the point. “The point is why should anyone have to go through this in order to be able to say the relatively moderate things I’m saying? So there are hundreds of other people who are silenced because they cannot face this. That’s the problem.” Although she is booked for a few weeks’ work at a new pro-free speech university in Austin, Texas, Stock doesn’t expect to return to academia, but she’s planning another book, either on feminism or social media. She consoles herself that her life now has more “meaning and purpose” than it did. “I did find teaching valuable, but honestly I did not find writing about imagination and fiction particularly valuable. I enjoyed it - I’m not saying it was nothing – but a lot of my friends do work that I think is obviously interesting and valuable in a way that I never felt mine was.” In leaving a job, Stock has perhaps found a mission.Jacob Rees-Mogg’s mask keeps slipping. I don’t mean the literal mask he uncharacteristically wore at prime minister’s questions last week. I mean the metaphorical one behind it. It needs new metaphorical elastic because it’s been slipping and then being hastily put back for a couple of years now. People don’t seem to notice, though, because the mask is so off-putting, like a Hitler mask. Not Hitler, that’s not fair. He’s never worn a Hitler mask. Neither has he, in any broader sense, pretended to be Hitler. As far as we know. If he has, the footage is yet to emerge. He’s much nicer than Hitler. I mean that. He can quote me on it in his campaign literature if he likes. I think he should – it would be funny. What I mean is that the image Rees-Mogg effortfully projects is deliberately repellent. He presents, for most leftwingers and centrists and also a significant number of fellow Conservatives, a nightmarish vision of Tory privilege. Not Hitler, but still a massive turn-off. He proclaims himself to be a posh, old fashioned, entitled, obsessively religious, weedy, nerdy, rich know-all. Who would disguise themselves as that? So people conclude that it must be what he’s really like. This is clever because it means that, once they’ve got used to his eerie aesthetic, they start to assume he’s honest. The very fact that he seems not to have bothered to come across as likable starts to come across as trustworthy. And then likable. What they first took to be a contemptuous demeanour gradually morphs into an aura of integrity. These positive feelings are all the more resilient for the fact that Rees-Mogg apparently hasn’t sought them. Unlike most politicians, he hasn’t tried to make people approve of him, so any approval you find yourself experiencing feels more genuine. My attitude certainly shifted in this way, particularly when comparing him with other members of the government. It became difficult not to feel that there was something more wholesome and decent about Rees-Mogg than, say, Dominic Raab or Grant Shapps or Liz Truss. I found myself tempted into the murky self-defeating realms of: “I may not agree with him but he’s all right really.” Then, in the autumn of 2019, he was on LBC talking about the Grenfell Tower disaster when something dislodged his mask for a moment. “I think if either of us were in a fire,” he told Nick Ferrari, “whatever the fire brigade said, we would leave the burning building. It just seems the commonsense thing to do.” The implication that those killed in the fire lacked common sense for not defying the firm instructions of the emergency services during an emergency caused great offence and led Rees-Mogg to clarify: “What I meant to say is that I would have also listened to the fire brigade’s advice to stay and wait at the time.” Is that what he meant to say? I have no doubt it’s what he wished he’d said, but that’s not the same thing. He’s claiming he meant to say the precise opposite of what he actually said. I reckon he’s lying. Which makes it two slips of the mask: first, revealing a pitiless contempt for people who’ve been killed and, second, showing the standard squirming dishonesty of a politician in trouble. Neither fits the profile of the paternalistic fogey whose heart is in the right place. Suddenly, he’s just a spiteful liar with a creepy manner. It happened again last week. In response to the startling fact that all five living ex-cabinet secretaries – top civil servants who served every prime minister from Margaret Thatcher to the current incumbent – wrote an open letter calling on Boris Johnson to strengthen the rules governing parliamentarians’ conduct, Rees-Mogg was all scorn. “How many of those went off to take jobs in the private sector? How many of those got quite nice jobs once they’d left being cabinet secretary, well-paid, from merchant banks etcetera etcetera?” He actually essayed a mild impression of Yul Brynner in The King and I while doing the etceteras, such was his disdain for these former public servants’ gall in seeking further employment after leaving the civil service. I know this because I heard him say it, on episode 68 of The Moggcast, a podcast he does for Conservative Home. It takes the form of Rees-Mogg putting forward quite extreme political positions in such calm and measured tones that it’s almost impossible not to fall asleep. It’s not reasonable to imply that former civil servants are hypocrites to question MPs for taking second jobs merely because they themselves took other jobs after leaving the civil service. It’s just not a fair comparison and there’s no way he’s stupid enough to believe it is. But throughout the podcast he is deeply sceptical about any institutions reining in MPs’ behaviour apart from “one great, large, independent body that judges whether what is done is right or wrong and that’s the British people”. So it is only to voters, he contends, that MPs and governments should be accountable. For the Tories, that’s a convenient system. Keep 40% of the electorate on side and they’re guaranteed a big majority and can do whatever they want for five years. Later, though, slipping the mask back on, he piously opined that “this is in many ways a matter of honour as much as of regulation… I think politicians should want to, of their own volition, avoid those grey area conflicts”. But of course! We all think they should want to! But what if they don’t want to? Do we just hope that there are enough voters who hate sleaze more than they love tax breaks to stop a bunch of self-interested crooks commanding 40% of the vote? How do we feel that’s going? Last week, it emerged that the Commons standards commissioner, Kathryn Stone, was investigating Rees-Mogg himself. This apparently relates to £6m that he lent himself from a company he owns in order to do up his Westminster home. He says it’s fine. Labour isn’t so sure. But it’s another mask slip. It’s far too wheeler-dealery for the bumbling aristocratic image. More Philip Green than Lord Grantham. Nadine Dorries says he’s a fuckwit. If only.Rhoda Meek knows the power of Scottish islands working together. During the first lockdown she created a website for more than 360 businesses from Arran to Ulva to sell their wares while the pandemic prevented visitors. Now she and her neighbours have launched a holiday lettings website that aims to take on Airbnb and ensure that more of the islands’ tourism revenue stays local. “I was increasingly aware of the challenge posed by lack of affordable housing for islanders and the proliferation of short-term lets, and the difficult balance between the need for tourism and the damage that can be done,” explains Meek. IsleHoliday.com aims to ensure that more of the revenue generated by tourism in the islands stays local, with profits from the commission-based structure to be reinvested in small businesses, community and housing projects. On the east of Tiree, an island in the Inner Hebrides where Meek lives, she estimates that 40% of the houses sit empty during the winter: “It’s just not sustainable for keeping communities in fire fighters and care staff. We have to start somewhere.” But she is likewise a pragmatist: “It will take time to change that situation and involve action at a local and national government level. But, in the meantime, the letting market exists. “People have sunk money into houses then can’t afford to let them on a long-term basis. And with short-term lets now the money is leaving the islands, and often leaving the UK. Our goal is to use the current market to generate revenue which can be used to the benefit of our communities, particularly in relation to affordable housing and long-term rental options for residents.” Meek admits she was nervous about floating the idea, given how controversial the subject has become, but says that so far the idea has “struck a chord” with islanders. She has also sought input from housing groups across the islands, and from younger residents, “to make sure we’re not working at cross purposes”. On South Uist last month, for example, a house was for sale to islanders or first-time buyers only following a spike in second-home ownership as remote working during the pandemic made the islands an option for city-dwellers who were able to pay more. Yvonne Murray, originally from Lewis but now working in Worcestershire, is keen to sign up after buying a small cottage on Harris earlier this year. “I could see the property prices on the islands going up and up after lockdown, and as a first-time buyer, I didn’t want to miss the boat,” she explains. “As a young person, I want to live and work in the islands but until the internet connectivity is good enough it’s just not possible”. She currently uses Airbnb to rent out both her new property and her father’s house on Lewis – he moves out to a caravan behind the garage in peak summer season to supplement his pension. The new platform will be “totally invaluable”, Murray believes. “The commission is going back into the community and I’m behind any young upstart company challenging the big boys.” Last year, analysis by the Guardian showed that Airbnb has become so prevalent in Great Britain that some parts of the country now have one listing for every four properties, fuelling concern that the rapid expansion in short-term lets is out of control and depriving local residents of much-needed homes. Identifying hotspots in both rural areas and inner-city neighbourhoods, across England, Scotland and Wales, the analysis found the highest incidence of Airbnbs was in Edinburgh Old Town, where there were 29 active listings for every 100 properties, while the north-west of Skye had the second-highest concentration, at 25 listings per 100 properties. At the time, Airbnb responded that the findings are based on “unreliable scraped data and flawed methodology”. Responding to what many in the Highlands and islands frame as a crisis, last month the Scottish government set out legislation requiring all local authorities to establish a short-term lets licensing scheme by October 2022, after residents across Scotland raised significant concerns about the impact of short-term lets, including noise, antisocial behaviour and the impact on the supply on housing. And in July the Holyrood government pledged £43m to build affordable homes on the Western Isles amid fears of population decline. Whilst isleHoliday is a direct response to this, Meek also hopes that – by encouraging islander hosts – the new platform will shift the dynamic between locals and tourists. This aspiration comes after a series of flashpoints in recent years: thoughtless camper van traffic blocking and littering narrow rural roads, an influx of visitors who were not always mindful of local Covid concerns following lockdowns, and most recently furious islanders complaining about tourists taking up space on already over-stretched ferry services. “This allows us to start a dialogue with people coming to the islands, to send them information about passing places, phone signal, local charities before the arrive,” says Meek. It should make people think slightly differently about visiting: yes these are gorgeous places but they are also living, breathing communities.”A Colombian mother and daughter’s celebration of their country’s traditional leaf-wrapped dishes has been named best cookbook in the world at the Gourmand awards in Paris. Colombia’s envueltos are part of a culinary heritage that stretches across much of Latin America, from the tamales of Mexico and Guatemala to the humitas of Chile. All involve some kind of dough, or masa, made with a starches that could be corn, yucca, bananas or rice, studded with tasty fillings. These can be pork, chicken and other meat, or beans and vegetables. The dish is then wrapped in a corn husk or other leaf for cooking, usually by steaming. Mother Zoraida “Chori” Agamez and daughter Heidy Pinto, who have both been cooking since they were children, wrote the prize-winning book, named simply Envueltos, to chronicle the Colombian approach to these delicacies. “In troubled times, in sad moments, in the middle of a pandemic, cooking will always be part of the solution,” they said in an Instagram post celebrating their win. “Long live tradition, envueltos and Colombian cuisine.” The duo come from the northern Colombian city of Barrancabermeja, but decided nearly four years ago to crisscross their country collecting traditional recipes. “We had been teaching workshops on techniques for making envueltos. We focused on the masa, but people wanted to know more about the wrappings,” said Pinto. “So we began travelling across all of Colombia looking for envueltos, to find out where they are popular, what they are called locally, and how they make them. We collected more than 300 recipes.” The details of these local traditions are all are mapped on their Spanish-language website El Toque Colombiano (The Colombian Touch), but for the book, they had to winnow down the list. “We began trying them out, until we couldn’t face any more,” Pinto said with a laugh. They ultimately decided to focus only on recipes using corn, yucca and banana as the main starch. Publisher Daniel Guerrero, a Spaniard who had been living in Colombia for years, stumbled across their blog and told them he wanted to publish the recipes. The women told him they didn’t have a book yet but were searching for a publisher, so he snapped up the rights and planned to launch his new publishing house, called Hambre de Cultura – or hunger for culture – with Envueltos. They were nearly ready to launch when the pandemic hit, but Guerrero decided to go ahead anyway. Lockdown helped with sales, as orders flooded in from homesick Colombians abroad in Europe, Asia and even in Australia, and they are now on to a third edition. The books was shortlisted in May, and last week the mother-daughter duo beat competition from Zimbabwe, Malaysia, Ireland and New Zealand to be named world best of the best.Covid precautions duly observed, it’s time for the seasonal celebrations of togetherness that were so cruelly derailed last year by the virus. Full steam ahead for family shows! First off, Hull Truck’s The Railway Children. Mike Kenny’s adaptation of E Nesbit’s book was a runaway success when it was launched at the National Railway Museum in 2008, and not just because it featured a real steam train. The story of three children adapting to a new life after their father is wrongly accused of a crime, and giving shelter to a Russian refugee cruelly torn from his own family by an autocratic regime, is set at the beginning of the 20th century, but the themes it explores – of separation and loss, poverty and pride, kindness and sharing – are timeless. At the suggestion of director Mark Babych, for this latest production Kenny has teamed up with the composer John Biddle. The introduction of new songs and incidental music brings a fresh energy to the script and heightens its emotive impact. Adult actors, taking on the roles of narrators and children, strike just the right notes of innocence and curiosity. Ciaran Bagnall’s single set, surrounded by revolving railway track, summons to our imaginations family homes, a railway station, a tunnel, a cutting and a steam train coming to a sudden halt. Was there a dry eye in the house at the conclusion, when Gina Jamieson’s Bobby, seeing her father walking along the track towards her, called out: “Oh Daddy, my Daddy”? My eyes were too full of tears to tell. I didn’t think I could love any version of Frank L Baum’s The Wonderful Wizard of Oz better than the 1939 musical with Judy Garland – until I experienced Hope Mill theatre’s sizzling, joyous new production of The Wiz. “You’ve got more energy than a freight train,” Aunt Em declares to Dorothy as she hangs washing on a rack beside a flickering TV (she might just as well have been describing the multitalented, 14-strong cast and eight-member, offstage band). Dorothy pauses to watch televised footage of 2020’s Black Lives Matter protests in the UK, and the unveiling of the mural of the footballer Marcus Rashford. This opening isn’t Kansas any more, but 21st-century Manchester. Suddenly, the TV flashes “No Signal”; horns blare, dancers surge, whirling on to the tiny stage. A tornado transformation: black curtains disappear to reveal bricks multicoloured with graffiti, the word “Oz” swirled in huge letters (Simon Kenny’s design); Munchkins; good witch; dead witch; silver shoes… we’re back on familiar, fictional territory – sort of. The 1974 stage musical, by William F Brown (book) and Charlie Smalls (music and lyrics), reimagines MGM’s take on Baum’s story from an urban, African American perspective, and was subsequently adapted into a 1978 film starring Diana Ross and Michael Jackson. Scarecrow (the impossibly bendy Tarik Frimpong), wheeled on in a shopping trolley, asks Dorothy for money to buy brains. No cash? “Credit cards accepted!” Director Matthew Xia and his team keep the focus of the action tight, the choreography (Leah Hill) sharp and the music (Sean Green’s orchestrations) full of soul, as well as soca, R&amp;B, funk, gospel, hip-hop… Powerful characterisations are subtly drawn (excepting Ashh Blackwood’s Evillene – wicked through and through). As Dorothy, Cherelle Williams is simply superb. The Brothers Grimm Present: Cinderella at the Barn in Cirencester is a ball. A band of actor-singer-musicians playing klezmer-influenced songs (composed by Tarek Merchant) appear in a puff of smoke, rising through a trapdoor; a giant book looms out of shadows, images streaming across its blank pages (projected animations by Bryony Collishaw and Benjamin Collins); tree trunks soar out of sight. Cory Shipp’s atmospheric design makes much of little. Alan Pollock’s new adaptation glances slyly towards the classic Disney film, but his main source is the folklore that inspired the Grimms’ tales, although here it is less gruesome, more humorous. Cinderella’s beard-sporting stepmother, played with relish by Jesse Ashby, shoves underwear into a bodice to swell a bosom; Tanya Bridgeman’s energetic Cinderella wins the heart of Matthew Romain’s flustered Prince by telling him stories – the first involves a loud fart. An overabundance of stories threatens to overwhelm Pollock’s plot (at one point, a police procedural intertwines with Red Riding Hood) but Francesca Goodridge’s pacy direction keeps the action lively and the audience up to speed. Director-adapter Theresa Heskins similarly gives Disney a swerve, and weaves her enchanting Beauty and the Beast for the New Vic from the original story by Gabrielle-Suzanne Barbot de Villeneuve, published in 1740. We meet the Beast as a human boy, on his sixth birthday. For a present, his Warrior Queen mother (ferociously martial Polly Lister) gives him the newly defeated Goblin Queen (Danielle Bird, radiating mischief). A goblin trick and a couple of spells later, the boy is a beast, his mother a stone statue. Decades pass. Bella, too, is tricked – by her sisters, who take her to the Beast’s castle on the pretext that the owner wants to employ her on a cleaning contract. The Beast roars (the children in the auditorium jump), the sisters flee. Bella must stay (Rhiannon Skerritt combining brave resolution with stark terror). The company’s storytelling, under Heskins’s direction, is masterly. On the geometrically marked, in-the-round stage, an interplay of music (James Atherton), lights and projections (Daniella Beattie) and set (Laura Willstead) conjures the castle: doorframes and chandeliers rise and fall. Bella and mechanical servant Wheeliam move as if through long corridors, into a multiplicity of rooms. Time’s passage is marked by increasingly speedy progressions along the same route: loping on jumping stilts, Nicholas Richardson’s Beast, touchingly pathetic beneath his pelt, repeats: “Marry me”; Bella, quick-stepping away, refuses each request. Impossible not to pity both. The only section of the production that felt forced and short on emotional charge was Bella’s return home. Her concluding reunion with the Beast, though, was thoroughly satisfying. When she and the returned-to-human prince kissed, the matinee’s primary-school audience groaned “Yeugh!” What praise could be higher? Finally, to Newbury’s Watermill. Brought up by beasts – first wolves, then Bagheera the panther and Baloo the bear – Mowgli’s quest, in Tom Jackson Greaves’s adaptation of Rudyard Kipling’s The Jungle Book, is framed by the question: “How will I know who I might be/ When I can’t see anyone who looks like me?” (poems and lyrics by Sanah Ahsan). The action, sidestepping both Disney and Kipling, feels secondary to messages about identity-forming and belonging. That said, individual scenes, played to Dom Coyote’s score, swing merrily along (notably partying monkeys inciting the audience to imitate them), Karishma Young’s Mowgli is soulful and the actor-musician ensemble is accomplished (special mention to Peter Ashmore’s tiger and Guido Garcia Lueches’s jackal-narrator). Stoker, keep that engine fired – family shows are rolling. Star ratings (out of five) The Railway Children ★★★★ The Wiz ★★★★★ The Brothers Grimm Present: Cinderella ★★★ Beauty and the Beast ★★★★ The Jungle Book ★★★ The Railway Children is at Hull Truck until 2 January The Wiz is at Hope Mill, Manchester, until 16 January The Brothers Grimm Present: Cinderella is at the Barn theatre, Cirencester, until 2 January Beauty and the Beast is at the New Vic, Newcastle-under-Lyme, until 29 January The Jungle Book is at the Watermill, Newbury, until 31 DecemberIn our house, baking is therapy. My wife bakes in the early morning before the rest of us are up. We come down to steamed-up windows and a warm loaf of banana cake to slice up for breakfast, or cram into a school bag for an afternoon snack. I am more likely to be found crouched over the work surface at the other end of the day. My wife has been known to have pudding hours after supper while reading a book in bed. By Advent, there isn’t a surface in the kitchen without a dusting of flour. I remember my love of boozy puddings, and my wife enjoys the necessity of a cake to cut up with her afternoon cup of tea. There is here a clutch of instant-gratification recipes: a jam made when it’s needed, a sunken cloud-like marsala soufflé cake that requires eating right away, and a spiced apple and pumpkin cake. I’ve included a festive biscotti recipe, for treats to package up and give as a gift or to buoy yourself up with mid-morning. Pumpkin and apple cake I tried several versions of this, the final edit being a pale, pillowy number studded with apples, with subtle spiced flavours. In true tray-bake style, serve in rectangular squares, maybe with a dollop of something creamy. Serves 6 pumpkin 150g eggs 3 sugar 115g salt a pinch oil 4 tbsp flour 150g baking powder 1 tsp cinnamon ½ tsp apples 3, small honey 2 tbsp butter 25g pumpkin seeds 25g, toasted Heat the oven to 180C/gas mark 4. Line a baking dish with greased baking paper, mine is 20cm x 14cm. Dice the pumpkin into 1cm cubes and place them with several tablespoons of water in a small pan. Cover and place on a medium high heat for 5 minutes, until they’re soft. Remove from the heat and mash with a fork. Separate the eggs and whisk the yolks with sugar and salt until pale. Next add the oil and pumpkin and then flour, baking powder and cinnamon. Whisk the egg whites until firm peaks and fold them into the pumpkin mixture. Peel the apples, quarter and cut out the cores. Now cut into eighths. Pour half the cake mix into the dish, cover with apples, then add the remaining cake mixture. Bake for 35 minutes. When done, remove from the dish. In a small pan, bring the honey and butter to the boil and cook for 1 minute, then add the pumpkin seeds and remove from the heat. Allow to cool and thicken briefly before spooning over the cake. Clementine jam crostata Jam crostata is the quintessential Italian dessert. It can be unforgivably sweet, so I like the contrast of a little rye flour. The one clementine peel is plenty to give it a bitter marmalade hit. Serves 6 clementines 600g, peeled sugar 315g lemon juice of 1 plain flour 150g, plus extra for dusting rye flour 50g baking powder ¼ tsp salt a pinch butter 100g, plus extra for the tin egg yolks 2 Peel the clementines, and reserve one of the skins. Cut the fruit in half and remove any pips with a fork. Place them with 115g sugar, all the lemon juice and the reserved skin in a food processor, then blitz until smooth. Transfer to a heavy saucepan and bring to the boil. Turn to a simmer and cook, stirring very often, until the consistency has changed from juice to something altogether firmer. It shouldn’t take more than about 15 minutes to achieve something like jam. If you are unsure of its texture, place a spoonful onto a cold plate and see how it thickens as it cools. If it is very runny, keep cooking. Make the pastry by food processing the flours, baking powder, salt and remaining sugar with the butter until it resembles breadcrumbs. Then, pulsing, add the yolks until a dough is formed. Separate a quarter of the dough off and roll both pieces into balls. Set the dough balls aside to rest for 30 minutes in the fridge. Heat the oven to 170C/gas mark 3. Grease a 20cm pie dish. Dust the work surface with flour and roll out the larger piece of dough into a round and line the tin. Fill with the jam and then roll out the remaining pastry. Cut into thin strips and arrange into a lattice over the tart or do as I do and just have it in artful little scattered pieces. Bake for 35-40 minutes. Serve when completely cooled. Marsala cake This is a quick cake, best very soon after it is made. Depending on the type of night you’re having, it’s a contender for making at the end of a meal – if you’ve prepped ahead. Serves 4 butter for the tin marsala 150ml sugar 75g eggs 2 egg yolks 3 flour 40g Prepare a 12cm loose-bottomed cake tin. Line the bottom with a disc of paper and the sides with a ring of paper, buttered on both sides, to double the height of the tin. Heat the oven to 180C/gas mark 4. In a small pan, reduce the marsala with all but 10g of the sugar over a medium heat until reduced by half and visibly thicker. In the impeccably clean bowl of an upright mixer, add all the eggs and yolks with the remaining 10g sugar and whisk at a medium speed for 1 minute. With the mixer still at a medium speed, add the hot marsala syrup in a stream. When incorporated, turn the speed to maximum and run for 5 minutes until very thick. Carefully fold in the flour, spoon into the tin and bake for 12 minutes. It will have risen and will now sink spectacularly. Allow to cool for several minutes before removing from the tin. It should be softer at the centre. Ginger chocolate biscotti The ubiquitous Tuscan biscuit, given a bit of a makeover with Christmassy flavours: walnuts, ginger and chocolate. Makes about 30 biscuits walnuts 50g eggs 2 sugar 200g 00 flour 250g baking powder 1 tsp dark chocolate 50g, finely chopped ginger 30g, finely chopped Heat the oven to 180C/gas mark 4 and toast the walnuts for 8 minutes, until faintly coloured. Whisk the eggs with the sugar until pale and light. Then add everything else, mixing to make a dough. Break the dough into three pieces and roll each into a ball. Then roll each ball into a branch about 3cm thick and place side by side on a baking tray lined with paper. Bake for 20 minutes, then remove from the oven. Allow to cool for 5 minutes before cutting into 2cm thick slices. Lay them back on the baking sheet and return to the oven for 5 minutes. Turn them over and bake for a last 5 minutes. Once cool, they will be very crunchy and will last well if kept in an airtight jar or tin. Tip from my Danish friend: if you mix up several types of biscuits when storing, they soften quickly. Joe Trivelli is head chef at the River Cafe, LondonFrance’s most senior naval commander has said future conflicts are likely to be fought at sea and in the cybersphere, citing the “rapid rearmament” of countries such as China as a potential threat. Adm Pierre Vandier made his comments after the French Marine Nationale and forces from five allied countries, including the UK, took part in what he described as a unique two-week exercise intended to prepare for “composite threats”. Political and diplomatic relations between London and Paris sank to a new low after the Aukus row when Australia cancelled a contract to buy French submarines and signed a joint security pact with the UK and US to buy American vessels instead, but defence links between the two countries remain firm. Lt Cdr Duncan Abbott, the only Royal Navy officer onboard the aircraft carrier for France’s Polaris 21 exercise, said he had seen no post-Aukus tensions. “There exist inextricable ties between the French and the UK and there are many exchange officers like me working with the other’s military. All these relations are carried out day to day on a personal level and there’s been no change,” he said. In an address to crew and journalists aboard the aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle, the flagship of the French fleet, as the Polaris exercise came to an end, Vandier said: “For the last 20 years we have seen naval forces involved in conflicts that have taken place mainly on land, as in Syria, Iraq and Libya. “Today the maritime environment is challenged or will be, by submarines, by cyber-attacks, by space attacks and by a naval war itself. Our mission is to understand these factors in an operational setting.” Vandier said the “forced march” to expand of certain navies he would not name in the Mediterranean – clearly understood to be Russia – and China in the Pacific were the main threats. “Today we are seeing the growth of navies to two or three times what they were. We have seen the tripling of the Chinese navy in 10 years so that it now exceeds the US navy,” he said. The rapidity of international rearmament was creating disorder and playing with the “keystone of international stability”, hesaid. “We cannot wait until it’s too late, we cannot be taken by surprise, we have to prove our credibility. In an unrestricted, uncertain, volatile world if we want to be respected we have to show our pugnacity. We have to prepare for combat in all situations.” Polaris 21, one of the biggest ever international sea exercises, involved 6,000 military personnel from six countries – all Nato allies – and half the French navy in the simulation of a “high intensity” battle for the control of occupied territory. Twenty-four warships took part, including vessels from the US, Italy, Spain, Greece and the Royal Navy Type 45 destroyer HMS Dragon, as well as French land and air forces. Those participating were divided into two enemy camps and engaged in an intense six-day “battle” in real time controlled from the Charles de Gaulle. At one point there was a blackout of satellite communication for 24 hours leaving forces to operate in what officers described as the “fog of war”. “It was a return to the 1980s,” said one officer in charge of coordinating flights. “We had no idea where the enemy was.” All crew were ordered to turn off their mobile phones to avoid being traced. A ship can be tracked if a single sailor has misconfigured one of their applications, officers said. “Warfare even at the tactical level has become completely composite today. The digital traces we leave are tools for the combatants,” Vandier said. Emerand, a fighter pilot, said the 16-day exercise had been intense. Two squadrons of the jets were repeatedly scrambled without notice as they would be in a real combat and a simulated mission took place to rescue an ejected fighter pilot from enemy territory. “It was a unique exercise over a large area and for a long time,” he said. “As well as testing our own capacities it sent the message of what we and our allies can do. It allowed us to see our capacity to react against an enemy that is as well armed or even better armed than us.” The Charles de Gaulle and the UK aircraft carrier HMS Queen Elizabeth also took part in Exercise Gallic Strike in the western Mediterranean in June, showing how the two navies could work together. Abbott, who is on detachment to the Marine Nationale at the naval base in Toulon, said Polaris had tested the French navy’s “plug and fight” capabilities, meaning the ability to integrate non-French forces into a national deployment. “The whole purpose of the exercise was to look at fighting in a high-intensity situation, to test the French and allied units’ capability to respond to unpredictable and different threats in an agile way. What we learned is that a ship like HMS Dragon could have been integrated. It was a really useful training opportunity,” he said. “It was about fighting above, on and under the water. The Royal Navy and Marine Nationale are similar in many ways including size and the way we operate. It’s unlikely France would be involved in something and the British not.”I know the rows over fish and migration mean we’re not talking to the French these days, but pondering their history is still allowed. A huge historical puzzle is why France, from the 1760s, underwent the demographic transition to lower fertility rates a century before the rest of Europe. It’s a puzzle because economists usually argue that fertility declines are driven by technological progress, making human capital more useful and raising the cost of kids. But pre-revolution France was backwards on most development measures, with half the literacy of England and Wales. An interesting paper crowdsources family trees to provide the answer: secularisation. Dechristianisation saw the Roman Catholic church lose influence in 18th-century France, with religious giving falling and references to God disappearing from wills. The loosening of traditional religious moral constraints also led to the wider use of contraception (of the coitus interruptus kind). The author shows that areas where priests stayed loyally Catholic during the French Revolution (ie where secularisation had made less progress) had much smaller falls in fertility. Religious, rather than economic, change drove the demographic transition, but it had big economic consequences: falling fertility is a prerequisite for rising living standards (or progress gets eaten up by population growth). That’s why French GDP per capita kept pace with England despite the industrial revolutiontaking place on this side of the Channel. For the French, the story was less church, fewer kids, higher incomes. • Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation. Read more at resolutionfoundation.orgBrighton With a backdrop of the extravagant Indo-Chinese Royal Pavilion, Brighton’s pop-up ice rink resembles a scene from a vintage Christmas card. Book a visit after dusk and the Pavilion shimmers under a floodlit wash of purples and blues, scarlets and golds that highlight the palace’s domes, and cast sparkly reflections on the ice. After a bracing seafront walk, strut your moves around the rink. For little ones under 1.2m, there are penguin skate aids available. Hungry? The rink-side bar and café serve generous vegan burgers, halloumi fries, soups and bratwurst, alongside a children’s menu. Tickets from £15pp for 45 minutes, free entry for spectators; royalpavilionicerink.co.uk Greenwich Few ice rinks can claim such swanky surroundings as this one, set within the grounds of the Queen’s House and Royal Museums at Greenwich, a Unesco World Heritage Site. Enjoy the magnificent architecture, stunning views over Greenwich Park and – across the River Thames – the dazzle of London’s city lights. Make a day of it with the attractions of Greenwich and its parkland, market and shops, and a tour around the museums. Eat at the on-site food stall, or try nearby Pavilion Café. Tickets from £15pp for one hour; rmg.co.uk Somerset House One of the UK’s most popular skating venues, the ice rink at Somerset House transforms the neoclassical courtyard here into a fairytale world of winter-themed decor, presided over by a 40ft Christmas tree. New to skating? Book a Skate Mate to accompany you around the rink. As for the après-skate scene, choose between gourmet Alpine-themed specials such as cheese fondue, charcuterie and smoked salmon at Chalet Barragiste – or bag a bottle of bubbly at the Moët &amp; Chandon skate-side lounge. With the ice rink’s generous opening hours, you can even book a late-night DJ session for cool tracks to accompany your pirouettes. Tickets from £11pp for a 45-minute skate; somersethouse.org.uk Hampton Court Glide across the ice in the gardens of Henry VIII’s former residence, Hampton Court, and you’ll get spectacular views of the Tudor palace, with floodlit colours brightening the facade as night falls. Make a day of it exploring the historic residence, then introduce the kids to the magic grotto in the secret garden, before donning your skates for a swish across the ice.. Marshals are available to help children learn skating skills, alongside penguin skate aids that can be sat upon or pushed. Feeling peckish? Soak up the seasonal spirit with mulled wine and mince pies at the rink’s café and bar. Tickets from £16pp for a 45-minute slot; hamptoncourtpalaceicerink.co.uk Eden Project Worth visiting even without the added attraction of a sparkly rink, Cornwall’s eco-attraction, the Eden Project sees the return of its seasonal ice skating – and this year, marking the venue’s 18th rink, promises to be superspectacular. Expect twinkly lights, Narnia-styled lanterns and a tree-lined tunnel leading you into the biomes. Allow time for a peek around the biomes, then head for the Eden Bakery, where little ones can make Christmas cards. Feel a bit rusty on ice? For locally based visitors, the Eden Project is running a six-week block of classes on Wednesdays and Saturdays (starting in January). Tickets from £8-£10 for a 40-minute slot; edenproject.com Cardiff Set against the backdrop of Cardiff castle’s dramatic Norman keep, this Winter Wonderland ice rink is just one of the city’s many seasonal attractions. Spend the whole day here, and you can try the ice walk through the castle grounds then, at neighbouring City Hall, enjoy funfair rides, live music and DJ nights. New this year is an ice bar, set to a chilly -10C. Alternatively, the Alpine Village serves festive food and for lovers of mulled wine or hot chocolate, Sur le Piste ski lodge provides hot drinks in a cosy Swiss-themed setting for relaxing. Tickets for ice skating from £13pp for 60 minutes, free entry; cardiffswinterwonderland.com Edinburgh With an alternative take on the traditional circular ice rink, this winter marks the first time in three years that visitors can glide up and down elegant George Street on Edinburgh’s magnificent Alpine rink. The city is staging lots of seasonal events in conjunction with the rink – worthy of a full day’s outing. Check out the ever-popular Christmas market for gifts and European snacks on East Princes Street Gardens, book in for Santa’s Grotto at West Princes Street, or try out family-friendly attractions spanning a magical Christmas tree maze, to mooching around market stalls packed with seasonal goodies. Tickets from £6 for a 45-minute slot; edinburghchristmas.com Cambridge The punting season may be over, but you can still eEnjoy thrilling alfresco activities in Cambridge within at the “North Pole” at, Parker’s Piece . The city’s very own winter wonderland has There’s a large covered rink – ideal for skating whatever the weather – and, new for this year, some extra attractions. Try out theand a three-lane ice slide (the UK’s longest), or v. isit at night for a skate under the stars followed by a frozen vodka in the ice bar. Alternatively, get a bird’s eye view of the city from the big wheel, then treat the kids to a clutch of traditional fairground rides. Tickets from £13.50 for a 45-minute slot; thenorthpolecambridge.co.uk Tobacco Dock, London Feel on top of the world as you lace up your boots to swish over the ice – and if vertigo’s not a problem, then Europe’s only rooftop rink at London’s Skylight Tobacco Dock will prove wonderfully rewarding. Enjoy offers fabulous views towards the Gherkin and Nokia; drink in those twinkly city lights once dusk falls, then mix and match your time here with other festive experiences. As well as the rink, Skylight has heated rooftop igloos for friends to share Alpine grub and mulled wine – or warm up in the Skylight cinema watching cheesy Christmas films – with cocktails on tap. Tickets from £15pp for a 45-minute slot. Book igloos and cinema separately; skylightbars.com/tobacco-dock Bath Planning a day trip to Bath? Factor in an hour-long skate at the city’s atmospheric rink near Victoria Park. At 1,000sqm, you can take to the stage, ice-dance to the music and show off those arabesques and backflips without fear of bumping fellow skaters. Skate aids and sleds are bookable for toddlers, and the rink has some great family deals. Fuel up with hot chocolate and churros, or a glass of wine, at Moguls Alpine Bar, then finish off with a warming dip in the open-air rooftop pool at neighbouring Thermae Bath Spa. Tickets from £12.50pp; bathonice.com; thermaebathspa.com has 2-hour spa sessions from £37ppI’ve read some crazily good graphic novels this year: sad comics, funny comics, exquisitely drawn comics. But it was probably Esther’s Notebooks by Riad Sattouf (translated by Sam Taylor), the first three volumes of which were published in rapid succession by the brilliant Pushkin Press, that I most looked forward to opening. Sattouf bases these (in France, bestselling) stories about the everyday life of a little girl who lives in Paris on real conversations with the daughter of a friend, and thanks to this they have an illicit veracity that’s powerfully attractive to readers of all ages: my small niece Edith and I both adore them. In my hands, Esther’s adventures comprise an indispensable guide to the conflicts of 21st-century girlhood; I see them as slyly feminist. But in Edith’s, they’re just madly enjoyable: naughty, resonant and true. I also loved Tunnels by Rutu Modan (Drawn &amp; Quarterly; translated by Ishai Mishory), in which two rival archaeologists attempt to find the Ark of the Covenant beneath the wall that separates Israel from the West Bank. It’s impossible not to think of Tintin as you turn this book’s pages: here are good guys, and bad guys, and museum-standard sarcophagi. But it works on a deeper level, too, its real subject being contested land, and all the ways in which competing narratives are imposed on such territory. Modan is a genius and I hope lots of people will read this story with its ending that might have been borrowed from Evelyn Waugh’s A Handful of Dust – and then, perhaps, seek out her earlier books, Exit Wounds and The Property. It was wonderful to see Alison Bechdel, of Fun Home fame, return with The Secret to Superhuman Strength (Cape), a knowingly neurotic memoir of her lifelong obsession with fitness that covers so much territory – what other writer would detour into Jane Fonda and William Wordsworth? – it demands to be reread immediately. Wrestling the notion of physical self-improvement from the clammy hands of the so-called wellness industry, Bechdel puts it instead in the context not only of her own struggle to be happy (exercise is her balm), but of centuries of literary and social history. The result is transcendent, and does the reader far more good than a Peloton class and a cup of turmeric tea. Finally, a debut, and a big return. Lizzy’s Stewart’s story collection It’s Not What You Thought It Would Be (Fantagraphics) is an amazing first outing, one I relished both for the way it looked – you’ve never seen an English housing estate look so gorgeous – and for its dialogue (these tales of female friendship and teenage boredom require restraint when it comes to speech bubbles). But her rare delicacy made for some contrast to a book I read at about the same time: a counterfeit meta-memoir called Fictional Father (Drawn &amp; Quarterly) by Joe Ollmann, a veteran comics star whom no lesser an artist than Seth has described as “the last of the great funny/sad underground cartoonists”. Jimmi Wyatt’s syrupy daily strip, Sonny Side Up, has earned him fame, fortune and the nickname Everybody’s Dad. But, alas, in reality pa is a nightmare: a raging egomaniac who has long neglected his family. What happens when Jimmi dies and bequeaths his strip to his artist son? Will Cal ever be able to find his own voice? Though no one does galumphing human failure better than Ollmann, thankfully his tongue is also ever in his cheek. On the book’s jacket, the eye falls on one puff quote in particular. “Don’t worry, my father is not really like this,” writes a certain Sam Ollmann-Chan. To order any of these books for a special price click on the titles or go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe latest, most personal picture from Paolo Sorrentino, The Hand of God is a film of two uneven halves. Set in 1980s Naples and focused on Sorrentino’s alter ego, teenager Fabietto (Filippo Scotti), it is at first cacophonous and scattershot. With rumours circulating about Diego Maradona’s signing to SSC Napoli, there’s a fizzing excitement on the streets of the city. Fabietto’s extended family is boisterous, exaggerated, bursting out of the frame as regularly as his curvaceous Aunt Patrizia (Luisa Ranieri) spills out of her dress (spoiler: a lot). Toni Servillo and Teresa Saponangelo, as Fabietto’s parents, fill the story with love and laughter, mischief and marital drama. And then, quite suddenly, they are gone. Fabietto is orphaned; it’s only thanks to his devotion to Maradona and Napoli that he escapes the same fate. And the tone of the film shifts to a more subdued and introspective second half. It feels like the sullen pall of smoke after a firework display. But then something changes. The writing and characters take on a more satisfying depth. Sure, the gaudy pyrotechnics of the early part of the film are fun, but it’s not until later that we start to know Fabietto as a person rather than a passive observer. In cinemas now and on Netflix from 15 DecemberWhen I spoke to Ai Weiwei earlier this year, he insisted that “whenever we talk about democracy, we’re talking about continuous questioning and argument”. The artist’s latest contribution to that ongoing debate is a typically forthright memoir, 1000 Years of Joys and Sorrows (Bodley Head), in which he offers a personal history of his ongoing battles with the repressive Chinese state, and his defiant dramatisation of what creative freedom looks like. “To express yourself needs a reason,” Ai writes, “but expressing yourself is the reason.” The more years that pass, the more David Hockney delights in the colouring in of the seasons. Spring Cannot Be Cancelled (Thames &amp; Hudson) celebrates lockdown in a farmhouse near Bayeux, eyes and iPad alive with sap-drenched greens and the dazzle of sunlight. Happily, his long-term confidant, Martin Gayford, was on hand – or at least on FaceTime – to record the painter seeing the world afresh, again. Rebecca Birrell’s This Dark Country: Women Artists, Still Life and Intimacy in the Early Twentieth Century (Bloomsbury) asks a provocative series of questions about the pioneering lives of artists including Gwen John, Vanessa Bell and Dora Carrington and then finds imaginative ways to answer them. Key among the questions is this one: “What kind of life, what kind of selfhood, would best nourish their art?” In a striking act of collective empathy, Birrell brings to life not only the interior worlds of the painters and their work, but also the support network – of female friends and lovers and domestic staff – that enabled them. Edmund de Waal’s Letters to Camondo (Chatto &amp; Windus) is a poignant coda to his bestselling The Hare With Amber Eyes. In it, he recreates the world of the early 20th-century Parisian elite with “talk and food and porcelain and politesse and civilité and everything possible”, through the preserved house of the great Jewish collector Count Moise de Camondo, which uniquely escaped Nazi looting. His reconstruction is told in a series of letters to Camondo across a century, a delicate homage to what he calls “lacrimae rerum”: the tears of objects. Philip Hoare’s Albert and the Whale (Fourth Estate) begins as a book about Albrecht Durer and his (failed) efforts to draw a beached leviathan. It quickly becomes something far stranger and more magical, a vivid, freewheeling personal memoir of an obsession with an artist, as well as a meditation on the great realist eye of the northern renaissance, who “painted God in dirt and blood”. To order any of these books for a special price click on the titles or go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyHurrah for the first London staging of this play by David Ireland, most mordant of contemporary dramatists. No one who saw Vicky Featherstone’s coruscating production of Cyprus Avenue five years ago will have forgotten the Ulster Protestant who thought his baby granddaughter was actually Gerry Adams, nor the jack-knifing from comedy to killing. Now the tiny Finborough is ignited by Max Elton’s spot-on direction of an earlier play, one that the author considers “deranged”, “unapologetic in its recklessness”. Yes So I Said Yes, first performed in Belfast in 2011, features a troubled soul, a former loyalist gunman who consults a doctor about the disturbing noise of a dog barking – which may be inside his head. The medic looks into his ears: his diagnosis is that they are very small. He pronounces that his patient has depression – and tells him not to be pessimistic about it. The man confronts a neighbour about the barking; the neighbour denies having a dog. He applies to the BBC for assistance. He meets a dog, who is, mmm, extremely forthcoming: anyone in doubt about how to do it doggy style can learn here. He is visited by men in balaclavas. When first staged 10 years ago in Omagh, the play caused outrage, mostly on grounds of bestiality. Audiences at the Finborough are confronted with closeup violence. It is worth the flinch: to see an all-round strong cast and a central sonorous performance from Daragh O’Malley, his jaw sagging with accumulated anger; for Ceci Calf’s trim design; for the unusual foregrounding of the Unionist experience. Most of all, for the icy crackle of the dialogue. Caustic and comic, here is absurdity in the guise of logic: “I’ll rape if it helps us find peace.” A modest proposal in a direct line from Jonathan Swift. Yes So I Said Yes is at the Finborough, London, until 18 DecemberIn colonial times, Brazil’s European settlers referred to the malarial, snake-infested jungle of the Amazon as a “green hell”. Sebastião Salgado’s superb Amazônia (Taschen) sees it as a black and white heaven, or as a paradise in the process of being lost – not closed to unworthy human beings but whittled away by farmers and churned up by mining. Salgado mythologises the landscapes he photographs, and his documentation of six years in the Amazon looks like a reprise of the first week in Genesis. As drenching rainstorms retreat from the steaming, apparently molten earth, dry land solidifies; tribal people clamber out of the river and begin to increase and multiply; the creator’s covenant with his biodiverse creation is renewed by a rainbow that arches over the mountains. Salgado depicts the indigenous Amazonians as noble savages, innocent but startlingly elegant with their feathered headdresses and patterned face paint. Ejected from Eden, their latter-day descendants perform eroticised war dances in Helmut Newton’s Legacy (Taschen). Newton, who enjoyed reducing his sophisticated female subjects to a primitive state, saw clothes as fetish wear that revealed the body rather than covering it. Models were stripped nude after the catwalk parade ended, then ordered to reassume their strutting poses: is their bare skin also a disguise? Jerry Hall squeezes a slab of bleeding beef against her face, and another model shows off the Bvlgari jewels on her wrists and fingers while chopping up an uncooked chicken. In Newton’s perverse tableaux, beauty is an act of violence, an armed assault on nature. Matt Black’s American Geography: A Reckoning With a Dream (Thames &amp; Hudson) is a tragic atlas, documenting long months on the road in impoverished tracts of the country. The palette is stark, inky black and icy white, with flights of baleful Hitchcockian birds blotting out a washed-out or ashen sky. If the sun shines, it glints from junked liquor bottles, and the music that accompanies Black’s halting progress is made by the squeaking of plastic seats in a Greyhound bus. When western horizons open up, the space looks desolate, not grandly primordial like Salgado’s Amazon. Yet the photographs confer a stoical dignity on these exiles from America’s glossy promise, and notes from Black’s journals reveal how compassionately he listened to their jaunty tales of woe. The Year That Changed Our World (Thames &amp; Hudson) chronicles the pandemic in bright, sometimes lacerating colour. It begins by exposing something no one wants to see, as a passing cyclist in Wuhan pointedly ignores a corpse slumped in the street. Surreal oddities soon beguile the eye. An Indian policeman wears a blow-up of the spiky red coronavirus as a helmet; in Virginia, shop window dummies in evening dress occupy alternate tables in a fancy restaurant to enforce social distancing. Near the end, the nave of Salisbury Cathedral becomes a vaccination clinic, while in the Barcelona opera house a string quartet serenades an audience of 2,000 potted plants. Both spectacles are post-apocalyptic but somehow reassuring: religious faith gives way to medical science, and greenery reinherits the abused Earth. To order American Geography: A Reckoning With a Dream for a special price click on the title or go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applySometime in 2016, Chris Mullins received a message about a missing skunk. Mullins, 70, who lives in Leicestershire, had founded a Facebook group, Beastwatch UK, in 2001 as a place to document exotic animal sightings in the British countryside, so it was natural for news of this sort to trickle his way. In that time there had been a piranha in the Thames and a chinchilla in a post box, so a skunk on the loose in a local village seemed a relatively manageable misadventure. He loaded up some traps and headed to Barrow upon Soar to see if he could help locate the wayward creature. Mullins, who has a white beard, smiling eyes and maintains a steady, gentle rhythm when he speaks, had always nurtured a passion for wildlife – chasing it down, catching it. The interest took hold amid a challenging childhood. Aged five, Mullins was victim of a hit and run that left him with amnesia and he spent two years in hospital before his parents sent him to a special school to catch up with his education. It was there his interest in animals was sparked (he recalls sprinting after a hare in a field – “Sadly it was that little bit faster than I was” – and catching a bat that flew into the boy’s dormitory), so when a move to secondary school saw him the victim of bullying, the natural world became a sanctuary. By the late 1970s, as the beast of Exmoor, a vicious big cat said to roam the West Country, gained notoriety, he became enamoured with the phenomenon of British big cats. Curious about what other exotic animals could be out there, he found that wallabies, raccoons, pythons and many other species were hiding in Britain’s parishes, roaming the estates, hidden away in garden sheds. He started the Beastwatch group out of “pure curiosity”. Think of it as a data project: “What’s out there? Let’s find out.” But it was only in 2016 when Mullins set out to search for that missing skunk that the group’s potential became clear to him. When he arrived in Barrow upon Soar he met the distraught owner – a keen exotics keeper – and realised that many of these incongruous creatures he’d been fascinated by were people’s pets that had escaped or been freed. “I realised that it was time to stop treating these animals as statistics,” he says. “To roll my sleeves up and get stuck in… To try to help find them.” Mullins resolved that Beastwatch needed to refocus its purpose: the seed for the country’s first dedicated search and rescue operation for exotic animals was sown. As more attention is given to the issue of non-native invasive species in the UK, exotic pets have come under further scrutiny. Invasive species, which can disturb the equilibrium of a local ecosystem via predation, competition, or spreading disease, have been described as one of the top threats to biodiversity worldwide. It costs the UK economy up to £1.8bn a year, mainly through its impact on agricultural land or property damage. Many of the most problematic species – such as Japanese knotweed or the signal crayfish – were brought over as a result of trade and agriculture, but escaped pets represent another channel of entry. Exotic pets have been living in Britain since the Norman times. William the Conqueror kept a menagerie at Woodstock, Oxfordshire, which contained lions, camels and lynxes. The Tower of London counted leopards, bears and an African elephant among its residents. Tales of escapes go back centuries. A monkey that lived at the Tower broke free in 1754, climbed the walls and showered staff with roof tiles before it eventually returned to its cage of its own volition; a Bengal tiger went on an all-night rampage down London’s Piccadilly half a century later. The exotic pet trade as we know it took off in the second half of the 20th century. Between 1952 and 1965 the number of “foreign” animals that passed through Heathrow airport each month increased from 80 to 8,000, according to a 1965 feature in this very magazine that asked: “Is the pet business getting out of hand?” It’s grown ever since. The last two decades have seen a 60% increase in the number of exotic pets in the UK, according to a survey by the Born Free Foundation, a wildlife charity. It includes an estimated 3m reptiles, amphibians, invertebrates and birds. Last year there were 3,651 dangerous wild animals kept under licence. And no, they are not all safely at home with their owners. If anyone knows this, it’s Mullins. In 2006, Beastwatch conducted its first survey of exotic animal sightings. It counted 5,391 big cats, 51 wallabies, 43 snakes, 10 crocodiles, seven wolves and three pandas, among others, between 2000 and 2006. The big cat sightings are unverified – so perhaps speak to imaginations running wild, not just pets – but it has been estimated that about 500 big cats are loose in the UK. And yes, a red panda was found in the Birmingham suburbs in 2005 after escaping a nature park. “It is clear the UK contains far more exotic wild animals than the British public could ever imagine,” he told reporters at the time. Many historic escapees have already made themselves at home in the UK. Ring-necked parakeets, or the “grey-squirrel of the sky”, were kept as pets in the Victorian times. A colony first established itself in Kent in the late 1960s and there could now be up to 30,000 breeding pairs. Red-eared terrapins became hip in the 1980s amid Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtle-mania and can now be found nationwide. A small population of wallabies has lived in Staffordshire since the Second World War, when five of the marsupials escaped a zoo at Roaches Hall. A number of Himalayan porcupines established themselves in Devon during the 1970s after escaping a wildlife park. In 2009, a colony of skunks was found in the Forest of Dean. Raccoons, raccoon dogs and Siberian chipmunks are three mammals with the biggest potential to become established in the UK to the detriment of local wildlife according to a horizon-scanning report funded by Defra. Many raccoon dogs, or tanuki, were kept as pets in the UK until 2019 when the animal was added to the invasive species list. It is known as the “escapologist of the mammal world”. When Mullins was investigating that missing skunk, he picked up the Barrow upon Soar newsletter to discover the village also had a renegade raccoon dog; a photo had been printed of the animal rummaging in someone’s kitchen. The RSPCA does not have the resources to go looking for missing pets – however exotic – though will attend to them when found. The organisation has fielded an increasing number of calls regarding exotic animals over the past decade, many of which have been abandoned. In September it published a report with Born Free calling for tighter restrictions. Animals on the non-native invasive species list cannot be kept as a pet (unless you owned one before the species was listed), and dangerous animals require a licence from the council. Otherwise you can keep almost any animal as a pet in the UK. The Kept Animals Welfare Bill, which is currently moving through parliament, is set to ban the keeping of primates as pets and require anyone in possession of one to apply for a licence. Until then, even monkeys are fair game. While animal welfare charities, environmental groups, exotic keepers and the government grapple with the best way to manage the UK’s rapidly diversifying population of animals, the frequency with which they are popping up in unlikely circumstances is rising. Whether it’s a raccoon dog dumped by its owner, a much-loved python gone awry, or a suspected big cat on the Derbyshire hills, the fact is, the animals are out there. Who’s going to get them back? Mullins never did manage to catch the Barrow upon Soar skunk – the animal was later found by the owner trapped in a drain – but he returned home inspired. He put out a message to the Beastwatch Facebook community and a committee was formed to establish how to organise an effective search and rescue operation. His first successful recapture came a year later, when a creature-encounter company put out an appeal about another skunk, named Jasper, on the loose in Narborough, Leicestershire. Mullins showed up with a small team armed with humane traps and walkie talkies. It was caught within the hour. “That was remarkable,” says Mullins, who spotted it in a garden, took pursuit and helped corner it in an outhouse. “Sometimes we could be out for hours, days, weeks and nothing comes of it.” Mullins built a database of volunteers, but at first Beastwatch operated in a fairly loose fashion. Like Mullins, many Beastwatch members were interested in cryptozoology – animals whose existence is disputed, or that have roots in myth, legend or folklore. For many in the group these out-of-place animals were a similar phenomena. Cryptozoology was recreational, fun, nothing much depended on their success or failure in finding something. But one member who was eager to change this was Mike Potts, 54, the committee secretary. Potts shared an interest in cryptozoology, but what really intrigued him were the mysteries that surround real animals. The Beastwatch project tapped into his desire to make sense of the subversive side of nature and the legends that out-of-place animals can generate. “If they’re not escaped or released pets, they’re either unusual migratory visitors, or stowaways,” says Potts. Mullins and Potts hit it off. “He was full of enthusiasm,” says Mullins. “This was what we needed”. Potts knew that work needed to be done for Beastwatch to be credible. There are skills required to investigate a mystery beast or handle an exotic pet. They don’t always match. Potts became more selective with recruitment. “There’s no point having hundreds of volunteers if they won’t move from behind the keyboard.” Beastwatch began making its transition into a serious, albeit fringe, wildlife rescue group. In 2019, Potts took over as CEO. That summer it boasted another success when it recaptured two raccoon dogs reported by the BBC to have been “terrorising” residents around Clarborough, Nottinghamshire, “as if they were monsters,” says Potts. The Beastwatch team showed up to coordinate a search operation that boasted drones, thermal imaging technology and cameras as well as a team scouting the surrounding countryside. After a 96-hour search the raccoon dogs were recaptured. Climate change is increasing the threat of invasive species, but most escaped exotics are unlikely to survive long in the wilds of Britain, let alone become established. That’s the key reason Beastwatch believes it’s urgent to swiftly retrieve them. It’s a welfare issue. And a service for keepers that have been given the slip. Potts does not dispute the need for regulation, and that it should not be so easy to buy these creatures. On a cold, grey November day, I pay Potts a visit. He lives just outside Preston, in a semi-detached house. He shares it with his partner and fellow reptile aficionado Kate Ashley, 36, two of her children, and more than 30 animals. In the driveway is a car with a green sticker on the windscreen: “Emergency Animal Responder on Call”. There’s a stuffed leopard toy on the dashboard and a pile of cages on the back seat. Potts, who has a grey beard and thick black eyebrows, answers the door. We take a seat in the front room surrounded by reptile tanks. There’s a gecko, a salamander, leeches. Another is filled with cockroaches. He reaches into the tank and pulls out two of the insects. “These would make appropriate pets for children,” he says fondly as they crawl around his hands. They almost seem cuddly. He unlatches a door in the base of a black cabinet and a brown and white skunk named Bisto scuttles out and hides behind the sofa. “Cup of tea?” asks Potts. “Yes, please,” I reply. Many of the animals in his home are rescues that he has rehoused. Through the kitchen is a conservatory where a Savannah cat patrols more tanks containing a python and a boa. Beyond that is a concrete yard where Potts keeps two raccoon dogs. Potts wants Beastwatch to be taken seriously by the authorities. Sure, many of the early members were there for the big-cat chatter, but since then it has evolved into a network of experienced exotic keepers. Today it has 500 volunteers in local teams that cover every county in England, with four teams in Scotland and one in Northern Ireland. The group has 3,300 members and a steady stream of requests for help. Recent posts include a (now found) royal python in Rainham and a missing African grey parrot in Banks. They encounter about 100 cases a month, but Potts reckons it’s pushing 1,500 cases a year now. As well as proactively searching for missing animals, Beastwatch is connected to people with the facilities to home them. There’s a gap within the existing animal rescue infrastructure, Potts believes, and they can plug it. The doorbell rings. It’s Tracie Williams, executive director of operations for Beastwatch. Williams is a former RSPCA inspector who joined Beastwatch about four years ago. She is helping Potts build collaborative relationships with other wildlife groups and tout their unique skill set to the emergency services. “They effectively treat every single animal that isn’t a cat or dog as venomous,” says Williams. “So they’re looking for somebody to tell them: ‘Is this snake going to kill me?’” Another reason to have a good relationship with the police is that Beastwatch activity has a tendency to look suspicious. In October, Potts and Williams hot-footed it to Blackpool to join the hunt for a 4ft iguana. “It’s night-time and we’re going around back alleys with high-powered torches and peering over people’s fences,” says Williams, who phoned the local force to let them know. “An hour later they’re calling us back asking: ‘Have you found it? Is it OK? Will it live!?’” It was vindicating: “They showed real interest,” she says. As for the iguana? Conveniently, it was bright orange. The lizard was soon spotted in the low branches of a tree and caught with the help of a snake hook. Potts shared a celebratory post on the Beastwatch Facebook page. “You can keep your hedgehogs and pigeons folks – this is what we live for!” He whooped. While Potts charges onwards – he wants Beastwatch to be a household name – Mullins is happy to take a step back from the day-to-day operation. He never imagined Beastwatch would take the course it did, though his love for the chase still pulses through it. “I was gobsmacked at how quickly it evolved,” he says. “When people started joining it was wonderful. I couldn’t have asked for more.” Today, Mullins still keeps tabs on notable sightings and goes on excursions from time to time. “I’ve been given some leads, which would be interesting to chase up,” he says. “I need to put it out there in the local press again – see if I can get some more information.” He’s fixing up a motorhome so he can tour the country. Spread the Beastwatch gospel. In the meantime the creatures on his doorstep keep him occupied. There are badgers that come up to his house every night. He feeds them, talks to them. “They can be very entertaining animals,” he says. “Squirrels, too. I do love them. They’re an invasive species – so we’re not supposed to – but they’re cute little buggers.” Whether it should be here or not, Mullins is satisfied with whatever is out there. He doesn’t go in for pets. “I have four chickens,” he says.“It’s been two years since we’ve played live,” singer Suggs declares, reflecting on how the pandemic derailed this British pop institution. “I’ve found myself singing at old grannies at the bus stop.” Still, within seconds, band and audience resume their positions for the traditional festive staple of a Madness December tour. Around a quarter of the crowd are wearing fezzes. The sunglassed, besuited vocalist begins the evening in a stage-left phone box, supposedly phoning his mum, and still has the charmingly befuddled air of someone who woke up from a dream to find himself onstage in an arena. At 60, he changes the “I’m feeling twice as older” line in 1980’s Embarrassment to “three times as older”. He doesn’t need to complete the “Hey you, don’t watch that …” intro to One Step Beyond – the audience do it for him. Without a new album to promote, this tour leans heavily on the hits, and The Prince and a glorious My Girl set a high bar which, in fairness, they don’t drop far below all night. More recent songs NW5 and Mr Apples easily punch their weight. The “nutty boys” image belies the rich content of Madness’s material, which documents all sorts of aspects of British life including homelessness and racial prejudice. Two songs are so new they are unreleased. Baby Burglar reflects on a misspent youth of “petty criminality” over a samba-ish rhythm. “I thought I might go mad in the last couple of years, but who’s to say I wasn’t already?” Suggs quips, by way of introducing If I Go Mad, which has enough hooks to become yet another Madness banger. The venue’s boomy sound and a missed vocal cue at the start of The Sun and the Rain can’t dampen a fearsome home run of classics, and that song is beautifully illustrated with film of Gene Kelly in Singing in the Rain. Their own street scene stage backdrop is perfect for Our House, and It Must Be Love becomes an epic sing-song. “No more singing to old ladies!” yells Suggs, surveying the crowd rapture. “This is the stuff!” • Madness play Bournemouth International Centre on 6 December. Then touring, with Squeeze supporting on all dates.Man, I love being cancelled,” said Dave Chappelle to a crowd of 19,000, after his Netflix special saw a member of staff walk out in protest at the way they’d handled complaints for his jokes about trans people. Leaked internal financial data revealed that Netflix had spent more than $20m on each of Chappelle’s shows, a figure that goes some way towards persuading me that “cancel culture” could be one of the most profitable startups in living memory. I read Chappelle’s quotes on my phone while waiting for a friend in central London, a place now frosty and faintly hysterical, standing outside what appeared to be a Monopoly theme park. Yes, just up from the closed-down Habitat is a new and gleaming theatre, where for approximately £60 you can play an immersive version of Monopoly. By Christmas this may be the only way for most people of us to enjoy the experience of buying a house in London – strolling round a massive board with colleagues who have fattened significantly since they last shared a workspace, slightly drunk on red cocktails, alternately yearning for home and sickening at the idea that this fun must end, and by midnight, confused completely by the concept of cash. As well as offering a cheery dystopian thrill, it reminded me slightly of the latest grift, sorry, gift from the “anti-woke” community, the University of Austin. Launched by a group of cancelled academics in “fearless pursuit of truth”, it is so far similarly illusory. Very much a work in progress it as yet has no campus, no degree programmes, no faculty – it is just a glossy facade. It becomes more and more clear that a defining feature of “cancel culture” is not, as one might expect, silence, apology or shame. A defining feature of cancel culture is lots and lots of money. Of course, it’s worth stressing that there is still no real consensus on what cancel culture actually is. Everybody has a different idea of what it means, or what it should mean, to be “cancelled”, a word I must regularly accessorise with frilly quote marks for sanity – it is used to describe the consequences of social transgressions, but used in a way that attempts to shame the critic. This vagueness of meaning allows almost any conservative or contrarian or person who’s facing a little online friction to benefit from cancelled status. And the benefits can be vast. The beauty of embracing a cancelled identity is that it imbues on the cancelled an aura of rebellious glamour. Rather than being seen as maybe mean, possibly out of touch, perhaps a bit of a bully, they become an outlaw. This exoticism allows them to take their next steps through a cloud of virtual cigarette smoke, their opinions quickly rinsed of offence, now suddenly bewitchingly controversial. Simply by dabbling in the forbidden, regardless of what they said or did, they have become interesting. Which leads to attention, which leads to celebrity, which leads to profit, both for the cancelled and those that report on them, hi. Louis CK, who promised to “step back” after accusations of sexual misconduct (and saw his TV series literally, actually, properly cancelled) has been nominated for a Grammy for best comedy album. His career has no doubt been impacted by the revelations, but it’s difficult to say if the darkness that attached itself to him after sexually intimidating multiple women has had a wholly negative effect, or whether, in fact, it has also found him a new audience, with critics seeing depths down among the weeds. As has Marilyn Manson, currently facing three sexual assault lawsuits, with accusations from more than a dozen women of psychological, sexual and physical abuse. It’s not fair to lump all the “cancelled” men in together, I know, and perhaps theirs are actually some of the best albums of the year, of the decade, of all time. It’s possible! It’s possible. But when industry judges behind awards like the Grammys choose to lift up those accused over the countless other artists vying for space, including other artists who did not, for instance, build soundproof booths in which they imprisoned “bad” girlfriends (as Manson is accused of doing) or masturbate in front of female comics (Louis CK), knowing that doing so sends a very clear message to the world, about art, about rewards, about who and what really matters, it does make you question what justice should look like today. When even literal cancellation likely leads to glittering prizes. No doubt there are people right now putting the final touches on a racist tweet designed to get them thoroughly and gloriously cancelled tomorrow, an eye on the riches ahead. No doubt there are people right now, practicing their spicy opinions on gender and rubbing their thighs at the promise of a many-lunched career in punditry. If this is not reason enough to cancel any belief in “cancel culture” then I don’t know what is. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWisemanA black British spin on the Richard Curtis formula, Boxing Day recycles plenty of the Christmas romcom themes – lots of extravagant public declarations of love; an entire plot that hangs on the fact that key characters fail to tell each other basic information – and sets them to a glossily antiseptic musical accompaniment courtesy of Little Mix star Leigh-Anne Pinnock. Aml Ameen directs and stars, playing a successful, Hollywood-based novelist returning home to visit his extended British Caribbean family in London for Christmas with his American fiancee, Lisa (a likable Aja Naomi King), in tow. A charismatic cast inject some sparkle, but the contrived plotting and thin characterisation take some of the shine off this festive bauble.In a warehouse laboratory in Berkeley, California, Nicholas Flanders stands in front of a shiny metal box about the size of a washing machine. Inside is a stack of metal plates that resemble a club sandwich – only the filling is a black polymer membrane coated with proprietary metal catalyst. “We call the membrane the black leaf,” he says. Flanders is the co-founder and CEO of Twelve, a startup founded in 2015, which received a $57m funding boost in July. It aims to take air – or, to be more precise, the carbon dioxide (CO2) in it – and transform it into something useful, as plants also do, eliminating damaging emissions in the process. Taking the unwanted gas wreaking havoc on our climate and using only water and renewable electricity, Twelve’s metal box houses a new kind of electrolyser that transforms the CO2 into synthesis gas (syngas), a mix of carbon monoxide and hydrogen that can be made into a range of familiar products usually made from fossil fuels. Oxygen is the only by-product. This August, the pilot scale equipment made the syngas that went into what Flanders claims is the world’s first carbon neutral, fossil-free jet fuel produced by electrolysing CO2. “This is a new way of moving carbon through our economy without pulling it out of the ground,” he says. Twelve is one of many companies beginning to make stuff out of CO2, captured either from industrial emissions or directly from the air. High-end goods such as vodka, diamonds and activewear, industrial materials such as concrete, plastic, foam and carbon fibre, and even food, are all beginning to be created using CO2. In addition to jet fuel, which is a partnership with the US air force, Twelve has been using its syngas to explore making parts of car interiors with Mercedes-Benz, laundry detergent ingredients with Tide and sunglasses lenses with Pangaia. Online marketplaces such as Expedition Air and SkyBaron are even springing up to sell consumer goods made with CO2 emissions. “We are at the very early end of a new carbon tech industry,” says Pat Sapinsley, of the Urban Future Lab at New York University, who oversees a new accelerator programme to help fledgling startups get a foothold. While the industry is still only emerging – most activity is only at bench or pilot scale – it is estimated by the Lab there are now about 350 startups hoping to deliver so-called carbon-to-value. Venture capital investment has sharply risen. This year, over $550m had flowed in by the end of September according to research and consulting firm Cleantech Group; that’s more than in the previous five years put together. The sector could have the potential to reduce the world’s CO2 emissions by more than 10%, according to analysis by the University of Michigan’s Global CO2 Initiative, which aims to help the sector emerge (fuels and building materials such as concrete and aggregates are considered to hold the biggest CO2 mitigation – and market – potential). That contribution, advocates argue, firmly makes carbon utilisation part of the suite of technologies we are going to need to reach the net zero commitments governments and corporations have been making and which, it is becoming clear, can’t be met by renewable electricity alone. “I don’t see a path to net zero without these kinds of technologies,” says Richard Youngman, CEO of Cleantech Group. Premium running shoe brand On – which went public this September – realised that if it was going to reach its aggressive net zero targets it would need to rethink its materials. Its vision is now that half of all its shoe bottom foam will be made not from petrochemicals but captured carbon. Last month, it announced plans to team up with US-based startup LanzaTech – an early pioneer of the sector, which uses a patented fermentation process to make ethanol out of waste carbon monoxide collected from factories which would otherwise be burnt to emit CO2 – and chemical manufacturer Borealis, which makes the foam by polymerising ethylene (to which ethanol can be converted). On is hoping to unveil its first pair of shoes made wholly from captured carbon sometime next year (it has separate arrangements to make the shoe uppers). That first pair will cost about $1m to make, says Caspar Coppetti, On’s co-founder and executive co-chairman. It’s a lab endeavour to prove viability – but, eventually, when it scales, he doesn’t expect the shoes to cost much more than a regular pair. It’s not that CO2 isn’t already used industrially (think carbonated beverages). But those uses either put the gas unchanged back into the atmosphere or, in the case of enhanced oil recovery, where injected CO2 pushes out oil and then remains underground, still perpetuates the extraction of new fossil fuels. What’s different here is that waste CO2 is chemically transformed to make new products. Some, such as building materials, eliminate emissions by locking the carbon away permanently; others, such as jet fuel, prevent new emissions by recycling already emitted carbon. Often grouped with utilisation is CO2 sequestration, which promises to store large amounts of captured CO2 permanently underground, but the two are quite different, as advocates point out. “It’s almost a sin to throw away a valuable resource,” says Volker Sick, a professor of mechanical engineering at the University of Michigan who directs the Global CO2 Initiative. “The beauty of carbon is you can make so many different things.” New York-based startup Air Company, launched in 2017, is selling CO2-made vodka and perfume, and produced hand sanitiser during the pandemic. Like Twelve, it starts with CO2, water and renewable energy but combines them in its reactor to make alcohols such as ethanol. A litre of vodka removes a pound of CO2, and it may soon even use CO2 captured from the heating systems of Manhattan office buildings (in a collaboration with capture startup CarbonQuest). But, like Twelve, Air Company has jet fuel in its sights – which can also be produced from ethanol. It is a crowded field – others pressing ahead with CO2-made jet fuel include LanzaJet, a spinoff from ethanol maker LanzaTech, and SynHelion, which uses solar energy to transform CO2 to syngas. Typically, it is small amounts – think litres per hour – of jet fuel being made at this stage, says Ian Hayton, a materials and chemicals analyst at Cleantech Group. But countries are beginning to introduce quotas for sustainable aviation fuels, which could move things forwards. And the advantage of making it from CO2, rather than biomass or waste vegetable oils, is that it uses far less land. Canadian company CarbonCure, founded in 2012, is one of the pioneers on the building materials side. Backed by investors such as Breakthrough Energy Ventures, Bill Gates’s investment firm, its technology involves injecting CO2 into concrete as it is being mixed. The injected CO2 reacts with the wet concrete and rapidly becomes permanently stored as a mineral, the same one as in limestone. CarbonCure’s business model is to license its technology to concrete manufacturers themselves. CarbonCure retrofits their systems, transforming them into carbon tech companies (the CO2 is supplied by waste emission sources in their region). It gives them a green sales advantage, but really what the concrete producers like is the economic benefit, says co-founder and CEO Robert Niven. It means less cement is needed to make the concrete – most are able to reduce their cement content by about 5% – and the addition of the CO2 also strengthens the final material. It is hard to imagine that food in the form of protein could be mass produced from CO2, but that is exactly what another subset of carbon tech companies are working on. Some, such as Solar Foods in Finland, and Air Protein in California – which uses the tagline “meat made from air” – intend their products for human consumption, while others, such as UK- and Netherlands-based Deep Branch, are focusing on animal feed ingredients. With inputs typically of CO2, water and renewable electricity along with ammonia and nutrients, their proteins are produced in bioreactors from naturally occurring microbes. The microbes grow and multiply and are then dried out to produce a protein powder with all the essential amino acids. “It is somewhere between dried meat, dried soy and dried carrot,” says Pasi Vainikka, Solar Foods co-founder and CEO, of its product Solein. Admittedly, that doesn’t sound very appetising, but, says Vainikka, the taste comes in the final product and Solein is versatile. It could replace pea and soy protein isolate in processed foods or even be used as a feed for the cultivated meat industry. Treated with heat and pressure, it can be eaten like a tasty slab of steak or tofu. Two kilograms of CO2 makes a kilogram of the product and it has been submitted to food regulators in Europe and the UK for novel food approval. Yet the field also faces many challenges to come to fruition. First, if the technology is really going to serve the climate, it has to be scaled up for mass production quickly and offer price-competitive products. “There’s no point unless we can deliver on scale,” says Allison Dring, CEO of German startup Made of Air, which is focusing on plastics replacements. Many of the companies have plans for their first commercial facilities – Twelve, for example, which has designed its equipment to be modular so it can easily be added to increase capacity, a bit like a solar farm, hopes to have its first shipping container-sized plant by next year and predicts significant commercial volume by 2023. But scaling up is capital intensive and takes time. One specific roadblock is finding customers. The startups need bigger companies to pair up with to buy their CO2-made raw materials, but it can be hard for them to break into established supply chains. A big focus of the startup accelerator programme run out of the Urban Futures Lab, called the C2V Initiative, is on making inter-industry connections but, really, more early movers like On are needed. CarbonCure is proud of the fact that 450 concrete plants have been retrofitted with its technology – accounting for virtually all the carbon utilisation project deployments to date, says Niven – but it is only a tiny fraction of the more than 100,000 concrete plants there are worldwide. “Right now, what we need is partners,” he says. Another bottleneck to scale may be providing the large and low-cost quantities of CO2 needed. While technologies are certainly established to capture CO2 from industrial sources, it is only done on a minuscule scale at present, experts note. Direct air capture is less technologically developed and more expensive. And infrastructure will be needed to move the CO2 if, for example, it is being captured in a different place from where it is being used. Massive government intervention and support are required for rapid growth, say advocates – be that by setting a carbon price, through procurement policies in government contracts that require CO2-based alternatives, or by infrastructure investment. “This needs to be exponential growth… and we need policies to support it,” says Peter Styring, an expert in carbon capture and utilisation at the University of Sheffield, who directs its Centre for Carbon Dioxide Utilisation. And while recent US efforts are welcomed – the US infrastructure bill, for example, includes over $8bn for direct air capture and CO2 transportation and storage – “there is space for governments to be braver,” says Cleantech’s Youngman. More detailed guidelines for carbon accounting might also be needed to aid consumer acceptance. Life cycle analyses for the products need to take the whole of the supply chain into account, but companies can set the boundaries in a way that excludes some processes. “We studied concrete production and, in some cases, it actually was worse than just making regular concrete,” says Sick. Both he and Styring are working on improving how companies might perform their assessments as part of an international effort. And just how controversial carbon utilisation will be remains an open question. Not everyone is gung-ho. Innovation has a role to play in curbing climate change, says Mike Childs, head of policy at the environmental campaign group Friends of the Earth, but such “wonder technologies” are “unproven” to work at the massive scale envisaged and are therefore a “huge gamble” with both people’s lives and the planet. “We know that driving down emissions at source is the best and cheapest way to limit global heating,” he says, adding that the technology also risks providing political and business leaders with justification to keep burning fossil fuels. The transition away from fossil fuels is a must, say the advocates of CO2 utilisation. But if we want modern life to go on as normal without sacrifices, we’ll need to find new ways of continuing to produce the goods fossil fuels have given us. This industry, they argue, will not only help mitigate climate change but provide the carbon-based products we will always need. “There’s a lot of ‘climate don’ts’,” says Flanders. “[But] you can actually continue to use products that you like, just made in a better way.” • This article was amended on 5 December 2021. Syngas is short for synthesis gas, not synthetic gas as stated in an earlier version.Inspired by the harrowing real-life stories of adopted children who find themselves facing deportation from the US to the countries of their birth, Blue Bayou is an eye-opening glimpse into a dysfunctional side of America. Justin Chon wrote, directs and stars in the picture, about a Korean American man raised in the Louisiana bayou who finds himself targeted by US Immigration and Customs Enforcement just as his wife (a miscast Alicia Vikander) is about to give birth to their first child. Chon’s directing choices are bold and sometimes interesting, but the screenplay – a big old overcooked melodrama that chucks in everything from a motorcycle chase to a terminal cancer subplot – is an almighty mess. Kudos, though, for a wrenching final scene involving Chon’s character, Antonio, and his stepdaughter, Jesse (Sydney Kowalske), that lays bare the human cost of an inhumane policy.Millennials are getting old. The people on the upper end of that demographic – defined by Pew Research as those born between 1981 and 1996 – are now pushing 40. They’re the dominant part of the workforce. But that dominance is quickly – and naturally – eroding to the next class of workplace warriors. That would be the members of Generation Z, or those born (according to the same Pew report) from 1997 and after. A 2018 study from Deloitte says that Gen Zers (they define this generation as born in 1995, so there’s overlap with Pew above) are already about 24% of the US population, so it’s clear that they will become the majority of workers within the next decade. By that time, many of the older class of business owners – mostly my class – will have retired or moved on. The millennials who were once the anti-establishment will be the establishment, the managers, the owners. Gen Zers are entering the workforce with knowledge and a confidence that my generation couldn’t dream of. They understand more about the economy, technology and the world than I ever did at that age. This is a generation that’s not only more diverse but one that embraces diversity. According to the above research: “Gen Z is the most ethnically and racially diverse generation in history: one in four is Hispanic, 14% are African-American and 6% are Asian. And their views on gender and identity are unprecedented and untraditional: Gen Z refuses to turn ethnicity and race into checkboxes on a survey form.” Gen Z want to work for – and have equity in – companies that have sound principles and exist to truly make the world a better place. These workers are quick to criticize their own employers when their actions contradict their social or moral beliefs. Gen Zers bring with them not only a lifelong experience with the cloud, social media and mobile technology but – because they’ve known and adapted to this stuff since birth – are also open to more technology, more changes, more adaptations. They expect their employers to embrace the latest if it will help them be productive, independent and better balance their work and personal lives. They’re on the forefront of augmented reality, green tech and mental health platforms. Like all generations they’ll be pushed by the generation before them on this, but probably not as hard because this generation has so much technological momentum already. All of this is great. But even with all of this – the confidence, the diversity, the activism, the technological intelligence – Gen Zers lack a critical thing that employers cannot ignore. And that critical thing is the secret to managing them. It’s experience. This generation are still just kids and let’s not forget that. They may not like to admit it but they know it. And they want our help. There is already much being written about how to manage this up-and-coming group. But in the end, knowing this secret is the most important thing. Like any young person looking to impress, Gen Zers want to appear that they know the answers. And having that self-confidence is good. But we, as employers, should know better. We should understand that underneath that façade is someone who is not as confident as they appear. We should recognize that it is our job to weigh all the good things that this generation brings to the workplace with the secret that they don’t know very much about the realities of running a business. What realities? For starters, it’s that more sales are made and more ideas are formed when people spend more time face-to-face rather than working from home. Or that too much software, technology and AI takes away a manager’s ability to make judgments that only humans can make. Or that sometimes – but not always – it makes more business sense to hire an experienced, middle-aged salesperson over an inexperienced, younger person. We will have to help this generation understand that in order to earn more money and be entitled to greater benefits one must work for a while to gain the confidence, trust and experience of their employer. We will need to take pains to help younger workers accept the fact that they are indeed on the lowest rung of ladder, which may require them working odd hours or doing tasks that no one else wants to do. With all the great things Gen Z brings to the workplace there’s an even greater thing that we, as employers, can give back to them. We can help them survive their 20s and emerge with the knowledge and experience that’s needed to make profits and build value so that their generation – and future generations – can have jobs and opportunities that sustain their families. Understanding that for all their many assets they still lack experience is truly the secret to successfully managing this generation.The government is launching a national review into the killing of six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes to protect other children from harm and identify improvements needed in the agencies that came into contact with him before his death. Announcing the review on Sunday, the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, said the government would not rest until it had the answers it needed. Arthur was tortured and killed after weeks of abuse during lockdown last year. Social services were notified of concerns from family members who found bruises on the boy’s body but a home visit found “no safeguarding concerns”. Arthur was left with an unsurvivable brain injury while in the sole care of 32-year-old Emma Tustin, who on Friday was jailed for life after being convicted of murder by assaulting the child in Solihull on 16 June 2020. Tustin’s sentence carries a minimum term of 29 years, while Arthur’s father, Thomas Hughes, was sentenced to 21 years for manslaughter. “Arthur’s murder has shocked and appalled the nation. I am deeply distressed by this awful case and the senseless pain inflicted on this poor boy, who has been robbed of the chance to live his life,” Zahawi said. “I can announce that this government is launching a national review into the circumstances leading up to his tragic death to determine what improvements are needed by the agencies that came into contact with him. “This will identify the lessons that must be learnt from Arthur’s case for the benefit of other children elsewhere in England, to be led by the national child safeguarding practice review panel who will work with Solihull safeguarding children’s partnership.” The national review will in effect “upgrade” the existing local review, which was launched shortly after Arthur’s death in June 2020 but paused for the court case. Zahawi also said the government was commissioning four inspectorates, covering social care, health, police and probation, to carry out an urgent inspection of the safeguarding agencies in Solihull who were aware of Arthur’s case. He said: “All the agencies tasked with protecting children at risk of abuse and neglect in Solihull will be subject to a joint targeted area inspection to consider their effectiveness and advise on where improvements must be made.” “We are determined to protect children from harm and where concerns are raised we will not hesitate to take urgent and robust action. We will not rest until we have the answers we need,” he added. Zahawi is expected to make a statement to the House of Commons about Arthur’s case on Monday. On Sunday, hundreds of people gathered in Solihull near to Tustin’s former address to pay tribute to Arthur. The crowd released balloons and laid flowers in his memory. Others placed posters and drawings on the boarded-up property where the family used to live. Speaking about Arthur’s case, the children’s commissioner for England, Dame Rachel de Souza, urged the prime minister not to close schools again following the emergence of the Omicron variant as lockdown weakened the system of support for children. “I think there’s no doubt that lockdown was such a shock to the whole nation that it weakened the system of support,” she told the BBC One’s The Andrew Marr Show. “But actually in Arthur’s case he did have a number of professionals around him, he did have home visits, we have to wait to hear exactly what’s happened there.” She said more must be done to help social workers to spot cases like Arthur’s. “The system must support social workers’ professional curiosity, not distract them on other things. This is not a quick fix, an easy recommendation. The best places in the country that do this have taken three, four, five years to do this. It’s a big job but we must do it for Arthur and we have to do it.” Over the next few days the Department for Education (DfE) will work with the national panel and the Solihull partnership to agree a timeline for publication of the review. In a statement, the DfE said: “The national review takes into account the significance and scale of the circumstances of Arthur’s murder, allowing findings to be disseminated around the country to improve practice and identify the lessons that must be learnt.”The Omicron variant is “spreading pretty rapidly” across the UK and new travel rules will be too late to prevent a potential wave of infections, one of the government’s scientific advisers has said. Ministers have announced all passengers arriving in the UK will have to take a pre-departure Covid test because of fears about the spread of the new variant. The measures will be introduced on Tuesday. Prof Mark Woolhouse, a member of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling (Spi-M), said the move was too late to make a “material difference”. Asked about the new travel rules on BBC One’s The Andrew Marr Show, he said: “I think that may be a case of shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted. “If Omicron is here in the UK, and it certainly is, if there’s community transmission in the UK, and it certainly looks that way, then it’s that community transmission that will drive a next wave. The cases that are being imported are important, we want to detect those and isolate any positive cases we find, as we would for any case anywhere. But I think it’s too late to make a material difference to the course of the Omicron wave if we’re going to have one.” The latest figures from the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) show that a further 26 cases of the variant had been reported across the UK as of Saturday night, taking the total so far to 160. “The numbers are still quite small, so the absolute number of Omicron cases in the UK, I would strongly suspect, is more in the hundreds than the thousands,” Woolhouse, a professor of infectious disease epidemiology at the University of Edinburgh, said. “But the important point is that they’re growing and they’re growing quite fast.” He also said he believed Omicron could become the most dominant variant globally. “The Omicron variant is highly transmissible, it appears to be spreading very rapidly in South Africa and the early signs are that it’s spreading pretty rapidly in the UK too,” he said. “If those trends continue then over the course of the coming weeks and months, Omicron could even come to replace Delta entirely right around the world.” Despite the threat posed by the variant, however, vaccines would still be “very, very good” against it, he said. “Vaccinologists and immunologists think that this variant won’t evade the vaccines entirely. It’s important to remember that against the Delta variant, which is a different variant, the booster vaccinations have turned out to be very effective, well into the 90% protection against infection but also against disease and putting people in hospital. So even if the vaccines were slightly less effective against Omicron they would still be very, very good.” A South African health researcher has said early data suggests the new variant is highly transmissible, but that it has a less than 1% chance of re-infection and typically results in “milder” disease. Speaking to Andrew Marr, Prof Willem Hanekom, the director of the Africa Health Research Institute in South Africa, said: “We know three things that we didn’t know last week, the first thing is that the virus is spreading extraordinarily fast in South Africa, the increase in cases is much steeper than it’s been in the past three waves so it seems that Omicron is able to spread very easily and virtually all the cases that we see in South Africa right now are Omicron. “The second thing we have data on is reinfections, so as you know, after you’ve had Covid you have about a 1% chance, or perhaps even less than a 1% chance, of getting reinfected and even getting disease again, of course, by this virus. “The third little bit of data we have already relates to clinical cases and how severe the disease is. The only data suggests the disease may occur more in younger people and mostly younger people who are unvaccinated and overall so far the disease has appeared to be milder but again I want to say we have to be cautious. These are very early days.” The statistician Prof Sir David Spiegelhalter echoed Hanekom’s comments Omicron did not look “really severe” when people got it, he said. He told Trevor Phillips on Sunday on Sky News: “In South Africa there’s data coming out showing pretty strong evidence that the increased risk of transmission and some evidence about people going to hospital, but it may actually be milder but we haven’t got enough data yet to be able to say. It doesn’t look as if it’s really severe if you get it, I think that’s about all we can say at the moment.”Four stories from contemporary Iran, all linked by the theme of capital punishment and suppression of freedoms, make up this Berlin Golden Bear-winning drama from Mohammad Rasoulof. It’s a typically forthright and powerful work from the director, who was sentenced to a year in prison in 2020 after three of his films were found to be “propaganda against the system”. Rather than take as its subject the prisoners sentenced to death, the film instead explores the impact on those who must enact the order; who, one way or another, are left with their own life sentences. A father and husband goes about the banal business of family life, but the comfortable existence that his job buys for his wife and daughter leaves him with chinks of trauma that leak through on the drive to work in the small hours of the morning. A soldier finds himself unable to follow the order to execute and makes a decision to escape instead. An older man lives with the consequences of making that same choice. Bleakly matter-of-fact in approach, the film has a devastating cumulative power that grows with each story.Written for performance at the London Hippodrome in 1912, Leoncavallo’s Zingari (“Gypsies”) was hugely successful in its day, and second in popularity only to Pagliacci among his operas in his lifetime, although like so many of his scores, revivals became sporadic after his death in 1919. Opera Rara, however, who have done so much to champion Leoncavallo’s work of late, chose it to mark their return to live music after lockdown with a terrific concert performance conducted by Carlo Rizzi, with an outstanding cast. The work itself is extraordinarily effective, if by no means a masterpiece. Based on Pushkin’s 1824 poem The Gypsies, it deals with Radu, a disaffected aristocrat who joins a band of Gypsies after falling in love with the independent-spirited Fleana, the daughter of the Old Man who is their leader. Love turns to murderous obsession, however, when she becomes attracted to the Gypsy Tamar, who has always adored her. The similarities with Carmen are not coincidental: Prosper Mérimée, on whose novel Bizet’s masterpiece is based, was also Pushkin’s first French translator. Leoncavallo’s score is occasionally hampered by his indiscriminate use of generic Eastern European and Orientalist tropes for his Gypsies: a polonaise, mazurka and czárdás, and chromatic or modal melismas in some of Fleana’s vocal lines. But the love duets are fiercely sensual, and the way Leoncavallo probes the escalating tensions of the central emotional triangle has you hooked by the end. It’s hard to imagine it better done, either. Arsen Soghomonyan was the dark-voiced, passionate Radu, slowly losing control when faced with Krassimira Stoyanova’s imperious, self-determined Fleana, gloriously sung. Stephen Gaertner, handsome sounding as Tamar, did wonders with his seductive serenade – a hit number in 1912 – while Łukasz Goliński was the stoical, knowing Old Man, unfazed by the murkiness of human nature. Rizzi conducted with formidable intensity, and the playing (the Royal Philharmonic) and choral singing (the Opera Rara Chorus) were both first rate. The performance was preceded by Rizzi’s own arrangement of an orchestral digest from Puccini’s Tosca, finely done, though it fails to capture the power of the original. Zingari, however, will linger in the memory as a superb achievement. • This article was amended on 5 December 2021 to correct the subheading. An earlier version had the composer of Zingari as Pagliacci (the composer’s most famous opera) instead of Leoncavallo.A US congressman has posted a Christmas picture of himself and what appears to be his family, smiling and posing with an assortment of guns, just days after four teenagers were killed in a shooting at a high school in Michigan. Thomas Massie of Kentucky tweeted: “Merry Christmas! ps. Santa, please bring ammo.” Ethan Crumbley, 15, faces charges of terrorism and murder after the deadliest school shooting in the US this year. His parents were arrested on Saturday in connection with the killing of Tate Myre, 16, Hana St Juliana, 14, and 17-year-olds Madisyn Baldwin and Justin Shilling at Oxford high school near Detroit. Six other students and a teacher were wounded in Tuesday’s shooting. Massie, who represents a solidly Republican district, posted the picture of himself and six others holding firearms resembling machine guns and semi-automatic weaponry, some of which are made to look almost identical to fully automatic weapons. Under US law, weapons such as machine guns are restricted to the military, law enforcement and civilians who have obtained special licenses for weapons made before May 1986. Jonathan Van Norman, a campaign manager for Massie, did not immediately reply to a request for comment via Twitter. The Democratic US Representative John Yarmuth condemned his fellow Kentuckian’s post. “I’m old enough to remember Republicans screaming that it was insensitive to try to protect people from gun violence after a tragedy,” Yarmuth tweeted, apparently referring to calls for gun control laws. “I promise not everyone in Kentucky is an insensitive asshole,” he added. The shooting in Oxford, Michigan, was the latest in a string of such incidents that have prompted fierce debates over school safety, gun control and gun rights. A judge in Michigan set bail at $500,000 (£378,000) each for Ethan’s parents, after authorities arrested the couple on Saturday after a manhunt. Appearing by videolink from jail for their arraignment, James and Jennifer Crumbley both pleaded not guilty to four counts of involuntary manslaughter. The Oakland County prosecutor Karen McDonald told the hearing the Crumbleys withdrew $4,000 from an ATM while authorities were searching for them and remained a flight risk. “These are not people that we can be assured will return to court on their own,” McDonald said. Authorities began searching for the Crumbleys after prosecutors said on Friday that the couple would be charged with manslaughter in connection with the shooting. Prosecutors said the Crumbleys bought a handgun for their son as a Christmas present and then ignored warning signs including on the day of the shooting. The judge, Julie Nicholson, said on Saturday she had “some concern about the flight risk” posed by the couple after they did not appear for the Friday arraignment. The Crumbleys’ lawyers have said the couple never sought to evade authorities. “Our clients were absolutely going to turn themselves in,” one of the lawyers said at Saturday’s hearing. “It was just a matter of logistics.” Detroit’s chief of police, James White, told reporters on Saturday that the couple had been found hiding in a commercial building on the east side of the city. He said they had not broken into the building, but were let in by somebody. White said the couple’s vehicle had been outside the building. Four days before the shooting, Ethan accompanied his father to a gun shop, where James Crumbley bought a 9mm handgun, prosecutors said. Ethan posted photos of the gun on social media, writing: “Just got my new beauty today,” and adding a heart emoji. The next day his mother posted that the two of them were at a gun range “testing out his new Christmas present”, McDonald said. The prosecutor detailed a number of other warning signs that she said the parents failed to act on. On 21 November, a teacher found Ethan searching for ammunition online on his phone and alerted school officials, who left messages for his mother that went unreturned. His mother later texted him: “LOL, I’m not mad at you. You have to learn not to get caught.” On the morning of the shooting, a teacher discovered drawings by Ethan that depicted a handgun, a bullet, and a bleeding figure next to the words “blood everywhere”, “y life is useless”, and “the thoughts won’t stop – help me”. Ethan told school counsellors the drawings were for a video game he was designing, and that he wanted to pursue video game design as a career, according to a letter that the Oxford community schools superintendent, Tim Throne, sent the school community on Saturday. “At no time did counsellors believe the student might harm others based on his behaviour, responses and demeanour, which appeared calm,” Throne said. School officials summoned the Crumbleys and instructed them to get Ethan into counselling within 48 hours, McDonald said. She added that the parents resisted the idea of taking their son home, and did not search his backpack or ask him about the gun.Over the course of more than a decade, the documentary film-maker Luke Holland collected interviews with surviving witnesses and participants of Hitler’s Third Reich. The result is an exhaustive study that was completed shortly before Holland’s death last year. In some ways, Final Account draws a line under a period of history that has been explored extensively before. But it also hints, in several chilling segments, at how pervasive some of the ideas that formed the core of Nazi ideology remain, even now. This is not, the film argues, the time for complacency.Exhilarating, mighty, radical, tender, as disturbing as it is beautiful, Life Between Islands is a revelation from first to last. It follows 70 years of tumultuous history through art. Agonising departures and brutal arrivals, kindness, cruelty and community, uprising, oppression and unceasing injustice: all are carried in powerful films and photographs, spectacular sculptures and paintings, portraits sketched on police stop-and-search reports, even a walk-in front room where Joyce, the imaginary inhabitant, recreates her old home down to the crocheted doilies and velour map of Saint Vincent. Playing on the vintage telly is Horace Ové’s 1976 classic Pressure, the first feature film by a black British director, following the teenager Tony, born in Britain to parents from Trinidad, through the cycle of educational deprivation, poverty, racism and eventual unemployment that grinds on today. The Notting Hill setting appears throughout the show – 60s photos of black-white couples snogging outside the Piss House pub, and carnival in full flourish, until its violent suppression by police in the 80s – depicted in Tam Joseph’s stark painting of black helmets and riot shields closing in on a single costumed man, hunted to oblivion. Zak Ové, son of Horace, is showing two unforgettable figures – a female devil with cowrie eyes and legs of beach flotsam, and a great shaggy head of ropes, mops and wigs. Both reprise Caribbean legends as contemporary shamans, outlandishly menacing. The Brixton front room in Njideka Akunyili Crosby’s 2018 painting Remain, Thriving is wallpapered with photos of the Windrush generation, whose present-day descendants sit near a TV showing breaking news of the Windrush scandal. Time runs backwards and forwards in this show. And so do the influences and connections. Hew Locke is showing the shaggy heads of 19th-century British monarchs: whiter-than-white porcelain busts draped in gold and jewelled headdresses. Look closer and you will see tiny Benin heads and Caribbean carnival masks, east African coins and the medals of empire; the ghosts of slavery and colonialism hanging over their royal heads. One of Steve McQueen’s earliest works loops on another telly. A one-minute fragment of Super 8 dating back to 1992, it shows two elderly West Indian men carrying potted palms from Brick Lane on the 243 bus home towards Tottenham. Exodus is its apt title. (A startling shot of Bob Marley in Leeds appears earlier on.) And pinned high on a wall nearby is a gilded palm frond, by the artist Blue Curry, shining like a radiant sunburst, emblem of Caribbean holidays. In fact its shine comes from spools of cassette tape laboriously and painfully stitched into each leaf for sale to tourists. Hew’s father, Donald Locke (1930-2010), journeyed from Guyana to art colleges in Bath and Edinburgh in the 50s and 60s. His work is superb. Growing up at a time when the plantation system still existed, he later made an indelible image of his local countryside titled Dageraad from the Air. At a distance it might be an abstract canvas, entirely dark – even a pastiche of Ad Reinhardt’s all-black paintings – until you approach. Squares of blackened canvas, partitioned by sharp metal tacks and a cage-like grille, condense both the tortured history and the topography of the land below. The show opens with magnificent paintings by Locke’s Caribbean compatriots. Aubrey Williams’s canvases are laments for broken lives and lost homelands, the paint itself seeming charred or skeletal. Frank Bowling’s famous 1968 work Who’s Afraid of Barney Newman sends up US abstract expressionism with its glowing verticals of green, yellow and red, in which the outlines of African and Caribbean countries seem to drift like sea wrack. Paul Dash paints himself like a Flemish master in a paper hat. Claudette Johnson, noting the absence of such images in art history, portrays herself as a deeply pensive reclining figure. It is a measure of the immense strength of Caribbean British painting that it is in no way diminished by the staggering photographs that run through this show like live news. Michael X arriving at Paddington station; Stokely Carmichael addressing the Dialectics of Liberation congress at the Round House in Camden in 1968; a quartet of girls on their way to lessons wearing Black Panther school bags. Vanley Burke’s uplifting photograph of young black men balancing on a seesaw in Handsworth Park, Birmingham, so that they appear to be levitating is as classic as any shot by the titan of American documentary photographers, Gordon Parks. And nobody seeing Vron Ware’s photographs of the Black People’s Day of Action, 2 March 1981, taken for the anti-fascist magazine Searchlight, is ever likely to forget the grave faces of the crowd. A march enacted with all the solemnity of a funeral procession, this was a protest against the atrocious inaction of the police, failing to inquire into the arson attack on a house in London’s New Cross in which 13 black teenagers burned to death. The placards spell it out with epigrammatic eloquence: “Thirteen dead, nothing said” and “Thatcher’s Silence Incites Violence”. One open verdict succeeded another. Nobody has ever been charged. Handsworth, New Cross, Broadwater, Brixton: names synonymous with 80s riots and racism become, too, part of the great Caribbean soundtrack of ska, dub and reggae that moves through the art in this show. In Isaac Julien’s three-screen Paradise Omeros, the original Jamaican recording of The Tide Is High yields to Derek Walcott reading from his tragic Saint Lucia epic, Omeros, as the film washes back and forth between the shores of that golden island, where Julien’s parents were born, and the dismal, grey England “where we start living”, in Walcott’s words, “as if to… pay for our sins”. This is the great and poignant narrative, as well as the underlying choreography, of this show. What it has meant to be here – or to return home, say, in Chris Ofili’s paintings – is the enthralling theme of Life Between Islands. Some works are humorous, even satirical, others unforgettably trenchant or poignant, as in Ingrid Pollard’s photographs of beaches (mainly here, but also there) where the tide measures the oceanic distance between this life and home. Most elegiac of all is Martina Attille’s 1988 film Dreaming Rivers, in which a Caribbean woman lost in exile, and alone in a British bedsit, dreams of her long-gone husband and departed children, their faces close, yet unreal as a movie, as she gradually leaves this world. This film runs to half an hour, screened in a small side gallery. It needs to be watched right through. So it is with everything here. For this show is crucial, mind-altering, a portrait of human life through art that cannot be encapsulated in any other medium. It is living history, and not just, as the photographer Charlie Phillips declares in a wall text, “black history, but British history”. Go if you possibly can, and give it all the time you’ve got. Life Between Islands: Caribbean-British Art 1950s–Now is at Tate Britain, London, until 3 April 2022When the Venezuelan electronic music pioneer Arca released her fourth album, KiCk i, last June, she promised a flurry of followups. Eighteen months later and she’s unveiled Kick ii, iii, iiii and iiiii. While that opening salvo, which featured the likes of Rosalía and Shygirl, prodded pop into new shapes, and other albums in the series explore her more delicate side, the mutated dance music of KicK iii plays out like a violent headrush. Tellingly, it opens with Arca giggling “oh shit” as if half-excited, half-scared about what she’s about to unleash. Over the course of 12 frantic songs, she leads the listener through the volcanic dancefloor anthem of opener Bruja (“Let me see you bitches bounce!” she screams, within a cyclone of distorted synths), the head-knocking, club-ready Señorita and the album’s euphoric highlight, Ripples. Rearing up from a tentative start, Arca intoning “my body, my flesh”, the song quickly morphs into a heaving, twitching apocalyptic anthem. Recalling her early experimental work, while hoovering up dance genres at will, KicK iii is imbued with a joyous sense of freedom. “Did I stutter?” she asks at one point, as a cacophony rages around her. “Hear me roar.”CNN has fired the primetime anchor Chris Cuomo for trying to help his brother, the former New York governor Andrew Cuomo, fight accusations of sexual misconduct which resulted in his resignation. Announcing the firing on Saturday, CNN said “additional information” had come to light. “Chris Cuomo was suspended earlier this week,” a statement said, “pending further evaluation of new information that came to light about his involvement with his brother’s defense. “We retained a respected law firm to conduct the review and have terminated him effective immediately. While in the process of that review additional information has come to light. Despite the termination, we will investigate as appropriate.” In a statement reported by the New York Times, Cuomo, 51, said: “This is not how I want my time at CNN to end but I have already told you why and how I helped my brother. “So let me now say as disappointing as this is, I could not be more proud of the team at Cuomo Prime Time and the work we did … I owe them all and will miss that group of special people who did really important work.” The CNN anchor tested a policy of not covering his brother in early 2020 when, during the early stages of the coronavirus pandemic and with New York hard-hit, the two regularly spoke and joked on air. The scandal which engulfed Andrew Cuomo spread to his younger brother, who acknowledged offering advice when the governor faced the harassment charges that he denied but that ultimately led to his resignation in August. The New York state attorney general, Letitia James, found that Andrew Cuomo sexually harassed at least 11 women. His resignation meant he avoided a likely impeachment trial. Chris Cuomo was suspended on Tuesday, after the release of documentation collected during James’s investigation of Andrew Cuomo. The information released by James showed how Chris Cuomo pressed sources for information on his brother’s accusers, reported to the governor’s staff and was active in helping shape responses to the charges. While Cuomo has said he never tried to influence CNN’s own coverage of his brother, he told investigators about calls to other journalists to find out what information they had about some accusers. That seemed to conflict with an on-air statement Cuomo gave on CNN following his brother’s resignation in August, when he said: “I never made calls to the press about my brother’s situation.” Cuomo also said he never “attacked, nor encouraged anyone to attack any woman who came forward”. According to email transcripts released this week, Cuomo wrote to aides “I have a lead” on one accuser, though it was not clear what he meant. A veteran TV executive, Shelley Ross, wrote a column for the New York Times in September saying Chris Cuomo groped her at a party 16 years ago, when they both worked for ABC News. Cuomo told the newspaper: “I apologised to her then, and I meant it.” Calls for CNN to fire Cuomo grew louder this week. Marissa Hoechstetter, a victims’ rights advocate, tweeted: “As a survivor who has trusted CNN with my story, it is deeply disturbing that Chris Cuomo remains employed. “His unethical behavior – plus that of anyone giving him any info in the first place – should be disqualifying for a journalist. If they keep him on, they can’t be trusted.” Charlotte Bennett, an alleged victim of sexual misconduct by Andrew Cuomo, said: “Just like his older brother, Chris Cuomo used his time, network and resources to help smear victims, dig up opposition research, and belittle our credible allegations. “Anything short of firing Chris Cuomo reflects a network lacking both morals and backbone. Does CNN stand by journalistic integrity, or will it simply excuse his actions because Chris Cuomo drives ratings?” On Saturday, CNN took action. The Associated Press contributed to this reportUsers of class A drugs in the UK would face losing their passports or driving licences under proposals reportedly set to be unveiled this week. Boris Johnson will this week launch a 10-year plan to tackle drug-related crime, which will include travel bans, harsher sentences for drug dealers and measures to break up county lines gangs. According to the Sun on Sunday, some of the measures will be designed to target “middle class” users to act as a “deterrent for well-off professionals who peddle coke at swanky clubs and dinner parties”. “We need to look at new ways of penalising them. Things that will actually interfere with their lives,” the prime minister told the paper. “So we will look at taking away their passports and driving licences.” He added: “What I want to see is a world in which we have penalties for lifestyle drug users that will seriously interfere with their enjoyment of their own lifestyles.” The civil penalties will be modelled on sanctions already used against parents who fail to pay child maintenance and banning orders for football hooligans, the Sun said. Meanwhile, the Sunday Times revealed sniffer dogs could be deployed across the parliamentary estate under plans for a drug crackdown by the Commons authorities. The Conservative MP Charles Walker, who chairs the administration committee, said the issue would be discussed by the body responsible for the administration and services of the Commons next week. “The House of Commons has a long history of using sniffer dogs to detect explosives,” he told the paper. “It may be that we now need to broaden the range of sniffer dogs ... to include those which can detect drugs.” The Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, has said police will be called in amid growing evidence of cocaine use in parliament. Funding for addiction treatment and recovery services across 50 local authorities with the most challenging drug issues will also reportedly be announced as part of the 10-year crackdown on drugs. The government announced in July it would establish a new unit to help end illegal drug-related illness and deaths, as the second part of Dame Carol Black’s independent review of drugs was released. The first phase of the review, which was published in February, estimated there were 300,000 opiate or crack cocaine users in England, and about 1 million people had used cocaine in the past year. Drug poisoning deaths are at a record high, having increased by almost 80% since 2012. Black’s review estimated that the illicit drug market in the UK was worth £9.4bn a year, but cost society more than double that figure in terms of health, crime and societal impacts.In great sporting events, great events happen peripheral to the great sport, adding phrases to our lexicon and images to our imaginations – consider, for example, the words “Sprinkler Dance”, “53 cans” and “Stuart Broad”. As time passes, these become a code for the initiated, and by remembering them we remember that we’re part of something bigger than ourselves. It’s like receiving a big, warm hug. During the 1990-91 Ashes that role was played by the “Tiger Moth” couplet. But before we get into it, some context. England had been spanked in 1989, but because they had won the two previous series against Australia the team still felt confident. Not for long. They lost the first two Tests badly enough to earn a going-over from the captain Graham Gooch – a development ill-received by David Gower, who had scored 61 at the Gabba and 100 at the MCG. “David was revved up and playing so well,” says John Morris, a young player on his first tour. “As senior player and former captain, he felt he had the right to speak up and not necessarily agree.” Gooch’s enthusiasm for being not necessarily agreed with is famously lukewarm, but nothing more was said and sure enough Gower made another century in the draw at Sydney. “One of the best you’ll see,” says Morris who, still to play in the series, watched the knock sitting on the SCG’s famous hill. “I just wanted to have that experience being part of the locals,” he says. Next up for England was Queensland on the Gold Coast, where Morris happened upon another experience he just wanted to have. First, though, he made 132 against an attack comprising Craig McDermott, Michael Kasprowicz, Carl Rackemann, Trevor Hohns and Peter Taylor. “A good effort,” he says, “which put me in contention for the fourth Test.” The ground at Carrara sits opposite an airfield, and when Morris came across Gower and Lamb on a stairwell he overheard an unusual conversation. “Biplanes had been buzzing around the ground for two days and David suggested he was going to go up in one, so I literally said: ‘Well, I’m out and there’s two seats, I’m coming with you.’” So the pair went over the road and, just after lunch, up they went in a pair of Tiger Moths. “It was an experience just sitting there in an open cockpit,” Morris recalls. “Goggles and helmets on with the wind rushing past you and this propeller only four feet in front of you. And it was perfect timing, just as Robin Smith got his hundred.” The pilots were meant to fly at 2,000 feet, but Gower coaxed them down to 200. “David really wanted to come in behind the bowler’s arm, so we were above the sightscreens as Carl Rackemann came in to bowl and the view was amazing! Lamby stopped him and everybody looked up, he gave it the machine gun like he was shooting us down with his bat.” So far, so brilliant: a harmless bit of fun, raising spirits of a team who were getting battered, again. Except fun – or at least the fun of others – has never resonated with English cricket suits, and trouble was soon upon the intrepid pair. When it began Gower was, of course, out for dinner, so Morris was summoned to a meeting with the captain, coach and tour manager. “I sat there and pleaded my innocence: ‘It was a bit of fun yer honour, nothing derogatory to the game,’” he says. The bench, though. was unconvinced, spooking Morris by telling him he had endangered himself, thereby breaching his contract. “David, on the other hand – the fact he got 7,000 Test runs and I’ve only got 72 probably made him a little bit more relaxed than I was.” To Morris’s disbelief, the aggravation didn’t end there. “They should’ve said: ‘Silly pair of buggers should’ve known better,’ and drawn a line. But it carried on because of the way it was handled. Crikey, we hadn’t played well but David had played brilliantly, so the last thing you’d want to do is undermine that by getting upset about a bit of fun. But they felt that David was undermining the management.” Both players were fined £1,000, but for Morris the repercussions continued. “I got left out, never played again, and that’s the bit that narks me – my last-ever innings is a hundred for England. In 1993 I played exceptionally well, especially against fast bowling, so should’ve been in contention to go to the West Indies. But I never got a mention, and that’s the bit that sits awkwardly with me: was this really gonna hang over me for ever? It seems like that.” It must have been hard to take, but Morris is sanguine. “Did I feel anger? Probably, but I don’t now, obviously. When you’re a professional cricketer your goal is to play at the best level you can, and people say I didn’t fulfil my potential. I look back and think, well, I didn’t have a fair crack of the whip to fulfil that potential.” We can only imagine how that must have stung but, nearly 31 years later, here we are basking in a yarn that is as much a part of Ashes folklore as runs scored and wickets taken, the only question now is: who will provide this series’ Tiger Moth? Big, warm hugs are not to be underestimated.I have a chastening photographic memento of my first trip to Provence, aged 21. I’m slouching against a wall in a back alley in Cannes, dressed in a striped matelot’s shirt, and holding a 16mm Bolex cine camera – the very picture of a nouvelle vague director. It isn’t clear what the camera is pointed at. I’d hired it to film flamingos on the Camargue saltmarshes, but got carried away by the Riviera’s glamorous ambience and took it to the beach, where I promptly dropped it in the sea. It felt like a parable about the insidious impact of tourism in the Mediterranean, a postscript to the process that had led to the naming of Nice’s seafront the Promenade des Anglais. Several decades later, my partner, Polly, and I fancied trying another kind of Provençal promenade. We were both seriously in thrall to the south of France and wanted to challenge our ageing bodies to 10 days’ sauntering in the remote heart of the region, far from the coastal hustle, among the limestone hills and lavender. We wouldn’t book anywhere to stay in advance, we’d carry everything we needed on our backs, and we’d aim for an inland area that looked encouragingly wild and barely populated. We set out from Nice at the very end of May, and wiggled our way west by train and bus to the melancholy village of Salernes, which we made our base for the next few days. In its one restaurant that evening, the owner explained that it was a deprived settlement, where most of the men worked in the local quarries. We walked from there to Villecroze, where there are troglodyte caves. We saw hoopoes and basked in the scent of Spanish broom. But the countryside was changing dramatically. There were building works everywhere: farms being converted, scrubland enclosed behind high walls. When I looked at an aerial photograph later, the most conspicuous feature was a dazzling blue pixellation of new swimming pools. The bourgeoisie were digging in and putting up their high-security gateways. And it wasn’t easy to get off the roads. The French have mixed views about land access and aren’t particularly interested in rambling. Beyond the Grandes Randonnées system, the concept of a public footpath is a debatable one. We happened to set out at a time when Provence (always politically bolshie) was having one of its periodic wrangles with the EU. We felt we were wandering into a familiar southern thicket, where there is respect for the commune, but not the European community, or anything smacking of meddling officialdom. France’s Blue series of Topographical Maps sits on the fence in this ancient ideological stand-off, so aren’t much help to a would-be rambler. They paint a perfectly accurate portrait of the countryside – as it might be seen from a satellite. Paths aren’t differentiated from hedges, nor public ways from private. So we blundered about for days, losing our way repeatedly as waymarks mysteriously ended and paths split, unremarked by the map, into three. It didn’t really matter. The sun shone and nightingales sang. At Sillans-la-Cascade, Polly had a dip in the pool below the waterfall and we heard the fluting of golden orioles. Then we glimpsed one, a female, coloured the same milky green as the limestone river. That afternoon we tramped back to Salernes across country. Stumbling out of a wood after fording a stream, we bumped into the only other walkers we met in 10 days. It turned out we’d strayed into the grounds of a retirement estate called Paradis. They were not much older than us, but called us “courageux”! We walked south to the tiny village of Montfort-sur-Argens, and fetched up at Le Chat Luthier, a B&amp;B run by Fabrice and Pierre. Their dining room is in a converted cave, fitted with a wall-to-wall aquarium, and there they served us a local supper which climaxed in a dessert of tomato ice and wild thyme sorbet. Fabrice told us of their difficulties in laying out balades (the lovely word for a leisurely stroll) round the village, as part of a green tourism initiative called La Provence Verte. There is no legal status for footpaths in France, and local landowners are suspicious of even informal designation, worried about walkers suing if they fall over on the rocky paths. The next day we tried following a walk from Fabrice’s map, but it petered out at a chain-link fence. We ignored it and found ourselves in a landscape of poignant, feral beauty, the flipside of the gentrification we’d seen earlier. Farming was retreating from this stretch of Provence, olive-growing losing to cheap fruit from China and North Africa, and the ancient terraces were being invaded by glorious aromatic tides of broom and cistus and rosemary. There were more singing nightingales and orioles, and swooping rollers – like crows but in gaudy shades of blue. These, for better or worse, will be the new cash crops of La Provence Verte. The walk east to Carcès wasn’t long, but across high ground in searing heat with full packs, was our hardest stretch. We scrumped cherries and peaches from yet more derelict orchards, and had to ask for water at the edge of the village. Carcès was an energising spot to hang out. Multitudes of swifts screamed around our room, bats poured out of the roofs when we explored the town that evening, and we learned the reason so many houses had bottles of water outside: in something close to sympathetic magic, they were meant to deter dogs from peeing against the doors. We cheated at this point and hired a car to drive the 30km to the Massif de Maures, a wild and remote mountain range inland from Saint-Tropez. The north of the forest is Provence’s badlands, an arid savannah of umbrella pines on pink granite bluffs. We explored it along a dried-up riverbed, through drifts of iris and wild tulip, with eagles and turquoise-and-ginger bee-eaters cruising above us. Further south, the forest was denser, a mix of cork oak and chestnut, and the paths were strafed by enormous, two-tailed pasha butterflies. We found managed chestnut orchards among the wild trees, where the trees had grafts from especially productive varieties. Chestnuts and chestnut flour – a common staple this far south – are one of the region’s chief exports. We spent our last two nights in the cosmopolitan town of Collobrières, in the middle of the Maures forest. It had the feel of a frontier town, with the market’s herb sellers barking in Occitan (which always sounds to me like French spoken by a Brummie) and chic Parisian second-homers and north Africans alike wandering the streets in gorgeous Provençal costume. At the tourist centre, we learned of another row brewing with Brussels, over control of the forest, which, the locals protested, they had looked after successfully for centuries and were extrêmement attached to. We felt they had a point, though the image of those advancing weekenders’ villas wouldn’t go away. We bought a bag of chestnut flour to take home and wished them well. We had walked through a Provence that is trying, like so many other places, to reconcile many new meanings for the countryside. The four titles in the Richard Mabey library (The Unofficial Countryside, Beechcombings, Gilbert White and Nature Cure) are published by Little Toller at £18 each, littletoller.co.ukIt’s early December and in my corner of southeast London the Christmas illuminations are going up. Garden gnomes may have fallen out of fashion, but their seasonal equivalent, inflatable Santas, are very much in evidence. There are some pockets of tasteful conformity, where entire streets observe a “house style”, but mostly it’s a delightful free-for-all. If levels of outdoor decoration reflect a state of mind in the way that rising hemlines are said to mirror economic prosperity, then the mood here among us suburbanites is one of grim defiance. Apart from three years at university and a gap year in New Zealand, I have always lived in the suburbs, within a small triangle of southeast London – Croydon in the west, Bromley in the east and Norwood in the north. (I know that for postal purposes Croydon is Surrey, but administratively and spiritually it’s south London.) When you are a child, your own life seems normal, so it was quite some time before I realised that Croydon – fictionalised by PG Wodehouse as Mitching, “a foul hole” – had a reputation for architectural mediocrity, that the suburbs in general with their crazy-paving and curtain twitching were despised by both city and country and that having been born there was something which would need repeated apology over the years. My older siblings could not wait to get away and bolted to Switzerland and Australia as soon as the opportunity arose, never to return. Maybe they experienced the suburbs as a place of stifling bourgeois complacency, “the burying ground of all ambition”, in the words of writer and broadcaster Godfrey Winn. If so, they were not alone, as this is more or less the default position of poets, musicians and especially novelists. Hanif Kureishi and Julian Barnes portrayed them as somewhere enlightened creative souls need to escape from to the more thrilling city. Staying put, like the bride of Manfred Mann’s “Semi-detached Suburban Mr James”, means settling for a life of stultifying routine, “hanging things upon the line… as your life slips away”. Clearly, “Suburban” does not just relate to a postcode, or a lack of architectural distinction, but a state of mind. I never suffered from that sense of alienation myself, but enjoyed the available pursuits of the 1970s middle-class, cash-strapped Croydon childhood: clattering up and down the pavements on those lethal strap-on rollerskates, colliding with lamp-posts and parked cars; hanging around the shopping precinct on a Saturday with my friends in our identical outfits; trying on the makeup in Miss Selfridge; sampling the joss-sticks in the covered market; stalking any good-looking boys. My walk to school involved the quintessentially suburban pastime of judging other people’s front gardens and my mother and I took it seriously, awarding points out of 10, with towering condescension. (Ours only came in at a shameful four, so we knew our place.) I can still picture the one with all the dahlias and the perfect lawn stripes. (Nine out of 10, because there is always room for improvement.) My idea of an aspirational target at that time was to live in a road with grass verges. When I moved in with my boyfriend after university he lived in a small terrace house in Norwood, overlooking Crystal Palace FC’s ground at Selhurst Park. On a Saturday afternoon we could hear the roar that greeted every home goal and see the floodlights, and if we made the mistake of driving to the supermarket, we would instantly lose our parking space and have to walk miles back carrying the shopping. I worked in Bloomsbury then, and there were occasions on my long bus commute home that I may have wished we lived a little closer to the West End, or that the Walworth Road wasn’t quite so long, but when the time came to move, we went even further out – to Bromley, where we have lived in semi-detached, mock-Tudor comfort since 1993. Over the years I have repeatedly used southeast London as the setting for my fiction. The very thing that unbelievers hold against it – that it is neither one thing nor the other – is precisely what makes it such rich terrain for the novelist. It isn’t glamorous or edgy or sleazy, like the city, or picturesque or bleak or majestic, like the country. But it is in the middle, in that nowhere land of dimple glass and magnolias and pebbledash, that the ordinary truly shines and it is in the small, telling details of a person’s environment that they reveal their nature. What could be more revelatory of character than a privet hedge between two properties that has been conscientiously pruned up to the neighbour’s boundary and no further? Is there a better symbol of the collision between the haves and the have-nots, the well-behaved and the misbehavers, than a fly-tipped mattress at the end of a street of perfect front gardens? The concept of the semi-detached house itself – an arrangement peculiar to this country as far as I am aware – offers such a polite compromise between privacy and eavesdropping. Somehow the suburbs affords the writer a perfect backdrop for light comedy. You have only to think of the novels of Barbara Pym, to see how status anxiety, class pretension and petty rivalries are funnier in the context of parish jumble sales than that of superyachts. And it is no accident that so many classic British sitcoms, The Good Life, One Foot in the Grave, Keeping up Appearances, The Rise and Fall of Reginal Perrin, adopt this setting to expose the collision between our aspirations to fit in and our need to break out; our attempts to better ourselves and the daily micro-humiliations dealt out by reality. The suburban landscape lends itself equally well to the depiction of loneliness and melancholy: the trickle of commuters trudging up the road from the station in the fog; the damp autumn leaves blowing into front gardens; a lost glove impaled on park railings. When I came to write Small Pleasures in 2016, I knew that in my own back yard I had the ideal location. Although the seed of fact from which it grew – a 1950s newspaper investigation into a woman’s claim to be a virgin mother – was a Fleet Street sensation, I didn’t want my story to be about high-flying journalists or glamorous city-dwellers. This was going to be about people who were unfashionable, plain, over-the-hill, enduring lives of frustrated potential, and it needed a much smaller canvas. Of course, it had to be a local paper, concerned with parochial matters: a meeting of the Crofton North Liberals; the theft of petrol coupons from the British Legion; household hints about the joy of vests. When in the course of my research I came across a reference to the Lewisham rail crash of 1957 – an event which had passed me by, even though I commuted regularly on the Hayes to Charing Cross line – the pieces started to come together. Researching the recent history of my own area was pure enjoyment; the built environment had not changed much since the 1930s, and there were plenty of people around who remembered the 1950s in great detail and had stories to tell. The book was written, finished and edited long before the pandemic was even a rumour, and yet somehow the national experience of lockdown seemed to give it unforeseen resonance. The shops were mostly closed, the streets quiet, the traffic stilled and everyone back in their hutches after dusk. People were being resourceful and less wasteful in the face of shortages, baking bread and sewing their own face masks, talking over the fence to their neighbours, staying local. The spirit of 1950s suburbia was all around. Readers also seemed to embrace the concept of small pleasures, taking comfort from simple things and finding dignity in modest expectations. This came as something of a surprise to me. I’m suspicious of nostalgia and thought that the world I had conjured was bathed more in fog and soot than a rosy glow. The list of things that console the main character, Jean, in the face of a somewhat arid existence was hardly a manifesto for living. Compared to the fulfilment offered by a passionate and enduring relationship, “a glass of sherry before Sunday lunch, a bar of chocolate parcelled out to last a week, a newly published library book, the first hyacinths of spring” are thin fare indeed. And yet the idea that we can be fortified against disappointment or worse by little treats or a more thoughtful appreciation of some overlooked aspect of the natural world on our doorsteps, appeared to chime with readers. In a year when the bigger pleasures – parties, weddings, foreign travel – were unavailable and when disappointments or personal tragedies came thick and fast, it was only natural that our appetites and horizons shrank accordingly. Perhaps, as we move forward to the next crisis facing our weary planet, there is a place for the more admirable 1950s suburban values – thrift, resourcefulness, a horror of waste. Sherry anyone? Small Pleasures by Clare Chambers is published by W&amp;N at £8.99. Buy it for £8.36 at guardianbookshop.comOn the weather forecasts, they always say: “With the wind, it’ll feel like …” How is the wind-chill factor calculated? Mick Rawlinson, Brighton Send new questions to nq@theguardian.com. Readers reply My father refuses to believe in wind-chill factor because they didn’t have it in his day. salamandertome The difference in perceived and actual temperature is the result of a complex mix of air temperature, relative humidity and wind speed, as well as differences in health, genetics, hydration, body shape, dress and metabolism. So, wind chill temperature is entirely and highly subjective, not an exact science. Weather services in different countries make many assumptions relevant to their particular region and population, and thus its estimates may differ from those provided by local weather services in other regions. HaveYouFedTheFish Wind chill = 13.12 + 0.6215T – 11.37 (V0.16) + 0.3965T (V0.16) T = Temperature in degrees Celsius V = Wind velocity in kilometres per hour Alternatively, it can be measured in brass monkeys. Today, it is four. woodworm20 Multiply the wind speed by 0.7. Then subtract that value from the air temperature. So in Bodalla, NSW, on 1 December, the first day of summer, with a wind speed of 7km and air temperature of 25C, the chill factor is 20.1. Not too chill at all. Ursula Nixon, Bodalla. NSW, Australia There is a popular misconception that wind chill lowers the temperature. It doesn’t. The ambient temperature can never fall below the still-air thermometer reading. The wind merely serves to accelerate the rate at which exposed skin falls to that level. So a strong wind at 0C produces a net rate of body heat loss equivalent to that on a calm day of around -10C. So long as you keep your skin covered (hat, gloves, good windproof top layer), wind chill doesn’t affect you. Because of this, I climbed a Scottish mountain 10 days ago in sideways rain and 45-50mph winds (force 8-9) in two base layers and a thin mid layer, plus a good waterproof top. Ambient temperature 5C, “feels like” -5C, but I didn’t notice. Even when resting at the summit in the lee. Rickytip If your nuts and bolts freeze, its chilly. MysticKitty Frankly, if it’s cold enough to freeze the rowlocks off a brass dinghy, it’s cold. javathedog It’s the same answer every time which makes it easy. “According to the car, it’s 3C – and with the wind-chill factor it’s fucking freezing.” “Apparently it’s going to be -1C tomorrow, and with the wind-chill factor it’ll be fucking freezing.” And so on. idontcareanymore I would imagine that “wind-chill effect” is directly dependent on any individual body’s ability to re-warm the affected body area. As far as I’m aware this can only really be done by the circulation of warm blood in the affected area. So, someone with an exposed area which suffers from an arthritic condition will most likely experience wind chill much more than someone without any health compromises. It’s really about core body heat being “chilled” and the difficulties with restoring protection. Surface chilling can be protected against. The real problem is when it penetrates and becomes difficult to resolve by default. NewMe359 I remember being surprised to discover that, even indoors, air temperature is not the only thing that affects how “warm” a room is, from a human point of view. Heat leaves the body via radiation as well as through contact with the air; cold walls or ceilings can increase this loss rate, and make an appreciable difference to “warmth”, even if a thermostat holds the air temperature steady. Really sophisticated thermostats even sometimes measure the outdoor temperatures and bump the indoor air temperature setting up or down to compensate for this effect. Filterreader How to calculate wind chill with an explanation can be found here. Wind chill factor was designed for a limited purpose. It measures heat loss from exposed areas of the human body, like hands and face, in low temperatures and measured wind speeds. With this information, people venturing outside in exceptionally bitter weather would know an approximate time before exposed areas of the body would succumb to frostbite. BijiDog Not being good at figures but being a resident of Canada, when I hear that the wind chill is making the temperature considerably colder outside, I remember to wear a hooded coat, a woolly scarf, and proper gloves or mittens, to say nothing of comfy boots with good traction. I also sport a beard, an added adornment that also helps to prevent frostbite. Richard Orlando, Westmount, QuebecAre there any great Christmas traditions that I’m missing out on by just going presents-lunch-telly-coma? Emily Janacek, Swindon Post your answers (and new questions) below or send them to nq@theguardian.com. A selection will be published on Sunday.Train operators have been told to find ways to cut hundreds of millions of pounds from the railway’s operating costs next year, in a move that is likely to result in fewer services and worse stations for passengers. The Department for Transport seeks to cut spending by 10% after the chancellor Rishi Sunak’s autumn budget. With the Treasury anxious to limit spending on rail, which increased massively during the pandemic, letters from the DfT’s managing director of passenger services, Peter Wilkinson, have been sent to individual operators setting out the swingeing cuts needed across the industry. While train operators expected cuts – the Williams-Shapps plan for rail, which was published in May, set out a target of saving £1.5bn over the next five years – the immediacy and scale of the financial demands has come as a surprise. Government sources said there were no finalised decisions, and denied that individual operators were being asked to deliver cuts of 10% or more to expenditure. Operators have been under direct government contract since the abolition of franchising at the start of the pandemic in March 2020. Under the emergency recovery contracts, they are paid a fixed fee to deliver services with the revenue and cost risk taken by the government. Even if, as DfT sources suggest, the latest call for savings are a “routine business planning process” to maintain efficiency and reduce the cost to taxpayers, alarm bells are ringing through the industry. While the effects of the pandemic on rail travel patterns and revenue are clear to all, a division has grown between those who believe it is essential to maintain services and lower fares to attract passengers and those who favour cutting costs and maximising current income. According to figures released by the Office of Rail and Road on Wednesday, the Treasury spent an additional £6.5bn on running the railway in 2020-21, to cover lost revenues as passenger numbers dropped 78% overall. The shortfall will be substantially less this financial year, with weekly rail demand having risen steadily to about 70% of pre-Covid levels by November – although the discovery of the Omicron variant and the reintroduction of mandatory mask wearing is expected to depress numbers. Provisional DfT figures showed a 10% drop in train travel last Monday, although the impact of storms would have played a part. In October, train operators announced a voluntary severance programme to try to reduce staff costs. However, further budget constraints could mean mandatory job cuts, with many of the fixed costs in rail, such as rolling stock and track access charges, impossible to reduce quickly. Operators fear the reputational damage, and financial hit, of managing decline and likely industrial action. Under the new contracts, at least 20% of the potential profit will be linked to performance measures including customer satisfaction. One insider said: “If you’re setting the budget at a point where customers and staff are going to be unhappy, it looks pretty hard to get those fees.” Forced redundancies would spell certain strike action, with even the scale of voluntary departures – many thousands applying at Network Rail alone – yet to be agreed after months of talks with the unions. The unions have in the interim geared up for battle over proposed cuts to services that operators had already prepared before the latest DfT costcutting demands. South Western Railway, which has been badly affected by a drop in daily commuters to London from the stockbroker belt, has consulted on long-term timetable cuts to be introduced next December. A SWR spokesperson said it would still have 93% of pre-Covid capacity, adding that it was “appropriate and responsible that we right-size our services to match demand in the new normal”. Meanwhile, LNER, which is run by the government’s own operator of last resort since the collapse of Virgin, has been consulting on cutting ticket offices; protests against the cuts are due on Monday in stations in the north-east. Demands for savings have been compounding industry gloom after the HS2’s northeastern leg and the new Leeds-Manchester line were scrapped last month in the government’s integrated rail plan. Enthusiasm in some parts of government for building new rail infrastructure and improving services – a key tool for both “levelling up” the regions and decarbonising transport – has come up against Treasury unwillingness to spend more now. It’s back to the old days of British Rail when they squeezed services and then said no one is using trains because the service is rubbish Christian Wolmar, the author of the forthcoming History of British Railways, argued that the £96bn plan was actually “a vote of confidence in the long-term future of the railways, however mis-sold”. But, he said: “In the short-term, they are being completely squeezed. It’s incoherent. And it’s going to have a real impacts.” Timetables are likely to be thinned out and late-night services withdrawn to cut costs, he predicted: “It’s back to the old days of British Rail when they squeezed services and then said no one is using trains because the service is rubbish. “In a rational world they would just cut the branch lines – but they can’t do that politically because ministers have said they are reversing Beeching.” Meanwhile, the depth of Treasury control is also raising questions about the future plans for Great British Railways, the arms-length “guiding mind” supposedly taking charge under the Williams-Shapps plan to improve the railways. Six months after publication, progress has been slow, with legislation now unlikely to bring any new body into effect before 2024 or 2025. Its designate leaders – Network Rail’s chief executive, Andrew Haines, and its chair, Peter Hendy – were kept at bay as government departments tussled over the cuts to the integrated rail plan. As one industry veteran put it: “Network Rail can’t paint a station fence without asking the Treasury now.” Industry leaders and unions alike believe that the Treasury wants to target working conditions. According to one senior rail figure: “The single biggest thing is workplace reform, they believe productivity is low.” Mick Lynch, the RMT general secretary, sees it as “cynically exploiting the Covid crisis”, at a time when the government has talked up the value of rail as a green mode of transport and a way to level up. “What they really want to do is cut back on the existing workforce and start rehiring on inferior terms and conditions when demand returns,” he said. A DfT spokesperson said it was “demonstrably false” to suggest the government was delivering cuts to the railway, given the current levels of investment, the £96bn rail plan and the restoration of lines such as Okehampton. They added: “With passenger numbers significantly down, it would be reckless and irresponsible not to ensure that the railway is more efficient and reducing its costs to the taxpayer. “As taxpayers would expect, we have asked operators to provide credible and sustainable business plans which ensure taxpayer money is used efficiently, to deliver exceptional services, promote recovery to reset the balance in financial support and ensure the railway has a bright future.” • This article was amended on 6 December 2021 to remove a picture of a Scotrail train as that service is not covered by the Department for Transport.The House of Commons rarely hears speeches about what it is to be human, the elements of life that give it meaning, and the sanctity of free will. But last Tuesday, as MPs spent three hours considering what measures England should adopt in response to the arrival of the Omicron variant, the Conservative MP Steve Baker gave a brief oration that dealt with these things and more. The debate, he said, was not really about modest proposals for mandatory face coverings in most public spaces, and 10 days of self-isolation for anyone deemed to have been a contact of someone infected with the new variant. Even if they didn’t know it, MPs were fundamentally considering “the kind of nation and civilisation that we are creating in the context of this new disease”. He expressed concern about the effects of mask-wearing on children, and his worries about what a possible “pingdemic” might mean for the economy. But the nub of his argument was philosophical. “What is the relationship between the state and the individual?” he asked. “Are we to be empty vessels or mere automata – things to be managed, as if a problem? Or are we free spirits with, for want of a better term, a soul?” The latter was the truth, he said: all of us are “people who deserve the dignity of choice and the meaning in our lives that comes from taking responsibility. It is possible that meaning in our lives comes from little else”. Having offered this somewhat dried-up vision of the human condition (what, you could only wonder, of the meaning given to existence by friendship, family or community?), he then told his colleagues that they were facing “a fundamental choice between heading towards heaven and heading towards hell”. Some of them seemed to agree: 32 Tories opposed the self-isolation rules, and 20 voted against the new mask mandate. There it was again: that vocal element of the Conservative party that successfully pushed us into the hardest of Brexits, and these days spends a lot of its time railing against measures designed to control the worst effects of the virus. In the wake of the 2016 referendum, MPs faithful to its view of things relaunched the European Research Group to push for the UK to leave the single market and customs union. Today, some of their most high-profile politicking is also done via the new(ish) Covid Recovery Group. You might call the people involved Groupies: many are also members of the Net Zero Scrutiny Group, reportedly overseen by Baker, who thinks that if the government achieves its carbon emissions target by 2050, people are “going to be poorer, they’re going to be colder … and they may be eating insects for protein”. These Tories are often termed libertarians, but such beliefs seem to have their limits: notwithstanding one or two murmurings of concern, they have supported the new crime and policing bill, and its swingeing restrictions on the right to protest. They tend to insist that masks should be a matter of personal choice, but tell us what that choice should be by not wearing masks in the Commons chamber. Their politics is essentially emotional: hostile towards the state being used to shape society and the economy, more about the individual than any notion of the common good, and seemingly based on the insistence that people like them should be able to do as they please. They clearly have a strong influence on the prime minister. When the leading lights of the ERG agreed to vote for his withdrawal agreement with the EU and opened the path to the 2019 general election, they ensured that he owed them a debt. The exit from Tory politics of remainers and Conservative centrists has been another boost, as has the presence in the cabinet of such ideological allies as Jacob Rees-Mogg, Priti Patel and Dominic Raab. Regular whispers about Nigel Farage returning to steal Tory votes maintain Baker and his comrades’ influence. And their laissez-faire outlook chimes with one of the few sets of coherent convictions that Boris Johnson seems to possess, evident in his habit of claiming that Covid measures are a matter of huge reluctance, and the fact that he has almost seemed to make a point of being photographed without a mask. There are indications that this kind of Conservatism might not suit once-loyal Tory people and places quite as much as its adherents think: recent Tory losses in council elections clustered in the south of England, the summer’s Liberal Democrat win in the Chesham and Amersham byelection, even last week’s low turnout and 10% swing to Labour in true blue Old Bexley and Sidcup. Viewed from this perspective, the new Tory right perhaps has a flaw it shares with zealots on the left, claiming to speak for “the people”, but regularly falling out of step with large swathes of the public. There are, of course, Brexity, me-first strands of public opinion that do seem to fit with its view of things. But climate scepticism and opposition to meaningful action now seems to be confined to an increasingly small share of the population, even at the upper end of the age range. Just before the latest Covid rules were introduced, YouGov found that 83% of us supported compulsory mask wearing in shops and on public transport. Were millions of people told that accepting such restrictions was tantamount to a descent into the moral underworld, they would surely conclude that they were listening to cranks and fanatics. The Conservatives have a long history of focusing on the more eccentric, out-there elements of the Labour party and making hay, a habit that reached its peak in the Jeremy Corbyn years, and is these days reflected in all those caricatures of anything deemed “woke”. But even now, Keir Starmer’s Labour party seems surprisingly quiet about the Tory right and its ever-increasing influence – rarely pointing out how far its stances are from public opinion, nor highlighting the hold it seems to have on Johnson. If this were to change, Starmer might finally master something that has eluded him since the start of the pandemic: the ability to cast the Tories’ failings in moral terms, and offer a contrasting alternative. Think about it this way: if the most influential wing of the Conservative party favours flimsy ideas of personal choice over our collective wellbeing, that surely shines on everything from the prevalence among Tory MPs of second jobs and their aversion to face coverings, to Johnson apparently allowing staff to hold parties in Downing Street in defiance of lockdown rules. Such things are not only about arrogance, sloppiness and ineptitude: they also demonstrate what reckless individualism looks like in practice. If Starmer needs an example of the tone he might strike, he could read an old speech by one of his predecessors. Socialism, said this Labour politician, was about “a moral purpose to life, a set of values, a belief in society, in cooperation, in achieving together what we cannot achieve alone”. He wanted, he said, a country where “your child in distress is my child, your parent ill and in pain is my parent, your friend unemployed and helpless is my friend, your neighbour, my neighbour”. “We are not simply people set in isolation from one another,” he insisted, “but members of the same family, same community, same human race.” These were values, moreover, “shared by the vast majority of the British people”. There should be no nervousness among the Labour frontbench about rhetoric like that: Tony Blair said those words, when he and his party were less than two years away from finally sending the Conservative party into the wilderness. John Harris is a Guardian columnistAfter what happened this year, you could have forgiven the team behind the King’s panto if they had had a wobble. The death of Andy Gray from coronavirus in January at the age of 61 was not only a personal loss for his fellow actors Allan Stewart and Grant Stott but also the end of a longstanding panto institution. The triple act of Stewart, the dame, Stott, the baddie, and Gray, the clown, reigned supreme here for the best part of two decades. The audience knows this too. The most moving moment of Sleeping Beauty comes when the lead actors pay tribute to “King Andy”, a man who, like a benign theatrical ghost, has the power even now to give the show a happy ending. The moment earns the most sustained applause of the night. It’s nice his daughter Clare Gray is present to keep up the family tradition, playing a bolshie Princess Narcissa as a surly inversion of Sia Dauda’s Princess Aurora, who is all sweetness and light. That leaves Stewart and Stott in a fascinating place. On the one hand they are adversaries: Stott as Carabosse, a towering figure in black, like a malevolent chess piece; and Stewart as Queen May, a tireless master of mirth, leading from the front. On the other hand, they are also the show’s central double act, repeatedly putting aside their differences for set pieces involving tongue-twisters, audience interaction and daft jokes. The lurch from laughter to booing really shouldn’t work as well as it does, but the whole thing is so slickly timed – right down to the supposed fluffs and adlibs – that you hardly notice. The dominance of the star turns leaves relatively little space for the story of the spindle and the finger prick. The 100-year sleep is relegated to an incidental detail in favour of an act-one cliff-hanger about Jordan Young’s high-energy Muddles being captured by Carabosse. With an egalitarian twist, he gets to wake the princess, but has little time to develop much of a relationship with her. Logical flaws aside, though, the show has an energy and community spirit that’s impossible to resist. • At King’s theatre, Edinburgh, until 16 January.So here we are again. Christmas is approaching and a new variant of Covid-19 has appeared. Infections are on the rise but the government is worried about overreacting. There are risks to public health from people socialising but risks to the economy if they don’t. Being an armchair critic is easy but getting the balance right is hard. A couple of weeks ago it all looked different. Certainly, the number of UK cases remained stubbornly high but the UK was not suffering the surge in cases seen in Austria, Germany or the Netherlands. The arrival of vaccines – the big change in the past 12 months – meant hospitalisations and death rates were much lower than they were when the country was locked down last winter. Meanwhile, the economy was chugging along. The end of the furlough had passed off without the feared wave of redundancies and things were looking up for both the manufacturing and services sectors. Industry was reporting the strongest order books since the late 1970s, while the loosening of travel restrictions meant the service sector saw the biggest upturn in overseas business in four years. Growing inflationary pressure caused by supply-side bottlenecks posed the biggest barrier to rising output, and the City was convinced the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee would raise interest rates at its December meeting. Then Omicron arrived and everything was made a lot more complicated. For a start, the new strain of the virus is already having an impact on the economy. People are working from home more and they are going out less. In a milder form of the behavioural pattern seen during lockdowns, people will spend money that would have gone on services on goods instead. There will be fewer visits to cinemas but sales of new TVs will go up. It was this shift that created global bottlenecks, because supply couldn’t keep up with demand. Until a couple of weeks ago, consumers and businesses were starting to sense the end was in sight: that once the Delta variant had been seen off, life could return to normal. That idea has now been nixed, because even if Omicron proves to be less of a problem than feared, there will be more Greek letters to come, one of which could be a super-variant. What were originally considered to be temporary behavioural changes could become more embedded. Inflationary pressures seen as transitory could become more permanent. For the Bank of England, as for other central banks, this presents a dilemma. The MPC delayed raising rates last month because it wanted to see the impact on unemployment of ending the furlough. Should it again adopt a wait-and-see approach until there is more clarity on how serious Omicron will be for the economy, or does that run the risk that tougher action will be needed in the future? Michael Saunders, one of the two MPC members who voted for a rate rise in November, put both sides of the argument in a speech last week. Judging by his recent remarks, Threadneedle Street’s former boss, Lord King, would have no hesitation in voting for a rate rise were he still governor. Speaking recently, King said central banks had adopted a King Canute-like approach in which inflation would stay low because they said it would. When he was governor, Mervyn King coined an acronym for the state of the economy: Nice. It stood for non-inflationary continual expansion and summed up the seemingly benign state of the world as it was in the early years of the 21st century. The Nice times were never quite as good as they looked, but even so, things were a lot simpler back then. Economies grew steadily year after year, inflation remained low and central banks contented themselves with tweaking interest rates every now and again. There is nothing central banks would like more than to return to the era of the Great Moderation of the late 1990s and early 2000s. But those days are over, if not for ever then for a long time to come. If the stakes are high for the Bank of England, then they are even higher for Boris Johnson and Rishi Sunak. The prime minister and the chancellor have their differences but they are agreed that the UK has to learn to live with Covid, and that vaccines make that adaptation easier. Since the late summer, the Treasury has been acting as if the crisis is all but over: ending support schemes such as the furlough and switching its focus to reducing the budget deficit. Early signs from the labour market have been encouraging. Unemployment has not shot up and vacancies are plentiful. People wanted to get their lives back after more than a year of severe curbs on their personal liberty and flocked back to reopened pubs, restaurants, hotels, theatres and cinemas. Business was brisk in the sectors hardest hit by government restrictions. As with the Bank of England, the government faces a dilemma but one with potentially much more serious consequences. Would it be better to adopt a no-risk approach to Omicron by bringing in more stringent restrictions now or wait and see how things pan out? Despite the mixed messages coming out of Westminster and Downing Street last week, the view seems to be that economic disruption should be kept to a minimum and that Christmas should not be cancelled for a second year running. A high bar has been set for imposing new restrictions. The risk, of course, is that Omicron spreads quickly and tough curbs are eventually imposed anyway, leading to strains on both the NHS and the economy. For an already weakened government, such a double whammy would be potentially catastrophic.Even by weightlifting standards, Emily Campbell’s silver medal-winning lift at the Tokyo Olympics was a striking piece of Olympian theatre. With her hair in two Team GB-themed blue and red buns, she completed the lift, dropped the 161kg weight, then fell to her knees, letting out a tearful scream. “I don’t know where that came from,” says Campbell, 27, chatting to me over the phone. “When I fell to the floor it was genuinely because my legs were like jelly… It was massive emotion really: relief, pure excitement, joy, it was just a lot to think I’d managed to achieve everything I’d always dreamed of.” Campbell made sporting history, winning the first ever Olympic medal for British female weightlifting, and Britain’s first weightlifting medal since 1984. In her remarkable year, she also won gold at the European Championships in Moscow. As we talk, Campbell, snuffling, nursing a cold, is animated and open, talking about the struggle to get to the Covid-threatened, once-postponed Olympics, and the “amazing” atmosphere of the Olympic Village: “You’re around so many athletes from so many different sports, countries, cultures, it was so nice to be part of something so special.” Were her distinctive red and blue hair buns about Team GB spirit? “Definitely, we’re one team, and every single person had every single person’s back.” While things are more stable now, Campbell endured the usual athlete’s struggle for funding, including working as a receptionist at the physio clinic that now treats and sponsors her. Growing up in Nottinghamshire (her younger sister, Kelsie, is also an athlete, swimming on a US college scholarship in Florida), Campbell’s parents supported all her pursuits, whether in sport (she has a sports science degree) or the arts; she enjoyed singing, dancing, and acting. “I sing in the gym now, that’s enough,” she laughs. As a woman in the over-87kg weightlifting category, Campbell is an outspoken advocate for body positivity: “When I won the European Championships, the video was posted and a couple of people commented: ‘Did the fat one win?’” She sighs wryly. “I don’t look like the typical athlete: lean, with abs. My body type is for my sport. I need to be the strongest I can be.” One of her ambitions is to design a range of stylish plus-size gym wear: “There’s that opinion that you can’t be feminine if you’re big and strong. I beg to differ. I’m very feminine, and I’m 6ft and 125 kilos.” Campbell takes pride in her Jamaican-English heritage and, in Tokyo, she wore boots adorned with black consciousness-raising motifs designed by a friend: “It was my way of showing the world that I stand with everybody together. It’s something we need to keep talking about.” As well as showcasing weightlifting on television programmes such as Blue Peter, she uses her platform to do community work, including visiting schools, to inspire all children, but particularly those of colour: “Just being a great athlete is not enough – I need to give back,” she says simply. One of Campbell’s inspirations is tennis champion Serena Williams: her attitude, her athleticism. “She’s phenomenal. People say she’s one of the best female athletes; she’s one of the best athletes on the planet, period.” Campbell also found her Team GB teammates inspiring, and vividly remembers British BMX riders Beth Shriever and Kye Whyte returning to the Olympics Village food hall with their medals, gold and silver respectively. “Everybody gave them a standing ovation… every time somebody won a medal, it gave everybody energy.” What about those sacrifices Campbell mentioned earlier – do they include relationships, a social life, any kind of life? Right now, she’s focusing on forthcoming weightlifting events, the World Championship, the European Championships, where she’ll defend her title, the Commonwealth Games and, eventually, qualifying for the Paris 2024 Olympics. She confirms that it’s all-consuming, that she has to carefully consider everything from nights out to diet to how often she sees friends and family: “You have to sacrifice a lot,” she says, but she’s not complaining: “I can do all the fun things – stay up to whatever time, eat and do whatever I want – when I retire, that’s the way I look at it.”The Filipino singer-producer Guendoline Rome Viray Gomez has described his music as “shoegaze R&amp;B”. His debut for the 1975’s label certainly gestures in the direction of both genres. What No Rome never resolves is the contradiction between shoegaze, where singers sink in quicksands of guitar, and R&amp;B, which often depends on the lead vocal’s quality. His choice is to foreground his thin, trebly voice and treat it with endless effects, which owes more to hyperpop than anything else and is one of the many problems that make this album an exhausting listen. There’s fleeting relief – I Want U and When She Comes Around have moments that aren’t terrible. The more chillwavey A Place Where Nobody Knows and Everything are OK. Elsewhere, Gomez’s low attention span and love of distortion combine lethally to create music that is way too fussy and tricksy to be enjoyable, and never commits to anything for long enough to drive its innovations home. It’s like hearing a nearby fireworks display – you know someone, somewhere, is probably having a better time than you, but all you’ve got is a headache and an unhappy dog.The US is hoping pressure from Russia, China and some Arab Gulf states may yet persuade Iran to moderate its negotiating stance in regards to the steps the Biden administration must take before both sides return to the 2015 nuclear deal. Talks in Vienna faltered badly last week, when the new hardline Iranian administration increased its levels of uranium enrichment and tabled proposals that US officials said at the weekend were “not serious”since they had gone back on all the progress made in the previous round of talks. US officials at the weekend also confirmed they would press ahead with an emergency board meeting of the UN nuclear inspectorate, the IAEA, before the end of the year if Iran did not restore a level of access to its nuclear sites that satisfied the nuclear watchdog. In Tehran, officials insisted the two major texts on sanctions and Iran’s nuclear obligations that it tabled at the Vienna talks were fully in line with the nuclear deal, saying the real roadblock was the US refusal to lift sanctions. US officials claimed Russia and China had been “taken aback by the degree to which Iran had walked back its own compromises” from previous rounds of talks, as well as becoming more resolute about the demands it made of the US and of others. The senior US official said: “I think they do share a sense of disappointment, to put it diplomatically, at what Iran has chosen to do with the last several months of preparation for the talks.” The direct talks featuring Iran, Russia, China, Germany, France and the EU recommenced in Vienna last week after a five-month delay to give the newly elected Iranian administration headed by Ebrahim Raisi time to review its demands. The official claimed it was evident to Russia and China that Iran had “not adopted the posture of a country that was seriously thinking a rapid return to mutual compliance with the deal”. The approach of the Russians and Chinese is critical since the new hardline Iranian regime has insisted it can afford to walk away from the talks with the west, effectively leaving its nuclear programme unconstrained, and fund its domestic welfare agenda by trading with the east. The threatened emergency IAEA board meeting in the next fortnight would be an early test of whether Iran is truly losing the protection of either Russia or China. Claiming that Iran was beginning to isolate itself from its impatient natural allies, the US official said: “I think the world, which for a long time during the maximum pressure campaign [applied by Donald Trump from 2018] was more sympathetic to Tehran’s position. I think we’re seeing very clearly that countries around the world are now more and more aware of the fact that Iran is taking a position which is inconsistent with their stated goal of a return to the JCPOA [the 2015 nuclear deal] and their accelerated nuclear programme is exhibit A in that.” The officials did not directly answer whether he thought Chinese concerns about Iran’s nuclear proliferation would extend to ending the import of Iranian oil, estimated at half a million barrels a day and one of the lifelines that has kept the Iranian economy afloat. He also pointed to the way in which Gulf states had issued a statement in support of the restoration of the nuclear deal, a change in their previous posture. The United Arab Emirates’ most senior national security official, Sheikh Tahnoon bin Zayed Al Nahyan, is due to visit Tehran on Monday. But the US is also having to handle Israeli demands that the US recognise that Iran is involved in nuclear blackmail. Israel’s prime minister, Naftali Bennett, told his cabinet that he wanted the Vienna negotiations, which are due to recommence at some point this week, to be postponed until Iran halted the uranium enrichment. “Iran must begin to pay a price for its violations,” he said. An Israeli military attack on Iran’s nuclear sites would probably end any chances of effective Russian or Chinese pressure on Iran to change its negotiating tactics. The US officials pointed to something akin to “soul searching’” or interesting reflections in Israel by former senior officials about the decision to withdraw from the 2015 Iran nuclear deal. “What it has meant is it has opened the door for an unconstrained, uncontrolled Iranian nuclear programme, which obviously was not the case while the US and Iran were both in compliance with the deal.”In the four months since my first novel came out, I’ve had the same conversation probably a dozen times. “What’s it about?” a well-meaning stranger will ask. “Well,” I’ll reply, “it’s the story of a woman choosing between two very different men – as well as technology, divorce and the precariousness of renting in …” “Oh!” they’ll interject. “You mean one of those books with high heels on the cover? That must have been fun to write.” So I wasn’t surprised to find that the Times and Sunday Times’ best books of 2021 round-up did not, as they claimed, represent “every genre”. It’s a terrific list, full of books that have made an otherwise constraining year feel infinitely full of possibility. But in spite of crime fiction, historical novels, thrillers and science fiction all having their own categories, romantic fiction failed to get a look in. I’m an author of what I’ll call – for the purposes of this piece – women’s commercial fiction (more on that later), and I was one of the many writers who took to Twitter to express their frustration at this omission. I don’t think anyone at the Times was deliberately snubbing women’s commercial fiction. But the same omission keeps happening, in review pages and on award longlists. Although we may no longer call these books “chick lit”, they’re still treated in many quarters as an embarrassing afterthought. Jeanette Winterson was so incensed earlier this year when a box of her newly reissued novels arrived looking like what she called “wimmins fiction” that she burned the lot. This sniffiness stems from two outmoded beliefs that desperately need challenging. Firstly, that any book written by women about women’s relationships is a capital-R Romance novel by default. And secondly, that Romance is a genre without substance or literary merit. The whole question of genre is something that female writers of all stripes have to contend with far more than their male counterparts. Just look at people’s obsession with categorising Sally Rooney. The idea that a young woman’s pastel-covered novels about millennials falling in love might qualify as literary fiction causes a fair few commentators to start frothing at the mouth: in 2019, Will Self dismissed her work as “very simple stuff with no literary ambition” during an interview to promote (and I swear I’m not making this up) a line of macarons for the restaurant Hakkasan. However you define it, women’s commercial fiction is as diverse as the people who write it. Far from being lacking in what Winterson called “playful or strange or the ahead of time stuff”, it’s brimming with it. But there’s a tendency for all of that to get stuffed into a box with a label on it: romance, high-end commercial, up-lit and so on. Of course, there’s nothing wrong with labels: they’re invaluable in conceptualising a novel’s “package”. But they can also be limiting, and there’s no getting around the fact that their application is heavily gendered. We don’t call novels with titles like Bravo Agent Mincemeat and The Leonardo Enigma “men’s commercial fiction” – we just call them “books”. To move on to the second misconception, that women’s commercial fiction has nothing important to say – what makes a novel “serious”? Is it the subject matter, the quality of the prose, the author’s ability to connect with readers? By every one of these metrics, it’s the real deal. It’s generally accepted that Marian Keyes and Jojo Moyes, both globally successful and beloved, write novels with weight. And Helen Fielding has had a bit of a reappraisal recently, with authors like Candice Carty-Williams citing Bridget Jones’s Diary as a formative influence. But they’re framed as the exception rather than the rule. Just a glance at the pile of books by my bed right now would tell you that isn’t the case. There’s a proof of Laura Kay’s Tell Me Everything, about a queer therapist’s intimacy issues, and The Mismatch, Sara Jafari’s sensitive look at first love and cultural differences. Each word of Mhairi McFarlane and Sophie Cousens’s sentences is weighed and measured. And you only have to watch the Sylvanian Families trailer that Lindsey Kelk made for On a Night Like This to know that you’re in the hands of a serious comic talent. My own novels devote just as much space to subjects like bias in dating app algorithms, premature ovarian failure, abortion and mental illness as they do to falling in love. Another thing that’s serious is the amount of money that women’s commercial fiction is worth to publishing. As bestselling author Milly Johnson (who at the time of writing had only been outsold in the week’s paperback fiction chart by Richard Osman) made clear in a recent blogpost, romantic novels are one of the backbones of the industry, flying off the shelves in their millions. “We make profit,” she wrote. “No one gives us publishing deals because they feel obliged to.” As any reader of romances knows, you often find love where you least expect it – usually by setting aside your preconceptions. Next year, I hope that the people who put together the Times list of the best books of 2022 can do just that. And maybe one or two old-guard Booker nominees can too. Emma Hughes’s latest book No Such Thing As Perfect is published by CenturyStudents at an Oxford University college have accused staff of disregarding their welfare after a postgrad who alleged she was sexually assaulted said she was treated with hostility after making a complaint. Harriet, a PhD student at Balliol, who has multiple disabilities, alleged she was repeatedly sexually assaulted in 2019 by a fellow student. The college has announced an independent inquiry into its handling of her complaint after she said staff made inappropriate comments about her appearance and behaviour and concluded no further action should be taken without interviewing or accepting evidence from her. An open letter by the newly formed Balliol Community for Safety to the master of the college, Helen Ghosh, condemning Harriet’s treatment has been signed by hundreds of Oxford students as well as supporters including equality campaigners, Labour MP Jess Phillips, and Oxford Labour councillor Shaista Aziz. Students have protested outside the college and, at a carol service last Sunday, a group wearing red stood up and turned their backs whenever Ghosh or the college chaplain spoke. Harriet, who first detailed her experience in an al-Jazeera investigations documentary said she had hoped speaking publicly would lead to reform. “This has not been the case,” she said. “In fact, Balliol has only become more adversarial in response to what it perceives as threat to its reputation. Balliol’s handling of this whole matter has left me exhausted, highly anxious, and deeply depressed, on top of the extremely painful process of dealing with the assault itself.” Among allegations of Balliol’s inappropriateness made by Harriet, who has endometriosis, chronic gastritis and interstitial cystitis, were: The chaplain, Bruce Kinsey, asked her if she was aware of the effect she had on men, called her very physically attractive and said she should be wary of the impact on her alleged attacker. Kinsey told her: “You don’t want to piss people off who you might meet again downstream.” When she reapplied for disability access accommodation she received an email from the praefectus, Tom Melham, implying that her behaviour was a problem, including drinking. Harriet provided audio and video recordings respectively, which appear to back up the last two allegations. She decided not to go to the police because of concerns at how protracted and traumatic the process would be but said the college’s disciplinary procedures contain a catch-22, allowing it to decline to act if there is no police report but if there is a police inquiry, to delay its own investigating until that has concluded. She said she was not convinced the independent inquiry would effect real change, while Balliol Community for Safety also has concerns about it. Co-founder Clara Holcroft said: “We worry that this … will be something promised to placate us with no plans in the meantime. What we’re trying to emphasise is that these sexual assaults will continue and the system is unfit for purpose.” The group, which says Ghosh has yet to meet its members, has vowed to protest until its demands are met. They include staff being held accountable for their actions, and given comprehensive training to deal with complaints, as well as a review of cases reported in the last three years. Another co-founder of the group, Fiónn McFadden, said: “All we want is for students in the college to feel safe and, when that safety is interrupted, that they can turn to these welfare systems that are supposed to protect them and not feel like their problems are going to be made worse.” A statement from the college and on behalf of Ghosh, Kinsey and Melham, said there were “factual inaccuracies” in the account of Harriet’s experience, which the Guardian put to it, but it would be inappropriate to comment further given the pending inquiry. It said a QC would shortly be appointed to conduct the inquiry, with the college “committed to acting on the lessons which emerge from the inquiry”. It said: “The college continues to offer support to those involved, and in parallel has also initiated an externally supported general review of its welfare provision, to which Balliol students are being encouraged to contribute.”One RSC production in which Antony Sher appeared that was omitted from Michael Coveney’s obituary (is the 1993 revival of Tom Stoppard’s play Travesties. John Wood’s performance as Henry Carr, in the original production some two decades earlier, made such an impression that I had assumed that Sher’s performance would be inferior. It is a testament to Sher’s virtuoso performance that I was completely won over by it. Richard Williams As a student at a large sixth form college in Essex, the first “serious” theatre I was ever taken to see was a production of Richard III at the Barbican in the mid-1980s. A few months later, my wonderful form tutor gave me a pair of tickets to take a friend to see Torch Song Trilogy. The performances of Antony Sher in both plays had an incredible impact on this working-class correspondent; they fired my love of literature, which I studied at university and have loved teaching for the last 30 years. I heard of this great actor’s death with real sadness, but also with a genuine warmth for the impact that actors like him can have on those of us lucky enough to be given such opportunities. Richard McDonaldKevin McCarthy is a “liar and a coward”, Ilhan Omar said on Sunday, regarding the House Republican leader’s refusal to condemn Lauren Boebert, the Colorado Republican who has made bigoted and Islamophobic comments about her Democratic counterpart from Minnesota. Omar also said she was “very confident” that the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, “will take decisive action” against Boebert in the week to come, perhaps by removing committee assignments or seeking formal censure. Omar came to the US from Somalia, and in 2018 was one of the first Muslim women elected to Congress. Boebert, a pro-Trump rightwinger, was also elected that year. In comments over Thanksgiving which echoed previous attacks, Boebert called Omar a member of a supposed “Jihad Squad” and joked about fearing Omar might have a bomb when they shared an elevator in the US Capitol. Omar condemned the remarks. Boebert apologised but a phone call ended in acrimony. Some Republicans have condemned Boebert – but not McCarthy, a minority leader widely seen to be in thrall to pro-Trump extremists as he seeks votes to make him speaker in 2023, when Republicans are expected to take back the House. On Friday, McCarthy told reporters Boebert “apologised publicly. She apologised personally … denied the ability to meet personally, she picked up the phone and she called Congresswoman Omar, she says, ‘I want to personally apologise to you.’ And that’s what she did.” Omar told CNN’s State of the Union: “He is a liar and a coward. He doesn’t have the ability to condemn the kind of bigoted Islamophobia and anti-Muslim rhetoric that are being trafficked by a member of his party. “This is who they are. And we have to be able to stand up to them. And we have to push them to reckon with the fact that their party right now is normalising anti-Muslim bigotry.” Attacks on Republicans who have spoken up against Boebert, Omar said, showed “their conference condones [her remarks] and that’s why it’s dangerous. “… The most dangerous thing that she has recently said is that we have a problem in Congress because there’s a terrorist. And I think once you sort of invoke that kind of language, you put not just my life but the lives of my colleagues as well in danger because we don’t know who’s out there.” This week, Omar released a recording of a threatening message. She told CNN: “The people who are leaving these voicemails that are saying, ‘We are taking up arms, coming to the Capitol to protect our country from a terrorist’ are not, you know, people that we should dismiss. They’re not joking. “And I think it’s important for us to say this kind of language, this kind of hate, cannot be condoned by the House of Representatives, and we should punish and sanction Boebert by stripping her of her committees, by rebuking her language, by doing everything we can to send a clear and decisive message to the American public, that if the Republicans are not going to be adults and condemn this then we are going to do that.” Asked if she thought Pelosi would act against Boebert, Omar said: “I’ve had a conversation with the Speaker and I’m very confident that she will take decisive action next week. “When I first got to Congress, I was worried that I wasn’t going to be allowed to be sworn in because there was a ban on the hijab. She promised me that she would take care of it. She fulfilled that promise. She has made another promise to me, that she will take care of this, and I believe her.”Why are children’s safety groups calling for age verification on porn sites? They fear it is too easy for children to access publicly available pornography online. Experts who work with children say pornography gives children unhealthy views of sex and consent, putting them at risk from predators and possibly stopping them reporting abuse. It can also lead to children behaving in risky or age-inappropriate ways, harming themselves and others. Charities say children tell them that pornography is difficult to avoid and can leave them feeling ashamed and distressed. One concern is the extreme nature of porn on mainstream sites, with one study showing that one in eight videos seen by first-time visitors showed violent or coercive content. A survey by the British Board of Film Classification last year found 60% of children aged 11 to 13 who reported having seen pornography said it was largely unintentionally. Ofcom research found the commercial pornography site Pornhub – which does not use age verification – had a bigger UK audience than BBC News. It was visited by 50% of all men and 16% of all women in the UK in September 2020. Three of the most popular sites in the UK – PornHub, RedTube and YouPorn – are owned by one Canadian company, MindGeek. Last December, Mastercard and Visa said they would stop customers using their credit cards on Pornhub following accusations that the porn site showed child abuse and rape videos. A New York Times investigation alleged that the site hosts revenge pornography taken without participants’ consent. Following the accusations, Pornhub owners Mindgeek removed millions of user-generated videos uploaded by unverified users from the site. Pornhub have strongly denied all the accusations though they did take far reaching steps to ‘safeguard’ the site. How do ‘age assurance’ and ‘age verification’ differ? Age assurance describes methods companies use to determine a user’s age online, such as self-declaration (ie a pop-up form); profiling (determining a user’s age by scrutinising content they consume or how they interact with a computer), and biometric details such as facial analysis. Age verification uses ID known as “hard identifiers”, such as passports or credit cards. The NSPCC, the child protection charity, wants this to be required for access to high-risk sites, such as commercial pornography or dating sites. What regulations exist on age assurance and age verification? The UK’s data watchdog, the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO), introduced the children’s code (or age-appropriate design code) in September. It is designed to prevent websites and apps misusing children’s data, such as using “nudge” techniques to make children spend more time online or building a profile of them then used by algorithms (the instructions for computers) that can steer children towards dangerous content. If a website or app acknowledges that its content may be risky for children, then it should manage that risk and one method is using age assurance. John Carr, of the UK Children’s Charities’ Coalition on Internet Safety, argues that porn sites should require age verification as they are “likely to be accessed by children”. The ICO believes pornography sites are not intended for children and therefore do not come under a code designed to make internet services safer for children. Ofcom has regulations for video-sharing sites which have their European headquarters in the UK such as TikTok, Vimeo and Snapchat (YouTube, for instance, is not UK-based). These sites are legally required to protect under-18s from harmful video content and Ofcom’s guidance in October said platforms hosting porn “should have robust age verification in place”. Users of online gambling sites, which are barred to under-18s, are also required to “affirm they are legally old enough to gamble.” What is the online safety bill proposing about age verification? The online safety bill (OSB) focuses on protecting children from harm online, whether through being exposed to online pornography or viewing other harmful content. It applies to companies that produce “user-generated content” – Facebook, Twitter and YouTube – but also commercial porn sites. The bill imposes a duty of care on tech companies: to prevent the proliferation of illegal content such as child sexual abuse images; and to ensure children are not exposed to harmful or inappropriate content. Age assurance or verification is an obvious way to police the latter. But the bill does not require age verification for sites that could expose children to harmful content. Instead, the regulator, Ofcom, can recommend that certain sites such as pornography outlets can impose age assurance or verification. Companies could be required to provide a risk assessment, including whether they expose children to harmful content, and propose how to mitigate those risks. Ofcom will then determine whether the company has put in place appropriate measures to protect children or if it is failing in its duty of care. Ofcom may then order the use of age assurance and age verification measures. Is there alternative legislation pushing for age verification? Yes, the crossbench peer Beeban Kidron, architect of the ICO children’s code, has introduced a private member’s bill to the House of Lords: the age assurance (minimum standards) bill. It sets out a framework for basic standards of checking ages online. It could find its way into the OSB bill if, for instance, Ofcom – which will implement the bill – is empowered to introduce new standards. • In the UK, the NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In the US, call or text the Childhelp abuse hotline on 800-422-4453. In Australia, children, young adults, parents and teachers can contact the Kids Helpline on 1800 55 1800, or Bravehearts on 1800 272 831, and adult survivors can contact Blue Knot Foundation on 1300 657 380. Other sources of help can be found at Child Helplines InternationalBarnardo’s works directly with children who are victims of abuse or display signs of harmful or risky sexual behaviour. In 2020-21, they worked with 382,872 children, young people, parents and carers. In a recent survey of their frontline workers across England and Wales, staff reported a rise in the number of children participating in acts they have seen in pornographic videos, despite feeling uncomfortable or scared. They describe porn as having a “corrosive” effect on child wellbeing. Child sexual abuse expert Sarah works with children who are displaying signs of inappropriate sexual behaviour. She also trains other professionals who work with children “I started out as a primary school teacher eight years ago, and I’ve been worried about children seeing porn ever since. Children don’t have to be able to type to see porn – it can be sent to them or shown to them on someone else’s phone. They see it at school, in the corridors, in the bathrooms, on the bus. There is just no censor on any of it – one video leads to another. If you can imagine it, it exists as porn, and children are seeing it. “I am working with a teenager who was sexually abused by a family member. This young person had been exposed to porn and it was perpetuating what the abuser told them – that this is normal, that it’s not abuse.” She is particularly concerned, as are her colleagues, about the increasingly extreme nature of the porn freely available on mainstream sites. “A common role play theme on porn sites is intra-familial abuse – on mainstream sites you will see fetishisation of grandad and granddaughter sex, or stepfathers and stepdaughters. This may lead to a young person not disclosing or getting the support they need. From both angles it is dangerous; it puts the child at risk and encourages the perpetrator. “The impact of porn shows in children harming others or themselves because they either don’t understand or are so ashamed of sexual urges. Shame is very prevalent and is often hidden. “We are working with a seven-year-old who has been exposed to porn and is now displaying sexualised behaviour. They had free rein on a device, and someone hadn’t deleted a browser history. Once a young person sees porn, they may feel a need to come back again and again – porn is designed to meet a need. That is a form of sexual abuse against that child.” Brian* is a senior social worker who has worked with children for over 30 years “Unfortunately, porn is a feature for the majority of the children who come into our service. The children we support are very damaged. They would be likely to have experienced multiple forms of abuse – sexual, physical and domestic. Porn in and of itself is not the cause of their behaviour but it becomes a compounding factor when it hits that history of vulnerability. Adult sex offenders can give children a distorted rationalisation for their behaviour, and the messages that are given through porn then fit with that distortion. Lucy* has worked within the field of child sexual abuse for 16 years. “We know children find porn distressing – they are telling us that themselves. We have done research with children in schools so that we have a cohort to compare our vulnerable children to, and they are saying the same thing. “This is not what could be described as erotic or soft porn. They may start on porn sites and quickly begin to see very hardcore material. Or [extreme material] lands in their social media feeds, and they can then feel compelled to go back and look again. “Children are less able to manage sexual arousal, and this material is designed to be arousing. Lots of children can feel guilty and distressed by what they see. We have 14-year-olds telling us they have to watch it as soon as they wake up. They describe being preoccupied with accessing porn to an extent that impacts upon their day-to-day life. “We also regularly work with children with learning disabilities, another group vulnerable to the harm of porn. They may be shielded from sexual information and then reach 13 or 14 and take away the wrong learning from porn. They may learn that no means yes, that if you persist, women will enjoy forced sex. These messages are harmful for any child but for children with learning needs or who have developed unhealthy beliefs around sex as a result of abuse, it’s particularly bad. “After lockdown, we began to get more calls from parents where there is no other obvious trauma, just the exposure to porn. I’ve been doing this 16 years, and children have far more access to porn now.” * Names and some details have been changed to protect identities • In the UK, the NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In the US, call or text the Childhelp abuse hotline on 800-422-4453. In Australia, children, young adults, parents and teachers can contact the Kids Helpline on 1800 55 1800, or Bravehearts on 1800 272 831, and adult survivors can contact Blue Knot Foundation on 1300 657 380. Other sources of help can be found at Child Helplines InternationalThe actor Roy Holder, who has died aged 75 of cancer, performed in the classics on stage and was directed by Franco Zeffirelli in film versions of two Shakespeare plays, but he will be best remembered by a generation of young television viewers for his role in a teatime fantasy series. Ace of Wands, devised by Trevor Preston – later to write for The Sweeney and create the hard-hitting dramas Out and Fox – began in 1970, starring Michael Mackenzie as the psychic magician Tarot, fighting evil with his young assistants, played by Judy Loe and Tony Selby. Tarot, who was described in publicity as “a 20th-century Robin Hood, with a pinch of Merlin and a dash of Houdini”, also had a pet Malay fishing owl called Ozymandias. Holder was introduced a year later as Chas Diamond, a photographer living with his sister, Mikki, a journalist, in a studio above an old London street market. They became Tarot’s new assistants for the final series, in 1972, when Holder’s storylines included sharing a dream about ancient Egypt with the mystery-solving magician and, under hypnosis, robbing a post office. “I went in as the baddie,” he recalled. “Then, they asked me to do the next series as the goodie.” In recent years, Holder appeared at fan conventions and autograph-signing sessions for cult series such as Ace of Wands and Doctor Who, in which he appeared in the 1984 story The Caves of Androzani as Krelper, an impatient gun smuggler working for a mercenary selling weapons to an outlaw who creates androids. Holder’s longest-running television role was in the sitcom Sorry! (1981-88) as Frank, drinking pal of the neurotic middle-aged librarian Timothy Lumsden (Ronnie Corbett), who lives with his domineering mother. “Just shut up about your mother!” Frank tells Timothy in one of his attempts to find him a partner. “Over there is a girl who likes you very much. You like her very much. Now, get to it or you’re going to find yourself neutered!” Roy was born in Birmingham, to Florence (nee Clifford) and Frederick Holder. He was three when his father, a factory worker, died and his mother later remarried. He acted in plays while attending Upper Thomas Street secondary modern school. At the age of 15, he was plucked from a shortlist of 150 pupils by the BBC to play a “rough-looking” boy with a broad Birmingham accent for a leading role as Robert Shaw’s son in The Train Set (1961), a play written by David Turner and performed live. Richard Attenborough was so impressed by Holder’s performance that, in his role of producer, he cast him alongside Hayley Mills as Jackie, one of the children encountering a murderer (Alan Bates) whom they mistake for Jesus Christ, in Whistle Down the Wind, one of the most popular films of 1961. Holder showed his adaptability by adopting a northern accent, reflecting the resetting of Mary Hayley Bell’s novel from Kent to Lancashire. He played a schoolboy again, alongside Laurence Olivier’s alcoholic teacher, in the film Term of Trial (1962). After returning to TV as Bugs in the children’s serial The Chem Lab Mystery (1963), Holder established himself as a character actor in dozens of series and plays, as well as bringing his comedy skills to light entertainment in The Little and Large Show (from 1987 to 1991) and The Les Dennis Laughter Show (1990-91). He had a starring role as the tough Sergeant Bilinski, of Six Platoon, B Company Wessex Rangers, in the army drama Spearhead (1978-81). He also played Potty, one of the Brummie anglers, in the comedy-drama series Eh Brian – It’s a Whopper (1984) and the slow-witted wagon driver Hiram Ford in Middlemarch (1994). Holder’s early stage career included four years with the National Theatre company at the Old Vic (1964-67), during which time he had elocution lessons after Olivier told him: “My dear boy, you must lose your Birmingham accent.” Zeffirelli, a guest director there, cast Holder in two Shakespeare film adaptations – as Biondello in The Taming of the Shrew (1967), starring Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor, and Peter in Romeo and Juliet (1968), with Leonard Whiting and Olivia Hussey in the title roles. Swimming with Taylor in the Mediterranean during time off was one of the actor’s happiest memories. His other film parts included the clown in Othello (1965), one of the raw recruits in The Virgin Soldiers (1969), Bob in The Virgin and the Gypsy (1970), Hal in Loot (1970) and Fred Goddard in War Horse (2011). In 2016, after they had been together for more than 40 years, Holder married Pauline Cox, a BBC makeup and hair designer whom he had met when they were working on the play Brent Geese in 1975. She and their children, Kate and Thomas, survive him. • Roy Trevor Holder, actor, born 15 June 1946; died 9 November 2021 • This article was amended on 6 December 2021. During Roy Holder’s four years with the National Theatre company, it was based at the Old Vic, not the Aldwych as an earlier version stated.It might not have been the day that Harry Kane scored his first Premier League goal of the Antonio Conte era, but still. A solid if unspectacular victory over bottom side Norwich, courtesy of Lucas Moura’s brilliant first-half strike and then Davinson Sánchez and Son Heung-min lifted Tottenham up to fifth spot and, perhaps more importantly, above Arsenal. As first months in a new job go, Conte could hardly have asked for much more. Yet had Norwich taken the chances that came their way at crucial moments in the game, the Italian will know this could have been a very different story. Kane’s solitary league goal of the season, against Newcastle in mid-October, predated the appointment of Conte but this should have been the perfect opportunity to add to that tally against opponents who had conceded an average of two goals a match so far; he was also facing the club where he spent half a season on loan back in 2012-13. But it was to prove another frustrating afternoon for the England captain as he watched Son round off the scoring late on following a surging run from Ben Davies that had the Tottenham supporters singing their new manager’s name. “On one hand I’m really enthusiastic for this but I feel a lot of responsibility,” said Conte. “They want to trust in my work but I have only been here for a month. Maybe it’s too much, too early and I want to show in the future that I deserve this for my work at this club.” Norwich had arrived in north London on the back of an unbeaten four-match run and having enjoyed a significant bounce since the arrival of Dean Smith. His decision to make three changes from the team that drew 1-1 at Newcastle last Tuesday was good news for Republic of Ireland striker Adam Idah, who made his first Premier League start of the season but passed up a golden opportunity to equalise in the second half with the game still very in the balance. Had Teemu Pukki also taken the chance presented to him on a plate by his strike partner in the third minute then Norwich’s chances of achieving an upset would have improved dramatically. Sadly for Smith, however, Pukki’s weak first-time effort that went straight into the grateful hands of Hugo Lloris proved costly almost immediately. The excellent Oliver Skipp warmed the gloves of Tim Krul with a rasping drive from the edge of the box after picking his way through the middle but the Norwich goalkeeper could do nothing about Moura’s brilliant goal soon after. The Brazilian exchanged a one-two with Son on the edge of the box, jinked his way past two defenders and let rip with a shot that flew into the top corner for his first league goal of the season. Tottenham’s plans were somewhat interrupted when Sergio Reguilón was forced off with a suspected thigh injury and replaced by Ryan Sessegnon midway through the first half. Also without the service of his other first-choice wing-back Emerson Royal due to illness and Japhet Tanganga standing in, Conte may have worried that his side would lack the usual width that is so vital to his gameplan. But even if Norwich had the majority of possession in their luminous orange shirts and created very little of note, a couple of lung-busting runs from Sessegnon suggested that he can be an able replacement for the Spaniard when required. Kane’s big moment of the first half came five minutes before the break when he was put through by Moura. The stadium held its breath waiting for the net to ripple after Kane attempted to chip the advancing Krul but there were only groans as the ball sailed way off target. Newcastle’s win over Burnley on Saturday, which left Norwich bottom of the table again, meant the onus was on the visitors to take the initiative after the break. Had Kane made more of a header from an early corner in the second half then it might have been game over already. His time at Norwich comprised only three Premier League appearances due to a broken metatarsal early in his loan spell before eventually he made the breakthrough with his parent club at the end of the following season. Kane’s next attempt was much better and drew a smart one-handed save from Krul, although he could do nothing about the resulting corner. Son’s ball struck the unfortunate Ben Gibson in the groin and Sánchez was there to lash home the second goal. From then on, it was all about how many Tottenham could win by. “They were more clinical than we were,” Smith said. “At 1-0 we were always in the game but didn’t take our chances.”Volkswagen deceived British car buyers by falsifying the green credentials of its vehicles, lawyers will argue this week, as a compensation claim linked to the German firm’s “dieselgate” emissions scandal reaches the high court. More than 90,000 claimants are seeking compensation after buying cars from Volkswagen Group – including Audis, Seats and Skodas – only to find that they emitted more of the air pollutant nitrogen dioxide than the company claimed. The group action, which was launched in 2019, is the latest to stem from the scandal, which emerged in 2015 when the carmaker was found to have installed defeat devices to rig emissions data. The company has already spent £25bn globally on legal costs, compensation and vehicle buybacks since the scandal broke. Arguments heard in court this week could have a significant bearing on further payouts, owing to their potential bearing on a trial scheduled to begin in January 2023. During the five-day hearing, lawyers for the claimants will argue that customers were deceived because VW did not tell them about the defeat devices. The company is expected to say that its failure to mention the devices is insufficient in law for a deceit claim, which could arise only if customers believed that the cars did not have them and that they were fooled into thinking otherwise. Should a judge rule that a deceit claim cannot proceed, VW could ultimately end up paying a significantly limited amount in compensation, or none at all. But VW would still face compensation claims including for breach of statutory duty – in effect failing to follow automotive manufacturing regulations – and a smaller number, about 40% of the 91,000 total, for breach of contract by providing a car of insufficient quality. Claimants are being represented by three law firms: Leigh Day, Slater &amp; Gordon and PGMBM. “It has been over six years since the dieselgate scandal broke and made headlines across the world, but our clients in the UK are still awaiting justice,” said Shazia Yamin, a partner at Leigh Day. “Whilst in many other jurisdictions, Volkswagen have admitted cheating emissions tests and have paid out billions of pounds in fines and settlements, they nevertheless continue to fight this drawn-out legal battle in the UK and, rather than taking the sensible approach and seeking to resolve these matters, have opted to bring an application seeking to dismiss some of the claims being made by our clients.” Yamin said a ruling in her clients’ favour “would serve a very important purpose in holding manufacturers to account, restoring consumer confidence, and furthering the wider goal of reducing emissions and their harm to public health and the environment”. She added: “There is a clear public interest in what is now a long overdue resolution to the emissions scandal in the UK.” A spokesperson for the German carmaker said: “Volkswagen Group maintains that there is no legal basis to the claimants’ argument that customers were deceived by Volkswagen. “In particular, we do not believe that the claimants were aware of and understood the specific representations it is alleged they relied upon before buying the vehicles. We are therefore requesting that the court strikes out (or gives summary judgment on) this allegation from the claimants’ case.” Mercedes is also facing compensation claims over defeat devices, as part of separate legal action which the German carmaker has said it will defend. • This article was amended on 6 December 2021 to clarify the compensation possibilities should a judge rule that a deceit claim cannot proceed.The double negative, a common grammatical elephant trap, claimed a high-profile victim on Saturday night: Donald Trump. In a statement, the former president said: “Anybody that doesn’t think there wasn’t massive election fraud in the 2020 presidential election is either very stupid, or very corrupt!” There was no massive election fraud in the 2020 presidential election, which Trump lost to Joe Biden by 306-232 in the electoral college and by more than 7m ballots in the popular vote. But Trump thinks, or at least says, that there was massive election fraud. Though his own formula would therefore make him “very stupid, or very corrupt”, his claims have had deadly effect, stoking the attack on the US Capitol on 6 January. That led to Trump’s expulsion from social media, which is why he now communicates by statement, nominally a means of communication less open to spontaneous error. As it happens, Trump has some sort of form with double negatives and the dangers they pose. In July 2018, in Helsinki, he famously stood next to Vladimir Putin of Russia and said “I don’t see any reason why it would be” Russia, which interfered in the 2016 US election. Under fire for that remark, Trump said: “The sentence should have been: ‘I don’t see any reason why I wouldn’t’ or ‘why it wouldn’t be Russia’. Sort of a double negative.” Mockery was delighted and swift. So it was again on Saturday night, on Twitter, perhaps the lost platform most costly to Trump. Kyle Cheney, a reporter for Politico, wrote: “This … doesn’t say what Donald Trump thinks it does.” The ABC correspondent Jon Karl, author of a bestselling book on the end of Trump’s presidency, offered a slice of wishful thinking: “He finally conceded …” And George Conway, a conservative critic married to a loyal Trump adviser, Kellyanne Conway, wrote: “Seriously, I usually don’t find it unsurprising when he says something that’s not inaccurate, but no one – not even the former guy – can be not correct all the time.”The Met Office has issued severe weather warnings for most of the UK ahead of the arrival of Storm Barra on Tuesday, as thousands of homes remain without power more than a week after Storm Arwen. Yellow wind weather warnings are in place across England, Wales and Northern Ireland for Tuesday, with yellow snow warnings in place in southern and western Scotland. Storm Barra, a deep area of low pressure moving in from the Atlantic and the second named storm of the season, is expected to bring the strongest winds and impacts to the Republic of Ireland. Two to five centimetres of snow is expected to accumulate widely across England and Scotland, but meteorologists said this could reach 10cm, particularly in parts of the Southern Uplands and Highlands. Gusts of 45-50 mph are expected across the UK, with 60-70 mph winds in exposed coastal locations, which could affect the ability of engineers to restore power to homes. The final properties left without power in Scotland following Storm Arwen nine days ago were reconnected on Sunday night. Scottish and Southern Electricity Networks (SSEN) said power has now been restored to all 135,000 homes affected by the “once in a generation” weather event on 26 November. The Energy Networks Association (ENA) said that 3,190 homes were waiting to be reconnected as of 2pm on Sunday, down from 4,025 homes on Sunday morning. Most of the impacted homes are in the north-east of England, the ENA added. During a visit to a Northern Powergrid call centre in Penshaw near Sunderland, the energy secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, warned power firms the government will review their operations after continuing outages caused by Storm Arwen nine days ago. “I think we can make the system a lot more resilient. We will have a review, we will see if the distributor companies have enough infrastructure, we may even have enforcement action if necessary,” he said. After visiting crews working in Weardale, County Durham, the energy secretary said engineers have been working in freezing temperatures to restore power supplies: “There are very challenging conditions. “There’s lots of ice, sleet, snow and it’s very difficult for the engineers to get vital infrastructure up and ready. “Some of the communications have not been brilliant. It’s very difficult in a centre or hub like this to know what’s going on on the ground, but I think that’s improving. “I think the engineers are doing a fantastic job, we have got the army out as well and they are all pulling together very effectively, but there are still a few hundred people who are still off power and I think that’s really unacceptable.” Kwarteng said he disagreed that the response to the Storm Arwen power cuts would have been swifter if they had happened in the south-east of England: “The physical infrastructure, layout and landscape is very different. One of the particular reasons why we haven’t got people back on the power supply is the weather conditions and they are very challenging [with] people in sparsely populated, very rural areas, and that represents a challenge,” he said.Leeds did not require proof that they had missed Patrick Bamford but they could welcome it when it arrived and Elland Road reverberated to the sound of his name. Sidelined since September, Bamford marked his return by sticking out his left knee and sending Leeds into raptures. His was a 95th-minute salvage job, leaving Leeds celebrating what, in several other respects, was a poor result and Brentford bemoaning what, in many ways, was a fine one. It was a day of competing comebacks, from Bamford and Luke Ayling, from Brentford and Leeds. When the influential Raphinha swung in the last corner, Ayling, who had also missed Leeds’ previous 11 matches, supplied the flick-on and Bamford reacted. Marcelo Bielsa can be a byword for the beautiful game but he could savour the effectiveness of an ugly finish. “Patrick scored a goalscorer’s goal,” said his manager. Shorn of a forward who struck 17 times last season, Leeds have lacked such predatory instincts as they rank among the lower scorers. They had needed a poacher. “The players that are used to scoring normally are in the right place at the right moment,” Bielsa said. “What you value about this goal is the opportunism of it.” The other element he appreciated was the timing. “Before the game it wasn’t a good result. After the first half it wasn’t but, when the game finished, we need to value what we got,” said Bielsa. It was Leeds’ second injury-time goal of the week and without either, they would be deeper in the mire. With Chelsea, Manchester City, Arsenal and Liverpool next, their position could get more precarious. They ended up depleted but not defeated. As the game of musical chairs on their treatment table continues, Bielsa lost the services of Liam Cooper and Kalvin Phillips. The England midfielder, already hurt, was unable to halt the counterattack that brought Brentford’s second goal. Bielsa refused to use it as an excuse while a can-do mentality – and a Canós – propelled Brentford to the verge of victory. “When you have the lowest budget, it hits harder when you are missing key players in key positions,” said the Brentford manager, Thomas Frank, but he produced an inventive response to the loss of his top scorer, Ivan Toney, who has contracted coronavirus. As Michail Antonio can testify, right wing-backs can sometimes turn into potent strikers and Sergi Canós was reinvented as an irrepressible frontman. The scorer of an own goal at Tottenham on Thursday could abandon his defensive duties and find the right net. His reward was to be struck by an object, seemingly a plastic bottle, thrown from the crowd when he scored. Leeds may face sanctions if the FA investigates. Bielsa’s team were certainly punished for losing their way when the odds were stacked against Brentford. They had lost five of their previous seven matches, were shorn of their talisman and went a goal down to a team who had two days more to prepare. Despite Bamford’s late intervention, stand-in strikers still outscored the specialists. It felt a vote of no confidence in Rodrigo, who was Spain’s No 9 last year, when, with Bamford held in reserve, Bielsa plumped for Tyler Roberts to begin in attack. He was vindicated as the utility man scored his first goal at Elland Road in 501 days, sliding to stab in Raphinha’s cross. Suitably buoyed, Roberts proved elusive and came close to a second with a rising shot that Álvaro Fernández saved. Ayling, too, had almost struck, with a header that Fernández tipped over but, irrepressible as the right-back proved, Bielsa sounded distinctly nonplussed when invited to praise him. “Ayling had a satisfactory game,” he said. Perhaps he would have been more upbeat but for Brentford’s swift double. In keeping with their humble origins, their fightback had a suitably unlikely catalyst. As recently as 2018 Shandon Baptiste was playing in the National League South for Hampton &amp; Richmond Borough. His only previous league goal came against Lincoln. But when Canos’s cross deflected off Diego Llorente, it fell obligingly for Baptiste, who bobbled a shot in from the edge of the box. Then Canós, undaunted by missing a simple chance a minute earlier, completed a slick passing move. Baptiste found Bryan Mbeumo, who supplied a cute reverse ball for Canós to spring the offside trap and rifle a shot past Illan Meslier. It was a triumph for his manager but even the normally ebullient Frank looked downcast after Bamford struck. He said: “This moment my feeling is definitely not to celebrate.”“We love you Rangnick, we do,” sang a jubilant Stretford End near the final whistle as Fred was the unlikely hero of this deserved victory for Manchester United’s interim manager Ralf Rangnick in his first game in charge. The winner was a smooth mid‑range finish from the maligned Brazilian – with his lesser-used right foot – and came from a cute pass from Mason Greenwood, on for Jadon Sancho, who had been United’s best performer. A delighted Rangnick said: “I had to ask my assistant coach if that was Fred’s right foot. I thought he could only shoot with his left. I’m happy for him.” Fred displayed a poise in front of goal that had been increasingly absent as what began as a promising display meandered after the interval. Moments before Fred’s goal, United had a heart-stopping moment when James Tompkins’ knockdown from Tyrick Mitchell’s corner was hit wide by Jordan Ayew from a tight angle but with David de Gea’s goal gaping. United are four matches unbeaten, three of them victories, and with this also only a second clean sheet of the campaign here was a perfect result for Rangnick to start his tenure. The German’s opening XI was an if-it-aint-broke-don’t-fix-it selection that retained those who beat Arsenal 3-2. This was an intriguing move due to the glaring structural problem Rangnick had identified – a lack of control in matches – which he stated was glaringly evident in the chaotic victory here on Thursday. The counter-view would run that Rangnick was citing a problem with style rather than personnel and that keeping the same side was smart management as the players were handed a first chance to impress. The 63-year-old’s thinking became clearer at kick‑off as the 4-2-3-1 of the previous regime was jettisoned for a 4-2-2-2 that had Marcus Rashford and Cristiano Ronaldo positioned ahead of Bruno Fernandes and Sancho. Palace’s 2-0 dismantling of Manchester City in October proved Patrick Vieira can plot eye-catching wins and there was an early warning when Wilfried Zaha slipped in Christian Benteke, who was flagged offside. This, though, was as good as the first half got for Palace. If a shaky defence and absentee midfield are prime factors in United’s struggle for control, attack is the bright spot, as illustrated via the constant forward surges from Diogo Dalot, Rashford, Fernandes, Alex Telles, Sancho and Ronaldo. When the latter floated on to Fernandes’ ball he unloaded at Vicente Guaita’s goal and claimed a corner. A curving Victor Lindelöf chip was next to turn Palace, with Rashford collecting and feeding Ronaldo, whose effort Guaita saved. In a flurry of action, Ronaldo missed a header, Sancho mopped up, turned back to Fred, and he let fly straight at Tomkins. There were sustained United forward patterns that pleased Rangnick. Ronaldo did then connect with a header he teed up for Fernandes whose attempted finish was powder-puff. Rashford pinged the ball to Fernandes and it ricocheted to Ronaldo but as the No 7 was cramped for space Palace escaped. United were looking like exactly what they are: a team whose confidence is gathering, Sancho’s effervescence sparkling the brightest. Rangnick had asked Sancho and Fernandes to be fluid as “two No 10s” and the former flitted around to knit play or test Guaita and his energy, too, was evident when it came to closing down the visitors. Was there more of this under the man nicknamed “the godfather of pressing”? Yes, is one answer, certainly in the opening phases. But such was United’s ascendancy there had been little cause for it when the second half started. A Fernandes blast over from 20 yards showed how calmness was missing from United. They still dominated, though. A foray from Benteke which ended with De Gea clutching his cross was a rare moment of Palace pressure. Then, after a melee close to United’s area, Craig Pawson awarded a free-kick, the referee judging Fred to have fouled. Conor Gallagher swung this in and Cheikhou Kouyaté jumped highest but his header was deflected out. Sancho – inevitably by now – sparked United when a lay-off had Rashford barrelling in on Guaita’s goal, Gallagher on hand to help crowd the forward out. Telles tried to twist the match United’s way with a free-kick on an angle from the right that beat Guaita but not his crossbar. There had been a dissipation of quality from Rangnick’s men, an aimless back-to-front pass by Lindelöf that sailed to safety summing this up. But then came the winner, and though Palace strived for an equaliser by the end the lesser seen Donny van de Beek and Anthony Elanga were on the pitch: perhaps hints for where Rangnick wishes to take United.The prolific Yolŋu artist Dhambit Munuŋgurr has been waiting a long time to get Julia Gillard’s attention. On 10 July 2013 Australia’s first female prime minister was scheduled to visit the north-east Arnhem Land community of Yirrkala to mark the 50th anniversary of the signing of the bark petitions, which sparked the Indigenous land rights movement. Munuŋgurr had prepared a bark painting in Gillard’s honour, hoping to present it to her. But a fortnight before the visit Gillard was toppled in a Labor leadership spill and the victor, Kevin Rudd, made the journey to Yirrkala instead. Munuŋgurr is too polite to publicly take sides but, suffice to say, the painting remains in her bedroom on Gunyaŋara, the tiny island in the Arafura Sea some 25 minutes’ journey away. Dhambit Munuŋgurr travels to the Buku-Larrŋgay Mulka Centre in Yirrkala three times a week to paint large bark canvases and larrakitj (hollow log poles). Photographs: Leicolhn McKellar Now, almost a decade on, the former female prime minister has again inspired the 53-year-old artist – this time as the subject of a large-scale work, Order, which depicts Gillard in parliament during her infamous 2012 misogyny speech. Speaking over Zoom from her wheelchair at the Buku-Larrŋgay Mulka Centre in Yirrkala, where she can be found painting large bark canvases and larrakitj (hollow log poles) three days a week, Munuŋgurr explains her admiration for Gillard quite simply: “She is a woman, like me.” Painted on stringybark in Munuŋgurr’s signature blue palette, Order features Gillard towering over pale, limp-faced politicians as Yolŋu dancers storm the parliament, holding arched spears aloft in representation of the cloud mass of the wet season. They are dancing the songline of “bol’ŋu” or “thunderman”, Munuŋgurr explains – an embodiment of the wet season. Order (2021) Will Stubbs, the longtime coordinator at Buku who is facilitating and translating my conversation with Munuŋgurr, says the Yolŋu in the painting are “supporting and dancing their identity and shepherding [Gillard] in – they’re her bodyguards”. Order will be hung as part of Bark Ladies: Eleven Artists from Yirrkala, a major new Melbourne exhibition that showcases the National Gallery of Victoria’s collection of stringybark paintings and larrakitj by female Yolŋu artists who work at Buku. Even if Gillard doesn’t see it, the thousands of gallery-goers who are expected to pass through Victoria’s premier art institution over its four-month run certainly will. 2021 has been a big year for Munuŋgurr, who began painting at 13 but only came to national prominence a year ago with her 2020 NGV Triennial presentation “Can we all have a happy life”. This year she was a finalist in the Wynne prize at the Art Gallery of New South Wales; and in August won the bark painting award at the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Art Awards for Bees at Gäṉgän, a work which references her ancestral stories. (Her artist parents Mutitjpuy Munuŋgurr and Gulumbu Yunupingu both won the top prize at the NATSIAAs during their lifetimes.) In October, Munuŋgurr staged a sold-out solo exhibition at the Roslyn Oxley9 gallery in Sydney featuring 24 of her works, including a diptych titled Welcoming the Refugees / Scott Morrison and the Treasurer – depicting Yolŋu pushing the two most powerful men in Australia out to sea. Her most expensive work sold for $60,000; although she only receives a portion of that amount, it is a handsome sum for an artist who paints compulsively but gives most of her work away. “There’s not many people in north-east Arnhem Land who haven’t got a personal Dhambit painting,” Stubbs says. Top: Dhambit Munuŋgurr and her husband Tony Gintz at the 2020 NGV Triennial. Photograph by Eugene Hyland. Bottom left: Welcoming the Refugees / Scott Morrison and the Treasurer (2021). Image courtesy of the artist and Roslyn Oxley9 gallery, Sydney. Bottom right: Bees at Gäṉgän (2021), which won the bark painting award at the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Art Awards. Image courtesy of the Museum and Art Gallery of the Northern Territory Munuŋgurr comes from a political family. Her artist grandfather Mungurrawuy Yunupingu helped spearhead the land rights struggle in the 1960s; her late uncle Mandawuy Yunupingu was the joint founder of Yothu Yindi; her son Gapanbulu Yunupingu played yidaki in the group and now sometimes fronts the band. But Munuŋgurr’s artwork mostly explores her deep esoteric knowledge of Yolŋu stories. Painting for her is “healing”, she explains. “It keeps me alive.” In 2005 a near-fatal car accident left Munuŋgurr with permanent physical disabilities and an acquired brain injury. During the seven months she spent in hospital in Darwin – 700km west of Yirrkala – her mother and French husband Tony Gintz received special permission to take Munuŋgurr on excursions to the nearby bush for traditional healing sessions. Her mother would dig a pit and add coals to create a natural sauna and then overlay it with paperbark and healing plants. Munuŋgurr would be placed inside. “I was cooked in an underground oven!” Munuŋgurr hoots. Dhambit Munuŋgurr with her husband Tony Gintz, who collects the bark she uses for her work. Photograph: Leicolhn McKellar Stubbs elaborates: “Her initial assessment by the doctors was that she would be a vegetable with no capacity to live any life. Tony and her mother defied that and through those healing processes she was able to return home. And the first moment she was able to, she painted, and through painting she has healed herself.” The accident impeded the use of her dominant right hand, so Munuŋgurr learned to wield her marwat (a traditional paintbrush made from her own hair) with her left. Her injuries also made it difficult for her to collect and grind the ochres and other earth pigments that Yolŋu artists customarily use on their canvases, so the elders gave her permission on compassionate grounds to use acrylic paint instead. After years of recreating traditional colours with orange, red and yellow paints, Munuŋgurr switched in 2019 to painting her larger works in the vivid shades of azure, ultramarine and turquoise that have come to define her. She chose the hue, she has explained, “because the earth is blue, the sky is blue and the sea is blue”. But her husband, who collects the sheets of stringybark for her work – venturing out during the wet season with a tomahawk to peel the outer layer off suitable trees – says: “The work [blue paintings] she does in Buku is only a small part of her whole body of work, because when she comes back home, she spends all her time painting [in many colours] … One day there’s going to be a surprising exhibition of the other side of Dhambit.” Stubbs adds: “There’s a shipping container full, because Dhambit is not painting for money, fame or profit – she needs to paint. She has to paint compulsively all day, every day.” Munuŋgurr nods her head: “Every day.” Before we hang up, Munuŋgurr fixes her gaze on me through the computer screen and smiles. “I’ll paint you one day,” she says, grinning. “You, talking to me.” Bark Ladies: Eleven Artists from Yirrkala runs at the National Gallery of Victoria from 17 December until 25 April 2022Ian Haywood’s partner is blunt when asked to sum up the couple’s latest battle with the National Disability Insurance Agency. “They don’t think it is ‘reasonable and necessary’ for Ian to have nursing funding,” Bianca* told Guardian Australia, referring to the key legal test for NDIS funding. “We think it is reasonable for him to stay home and it is necessary in order for him to live. It’s cheaper for them if he dies.” Haywood, 43, lives with the terminal illness motor neurone disease and is the latest NDIS participant to speak out about what the federal Labor party and disability advocates claim are “stealth cuts” being seen around the country. Communicating with Guardian Australia via email as he is non-verbal, Haywood said the NDIS had been funding 24-hour nurse care that allowed him to live at his home on the Mornington Peninsula rather than remaining in hospital. But when his plan was renewed for 12 months in October, he learned it would only cover six hours of care each day from a nurse. Haywood said he needed 24-hour care from a trained nurse because he cannot breathe for himself: he is mechanically ventilated via tracheostomy and needs urgent help if something goes wrong. “Usually it’s something simple like a leaking valve, a nurse with ICU experience can identify the problem and resolve it,” Haywood said. “But without a nurse I would be long dead of asphyxia before the ambulance arrived.” The funding was initially provided by the agency after he won an internal review of an earlier decision last year, Haywood said. Now, the NDIA has said it will no longer fund the same level of support. “My particular concern is that I have a ‘deadline’ of around mid-January when the nursing funding runs out, at which point in the worst case I would have to go to ICU and wait for it to be resolved,” Haywood said. During question time in parliament last week, the government was asked about several cases where participants and their families have been forced to appeal large cuts to NDIS plans. Disability advocacy organisations have also told Guardian Australia they are being swamped with requests from participants for help to appeal against the NDIA’s decisions. “It just seems so pointless to have to re-litigate the same issue [24-hour nursing care] when the need has previously been established,” Haywood said. Bianca said she had experienced nightmares during that last process. “I’d be like dreaming that he died,” she said. Haywood was diagnosed with motor neurone disease five years ago this week. Until then he’d worked as a child and adolescent psychiatrist. “Now I can’t move very much at all,” Haywood said. “I can wiggle my wrists, I can turn my head slightly, and I can blink and move my eyes. Some additional movements are still present but not under my voluntary control: for example I will smile if told a joke.” Still, Haywood said there was plenty he could do. He uses a button under his left wrist that allows him operate a computer to use the internet, watch films and read books. Last week, Haywood took part in a kitchen table Zoom meeting with the Voices of Mornington Peninsula political group. He prepared his contribution and shared it with the group when it was his turn. “People might look from the outside and just write him off, but he actually feels like he has a reasonable quality of life at the moment,” Bianca said. “A large part of that is the nursing staff look after him really well.” After he was hospitalised in 2019 with pneumonia, Haywood made the tough decision to be intubated and ventilated. He said he did it so he could spend more time at home with his family. They had briefly trialled aged care nurses caring for Haywood, but that was a “disaster” due to the technical expertise required in his case. In many instances, the workers themselves did not want to continue at the home due to the complicated nature of the role and the high risks involved. Since then, they have found a provider with ICU-trained nurses and Bianca says the care has been excellent. “This is what [the nurse are] skilled at, this is their job,” Bianca said. “This is what we’ve been trying to explain to the NDIA, ‘There can be a problem any day or night, you never know when there is going to be a problem.’” An NDIA spokesperson said the NDIS “continues to provide a significant level of funding for Mr Haywood’s disability-related supports, including 24/7 support”. “In some cases, such as this, where a participant requires nursing supports that can be delivered by a disability support worker, a transition will occur for a nurse to work closely with the disability support worker to implement a care plan, and provide appropriate training to support the participant safely,” the spokesperson said. Haywood and Bianca insist the current arrangement is the only one that is safe. They had not heard anything about a so-called “transition” until the NDIA’s statement to Guardian Australia. If the funding is not reinstated, Haywood will probably be forced to back to hospital. The other option is a group home for people who are ventilated in Thornbury, more than an hour’s drive from where the family currently lives. “So maybe Ian would end up there, rather than in his own family home,” Bianca said. “It’s just ridiculous.” With Haywood at home, he can still spend plenty of time with his eight-year-old son. “Ian has introduced him to Doctor Who,” Bianca said. “They’ll play chess together, they’ll do other stuff together. “They’ve got their other YouTube videos they watch together. We’ll play other board games … and stuff like that together.” Bianca said the family was “just exasperated” to be going through their second appeal process in two years. “Will we have to do this next year?” she said. *Name changed for privacy reasonsAustralia has weathered “sustained trade sanctions” from its top trading partner, China, to become more resilient, but has lost ground when it comes to diplomatic influence in the region, according to the latest rankings of power in Asia. Australia’s response to trade actions from China helped it to improve its score on its capacity to deter real or potential threats to state stability – one of the factors in the Lowy Institute’s fourth annual Asia Power index launched on Sunday night. Australia remained ranked sixth in the overall rankings of comprehensive power in the region, after the US, China, Japan, India and Russia, but narrowly ahead of South Korea. No country was left untouched by the health and economic impacts of Covid-19 in 2021, meaning a majority are not performing as well as they were a year or two ago, the Sydney-based thinktank found. Japan is an over-performer in wielding influence compared with the resources it has at its disposal, but it has “struggled to sustain its once-formidable regional economic clout” as China makes “foreign investment inroads into countries across the region”, the Lowy Institute found. At the same time, India’s economic growth has been thrown off course by the pandemic. The Lowy Institute’s analysts said Japan and India’s loss of standing compared with China “has been more pronounced and continuous than is the case for other middle powers such as Australia”. “By comparison, sixth-ranked Australia has weathered China’s growing power better than most US partners over the course of the last several years,” the analysts, Hervé Lemahieu and Alyssa Leng, said. “A loss of 1.6 points in its overall score in 2021, after gaining ground last year, means the country’s overall standing is now approximately back to its pre-pandemic level.” Beijing has rolled out tariffs and other trade actions against Australian export sectors including barley, wine, beef seafood and coal over the past year and a half, adding to existing strains in the relationship. Chinese officials have argued the Australian government “bears full responsibility” for the souring of the relationship, while the Morrison government vowed not to bow to “economic coercion”. “Despite coming under sustained trade sanctions by its primary trade partner, Australia has improved its resilience in 2021,” Lemahieu and Leng wrote. “The damage wrought by Chinese trade restrictions has been largely offset by untouched iron ore exports to China and trade diversion in other sectors.” The Lowy analysis is in line with comments by the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, that Australia has suffered a much lower than expected impact from China’s trade actions. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In a recent speech, Frydenberg said of the goods targeted by trade actions, Australia’s total exports to China fell by about $5.4bn over the year to June 2021. But exports of those goods to the rest of the world have increased by $4.4bn. But Treasury has blocked Guardian Australia’s application for analysis the department provided to Frydenberg about the impact of China’s trade restrictions. The freedom of information decision maker argued releasing the information would harm the relationship with China. ‘More adversarial relationship’ Despite the gain in resilience, Australia trended down in economic relationships, in part as a result of China overtaking it as the primary foreign investor in Papua New Guinea, according to the Lowy report. It also trended down on diplomatic influence. The Lowy Institute assessed 26 countries or territories against 131 indicators to produce an interactive index of performance across Asia. The indicators fall within eight main themes: resilience, economic relationships, diplomatic influence, defence networks, military capability, cultural influence, future resources and economic capability. Despite the formation of the Aukus deal with the UK and the US – which aims to deliver at least eight nuclear-propelled submarines to project power further from Australia’s shores – the country is trending down on military capability and regional defence networks. “The first development highlights the fact that the nuclear-powered boats will not arrive for perhaps two decades, during which time Australia’s signature military capabilities will remain limited and its navy reliant on an existing fleet of ageing conventional submarines,” Lemahieu and Leng wrote. “The second is a reminder that the trilateral pact marks a deepening rather than a widening of Australia’s defence partnerships. Though still ranked second for its defence networks behind only the United States, the pace of Australia’s regional defence diplomacy with non-allies was disrupted by the country’s pandemic-related border closures.” Vaccines ‘the new currency of geopolitics’ The Lowy Institute report described vaccine diplomacy as “the new currency of geopolitics”, as responding to the non-traditional security threat of pandemic disease had become the overriding concern of virtually every government at the current time. As of October, the US had “donated and delivered more than 90 million vaccine doses to the region – twice as many as China”. “China, Japan and India have also been active in donating Covid-19 vaccines to Asia, while New Zealand and Australia have been relatively generous after accounting for their population size.” Despite Australia’s relative generosity in vaccine diplomacy, the country’s prolonged border closures had “weighed heavily on external views of the country”. The US gained in overall points relative to China in the past year, in part due to Joe Biden’s efforts to strengthen alliances in a break from Donald Trump’s “America First” approach. But the US is also suffering a loss of economic influence in the region, and over time China is steadily eroding US military advantage. “The single biggest risk to US power remains the polarisation of US politics and the threat this poses to the stability of its democratic institutions and, ultimately, America’s commitment and reliability as an ally and partner in the Indo-Pacific,” Lemahieu and Leng wrote. Southeast Asian countries face growing challenges as they seek to navigate tensions between the US and China by not choosing sides, the report said. Aukus “raised further concerns that Southeast Asian powers may become bystanders to geopolitical changes driven largely by more powerful outsiders”. Indonesia is in the top 10 in the latest power index, but southeast Asian middle powers are “struggling to maintain their collective clout or sustain the diplomatic narrative”.It became a common refrain during 2020-21 to hypothesise about what was wrong with Melbourne Victory. Attempts to pinpoint the problem made for meaty discussion, in much the same way as more recent, bombastic declarations that the club is now “back” under new A-League Men coach Tony Popovic. Such comprehensive statements, however, were well off the mark. Because it was not Victory the club disintegrating into such a state from which they would have to rise from the ashes, but specifically its men’s team – which collapsed under the weight of years of hubristic stagnation. The club’s women’s program, conversely, was flying and, reaping the benefits of targeted a five-year strategy under coach Jeff Hopkins, ended the 2020-21 A-League Women season as champions. Now, following Sunday’s season-opening 5-1 triumph over Adelaide United –coupled with the early struggles of Melbourne City’s men’s side, Victory’s women have arguably assumed the mantle of strongest team in Melbourne. Across a blistering opening 45 minutes, they put to the sword the sacrificial lamb that was the Reds, leading 4-0 at half-time en route to the one-sided result. For the outside observer, the only negative was a potentially serious knee injury, and Hopkins put on a brave face as he confirmed the club was waiting on scans to determine if captain, Kayla Morrison, has become yet another victim of the ACL epidemic that blights women’s sport. The overall performance would put a smile on the face of most coaches, especially taking into account that Victory had played all of one warm-up game during the pre-season and was missing its two best attackers in Melina Ayres and new American signing Lynn Williams. Hopkins, though – perhaps somewhat forebodingly for the rest of the competition – was less than buoyant in the aftermath. “None of us are under any illusions that it was a really good performance,” he said. “I think we were quite clinical in front of goal, which was great. We capitalised on a few mistakes, which was good. We set the standard last year and we want to get better. It’s quite a really driven change room.” Softly spoken, with greying hair and a reserved demeanour, 57-year-old Hopkins cuts a friendly figure around AAMI Park; somewhat obscuring his history as a feared, no-nonsense defender who played 350 games for Fulham and Reading, as well as 16 internationals for Wales. Already a two-time championship-winning coach with Brisbane Roar’s ALW side before making landfall in Melbourne, the Welshman effectively inherited a program in free fall following the entrance of Melbourne City to ALW and its subsequent evisceration of Victory’s roster, and spent the next five years turning them into champions. Whereas regular ALW contenders Sydney FC and the Roar have effectively maintained strong and successful programs throughout history, he arrived at a team that at times felt as if it was fielded more out of obligation than desire. Yet from this, a program has been assembled that – despite the arrival of Williams – has come to largely rely on a sustainable core of relatively young and local Victorian talent developed over a number of years; Hopkins’s ever-presence at local NPLW Victoria games has ensured Victory effectively have right of first refusal on any of the most talented young prospects produced by the second most populous state in the nation. The 2020-21 championship, in effect, served as validation of his and his staff’s work – a demonstration of the virtues of coming up with a plan, believing in said plan and then executing ait. Now they enter 2021-22 widely heralded as a strong chance to take out an elusive premiership-championship double – the caveat is the fitness of Morrison, whose leadership and presence at the back will be impossible to properly replace. Now, finally, it appears the club is putting its money where its mouth has been with a long-overdue strategy of investment. Victory’s new director of football, John Didulica, describes his men’s and women’s programs as separate limbs on the same body. He envisions working with Football Victoria and Football Australia to take advantage of the momentum generated by the 2023 Women’s World Cup to facilitate the launch of a full-time, 52-week program for its senior side – allowing them to receive year-round training and development in an elite environment – with a plan in place to expand that to a pathway from girls to seniors. “It’s absolutely fundamental to the club’s future to have a fully functioning girl’s and women’s program,” he says. “From my perspective we’ve got, not just at Melbourne Victory, the whole game has 18 months to get its house in order and lay those foundations for the next 10 to 15 years. We can’t wait for the World Cup to come and go before we start planning. We need to hit the ground running for 2023 and that means that, as of next year, we need to have a model where professional clubs can invest in their women’s program 52 weeks of the year where possible incorporating a complete pathway for girls into the women’s game. “Maybe there are other reasons for it not having happened, but there’s really no more excuses to what I can see to why we can’t have a professional pathway for girls.”The word trauma has been so overused that it can sound meaningless. Yet there are profound effects on the body and mind following exposure to traumatic events. Our capacity to cope becomes overwhelmed and we feel helpless as the limbic system, which is the part of the brain associated with fight flight and freeze, goes into overdrive. This response often endures long after the event itself is buried in the past, resulting in the hallmark symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) - flashbacks, nightmares and a raft of other symptoms associated with an over-reactivity of the body. However, our personality structure usually remains intact. This is not the case when trauma occurs over a prolonged period, especially in our formative childhood years, as in child neglect or abuse, including emotional abuse. In this situation, the feelings of helplessness and the overactivation of the limbic system and the body are enduring, with personality structure often affected. Frequently, individuals who are suffering from this complex form of post-traumatic stress disorder cannot regulate their emotions, leading to impulsivity, a poor sense of self, and interpersonal difficulties. Longer and more intense treatment is usually required for these cases than in the instance of a less complex post-traumatic stress response unwittingly induced in her canine companion by Jacqui. Recently, while stopping to order coffee, Jacqui tied her dog Darling’s leash to what she thought was an immovable metal bench covered with plant pots while she went inside. In the midst of paying for her cappuccino, Jacqui heard an almighty clatter as Darling had lunged forward, causing the bench to tip over and the plant pots to crash to the ground. Frightened by the noise, Darling tried to run away from it, but of course the “monstrous” bench kept following her as she was tethered to it. By the time Jacqui reached her, Darling was sitting in the road with traffic roaring around her, having a full-fledged canine panic attack. With the help of the very kind ladies from the coffee shop, Jacqui was able to get her inside and eventually calm her down enough to take her home. Back in the house, she settled down and Jacqui thought that was the end of what had been a very distressing morning. However, the next time Jacqui ventured out with her, Darling immediately became agitated and afraid, and when they approached the corner where the incident had occurred, she froze. Her body quivered, her ears flattened back and her breathing became rapid. She was clearly experiencing primal and paralysing panic in relation to what she now associated with the setting. Darling was displaying classic symptoms of acute traumatic stress, along with an associated instinct to avoid the trigger for her fear. Treatment has involved gradual exposure to the source of trauma (the road near the coffee shop), along with a lot of reassurance that she is safe and attempts to give her positive experiences there so that she can delink the setting from the traumatic experience. Helping her to relax at a bodily level has been pivotal in this process, as while the body is over-adrenalised it remains trapped in a trauma response and unable to process an alternative experience. Prior to this trauma, Darling had been a happy and relatively confident dog, raised with love and security from early puppyhood, and this will assist her to return to her former state of being with help. Furthermore, Darling, unlike a human, is not dealing with the ethical and cognitive issues that are often involved in PTSD, as in returning veterans or the Lindt cafe victims. And her treatment could be more singularly focused on the body, which is implicated in all responses to trauma – whether complex or more acute – and includes a third state of trauma called continuing traumatic stress, in which the trauma is not located in the past, as in the previous two examples, but is continuing in the present. This stress is usually induced by social conditions such as war, poverty and social disintegration. However, the Covid pandemic and its sequelae have also given rise to continuing traumatic stress, particularly in vulnerable communities, resulting in a global mental health crisis. The problem with treating continuing traumatic stress is that it is not post, it is current. Treatment cannot focus on freeing the person from the impact of the stress in the past but must focus on strategies for coping with the stressors in the present, and for most of the world at the current time these include Covid-related stressors involving interruptions to family contact, career, schooling and income and living with uncertainty as we once again await information about the Omicron variant. Dealing with any traumatic stress implicates a bio-psycho-social approach, and while our focus here is on the body, the psychological and the social aspects of traumatic stress are not just additive but are multiplicative. Nevertheless, there are some simple strategies that can be used at the level of the body to calm over-reactivity, an over-reactivity which can come upon us suddenly. Deep-breathing techniques involving inhaling for six counts and exhaling for six counts repeated for some minutes is very helpful, as is tensing and relaxing feet and leg and arm and hand muscles. Both these exercises can be employed unobtrusively and immediately as soon as the over-arousal is felt. A hibernating body requires some longer-term strategies involving the usual suspects of exercise, sleep hygiene and – for a short-term fix – ice on the back of the neck or a splash of cold water to the face. However, if over-arousal or under-arousal persists after we have hopefully returned, for a more prolonged period, to a more “normal life”, then more intensive treatments that involve psychological processing and physiological reprogramming are indicated, as in the treatment of PTSD and complex PTSD. In his seminal book The Body Keeps Score, Bessel Van Der Kolk details the pivotal link between the hyperactive alarm system mobilised by trauma, the default fight, flight, freeze response of the body, the secretion of excess stress hormones and the impact of this on bodily sensation, cognitive functioning and emotional regulation. Van Der Kolk emphasises that it is only by making it safe for trauma victims to inhabit their bodies and “to tolerate feeling what they feel and knowing what they know” that healing can occur. This wisdom applies in acute, complex or continuing trauma but the timeframe, level of complexity and prognosis for this process is profoundly influenced by whether the trauma is acute, complex or continuous. To end on a lighter note, we are happy to report that while Darling still approaches the coffee shop with some degree of trepidation, she is now able to wag her tale and accept a treat as she waits for Jacqui’s morning caffeine hit to arrive. Prof Gill Straker and Dr Jacqui Winship are co-authors of The Talking Cure. Gill also appears on the podcast Three Associating, in which relational psychotherapists explore their blind spotsA New South Wales government plan to control feral horses in Kosciuszko national park will allow horses to remain in the only known habitat of one of Australia’s most imperilled freshwater fishes and risks pushing the species closer to extinction. Conservationists say allowing horses to continue to roam around some sections of the park will put vulnerable wildlife and ecosystems at risk. They include the stocky galaxias, a fish that was listed as critically endangered last year following the 2019-20 bushfires and was recently named as one of 100 priority animals in the Morrison government’s new threatened species strategy. The fish is one of the 22 most endangered freshwater species in Australia. Under the final NSW management plan, feral horses will be retained in the area around Tantangara Creek, which for years has been the only known habitat for the stocky galaxias. The final plan, released late last month after years of deadlock, would see horse numbers reduced from about 14,000 to 3,000. It would remove horses entirely from some areas but they would still be able to roam 32% of the park. The main threat to the survival of stocky galaxias is invasive trout but feral horses are also listed as a key pressure because of damage they cause to its habitat, including breeding sites, by causing silt and mud to flow into streams. To address the problem, NSW parks staff erected a fence around the creek earlier this year to exclude horses but conservation groups and ecologists say it would be better if the animals were removed altogether. They said the impact of horses, combined with other pressures including likely impacts from the Snowy 2.0 project, will put the fish at risk of further decline. “Locking in feral horse damage to the habitat of stocky galaxias, combined with the impacts of Snowy 2.0, is potentially a death sentence for this species,” said James Trezise, the conservation director at the Invasive Species Council. “It now means park managers are building fences inside one of Australia’s premier national parks rather than controlling a feral invasive animal. It’s a piecemeal solution. “It calls into question whether the NSW government is genuinely committed to zero extinctions of native wildlife within its national parks.” Mark Lintermans is a threatened-fish ecologist and associate professor at the University of Canberra. Lintermans is an expert on the species and organised a rescue mission in the Kosciuszko after the black summer fires. He has been outspoken on threats to the species and resigned from the NSW Fisheries Scientific Committee over the potential for the Snowy 2.0 project to introduce invasive fish into the stocky galaxias habitat. Lintermans said the recent construction of the fence would greatly reduce the threat caused by horses at Tantangara Creek but would not address the broader damage the animals caused to streams in the Kosciuszko national park. He has also recently discovered another smaller population of stocky galaxias about 30km from Tantangara Creek in the Upper Goodradigbee catchment, with the discovery due for publication in a research journal. Lintermans said the final NSW plan also retained horses in this second area of habitat. “It’s in an even smaller stream than Tantangara and an even smaller extent of stream,” he said. Lintermans said if there were other remnant populations still around, they would be totally unprotected by the fencing at Tantangara Creek. He said there was also another species, the Riek’s spiny crayfish, which was identified by the federal government as a priority species after the fires and is now being considered for a threatened listing under national laws. Horses cause damage to its habitat and burrows and the final management plan would see them retained in areas of the park where the species is found. “You can’t do one million little bits of fencing. The ideal thing would be to remove horses altogether,” Lintermans said. Don Driscoll, the director of the centre for integrative ecology at Deakin University, said fences were prone to damage from snow drift and fires. He said by managing the threat caused to the fish in this way, the state government “was turning a national park into a farm so they can manage these horses which are essentially farm animals”. “There’s a whole suite of species and ecosystems, not just the stocky galaxias, which are left inside areas where they’re going to retain horses. “It means these species and ecosystems will continue to decline in the horse retention areas, which is not the way people expect a national park to be managed.” A spokesperson for the federal environment department said the environment minister, Sussan Ley, “has been advised about the plan and is aware of public commentary on it”. “Implementation arrangements are a matter for the NSW government,” the spokesperson said. “The minister will actively monitor the state’s implementation of the plan.” Comment was sought from the NSW environment minister, Matt Kean, whose office referred questions to the NSW Department of Planning, Industry and Environment. A department spokesperson said the national parks and wildlife service was working with NSW fisheries to link ponds at a site in Eucumbene to “provide the best possible additional insurance habitat for the Tantangara galaxias”. The spokesperson said the draft plan received more than 4,000 submissions and all had been considered before adopting the final plan. “Stocky galaxias at Tantangara Creek are located in an area where wild horse densities will be reduced. The species will benefit from a substantial reduction (approximately 75%) in the density of wild horses,” the spokesperson said. “The plan provides for exclusion fencing where considered necessary to protect high value assets over the short to medium term while the wild horse population is reduced using other methods of control.”Isabella Manfredi – One Hit Wonder For fans of: Justice, Gwen Stefani, the Jackson 5. It always feels like tempting fate when an artist so openly declares themselves to be a one-hit wonder, especially when said artist, like Isabella Manfredi, had a certain massive hit single that looms a lot larger than any of their other work. Lyrically, this song stretches the relationship-as-a-band metaphor to its logical extension, with talk of B-sides, fading tracks and confessions being “off the record”. Musically, it is a spritely, Motown-infused wonder, with a breezy vocal melody dancing over a bouncy, infectious rhythm track. The cheerleader call-and-response and a bright piano that sounds like a toy in the best way makes this the sweetest breakup anthem of the summer. And that’s on the record. For more: Check out her score for 2021 film Plan B. Alex Cameron – Sara Jo For fans of: Tears For Fears, Bruce Springsteen, Talk Talk. Alex Cameron’s down-on-his-luck lounge singer shtick is one of the sharpest satires in music, and as his songwriting has improved, the joke has worn off, with Cameron now just writing future crooner standards, albeit still with more than a touch of dark comedy infused. “Who told my brother that his kids are gonna die from this vaccine?” he asks, in a song aimed at the titular Sara Jo, who has – unwisely, he explains – been messing with his family. The cooing female backing vocals are perfectly faceless for a song so indebted to the cheese of the 1980s, while Roy Molloy’s sparkling saxophone outro reeks of cigarette in once-plush carpets and cheap cologne. For more: Check out the 2019 album Miami Memory. Springtime – The Killing of the Village Idiot For fans of: the Disintegration Loops, the Bad Seeds, Tom Waits. Gareth Liddiard has made no secret of his devotion to Aussie instrumentalists Dirty Three: shades of their rambunctious clambering cacophonies show up in almost everything he creates. Here, he teamed up with Jim White, the band’s actual drummer, as well as multi-instrumentalist Chris Abrahams, to unleash another work of beauty and rage. Across nine vital minutes, Liddiard leads this unhinged trio through a work of simmering fury, chronicling the shameful tale of Australian special forces who slaughtered civilians in Afghanistan, as always exploring the various nuances and viewpoints without letting anyone off the hook. White’s military drumming marches along as Liddiard leads the troops towards slaughter, “another empire in the grave”. The relative anonymity of this project will probably see it overlooked, but this song deserves to sit with Shark Fin Blues at the very top of Liddiard’s enviable canon. For more: Springtime’s self-titled debut is out now. Caiti Baker – Spice For fans of: Ariana Grande, James Blake, Kitty Pryde. Caiti Baker has traversed country, folk, gospel and hip-hop in her storied career, but it’s the Darwin singer’s recent infatuation with slinky 90s-leaning R&amp;B that sees her find her groove, with glitchy futuristic production slipping in perfectly with melodies that could belong on an En Vogue record. The relatively unchanging backing track allows Baker’s voice to be the real star: harmonising, gliding into beautiful falsetto and growling in turn, while bouncing deftly from one earworm melody to another as the dancefloor thump keeps time. For more: Caiti Baker is touring nationally with Jessica Mauboy in April. Hayley Mary – Bullet For fans of: Deborah Conway, DMA’s, the Sundays. Hayley Mary’s solo turn has been one of the most pleasing reinventions of the past few years. Where former band the Jezabels were epic and, dare I say it, a tad overblown, Mary’s solo music is shimmering indie pop, sitting in the same sun-dazed world as the Sundays and the Stone Roses. Mary’s full-throated vocals spray joy like a sprinkler and the jangling guitars are perfect for soundtracking the type of road trip where cracked windows are the only air conditioning. Bullet is the best track from her new surprise-release EP, produced by the twin powers of Johnny Took from DMA’s and Scott Horscroft, who once added sheen to Silverchair and the Sleepy Jackson. For more: The five-song EP Fall In Love is out now. Even – Cinnamon Edge For fans of: the Who, You Am I, the Beatles. For a band who wear their classic rock’n’roll hearts on their paisley sleeves, it comes as a surprise that until now Melbourne’s Even had never released a double album, a must-have for any retro-leaning discography. Cinnamon Edge opens disc two on Reverse Light Years, hanging off the type of riff the Stones haven’t been able to write since the 70s, settling into a vaguely Eastern chorus melody and splashing the odd Ringo tom fill to really rattle the wireless. Frontman Ashley Naylor is one of this country’s most underrated songwriters, with an incredibly high strike rate and an aversion to leaning on his laurels and going for the easy hook. Despite all the gleeful stomping on this track, there is a dark edge: the minor-y harmonies and the wailing vocals help round out what could have been mere the Who pastiche in lesser-skilled hands. For more: Reverse Light Years contains 17 great tracks and is out now. Courtney Barnett – Write a List of Things to Look Forward to For fans of: Dick Diver, Kurt Vile, Parquet Courts. It’s not surprising Courtney Barnett’s observationalist lyricism took a turn inwards during the recent pandemic, and like most self-talk, it can appear as both destructive and instructive. The song title implores someone, possibly herself, to write a list of things to look forward to, but such a list is absent here. Instead, Barnett bears witness to the dying world and pens a catalogue quite devoid of emotion. She watches the world burn and bemoans how “we can’t have nice things”, noting how our best efforts have fallen woefully short. A baby is born as a man lies dying. Life enters and exits. So it goes. Barnett sits and awaits a letter, the only thing seemingly keeping her afloat. She walks around shoegazing and sad. She never does write that list; maybe it’s something for her to look forward to. For more: Barnett’s third album Things Take Time, Take Time is out now. Barkaa – King Brown For fans of: Busta Rhymes, Nicki Minaj, L-Fresh the Lion. As Barkaa tells us in this song, she’s come too far to fail. The 26-year-old Malyangapa and Barkindji rapper has battled and beaten drug addiction, homelessness and regular incarceration; during one prison stint she gave birth to her third child behind bars and became determined to beat her demons and build her life up. And boy, has she! She declares herself King Brown in this attitude-dripping tune, reclaiming a slur slung at her by a former lover, and few will dare to argue with her royal title after they’ve heard her in full force on this track. A salsa sample anchors what is a truly singular hip-hop single, with Barkaa’s fierce bark obliterating whatever her sorry ex called her as toxic and then kept on calling her phone. She still believes in love, just not the way it’s being offered to her. She’s royalty, remember. Bow to Barkaa. For more: Her new EP Blak Matriarchy is out now. Gang of Youths – Tend the Garden For fans of: the Killers. Devotees of Gang of Youths’ heart-filled epic Go Farther In Lightness will notice the drum machine first, then the heavy use of synths. By the middle of the song, they will be groovin’ to a sultry saxophone part not entirely divorced from the sound of Kenny G, which slides over a backing track reminiscent of Marvin Gaye’s What’s Going On. Frontman David Le’aupepe has signalled through previous singles that the band’s forthcoming album will be a sonic right turn, but this marks the biggest shift away from the past so far, with a danceable beat anchoring Le’aupepe’s lyrics, which give voice to his father’s early life and the deeds he was forced to commit. It’s ambitious as hell, unrelentlessly earnest and a sure sign that, despite this song’s nostalgic bend, Gang of Youths aren’t looking back. For more: Listen to recent EP Total Serene and single The Man Himself. Logic1000 – 21 For fans of: Armand Van Helden, Moby, the Wipeout 2097 soundtrack. A mere four years ago, Sydneysider Samantha Poulter fell in love with dance music and taught herself how to create it with a computer and a set of tinny speakers. Since then, Four Tet played one of her songs to a packed Coachella crowd, Pete Tong declared her I Won’t Forget his essential new tune and a flood of major label offers took up residency in her inbox. 21 ends her new EP, In the Sweetness of You, and fittingly sounds like a late-night driving tune, the type of dark and steady throb that belongs to 3am, to driving on empty streets, the blur of reds and greens shining up from the wet roads. The dreamy synth swells that glide along are hypnotic and the layered production is world class. For more: Listen to In the Sweetness of You.A New South Wales government program aimed at convincing professionals to become maths teachers attracted only six people last year, five of whom dropped out before their scholarships were complete. As the state’s public school teachers prepare for their first strike in almost a decade on Tuesday, new figures have cast doubt on the success of the government’s attempts to address teacher shortages in NSW without significantly increasing pay. In 2019, the state government announced the Teach.Maths NOW scholarship to lure current undergraduates and industry professionals with a background in pure or applied mathematics to become teachers. But the program has struggled to attract and retain applicants. Despite funding for 160 placements, the program was only offered to 53 people in its first two years. Now, new figures obtained by the Guardian show the program has also failed to keep many of the industry professionals who did apply. According to the government, only six industry professionals were among the intake for the Teach.Maths NOW scholarship in 2020. Of those, all but one dropped out of the program “citing a number of reasons including changes in circumstances during the Covid-19 pandemic”, the government said. The government said it had made substantial changes to the program, and in 2021, 13 of the 17 industry professionals who signed up for the scholarship remained, but the struggle to attract and keep teachers through Teach.Maths NOW underscores a larger problem. The NSW Department of Education has warned that a significant shortage of teachers – particularly in subjects such as maths and science – is affecting the quality of students’ learning. But the state government has rejected the claim of the teachers’ union that inadequate salaries are leading to declining enrolments in education degrees and an increase in the number of teachers leaving the profession. That’s set the stage for the first teachers’ strike in almost a decade on Tuesday. Staff will defy an order from the Industrial Relations Commission and walk off the job as part of a campaign to see wages increase by 5% with an extra 2.5% to recognise experience. The government has offered a 2.5% pay increase in line with its longstanding cap on wages for public servants and has rejected the argument that the department’s staff issues are related to pay. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The education minister, Sarah Mitchell, said: “It is unfortunate but not surprising the [NSW Teachers] Federation continues to attack a staffing strategy, informed by credible research, which seeks to build a sustainable pipeline of quality teachers through various initiatives including increasing pay and financial incentives.” “At no point has the federation engaged in any proactive conversations on how to improve staffing in hard-to-staff regional areas. “Arguing that the only way to attract more people to teaching is a pay increase wilfully ignores the complexities of the modern profession and genuine independent research on the issue.” As the wages dispute with the union escalated, the government last month released a $125m teacher supply strategy as part of its bid to tackle the problem without lifting wages above the 2.5% cap. But Labor has attacked the plan for its vagueness. The funding includes, among other things, a $5m marketing strategy to attract teachers, and a plan to poach 500 science, technology, engineering and maths (Stem) teachers from other states and jurisdictions. Other states, such as Western Australia, recently announced their own plans to poach teachers from NSW. Labor has seized on responses provided by the government to supplementary budget estimates questions which show half of the $125m is yet to be allocated. According to the government, about $63m of the fund is still being “refined as initiatives are scoped and implemented”. The responses also show the government’s plan to poach Stem teachers was based in part on “anecdotal evidence” that teachers from interstate and overseas were “interested in returning home to NSW especially during the Covid-19 pandemic”. Labor’s shadow education minister, Prue Car, has been critical of the government’s attempts to address staffing issues, saying teacher shortages were a “significant problem in NSW schools”. “Half of the promised funds to address teacher supply issues are unallocated and the government’s scholarships are failing to attract the Stem teachers NSW needs,” she said. “The NSW government needs to acknowledge the severity of the teacher shortages NSW faces and provide the investment needed to get this fixed.” Mitchell said the full funding for the strategy had been allocated over the next four years and that “further details on the initiatives will be released as they are rolled out”.So, Australia has reopened and your bank account has been emptied. It’s not surprising – between squeezing in four months’ worth of social catchups, pre-holiday sales and every beauty appointment under the sun, there’s suddenly a lot more things to spend money on. But even as we embrace the pub with new gusto, there are ways to mitigate the financial damage. Here financial advisers share a few relatively pain-free tips for getting your money in order after lockdown. Revisit your budget The first step to taking charge of your finances is always creating a budget – but make sure you’re doing it the right way. “A lot of people think that budgeting is about restriction and limiting your spending, when in reality it should be you fully comprehending what you’re actually spending every week,” says Victoria Devine, author, financial adviser and host of the podcast She’s on the Money. To budget properly, look at your bank account to see how much you actually spend on essential things like groceries – not what you want to spend. That way, Devine says, “you can align your budget and your money goals to your actual spending”. The pandemic may have changed what you consider “essential” – for instance, Devine says, “if you found yourself thriving without a gym membership during lockdown, I think that’s something you could ditch from your budget”. Cancel those subscriptions Speaking of gym memberships, when yours reopened they may have started charging you again – even if you are no longer attending. Add to that signing up for every streaming service imaginable during lockdown, and it means it is time to take stock of your monthly subscriptions, and scrap the ones you aren’t actually using. “Monthly subscriptions can be death by 1,000 cuts,” says Hamish Landreth, a financial consultant at Prosperity Wealth Advisers. “A lot of people take the view of, ‘oh, what’s another $10 a month?’ But those small recurring expenses can very quickly end up as quite a large annual outflow.” Check over your bank statements to get a clear picture of what you are paying for each month. “If you are committing to an ongoing subscription or payment, it’s important to make sure it’s something you’re actually getting value in and not just paying out a force of habit,” Landreth says. Curb online shopping Similarly, if you became passionate about, ahem, supporting small business during the Delta days, Landreth suggests putting a cap on things. “Coming out of lockdown it is realistic to assume some expenses, like petrol costs or work lunches, are going to increase,” Landreth says. “Try and offset these extra costs by cutting back on meal deliveries or setting some limits on online shopping.” Automate your holiday fund If you’re (perhaps optimistically) considering an overseas holiday in 2022, now’s the time to start saving. The best way to do this, Devine says, is to set up automatic transfers. First, open a savings account with a different institution to your everyday account, so “it’s out of sight out of mind”. Then arrange the automatic transfer for the same day your salary is deposited. It’s the set-and-forget approach to saving. “[Automation] can actually be a really good tool for people who don’t want to do too much with their money,” Devine says. Check your income protection Are you one of the Australians who changed careers during the pandemic? If so, you should check your income protection is still in line with your current salary. “If there’s been a change in employment, you need to make sure that what you’re covered for is consistent with what you’re earning,” Landreth says. “So if people have changed jobs or their salaries are different, it’s worth making sure that the benefit amount remains appropriate.” And if, um, you don’t even have income protection? “Not everyone has it,” Landreth says. “But I would say it should be a very high priority for people that have financial responsibilities, either to a mortgage or to dependents, or anyone that would be in a serious situation if their ability to earn an income was taken away.” He says this insurance essentially replaces your income if you’re unable to work for medical reasons. “It’s sort of like unlimited sick leave, if you will.” Look at your loans If you’ve got a mortgage, car loan or some credit card debt, this could be a good moment to refinance it, Landreth says. This isn’t particularly pandemic related – it’s just something worth doing from time to time to avoid paying what’s known as the loyalty tax or, less generously, “lazy tax”. “It’s a bit of a trend, unfortunately, that banks will often offer the best rates to new customers, often at the expense of their existing customers,” he explains. “If you’re a regular customer that never makes an inquiry, oftentimes you’re being overcharged on your interest rates. Whereas the customers that call up and ask for discounts or shop around are the ones getting the best rates.” Cut yourself some slack When all’s said and done, this is a moment in history when it’s OK to be a little less than perfect with our finances. Devine recommends planning to spend more than we usually would over the next month or so – especially as we’re also going into the festive season. “We need to give ourselves a tiny bit of permission to spend a little bit more. It’s actually OK to go out for an additional glass of wine with a couple of friends right now,” Devine says. “I feel like this could be classified as a little bit of self-care. It’s looking after your family, nourishing yourself and filling your cup back up after what has been arguably a pretty traumatic experience.” Now that’s financial advice that’s easy to get on board with.And here’s our report from Wembley. Thanks for reading! Fran Kirby: “It’s amazing. We worked so hard after the international break so make sure we got it tactically right. Second half we sat off a little bit more but I think we blew them away first half especially. My goal settled our nerves a little bit. When you’re through on goal its a stressful situation but I managed to stay composed and put it in but it was a magnificent performance from everyone - keeping a clean sheet in the final is amazing. Overall I think we deserved to win and could have cored a few more goals. It’s a massive day for women’s football. Today was about not forgetting the trailblazers who helped us get here. Hopefully the performance today made everyone proud and hopefully more people want to get involved in women’s football.” And here’s Emma Hayes: “I’m extremely proud of everyone in our organisation. Our performance was out of this world today. we were dominant from start to finish. I was upset we weren’t up by more than one at half-time but it was convincing in the end. That’s the best performance I’ve seen from Fran [Kirby], she ran the show. The midfield was set up to do a job and allow Fran and Sam [Kerr] to go and play. It’s nice to paint Wembley blue tonight. It’s a Chelsea day. The fans deserve that. Winning the treble is an amazing achievement and I will sit down and enjoy that this evening. Women’s football was banned 100 years ago. I said to the girls before the game: today we play for everyone who’s made the women’s game what it is. Women’s football is out livelihood but it’s also our passion and today that win was for every woman who’s been involved in women’s football in this country.” Last up is Magdalena Eriksson, who collects the cup and goes to join her teammates in the huddle, hoisting it aloft and being instantly soaked in a tidal wave of champagne. Lovely stuff. And Chelsea make their way back onto the pitch to collect their medals. Wembley’s PA system resounds with hellish EDM music but even that can’t detract from the genuine atmosphere generated by the fans in the stands. Sam Kerr speaks: “I think we deserved it. Me and Fran scored but the defence was amazing, it was a team effort and we’ll enjoy this one. We felt like we dominated but they defended well in the first half and we couldn’t put away some easy chances so we knew we had to score again to put the game to bed, and we did. Arsenal put their bodies on the line but if we kept pushing we knew we’d get the win and at Wembley in front of a massive crowd – it can’t get any better. We’ve conceded not many goals in the last few games and scored a bunch – I think we’re the best team in England.” Full time: Arsenal 0-3 Chelsea Peep peep! Three is the magic number for Chelsea: three goals, their third FA Cup victory, and their first ever domestic treble. They even hit the woodwork three times. Fran Kirby’s third-minute goal set the tone, and Chelsea could have been out of sight long before Sam Kerr scored twice – the second a delicious chip – in the second half. It’s been a humbling day for Arsenal, whose next game is against the European champions Barcelona. But they are still top of the WSL, and they’ll hope to write this off as a bad day. It was last season anyway. It’s a great day for Chelsea, one of their greatest. I’m off to blog Aston Villa v Leicester but Alex Hess will bring you all the reaction from Wembley – thanks for your company and emails. 90+4 min Another late change for Chelsea: Aniek Nouwen on for the tireless Sophie Ingle. 88 min McCabe, who has aleeady been booked, is very lucky not to walk for a high tackle on Spence. It’s been a miserable day for McCabe, who has played more like her 2020-21 self than the star of this season. 87 min And a change for Arsenal: Lotte Wubben-Moy off, Simone Boye Sorensen on. 86 min A triple change for Chelsea: Drew Spence, Beth England and Ji replace a beaming Sam Kerr, a beaming Melanie Leupolz and a beaming Guro Reiten. That’s a nice touch from Emma Hayes to involve as many players as possible, even if it’s only for a few minutes. 85 min Foord beats Cuthbert and lifts a dangerous cross that is cleared by, yep, Jess Carter. Moments later, Miedema heads well wide from McCabe’s cross. A quarter chance at best. 83 min Parris tries to run Carter, and soon realises the futility of that particular gesture. Carter has had a stormer. 81 min Nikita Parris comes on for Frida Maanum and is immediately booked for a foul on Reiten. 80 min Kerr and Kirby have stolen the show, and nobody would begrude them, but all of Chelsea’s spine - particularly Carter and Leupolz - have been superb. They have given Arsenal nothing. 79 min Mead’s deflected shot goes behind for a corner. Arsenal have been hammered; they’ll have no complaints. What a majestic finish from Sam Kerr. Maanum overran the ball in midfield and was coolly dispossessed by Leupolz, who moved forward and put Kerr through on goal in the inside-right channel. Kerr took two touches to set herself up and then, with Zinsberger on the six-yard line, chipped the ball slowly, teasingly over her and into the net. Sam Kerr clinches the treble with an exquisite finish! 76 min: Another save from Zinsberger! Harder dances away from Wubben-Moy in the area but takes the ball slightly too wide and can only lift a shot that is comfortably saved by Zinsberger. 74 min A very dangerous cross from Little is slid behind by Cuthbert, a vital interception with Foord waiting behind her. 73 min A change for Chelsea: Pernille Harder replaces the magnificent Fran Kirby. 72 min: Kirby hits the post! What a tremendous effort from the best player on ther pitch. She received the ball from Kerr, 40 yards out, and ran straight at the backpedalling Wubben-Moy. Kirby got as far as the D, then shifted the ball onto her left foot and smacked it off the post. Zinsberger didn’t move. 71 min McCabe has gone to left-back, with Catley moving into the centre of defence. 70 min Jonas Eidevall isn’t going to die wondering: he has brought on Caitlin Foord, a forward, for the centre-half Jen Beattie. 69 min Kirby is down as well, having been caught by a high challenge from Wubben-Moy. 68 min Catley’s cross is missed by Berger, who was relieved that there were no Arsenal players behind her. There’s a break in play as Berger receives treatment for cramp, which is a bit strange given how little she has had to do today. 65 min McCabe’s corner is headed away at the near post. Chelsea break and McCabe is booked for a cynical foul on Kirby. 64 min McCabe’s dangerous low cross is cleared by Cuthbert, who collides with Bright in the process. Corner to Arsenal... 64 min It’s easy to forget, as this is last season’s competition, that Chelsea are 26 minutes away from their first ever domestic treble. The flipping treble! 61 min Ingle fizzes a pass out to Reiten, whose deep, hanging cross is headed back across by goal. There are no Chelsea players in the middle, though, and Arsenal have time to clear. 61 min A change for Arsenal in midfield: Lia Walti is replaced by Mana Iwabuchi. 60 min This has been a masterclass from Emma Hayes, whose switch to 4-2-3-1 has befuddled Arsenal. 59 min Kirby and Kerr, who’d have thought. Inevitably, it came on the break. Kirby slid a long pass down the line to Kerr, who made an excellent run from centre to left. Kerr cut inside Wubben-Moy, shaped to shoot across goal and then dragged a low shot past Zinsberger at the near post. Zinsberger was already committed to moving to her left and was unable to change direction. Sad to say, especially after her first-half heroics, but that’s a goalkeeping error. Sam Kerr doubles Chelsea’s lead! 56 min Arsenal are dominating possession now, though Chelsea seem comfortable enough playing on the break. Ann-Katrin Berger still hasn’t had a save to make. 55 min Zinsberger makes a comfortable save from Kerr’s header. It was a difficult chance, with Cuthbert’s cross slightly behind Kerr. 54 min Eriksson’s deep, driven cross is headed behind by the stooping Catley, with Fleming waiting behind her. The resulting corner is headed away by Lia Walti. 51 min Mead turns Eriksson brilliantly on the edge of the area and is about to shoot when Carter lunges in to make a vital tackle. That’s excellent defending. Mead has been Arsenal’s brighest attacker by a distance. 50 min It’s been a calmer start to the second half for Arsenal, who are having a more even share of the match. 48 min Miedema slides the ball into the area towards Little, but Carter reads the play well and comes across to cover. Little does get to the ball first but can only slide it wide of the near post on the stretch. 46 min Beth Mead, who ended the half strongly on the left, has moved back to the right wing at the start of the second half. 46 min Peep peep! Chelsea begin the second half, with no changes on either side. “ I suppose that if the Arsenal team have a sports psychologist in the dressing room they’ll be able to explain why the players’ technique seems to all but have deserted them,” says Charles Antaki. “Has this team ever had a half hour filled with so many mis-controls, bad passes, futile lunges and general confusion? It got a bit better, but from an alarmingly low base. Credit to Chelsea’s harrying, I suppose, but it seems somehow that the Arsenal players just managed to spook themselves into incompetence.” I don’t think the pitch is helping. Chelsea have dealt with it a lot better, mainly by being more direct at times. Half-time reading Peep peep! Chelsea lead at Wembley thanks to Fran Kirby’s early goal. They should already be out of sight: Kirby hit the post*, Sam Kerr hit the crossbar and Manuela Zinsberger made a number of vital saves. The good news for Arsenal is that they were much better in the last 10 minutes of the first half, and that it’s only 1-0. * I didn’t realise at the time, but her shot inthe 19th minute was pushed onto the outside of the post by Zinsberger. At the time I thought she’d palmed it straight behind for a corner. 45+2 min Chelsea break three-on-three, only for Kirby to overhit her through pass to Kerr. That was yet another chance, and an unusually sloppy ball from Kirby. 45+1 min Three minutes of added time. Cuthbert has been booked for that foul on Mead. 45 min Cuthbert fouls Mead and hurts herself in the process. I think she’s okay but there’s a break in play while she receives treatment. 43 min McCabe’s free-kick hits the wall. 42 min McCabe is fouled by Leupolz 25 yards out. It might have been a dive actually, I’ll like to see it again. Either way, Arsenal are having their first good spell of the match, and this is a good opportunity... 40 min: Big penalty appeal from Arsenal! Mead runs at Cuthbert in the area, then twists back inside onto her right foot. Cuthbert, who is already committed to the tackle, slides into the ball and makes contact with her arm. The referee must have been unsighted because that was a clear penalty. Chelsea should have had one earlier as well. 39 min “Hi Rob,” says Dan in Kennington. “What time do Arsenal kick off? Chelsea are playing by themselves at the moment. Awesome stuff from them.” The daft thing is, if it’s 1-0 to Chelsea at half-time, Jonas Eidevall will be the happier manager. 38 min Arsenal have finally switched their wingers; I’m surprised they didn’t do it 20 minutes ago. Mead, on the left now, runs at Cuthbert and wins a corner. 36 min: Kerr hits the bar! This is getting silly. Kerr runs onto a long punt forward, muscles Wubben-Moy off the ball - Arsenal thought it was a foul - and lifts a shot onto the crossbar from eight yards. That was another brilliant opportunity for Kerr, whose finishing today has been strangely indecisive. 33 min Bright, up for a set piece, volleys off target from 20 yards. It was well struck, with excellent technique, but drifted a few yards wide. 29 min Now Leupolz tees up Kirby, whose shot from the edge of the area is deflected behind. Arsenal are being thrashed 1-0. 28 min Yet another chance for Chelsea! Kirby, who is having a stormer, breaks forward and plays in Reiten to her left. She moves into the area but then the ball gets stuck under her feet and Arsenal’s defenders are able to get across. The pitch saved Arsenal there. 27 min McCabe is lucky not to be booked after leaving one on the Chelsea keeper Ann-Katrin Berger. That was a bit snide. 26 min Cuthbert’s corner is headed wide of the far post by Eriksson, another excellent chance for Chelsea! This could, no exaggeration, be 5-0 to Chelsea. 25 min: Another fine save from Zinsberger! Reiten moves down the left and slides the ball infield to Kerr on the edge of the area. She lets it run to Kirby, who opens her body and shapes a curler towards the bottom corner. Zinsberger gets down smartly to her left to push it behind, and then thumps in the post in frustration at how much work she is having to do. 23 min After some snappy passing from Arsenal, Miedema shoots high and wide from 20 yards. 23 min Chelsea have been much the better team so far. A 3-0 lead wouldn’t flatter them. 21 min Emma Hayes is understandably fuming about that penalty decision. I suspect she’s as angry about the lack of VAR in such a big game as she is about the specific incident. 19 min: Fine save from Zinsberger! Kerr runs onto a long pass down the right from Cuthbert and moves into the area. She cuts the ball back to Kirby and is taken out, a split-second later, by the sliding Beattie. Play continues and Kirby hits a rising drive that is pushed onto the outside of the near post by Zinsberger. That should have been a penalty to Chelsea, but there’s no VAR today. Not like it’s a big game or anything. 17 min Zinsberger makes another point-blank save from Kerr, though this one wouldn’t have counted as she was fractionally offside. 16 min McCabe’s corner is cleared by Cuthbert. 15 min Arsenal are starting to find their feet. An intricate move involving McCabe, Miedema and Little leads to their first corner... 13 min A half-chance for Kerr, who wriggles away from Beattie on the right side of the box but can’t find Kirby in the middle. I’m surprised she didn’t have a shot - the angle was tight, but not prohibitively so, and the ball fell nicely for her. 12 min A long-range shot from Miedema is blocked. 11 min Chelsea are playing a 4-2-3-1, with Cuthbert aand Eriksson as orthodox full-backs. That’s a bit of a surprise, but it has worked well so far - Kirby, playing as a No10, scored the goal and almost made a second for Kerr. 10 min Arsenal haven’t got going as an attacking force. The pitch isn’t helping either side; it’s so slow. 8 min Beth Mead is booked for a very clumsy tackle on Eriksson. 8 min The pitch isn’t in great condition, by the way. The ball is moving pretty slowly, presumably because of all the rain in the last 24 hours. 7 min: Big save from Zinsberger! Kerr, back on the field, plays a slick one-two with Kirby, moves through on goal but then puts her shot too close to Zinsberger. That was such a good chance for Sam Kerr. 6 min There’s a break in play while Sam Kerr receives treatment. She’s limping quite heavily, though it looks like an impact injury so she might be able to run it off. I think she was injured during the build up to the goal. 4 min There was so much space for Kirby to run into. Wubben-Moy was drawn across to challenge Fleming (I think), and Maritz didn’t have time to cover from right-back. Out of nothing, Fran Kirby has given Chelsea the lead. The ball ricocheted off a couple of players, 35 yards from the Arsenal goal, and bounced favourably for Kirby. She scampered straight through the middle, drew Zinsberger and clipped the ball calmly into the corner. Whatever the stage, she is a nerveless finisher. What a start for Chelsea! 1 min Peep peep! After the players take the knee, Arsenal kick off from right to left. The players of both sides are introduced to Lesley Lloyd, captain of Southampton’s cup-winning side of 1971. Then it’s time for the national anthem. It’s a cold, drizzly day, not exactly cup final weather, and the players look keen to get down to business. “Both teams were indeed rusty for the league game, but Arsenal had had a couple of European matches to warm up with; things will be more balanced now,” says Charles Antaki. “Arsenal fans will still be fretting over the unavailability of Leah Williamson, though Lotte Wubben-Moy has stepped up impressively. And the bench looks terrific - Iwabuchi, Nobbs, Foord - so, Arsenal-style heavily-qualified sort-of positive anticipation…” This is a fine piece on that 1971 final, including some striking details about the state of the pitch and the nutrition. These teams have met once in the 2021-22 season, a 3-2 win for Arsenal on the opening weekend. Both teams were rusty, though, so I’m not sure how much we should read into it. “What an array of talent in front of us today,” says Bill Hargreaves. “I saw Beth Mead talking through the goals of the season so far: some belters. Play up!” Indeed, six of the top 11 in this year’s Ballon d’Or are involved today: Sam Kerr, Vivianne Miedema, Pernille Harder, Jessie Fleming, Fran Kirby and Magda Eriksson. Arsenal (4-3-3) Zinsberger; Maritz, Wubben-Moy, Beattie, Catley; Walti, Maanum, Little; Mead, Miedema, McCabe. Substitutes: Williams, Goldie, Boye, Patten, Schnaderbeck, Nobbs, Parris, Iwabuchi, Foord. Chelsea (3-4-3) Berger; Bright, Carter, Eriksson; Cuthbert, Ingle, Leupolz, Reiten; Fleming, Kerr, Kirby. Substitutes: Musovic, Nouwen, England, Ji, Charles, Harder, Spence, Andersson, Fox. Arsenal might play a 4-2-3-1, with Kim Little as a No10. Expect the wide forwards on both sides, especially Arsenal’s, to switch wings at some stage. No surprises in the Arsenal team, which is unchanged from the 2-0 win over Manchester United a fortnight ago. The outstanding front three of Katie McCabe, Vivianne Miedema and Beth Mead - who literally weren’t born when the Crash Test Dummies wrote a song about them - will be their main threat. And here’s the Arsenal team Emma Hayes makes one change from Chelsea’s lsat game, a 5-0 WSL win over Birmingham before the international break. Sophie Ingle is preferred in midfield to Drew Spence. That means Pernille Harder, who is still feeling her way back from injury, is on the bench. The Chelsea team is in Sunday 9 May 1971 was a big day in the Bolton and District Cricket Association League. Atherton CC were skittled for 68 by Astley and Tyldesley Collieries, who sneaked to victory by one wicket. I know this because the scores from that league were printed in the Guardian the following day. So were results from the Cross Cup, and the Glossop League, and the Shettleston Marathon, and the North of England Lacrosse League, and the Longwood 10-mile Road Race, and I’m genuinely not making any of this up. One sporting event was, or rather is, conspicuous by its absence: the inaugural Women’s FA Cup final. Nada. Zilch. Sweet bugger all. Not even the scoreline. (Southampton beat Stewarton Thistle 4-1, with Pat Davies scoring a hat-trick.) The world has changed since the heyday of DCI Gene Hunt, and it’s not just the Guardian that has embraced women’s football. Today’s final between Arsenal and Chelsea will be a celebration of 50 years of the FA Cup, and of how good the sport has become. The sheer quality of both teams makes this the perfect final. It’s also a riddle of the future: in which season did the two best teams in the country meet in the FA Cup final, having finished first and third in the league? The answer, obviously, is 2020-21. This match belongs to last season, when Arsenal finished behind Chelsea and Manchester City, and is being played now because of the backlog caused by Covid. Arsenal have replaced City as Chelsea’s main rivals this season, whatever Emma Hayes says publicly, and the two are involved in a cracking race for the title. One of them will make history today. Either Arsenal will win the FA Cup for a record-extending 15th time, or Chelsea will do so for the third – and, more significantly, complete their first domestic treble. Most importantly of all, the result will be in every newspaper tomorrow. Kick off 2pm.That’s all from me today. Thanks for reading and congratulations to Ralf Rangnick on kicking off his Manchester United tenure with a win. Commiserations to Crystal Palace but they won’t have too many problems this season if they keep performing like that. See you next time – Rob Smyth has Aston Villa v Leicester live, right here: Jamie Jackson’s report from Old Trafford is here: The Manchester United interim manager Rangnick speaks to BBC Radio 5Live: “I’m very happy with the way the team performed, the way they played, especially the first half-hour, that was exceptional, I thought. The only thing missing in that period was one or two nil ... we had control of the game ... I am very happy with the result and the clean sheet. “I said in my first press conference, there are things we need to improve on, to get clean sheets, to get control of the game. What they [my players] showed was more than I expected, to be honest. “Patience was important but we always tried to be on the front foot ... that’s what I liked today ... we were always trying to keep them away from goal ... We wanted to play with two strikers and with two 10s, to get more control in the centre of midfield.” On Cristiano Ronaldo’s performance, especially defensively: “By the way, what Ronaldo did today ‘against the ball’: Chapeau.” On Fred’s winner: “I had to ask one of my assistants if it was Fred with his right foot ... it was great what he did together with [Scott] McTominay at No 6.” Elsewhere, Tottenham beat Norwich 3-0, and here is Ed Aarons’ report: For Palace, although they head back to London empty-handed, it was more evidence of the progress being made under the very impressive Patrick Vieira. Ayew really should have scored from that second-half corner, and then who knows what may have happened? Another positive sign for United was their fluency in possession, particularly before the break, when there always seemed to be an option for them. Ronaldo was exemplary, too – the only thing missing was a goal. He was a constant thorn in the side of the Palace defence and it was something of a statement performance from him, in terms of his determination to play a full part in the new Rangnick era. After Manchester United drew 1-1 with Chelsea at Stamford Bridge last weekend, Thomas Tuchel laughed off the suggestion that United’s performance had shown the hallmarks of Rangnick. Today’s display certainly did, though, especially the way United pressed so effectively in the first half. On more than one occasion, they forced Palace into giving up possession high up the pitch, with Ronaldo playing full part in the focused, combined efforts to press the ball. It’s a far cry from some of the shambolic attempts to press that were seen in recent months, perhaps most notably in the 5-0 thrashing by Liverpool towards the end of October. Flying Fred. Ralf Rangnick starts his Manchester United reign with a win, and achieves the first home clean sheet of the season to boot. It was a game of two halves, with the hosts putting Palace under tonnes of pressure in the first half, before Patrick Vieira’s men grew into it after the break, with Jordan Ayew missing a golden chance to put them into the lead. Fred had the final word, though, with a sweet first-time finish that earned the three points. 90 min + 3: Palace aren’t finished and win a corner but they fluff the execution, the ball dropping to Zaha on the edge of the area, who miskicks completely ... will that be their last chance? 90 min +1: Palace break with pace down the left – Lindelöf is exposed one-on-one against Zaha. He chooses to chop him down and takes the booking. Olise takes the free-kick but Ronaldo, putting a real shift in, produces an excellent defensive header to clear the danger. 90 min: Maguire is now wearing a black bandage wrapped around his considerably-sized head after that clash with Éduoard. There will be five minutes of injury time. Time for a late twist? 87 min: Van de Beek wins a free-kick on Manchester United’s right wing for a foul by Tompkins. Tompkins looks disgusted with the decision, and has words with the linesman, not that it does any good or makes any difference. Telles bends an excellent delivery to the far post but Guaita manages to bat it clear. 85 min: Eberechi Eze and Michael Olise come on for Palace, with Ayew and Kouyate going off. For Manchester United, Donny van de Beek comes into the fray for Bruno Fernandes. The United fans are in fine voice as they close in on what is shaping up to be a positive start to the Rangnick era. 82 min: With Crystal Palace on the front foot, a clash of heads between Maguire and Éduoard has led to a break in play. Maguire is hurt - it looks like blood has been drawn - so he is going to be bandaged up and sent back out there, by the looks of it. 78 min: Greenwood, not long on the pitch, did really well to turn back while in the penalty area and tee up the opening goal. Fred had plenty still to do, though, and it was a beautiful first-time finish which has the Old Trafford crowd on their feet. Will that secure the first victory of the Rangnick reign? After a huge scare at the other end seconds before, Manchester United lead! What a goal it is too! The Brazilian midfielder Fred is teed up on the edge of the box and sweeps a wonderful right-footed finish, across Guiata, and into far corner! 74 min: Palace’s belief is growing – you can almost feel the nerves increasing across Old Trafford after such a positive first half. A smart sequence of passing from Vieira’s team sees Maguire cough up a corner on the United right. Tompkins does well to win a header at the far post from the corner ... the ball drops to Ayew at the far post who is no more than two yards from goal, albeit from an angle ... and he sidefoots just wide! What a chance to Crystal Palace. 70 min: Rashford storms down the left for Manchester United before the ball is worked to the opposite side of the penalty area, where Fernandes pulls off a little bit of trickery and tees up Mason Greenwood for a shot. He hits it left-footed but drags it well wide. 68 min: A free-kick for Manchester United on their right wing ... Telles hits it, curling to the far post, and it clips the top of the crossbar! But still no score as we approach the final 20 minutes. If Palace can snatch a winner here it would be a classic smash-and-grab raid. 66 min: Christian Benteke off, Odsonne Édouard comes on as Vieira freshens up his attacking options. 64 min: Palace win a corner, which is initially cleared by Manchester United. Gallagher gets the ball on the edge of the box and shoots, but it skews off the side of his left boot and out for a goal kick. 62 min: Rangnick mixes it up: Sancho off, Mason Greenwood on. 60 min: United win a corner, which is taken short. It’s worked back to Sancho, who curls a cross towards the far post, which flies harmlessly out for a goal kick. 58 min: Sancho bursts into the Palace penalty area, and lays a pass off to Rashford with the outside of his boot ... Rashford shoots from close range, with a forest of defenders in front of him, and Gallagher manages to get an important boot in the way to block the shot. 54 min: Palace build from the back and win a free-kick on the edge of the area when Fred fouls Ayew. Gallagher takes the set piece, which is in a highly dangerous spot on the angle of the area. Nervous moments for United after all their dominance before the break. From the free-kick, Kouyate heads towards goal from beyond the far post, and demands a corner, and gets it ... Gallagher takes the corner, Schlupp tries to head it from around the near post, but it flies way, way over the bar and out for a goal kick. 50 min: Ronaldo tries to get on the end of another cross but can’t quite reach it. Fernandes then plays a ball goalwards from a central area but Palace repel the danger. It’s a fairly low-key opening to the second period, with a noticeably lower tempo than much of the first half. 48 min: Both sides are feeling their way, slowly, into the second half. Manchester United stroke it around at the back, before Maguire sprays a good long pass out to the right, then eventually gets the ball back, and sends it left instead. The Manchester United centre-back gets his foot on the ball for a third time, with Palace happy not to press the ball high, and the ball eventually finds its way to Fernandes on the United right, who opts to shoot from about 25 yards out. The ball flies harmlessly high over the Palace goal. Palace get the second half started. Can Rangnick’s new charges find a goal or two, or could the Eagles pull off their second remarkable Manchester away win of the Premier League season? A bit of half-time viewing for you – a collection of stunning sports photos by Gerry Cranham: There is time for Dalot to bend a shot just wide of goal before the half-time whistle sounds. No goals, but a seriously impressive display from Manchester United in comparison to some of their recent efforts. They have pressed intelligently, they have passed the ball crisply, there have been threats all over the pitch, and only some committed last-ditch defending from Crystal Palace has prevented the hosts from taking the lead. See you in a few minutes for more. 42 min: On the touchline Vieira has his hands plunged into his pockets and looks suitably concerned with how this one is unfolding so far. Having said that, Palace have steadied the ship in the last few minutes, and are building a few passages of passing of their own, after a first 30 minutes in which their defence was under relentless pressure. 40 min: Kouyate flies into a tackle in midfield and wins the ball cleanly. Palace break, and Zaha is fouled from behind by Fernandes, on the Eagles’ right. Gallagher bends the resulting free-kick into the penalty area but Maguire’s physical presence repels the danger as Benteke tries to get a header on target. 39 min: Palace enjoy a rare foray into the United half. Jordan Ayew buys the space to curl a right-footed shot which flies wide of De Gea’s left-hand post. Ayew looks annoyed with himself for not at least drawing a save from the goalie. 36 min: Fernandes, Ronaldo and Rashford link down the United left. The structure they achieving in their play, and that they are imposing on this match, must be encouraging for the club’s fans who are hoping Rangnick can fix the team’s most serious problems. Crystal Palace have hardly had a kick, while Manchester United’s passing is crisp, they always seem to have an option to pass to. They just need a goal or two to reflect their dominance of this first half. 33 min: It’s one-way traffic but United cannot, so far, find the finishing touch. Rashford tries a right-footed shot which is blocked, and balloons up on to the roof of the net for a corner. Palace clear their lines from the resulting corner. Rangnick is pictured on the touchline applauding the efforts of his team. 30 min: Clyne runs the ball out of defence for Palace but it gets away from him a touch. Fred challenges in midfield, and is clattered by a studs-up challenge from the Palace full-back, who is today playing for the first time since February. It’s a yellow card but it could have been a red, even if it was more malicious than clumsy by Clyne. Fred needs treatment and leaves the field momentarily. 28 min: Another United corner. Relentless pressure on the Palace rearguard. Fernandes tries curling a cross to the far post, from the right, but no one can get on the end of it. 26 min: Ronaldo hangs up in the air for what seems like an age to nod a long ball back into the path of Fernandes. Fernandes shoots first-time, from around the edge of the area, and Guaita dives low to his right to make the save. 24 min: United stream forward in waves again. A cross from the right flashes across the danger area which Ronaldo can’t get on the end of ... the ball comes back to Fred, who hits a good shot which looks destined for the net but is blocked. All hands on deck for Palace. 22 min: Manchester United stroke the ball around confidently in midfield. Rashford is released down the left, controls, cuts back for Ronaldo, who cracks a first-time shot straight at Guaita. 19 min: Ronaldo, who looks even more up for this than usual, now heads over the goal from around the penalty spot. Palace have had plenty of defending to do, and have done it very well so far, but it looks a matter of time before Manchester United break through. 16 min: Manchester United under Rangnick, so far, look direct and very clear about what they are all trying to do. Sancho now makes inroads down the left and tries to cross low into the penalty area ... the ball comes back into midfield, Fernandes whips a ball looking for his compatriot Ronaldo, who brings the ball down but has a shot from close range blocked out for a corner. 15 min: Palace win a corner, they take it short, and Zaha smacks it towards the far post. But the cross is overhit and goes over everybody - a waste of a really good attacking opporutunity for Vieira’s men. 12 min: Rashford wins a free-kick just outside the area, on the Manchester United left. Ronaldo lines it up, with Fernandes also looking interested. But of course it’s Ronaldo who hits it, taking his time before doing so and letting the crowd build themselves into a froth of anticipation. It’s a sweet strike over the wall but is always going high over the bar. A positive start for the hosts, anyway. 8 min: Manchester United push Palace back again. The visitors’ penalty area is packed with yellow-shirted defenders. Ronaldo finds himself with the space to whip a shot in the direction of the far post, but his effort flies well wide ... Palace take possession down to the other end and Benteke has a shot from outside the box which is straight at De Gea. 7 min: A half-chance for Benteke at the other end, a glimpse of goal for the Palace forward from the corner of the six-yard box, but the flag was up for offside. 6 min: Again, fierce Manchester United pressing wins possession back high up the field for the home team. Ronaldo shows good pace and mobility to play his part in taking the ball back ... the footballing equivalent of leaving a juicy, ripe apple on Ralf Rangnick’s desk. 4 min: Good pressing from Manchester United (which certainly hasn’t always been the case in recent weeks and months) wins it back high from Palace. Ronaldo soon has a shot which deflects out for another Manchester United corner. 3 min: Marcus Rashford is released down the United left, and is brough down by Tompkins, but instead of a free-kick it’s a corner. From the resulting set piece, Telles cracks a shot just wide from the edge of the box! Guaita watches it sail past his left-hand post, but I’m not sure he had it covered. 2 min: Benteke tries to link with Zaha for Palace early doors, but Kouyate, who started the move, has gone down injured after a challenge in midfield from Fred. The players (and coaches) take the knee, uniting against racism and all forms of discrimination – and we’re off! Wayne “Wazza” Rooney has just taken his place in the directors’ box at Old Trafford. The teams are about to come out on to the pitch. The Rangnick era is about to begin. Wilfried Zaha captains Crystal Palace at Old Trafford this afternoon. Control, control, control: Ralf Rangnick’s mantra regarding what Manchester United are missing was also an apt characterisation of a 63-year-old who having just strode into a behemoth global football club oozed calm and clarity during his first media conference as their interim manager. A bit of other team news: Ivan Toney of Brentford has tested positive for Covid-19, and misses their trip to Leeds as a result. “There was no reason to change the team [after the win over Arsenal] ... they need to enjoy it,” says Rangnick: Klopp, Tuchel, Rangnick and the Premier League’s Germanification By Andy Brassell: “Rangnick ... inadvertently shook German football culture in December 1998 when giving a de facto seminar on a tactics board on the Saturday night institution Das Aktuelle Sportstudio, the German equivalent of Match of the Day.” Pre-match reading, part one, from Richard Jolly: Manchester United are unchanged from the side that defeated Arsenal 3-2 on Thursday, while there are two changes for Crystal Palace, with Nathaniel Clyne and Christian Benteke coming in, at full-back and up front respectively. Manchester United: De Gea, Dalot, Lindelof, Maguire, Alex Telles, McTominay, Fred, Sancho, Bruno Fernandes, Rashford, Ronaldo. Subs: Bailly, Jones, Mata, Greenwood, Henderson, Wan-Bissaka, Matic, van de Beek, Elanga. Crystal Palace: Guaita, Clyne, Tomkins, Guehi, Mitchell, Schlupp, Kouyate, Gallagher, Ayew, Benteke, Zaha. Subs: Butland, Milivojevic, Olise, Eze, Hughes, Mateta, Edouard, Kelly, Riedewald. Referee: Craig Pawson (South Yorkshire) Is Cristiano Ronaldo an expensive liability or a gegenpressing goal machine? Is Harry Maguire a League One-level clogger or a Franz Beckenbauer-in-waiting? Are Manchester United a serious football club or more a social media content provider? These are some of the questions Ralf Rangnick will need to answer during his time at Manchester United, however long it may last: his insistence on a two-year consultancy deal is a bit like the club’s top management being put on special measures by their new employee. Another pertinent question: Do players lose you games, or tactics? One wonders if, in all the excitement, Rangnick had time to watch Thomas Tuchel’s Chelsea fall at West Ham yesterday largely due to a succession of glaring individual errors. After much hype and speculation, this afternoon we’ll have the first tangible evidence of what the ‘godfather of gegenpressing’ is going to bring to Manchester United and the Premier League. There is no shortage of plots and sub-plots as far as Manchester United are concerned, then, and post-Roy Hodgson Crystal Palace are writing an interesting story of their own this season. Patrick Vieira’s fresh approach has energised the squad, with Conor Gallagher bossing the midfield at times, and it is not too long since they came to Manchester and bloodied the noses of Pep Guardiola and City. This, no matter what happens, is going to be worth watching. Pre-match reading, team news and much more coming up. Kick-off: 2pmPope Francis has returned to Lesbos, the Greek island long at the centre of Europe’s refugee crisis, to offer comfort to asylum seekers and harsh words for a continent that has all too often rejected them. Five years after his last visit, the pontiff admonished the west for its handling of the humanitarian crisis. Instead of welcoming people fleeing poverty and war, its indifference and cynical disregard had continued to condemn them to death, he said. “Sisters and brothers, I am here on Lesbos to say I am near you, to look into your eyes full of fear and expectancy, eyes that have seen violence and poverty, the pope told a group of immigrants on Sunday. “Migration is a humanitarian crisis that concerns everyone.” In an emblematic move seen as a defining moment for his papacy, Francis came to the island at the height of the migration drama in 2016. There he sent a message to Europe’s political elite by flying back to Rome with a group of Syrian refugees on his plane. The gesture appeared to usher in a new era of compassion and goodwill towards people seeking solace, often in the face of great adversity. Yet Europe had failed to heed the lessons from history, the head of the Roman Catholic church lamented on Sunday as he addressed asylum seekers and officials who had gathered under a tent within view of a migration camp. In the intervening years, the Mediterranean had been allowed to become a “desolate sea of death” where smugglers’ boats packed with desperate people sank, the pope said. “Please let us stop this shipwreck of civilisation,” he added, deploring a decision adopted by many EU countries to build walls along their borders to keep refugees out. Turning to Greek officials, including the country’s president, Katerina Sakellaropoulou, who was also in Lesbos for the visit, the pope said: “I ask every man and woman, all of us, to overcome the paralysis of fear, the indifference that kills, the cynical disregard that nonchalantly condemns to death those on the fringes.” Francis, who turns 85 later this month, looked animated as he patted children on the head and engaged with men and women lined up around the facility. The pope, himself the son of Italian immigrants who moved to Argentina, has made the defence of refugees a cornerstone of his eight-year papacy. On Saturday, shortly after he arrived in Athens on the second leg of a five-day Mediterranean tour that also included Cyprus, he criticised Europe for the divisions it has exhibited over migration, warned against the perils of populism and expressed concern over democracy’s retreat globally. While in Cyprus, his first stop, the pontiff condemned what he described as the “slavery” and “torture” often suffered by those fleeing war and poverty. “It reminds us of the history of the last century, of the Nazis, of Stalin,” he said at a prayer service held for immigrants coalesced in Nicosia, the island’s divided capital. “And we wonder how this could have happened.” But Francis, who arranged for the relocation of 50 asylum seekers from Cyprus to Rome, reserved his harshest language for the Greek end of his tour. Citing Athens not only as the birthplace of democracy but where “man first became conscious of being a political animal”, he expressed fears over the disenchanted being lured by the “siren songs of authoritarianism” and warned against populists promising popular but unrealistic solutions. Close to 1 million people, many fleeing war in Syria, traversed Greece between 2015 and 2016. Lesbos was by far the busiest entry point, with hundreds daily landing on its shores in dinghies and other rickety boats.When Valérie Pécresse crossed rural France this summer, visiting farms and villages to escape what she called her grotesquely unfair image as a “blond bourgeoise” from Versailles, she promised to smash the French Republic’s glass ceiling. “I will be the first female president of France,” she told meeting halls to cheers. Since Emmanuel Macron won the presidency in 2017 as a shock outsider with no election experience and a party put together in a few months, French politics has thrived on novelty. Pécresse’s supporters say her status as a woman is refreshingly new and makes her Macron’s worst nightmare. Pécresse, 54, wants to stop Macron, the favourite, from being re-elected next spring. As the first woman ever to run for president for the male-dominated, traditional rightwing party of Charles de Gaulle, Jacques Chirac and Nicolas Sarkozy, she is presented as new hope after a career of more than 20 years in frontline politics. Other female candidates are running on the left and the far-right, but Pécresse is a first for Les Républicains. She was chosen as presidential candidate after fighting on a staunchly rightwing ticket of “restoring France’s pride and protecting the French”. She wants to “bring back authority” to the nation. She has promised to toughen justice and policing, crack down on immigration and shrink the public sector. “I feel the anger of people who feel impotent in the face of violence and the rise of Islamist separatism, who feel their values and lifestyle are threatened by uncontrolled immigration,” she said in her victory speech. Her proposals include halving the number of residence permits for non-EU migrants. She wants to hold a referendum to change constitutional law and introduce immigration quotas. She has promised to end the 35-hour working week, raise the retirement age to 65, cut 200,000 public sector jobs and build more nuclear reactors. Pécresse had been traditionally considered on the moderate side of the centre-right, but in the Ile-de-France Paris region that she runs, which includes the high-rise suburbs around the capital, she has always promised a hard line on “law and order”. She banned “burkinis”, or full-body swimsuits, from outdoor leisure areas, and before France introduced same-sex marriage in 2013, during a tense political period of street protests by conservatives, she said she preferred a form of civil union instead of full marriage rights. She later changed her stance and said she would not go back on same-sex marriage. Pécresse likens herself to Margaret Thatcher for bravery and a “firm hand”, but she aims to lead more like Angela Merkel, who she said was good at consensus and left Germany “richer, stronger and more united”. Her strong point against Macron, her supporters say, is her experience as a budget minister trained in finance. According to her former boss Sarkozy, she is “obsessive” about the detail of her dossiers, and she has a background on the centre-right ground that the current president has come to occupy. Despite his drive to improve gender equality, Macron remains surrounded by largely male advisers and has appointed men to the highest positions in government. Pécresse’s team want her to make him look dated. Her task is tough. Her party has traditionally been the rightwing party of government, but it lost the presidency in 2012. It faces competition from a growing far-right opposition – not only Marine Le Pen but also the TV pundit Eric Zemmour. Many voters and politicians from the party’s centre have jumped ship to Macron. But Pécresse is a former senior civil servant who began her political career as an adviser to Jacques Chirac at the Elysée and shares the nickname often given to him of “the bulldozer”. She is known for difficult and epic election battles. In her first parliamentary election in Yvelines, outside Paris, as a young unknown outsider, she beat a famous military general. In 2015, she led the right to victory in the traditionally leftwing Ile-de-France, which includes Paris and the surrounding area, the most populated and richest region in France. Under Sarkozy, Pécresse held difficult cabinet positions, including as higher education minister facing down the worst street protests in years over an overhaul of the university system, when students blockaded themselves inside lecture halls. “I held out nine months against the street,” she said. “I took on the most dangerous reform of Sarkozy’s presidency, which no one else wanted to do.” Sarkozy later appointed her budget minister, a role in which she had to handle the fallout of the sovereign debt crisis. Pécresse was born Valérie Roux in the smart town of Neuilly-sur-Seine to the west of Paris, into a family of Gaullist intellectuals. Her father was an economics professor, and her maternal grandfather was a leading psychiatrist who treated Chirac’s daughter for anorexia. Her grandparents on her mother’s side were active in the French Resistance and hid parachutists during the second world war. Pécresse said she grew up as a “social Gaullist” raised on “republican merit”. Her father told her women could do as well as men. She skipped two grades in private school, won her baccalauréat at 16, went to France’s most prestigious business school and was later among the top students of France’s training school for senior civil servants. She became an Elysée adviser in 1998, turning to politics in part because she wanted to counter the rise of the far-right Jean-Marie Le Pen. She had married Jérôme Pécresse, an engineer who went on to work in business, and they have three children aged 18 to 25 whom she protected from media photographers. She knows she must win back voters from the centre as well as the far right and is already adapting her language. In an echo of Macron’s 2017 campaign, she has promised to “change the system”.He spent 5 January at a graveside service for his son, Tommy, who had taken his own life after years shadowed by depression. He spent 6 January under siege at the US Capitol as a mob of Donald Trump supporters staged a deadly insurrection. Nearly a year on, Jamie Raskin wonders whether he could have prevented either tragedy. “Just as I have blamed myself for missing cues that I might have picked up with Tommy, I blame myself for cues I missed relating to the violence as well,” says Raskin, carefully measuring each word. “I spent many, many sleepless nights in self-blame and self-prosecution over everything that had happened with Tommy and with the insurrection.” Raskin, a Democratic congressman from Maryland, took office in January 2017. Four years later, and a day after burying his 25-year-old son, he was at the US Capitol under coronavirus restrictions to help certify Joe Biden’s victory in the presidential election. He witnessed the citadel of American democracy come under attack from a frenzied mob convinced by Trump’s “big lie” about vote rigging. “I heard this terrible sound that I’ll never forget of some people trying to barrel into the House chamber,” the 58-year-old recalls in a phone interview from his home in Takoma Park, Maryland. “I don’t know to this day exactly what kind of physical objects they were carrying, but they kept slamming up against the central door to the House of Representatives and so lots of people began to move over there to try to reinforce it. “But then Capitol police officers came running in with their guns drawn, telling all of us to get back, and they went up and guarded that door. There were people screaming and it was very chaotic. You could hear people yelling, ‘We want Trump!’ and ‘Hang Mike Pence!’” – a reference to the vice-president who ignored Trump’s pleas to overturn the election. Members of Congress were evacuated through the speaker’s lobby, tunnels and stairwells. “We would see members of the mob running by in different directions. It was like a zombie movie. Whenever we saw them, everybody would accelerate efforts to get away. An insurrection is a pretty intimate thing. These people were all over the place. It’s remarkable more people did not die.” Finally, they reached the safety of a committee room in a House office building. But Raskin’s daughter Tabitha, 23, and son-in-law, Hank, who had accompanied him to the Capitol that day, were trapped in the office of Steny Hoyer, the House majority leader. They barricaded themselves in with furniture and hid under Hoyer’s desk. “I was obviously very concerned,” says Raskin. “I was an emotional wreck anyway but I felt now intensely responsible for having brought them with me and put them in harm’s way. It had never occurred to me that the Capitol of the United States would not be secure.” Eventually the building was cleared by security forces and the family was reunited. “I hugged them and kissed them and I told Tabitha how sorry I was and I said it would not be like this the next time she came to the Capitol. That’s when she said, ‘I don’t want to come back to the Capitol again’. The immensity of these events just hit me at that point. They had fundamentally changed everything by unleashing this violence to support their political coup.” That night Congress returned to the building to complete the electoral college counts and confirm Biden as the next president. In a stunned nation, there were demands for Trump to face a reckoning over his role in inciting the riot. Nancy Pelosi, the speaker of the House, asked Raskin to become lead prosecutor. He says: “For me the trial was a kind of salvation because I was so deeply in shock and trauma about Tommy and what had just taken place in the Capitol. It was a time of great confusion. “If you remember back to 9/11 and what that was like, everyone walking around buffeted and dumbfounded, there was that feeling. But by becoming the lead impeachment manager, I quickly had to develop a focus on what needed to be done.” Previously a constitutional law professor, Raskin made a compelling case and was not afraid to display his anger, grief and vulnerability. A majority of senators voted to convict Trump but fell 10 votes short of the two-thirds majority required by the constitution. The ex-president was acquitted. But Raskin was not done. He is now a member of the House of Representatives select committee investigating the events of that day. It has been gathering documents and phone records and subpoenaing witnesses in an effort to produce the definitive account of an event that Raskin says was “as close to fascism as any of us wants to come in our lifetime”. The congressman, who has written a book to try to make sense of the 50 days that upended his life, says: “I would like to say that 6 January was the end of something but it feels much more to me like the beginning of something. “Ultimately, that’s up to us. We are definitely in a struggle over the future of democracy. Joe Biden is the right president to try to lead us out of this period of emotional devastation but at this point Donald Trump’s ‘big lie’ lives and his control over the Republican party is absolute. So we are still very much in the fight of our lives.” Unthinkable: Trauma, Truth, and the Trials of American Democracy by Jamie Raskin will be published by HarperCollins on 4 JanuaryThat’s all for today. Thanks for following along and be sure to check out the full game report here. “Very happy with the result,” Carlsen says. “Obviously that’s ... what can I say? It’s huge. I’m pretty tired and looking forward to the rest day.” I don’t think it’s very easy for black to force a draw. And as long as you cannot force the draw then it’s always to be a little bit of pressure that you have to neutralize. Then of course, b5 ... I thought that was a blunder. Both of us are really tired at that point but it always helps to have the initiative.” “After (21. ... b5), probably I didn’t defend in the best way,” Nepomniachtchi says. “It becomes truly unpleasant and frankly speaking it’s hard to defend after such a blunder.” He adds: “I wasn’t quite happy, yeah? But in general the test remains the same. I’ve got to win some games. I was already down on the score. Instead of one win, I need two wins. Let’s see what will happen. “I think he played maybe a bit inaccurately in the opening,” Carlsen says immediately after stepping out of the playing studio. “I think (8. ... Bd6) is probably not a great move. But then he surprised me with (9. ... h5!) and I couldnt figure it out. I think I was kind of hoping that he would not follow h5 with Qe1, exchanging the queens. But I think Qe7 was just fine for him. I spent like 40 minutes thinking and at that point I was thinking, ‘I’m tired. Let’s see if I can get a very slight advantage, otherwise I’ll just make a draw.” He continues: “And then when he went for (10. ... Kf8), that was really surprising because I thought I still have a slight advantage with the queens on the board. It felt like he never really equalized. Obviously it went a lot quicker than it should have, but it felt like after that there was always going to be some chances.” Carlsen is asked about the two decisive results in the past three days following the record streak of 19 consecutive draws in classical world championship games, including Carlsen’s final two games with Sergey Karjakin in 2016 and all 12 against Fabiano Caruana in 2018. “It was pretty cagey at the start (of the match),” he says. “Obviously a win changes the dynamic of the match. I don’t think I would have won this game if I hadn’t won the first one.” Carlsen waits five minutes before playing 44. d5. Black goes three pawns down after 44. ... g4 45. hxg4 h3 46. Qf3. And it’s over! Nepomniachtchi resigns after 46 moves. And Carlsen is on the brink of retaining his world championship after winning for the second time in three days in the eighth game of their showdown in Dubai, opening a commanding 5-3 advantage in the best-of-14 match with six contests remaining. White mates in 14 moves after 42. Qd1 Qe3+ 43. Kh1 g5, according to Sesse. Nepomniachtchi is not throwing in the towel, but he may not have a choice soon. The players have reached the time control after 39. Qc3 Qf4+ 40. Kg1 Kh7. Carlsen plays 41. Qd3+ and Nepomniachtchi answers with 41. ... g6. A few more moves (36. Qe5 Qb2 37. Qe4+ Kg8 38. Qd3 Qf2). But it’s getting late early for Nepomniachtchi, whose body language is one of resignation as he prays for a Carlsen blunder. ... Nepomniachtchi plays 33. ... Qxa2. And Carlsen grabs black’s last remaining queenside pawn after 34. Qe8+ Kh7 35. Qxb5. Nepomniachtchi plays 35. ... Qf2 and he’s just about out of options. Carlsen plays 33. b3 after four and a half minutes. Nepomniachtchi returns to his chair from his antechamber. He smiles at the board but there’s no happiness on his side. A deep exhale from the Russian and he looks like he’s about to call it a day ... A resignation appears imminent after 32. Qe4+ Kg8. Carlsen on the brink of taking a commanding lead in this world championship match. A disgusted Nepomniachtchi steps away from the board. Carlsen plays 28. Qc5, attacking pawns while covering multiple checking squares. Nepomniachtchi answers with 28. ... Qa5 and Carlsen quickly captures a pawn with 29. Qxc6. Black follows with 29. ... Qe1+ and the next moves fly over the board (30. Kh2 Qxf2 31. Qxe6+ Kh7). The only remaining hope for the challenger appears to be perpetual check. The bishops and rooks come off (26. Bxe6 Rxe6 27. Rxe6 fxe6). Desperate times for Nepomniachtchi, who’s swapping off pieces with no path to improvement. A pure queen endgame looms as the players look at this position. Carlsen takes nearly 10 minutes before playing 25. Re4. That leaves the champion with 21 minutes to make his next 15 moves. Getting Carlsen into time trouble if he’s forced to play precisely could be Nepomniachtchi’s only hope at this point ... it’s too bad Carlsen is also the world’s top blitz player. Nepomniachtchi thinks for nine minutes before playing 23. ... Qd8. He’s brought his most powerful piece into a fully defensive position and the evaluation tilts even further in Carlsen’s favor. Absolutely ruthless from the champion, who turns the screw with 24. Bb3. The challenger’s struggles only continue with 24. ... Rd6. Carlsen improves his position with 22. ... Kg8 23. Qxa7. According to Sesse, Carlsen’s advantage is overwhelming. “All roads lead to disaster for black,” three-time British champion David Howell says on Chess24’s broadcast. “We can’t find anything even remotely close to a defense for black right now.” And Carlsen has found 22. Qa3+, which is best. The champion is more than 20 minutes behind on time, but enjoys a far superior position that will almost surely cost black a pawn. Nepomniachtchi finds himself in full-blown survival move, in danger of falling behind a practically insurmountable two points in this best-of-14-games world championship match. Nepomniachtchi exchanges pawns (20. ... dxc4 21. Bxc4) before pushing his pawn forward with the committal 21. ... b5. That’s a blunder! And the evaluation bar has swung dramatically in Carlsen’s favor, indicating a winning advantage for the champion. “Game over,” the Dutch grandmaster Anish Giri says on Chess24’s broadcast. “A full pawn and a bad position. It’s just losing. It’s insane, the level of blunder. Totally insane. Very odd.” Carlsen is going for it! After 19. h3 h4, the champion makes a statement of intent with 20. c4. This is difficult position for Nepomniachtchi over the board, although the Norwegian supercomputer Sesse says it’s wiped out Carlsen’s advantage to a dead heat. Carlsen retreats the queen with 18. Qe3. Nepomniachtchi quickly answers with 18. ... Bd7. It continues to look tricky for Nepomniachtchi after the rook exchange (16. Rxe8+ Bxe8). Now the challenger offers a queen exchange (17. Re1 Qf6). Doubtful Carlsen will accept it so look for him to retreat the queen to g3 or possibly e3 or e5. And Nepomniachtchi plays 15. ... c6 after exactly six minutes, which is an inaccuracy! He’s twice declined to get the queens off the board and now he’s in for a world of suffering. The position is not winning for Carlsen, but we’ve seen the champion squeeze out a full point from far less. Nepomniachtchi takes the open file with 13. ... Re8 after three minutes. The champion meets it with 14. Rae1 and Nepo immediately plays 14. ... Rh6. Carlsen then throws his queen forward with 15. Qg5, creating an uncomfortable position for the challenger. “It just feels like this is the type of position that Magnus Carlsen just excels in,” the English IM Jovanka Houska says on Chess24’s broadcast. “And I feel that in his desire to keep the game alive, Nepomniachtchi has taken too many risks here. Now it’s just Magnus who has a very pleasant choice of playing for a win or just taking a draw.” No draw yet! Carlsen declines the trade of queens for a trade of bishops (12. Bxd6 Qxd6). The champion then follows with 13. Qd2. Black will have a hard time connecting his rooks from this position. Nepomniachtchi plays 10. ... Kf8 after more than eight minutes. Ambitious! Says American grandmaster Fabiano Caruana on Chess.com’s broadcast: “Kf8 shows Ian’s intention to keep the game double edged, but I don’t really like it.” Carlsen immediately responds with 11. Bb4, offering the exchange of dark-squared bishops. The challenger follows with 11. ... Qe7. Carlsen ultimately gives a check, offering a queen exchange with the unambitious 10. Qe1+ after nearly 41 minutes. This could quickly lead to a draw if Nepomniachtchi responds with Qe7, which the engines like best. Carlsen has been thinking for more than a half-hour. The engines indicate his best options are Qf3 and c4. Indian grandmaster Vidit Gujrathi prefers the latter. Nepomniachtchi’s unusual move has sent Carlsen into the think tank. He’s been pondering his response for 20 minutes (and counting) and the players are equal on time again. Nepomniachtchi plays 9. ... h5! after nearly 17 minutes. That appears to be a new move. He avoids bringing his queen out but essentially rules out the possibility of kingside on the queenside. Carlsen castles after two and a half minutes (9. O-O). Nepomniachtchi’s natural response is to keep the symmetry by castling. But he’s been looking at the board for more than 12 minutes, perhaps looking for a sharper option that could pull Carlsen out of his prep and create some kind of winning chance. Nepomniachtchi plays 8. ... Bd6 after three minutes. This creates a completely symmetrical position with every square on the d-file occupied. All of the knights are off the board quickly after 3. d4 Nxe4 4. Bd3 d5 5. Nxe5 Nd7 6. Nxd7 Bxd7 7. Nd2 Nxd2 8. Bxd2. A rare position (white’s castling is far more common after 6. Bxd7) and hardly the most ambitious opening for Carlsen. It already looks like we’re headed for a draw. Nepomniachtchi is first to the playing hall. He’s taken his seat behind the black pieces. Carlsen, playing with white today, arrives about a minute late. Former Real Madrid left back Míchel Salgado makes the honorary first move for Carlsen (1. e1) ... and Carlsen doesn’t pull it back. And we’re very quickly into the Petrov Defence (1. ... e5 2. Nf3 Nf6). A quick refresher on the format for this world championship match. It will consist of 14 classical games with each player awarded one point for a win and a half-point for a draw. Whoever reaches seven and a half points first will be declared the champion. (Carlsen leads 4-3 over Nepomniachtchi at the midpoint.) The time control for each game is 120 minutes for the first 40 moves, 60 minutes for the next 20 moves and then 15 minutes for the rest of the game plus an additional 30 seconds per move starting from move 61. If the match is tied after 14 games, tie-breaks will be played on the final day (16 December) in the following order: • Best of four rapid games with 25 minutes for each player with an increment of 10 seconds after each move. • If still tied, they will play up to five mini-matches of two blitz games (five minutes for each player with a three-second increment). • If all five mini-matches are drawn, one sudden-death ‘Armageddon’ match will be played where White receives five minutes and Black receives four minutes. Both players will receive a three-second increment after the 60th move. In the case of a draw, Black will be declared the winner. Notably, Carlsen’s second and third title defenses both came down to tiebreakers. But many believe the increased length of this year’s match (from 12 to 14 games) and the stylistic matchup at hand promises a decisive result in regulation. Hello and welcome back for the eighth game of the World Chess Championship. The overall score in the showdown between Magnus Carlsen and Ian Nepomniachtchi is 4-3 to Carlsen after the Norwegian’s breakthrough win in Friday’s Game 6, which surpassed the 124-move stalemate in Game 5 of the 1978 title match between Anatoly Karpov and Viktor Korchnoi as the longest contest in the 135-year history of world championship matchplay. Unsurprisingly, Saturday’s seventh game was a far shorter affair as the pair agreed to a quiet draw after 2hr 30min and took the opportunity to recover. Nepomniachtchi, marshaling the white pieces, played 1 e4 before the pair blitzed out their opening moves into the same anti-Marshall line of the Ruy Lopez that had featured in each of the Russian’s three previous games as white (1 ... e5 2 Nf3 Nc6 3 Bb5 a6 4 Ba4 Nf6 5 O-O Be7 6 Re1 b5 7 Bb3). Carlsen took lengthy thinks of 33 combined minutes before his 12th and 15th moves, falling more than 20 minutes behind his opponent on time. But not long after the world No 1 gave up his stronghold in the center with the committal 17 exd4, a flurry of rapid simplification began and the action fizzled out fast. For anyone just coming aboard, Carlsen, who turned 31 on Tuesday, has been at No 1 in the Fide rankings for 10 straight years and was considered the world’s best player even before he dethroned Vishy Anand for the title in 2013. Nepomniachtchi, also 31, is ranked No 5, having earned his place at the table by winning the eight-man candidates tournament in April. The best-of-14-games match is taking place at the Dubai Exhibition Centre with the winner earning a 60% share of the €2m ($2.26m) prize fund if the match ends in regulation (or 55% if it’s decided by tie-break games, as happened in Carlsen’s second and third title defenses). We’re a little under a half-hour from today’s first move. Bryan will be here shortly. In the meantime here’s his report from Saturday’s Game 7 in Dubai.Emma Hayes praised the tactical masterclass delivered by her team after Chelsea ripped apart the league leaders, Arsenal to secure last season’s FA Cup with a 3-0 win in front of a buoyant Wembley crowd. “We got it spot on,” the manager said. “We predicted what they were going to do and they did what we thought they were going to do.” Fran Kirby was unplayable as the Blues secured their delayed domestic treble for the 2020-21 season – a quadruple if the Community Shield is included. The England forward gave Chelsea the early lead and Hayes whispered into her ear that it was “by far the best performance I’ve ever seen you play in a Chelsea shirt” after she was substituted in the second half, when Sam Kerr delivered the fatal blow, scoring twice. “Champions don’t make excuses, or become victims or look for anybody else to manage them,” Hayes said of Kerr, who played twice for Australia in the international break, was unwell, flew back, landed on Thursday and scored twice here. “Sam takes responsibility and, every time I listen to her and every time I watch her perform every day, she’s in charge and in control of making sure that she sets the standards for herself. And that’s what I admire about her. There was no way she was going to be on the losing team today. She sets that tone in such a way that I’ve rarely seen.” There was hope that this would be an occasion worthy of the 40,942 crowd and the 100th anniversary of the ban of women’s football from FA affiliated grounds. As a contest, however, the meeting between the league leaders and the WSL title holders ended almost as quickly as it had begun, with Chelsea rampant and forcing an Arsenal collapse in a week that could come to define their season with the visit of Barcelona to the Emirates Stadium to come on Thursday. “We were like a machine, everything about us – we just purred from start to finish,” said Hayes with a laugh and a literal meow – a nod to the Arsenal manager Jonas Eidevall’s admission that he avoids black cats out of superstition. In fairness the third-minute opener was staggeringly unlucky. The life-long Arsenal fan Lotte Wubben-Moy flicked her interception up and it bounced off an on-hand Frida Maanum into the path of Kirby who raced through the middle and side-footed low past Manuela Zinsberger into the corner. If the goal was a heavy dollop of misfortune, Arsenal – with their 14 wins the most FA Cup in history – rode their luck for the rest of the first half with the Austrian goalkeeper Zinsberger repeatedly responsible for keeping the margin narrow. Hayes’s team lined up with the back three of Jess Carter, Magda Eriksson and Millie Bright that has increasingly settled into the new formation as the season has worn on. But whenever Arsenal were in possession the versatile Erin Cuthbert, playing on the right side the midfield, would fall in line alongside the centre-back trio, tasked with stifling the similarly terrier-like Katie McCabe. It was a hugely effective tactic, cutting off width that Arsenal had exploited in the WSL opener between the title rivals in September and giving them the extra body in the middle when piling forward. “I want Erin to know this, I want her to read this,” Hayes said. “I don’t want Erin to run away from herself; what she is is what you saw. Whether she plays in the wing-back situation, at times right-back today, when she puts her hand to anything she achieves it at an unbelievable level, she goes beyond being a team player, her contributions are so underrated.” The half-time whistle could not have come soon enough for the battered Gunners, with Eidevall’s side heavily flattered by the 1-0 scoreline, both sides having had strong penalty appeals waved away. Having spent much of the season dominating, fluid and pressing high when out of possession, the Arsenal players looked like they barely knew each other let alone played together. After the break Kerr beat Wubben-Moy to a long ball from Kirby, cut inside and fired in at the near post to quell hopes of a fightback. And the atmosphere thereafter became as tepid as Arsenal’s attempted forays forward. Throwing caution to the wind, Eidevall swapped the defensive midfielders Lia Walti and Jennifer Beattie for the forwards Nikita Parris and Caitlin Foord but it merely sowed confusion among the red shirts and Kerr clipped the ball delightfully over Zinsberger with 13 minutes remaining to deliver the final blow. “After the final whistle you just feel powerless and it’s an opportunity that is gone,” Eidevall said. “But I’m not a person who is driven by hatred or motivated by being hurt or seeing others celebrate. I definitely would like for my players and my staff to be standing there themselves because they deserve that and I can’t wait to get another opportunity to get back here.”The writer Brian Clark, who has died aged 89 of an aortic aneurysm, was ahead of his time in tackling the subject of people trying to exercise choice over dying when they have no quality of life left. In his 1972 television play Whose Life Is It Anyway?, Ken Harrison, a sculptor who is left paralysed from the neck down after a car crash, decides against being kept alive by the miracles of modern technology but has to battle medical bureaucracy. “It’s not about death – it’s about dignity and the freedom to choose,” Clark said at the time. When he originally submitted the script unsolicited to Granada Television in Manchester, its potential was spotted by Walter Mariner, who worked closely with Peter Eckersley, the head of drama, and observed: “The subject was euthanasia, beautifully presented with the arguments for and against finely balanced.” Mariner had to convince Eckersley that they should produce the play, betting him a bottle of wine that, if it were included among four scripts offered to the director Richard Everitt, he would pick it – and he did. Everitt regarded it as “outstanding” and set about reducing the 90-minute play to fit an hour-long slot. Ian McShane played Ken and Whose Life Is It Anyway? quickly earned a showing on the American network PBS. Clark then restored the cut scenes, added more to create a two-hour stage version, and sent the script to a theatre producer. Some eminent actors were invited to play the part but insisted it was unactable because the lead character could not move. Eventually, Tom Conti took it on and the production opened in London’s West End at the Mermaid theatre in 1978, before moving to the Savoy (1978-79), and Whose Life Is It Anyway? won an Olivier award as best new play. When it transferred to Broadway (Trafalgar theatre, 1979), Conti went with it and won a Tony award as best actor. In a gender-reversal version, Mary Tyler Moore also won a Tony when she starred, her character renamed Claire, at the Royale theatre the following year, and Kim Cattrall played the part, directed by Peter Hall, in a revival at the Harold Pinter theatre in London in 2005. A 1981 film version starred Richard Dreyfuss. During the 1970s, Clark was a prolific writer for television. Two of his Play for Today productions starred Peter Barkworth in a continuation of the middle-class management roles he had established in The Power Game the previous decade. As Richard Elkinson, he was seen in The Saturday Party (1975), playing a stockbroker who is made redundant, before its sequel, The Country Party (1977), featured him running a restaurant and having his birthday celebrations gatecrashed by both his estranged wife and pregnant girlfriend. Clark and Barkworth then teamed up with Barry Davis and Mark Shivas, who respectively directed and produced those two plays, and formed a production company, Astramead, to pitch screen and stage ideas. When Barkworth said it had been his long-held ambition to play a bank manager in a TV series, Clark – and a BBC executive – had doubts about how exciting the premise was, but Telford’s Change (1979) was given the go-ahead. The writer did his research by visiting branches of the Midland Bank and attending their social events. “I have to say, I did find an awful lot of the local bank managers pretty boring,” he said. So he made it the story of a hotshot international banker, Mark Telford, who escapes the rat race by becoming a provincial bank manager in Dover. His scripts traced the effects this has on his wife, Sylvia (played by Hannah Gordon), who stays in London to pursue a showbiz career, and up to 11 million viewers watched. Brian was born in Bournemouth, to Selina (nee Smith), who worked in a cigarette factory, and Leonard Clark, a blacksmith, and grew up in Bristol, where he attended Merrywood grammar school and fell in love with the stage at the Theatre Royal. Following a job in a printers’ warehouse and national service with the Royal Signals in the Middle East, he taught English in schools in London and Cumbria. He trained at Central School of Speech and Drama in London (1954-55), but then realised his true ambition was to write. He returned to education by taking a degree in English literature at Nottingham University, then became a staff tutor in drama at Hull University (1968-72). The success of Whose Life Is It Anyway? on television enabled him to go full-time as a writer. He had three further West End stage successes: Can You Hear Me at the Back? (Piccadilly theatre, 1979-80), with Barkworth in a play about the world of architects and town planners; Kipling (Mermaid theatre, 1984), a one-man show based on the writer’s works and originally commissioned by Channel 4, with Alec McCowen starring in the TV, London and Broadway productions; and The Petition (1986), a two-hander about a retired British army couple (John Mills and Rosemary Harris) whose marriage reaches crisis point, directed by Hall in London and New York. On television, Barkworth starred when Clark wrote Late Starter (1985), a series about a retired university professor starting life again when his wife walks out, leaving him penniless. Astramead also produced The Price (1985), written by Peter Ransley, with Barkworth as a man who receives a ransom demand when his wife and stepdaughter are kidnapped by the IRA. Alongside his own writing, Clark ran Amber Lane Press, which published play texts such as Mary O’Malley’s Once a Catholic and Martin Sherman’s Bent. He also taught screenwriting at Surrey Institute of Art and Design Film School (1999-2012). His first three marriages ended in divorce. He is survived by his fourth wife, the writer and psychotherapist Cherry Potter, whom he married in 1990. Stephen, the son of his second marriage, died in 2016. • Brian Robert Clark, writer, born 3 June 1932; died 16 November 2021As a rule, I like my live shows to have some element of liveness about them. Michael Spicer’s has almost none. It’s the creator of The Room Next Door’s debut tour, and he clearly sees it as an opportunity to profit from the reams of online content he crafted before breakout success came his way, at last, in 2020. The show alternates between clips of his skits and stunts, commentary on his experience of going viral, and onstage re-enactments of his best-loved Room Next Door sketches – in which he plays a political adviser, wired into the earholes of Johnson, Patel, Trump et al, issuing desperate instructions as another foot-in-mouth public appearance unfolds. Spicer does little to give these internet creations a three-dimensional lease of life. He’s no showman. Very dry as a host, he lays out his plans for the show matter-of-factly at the outset, and takes every opportunity thereafter to stifle artifice or surprise at birth. And yet, The Room Next Tour – that’s what it’s called – is a hoot. It may at times resemble one of those cheap TV clip compendiums, as he chuckles at archive footage reclaimed from the internet’s wilder shores. But the footage is undeniably chucklesome, as Jon Pertwee offers bewildering road safety advice to 70s children, or a prize pooch at a dog show stops halfway round the obstacle course for a poo. Is that sophisticated? It is not. But, curated by Spicer, and with droll narration in the latter case from his out-of-his-depth voiceover-artist alter ego Daniel Smeeth, it’s very amusing. It also neatly offsets the Room Next Door skits, which rely heavily on Spicer’s mounting exasperation as another politician blithers off-message. Occasionally, his editing feels like a sneaky trick to make our rulers more witless or hapless than they are. They scarcely need the assistance, as most of the clips – of coughing Theresa May, rabbit-in-headlights Hancock, un-sweating Prince Andrew – abundantly demonstrate. One might wish that Spicer had been bolder in transposing his act into the live arena. Maybe that’s for the next tour? Tonight, it’s about his greatest online hits so far – and most of them are bangers.Dismissing as “preposterous” a Republican senator’s claim he is “overhyping” Covid-19 as he did HIV and Aids, Dr Anthony Fauci said on Sunday the threat to the US from the Omicron variant remained to be determined – but that signs from South Africa, where the variant was first detected, were encouraging. “Clearly in South Africa Omicron has a transmission advantage,” Fauci told CNN’s State of the Union, “because … they were very much at a low level then they had almost a vertical spike upwards, which is almost exclusively Omicron. “Thus far – though it’s too early to really make any definitive statements about it – it does not look like there’s a great degree of severity to it. “But we have really got to be careful before we make any determinations that [Omicron] is less severe or it really doesn’t cause any severe illness comparable to Delta. But, thus far, the signals are a bit encouraging regarding the severity. But, again, you got to hold judgment until we get more experience.” Fauci’s evident caution stood at odds with the bizarre and cavalier accusation made by the Wisconsin senator Ron Johnson. Speaking to the Fox News host Brian Kilmeade this week, the Republican said: “Fauci did the exact same thing with Aids. He overhyped it. He created all kinds of fear, saying it could affect the entire population, when it couldn’t. And … he’s using the exact same playbook for Covid.” Fauci, 80, has been head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, or Niaid, since 1984, serving seven presidents. His work on Aids and HIV earned him the presidential medal of freedom from George W Bush. In an interview with the Guardian last year, Fauci said: “My career and my identity has really been defined by HIV. Because I’ve been in a very unique position of now being one of the very, very few people who were there from the very first day.” H Clifford Lane, a longtime Fauci deputy, said: “There are so many ways in which the experience of going through HIV/Aids has helped prepare him for what he’s dealing with now. Brand-new disease, no treatment, no cure.” But Johnson’s attack was merely part of volleys of abuse from Republicans and rightwingers who in one case went so far as to compare Fauci to Josef Mengele, the Nazi “Angel of Death”. Asked about Johnson, Fauci said: “How do you respond to something as preposterous as that? Overhyping Aids? It’s killed over 750,000 Americans and 36 million people worldwide. How do you overhype that? “Overhyping Covid? It’s already killed 780,000 Americans and over 5 million people worldwide. So, I don’t have any clue of what he’s talking about.” Omicron has been detected in 15 US states. Fauci was cautiously optimistic current vaccines might work against it. “The vaccines that we are distributing now in the United States and throughout the world are directed against the original ancestral Wuhan strain,” he said. “And yet … we’re getting quite good protection against Delta [variant] when you’re vaccinated, and particularly when you get boostered. “And that’s the reason why we’re saying, even with a new variant like Omicron, if you get boosted, you’re going to get your level up way up, and we feel certain that there will be a some degree, and maybe a considerable degree, of protection against the Omicron variant, if, in fact, it starts to take hold in a dominant way in this country.” Fauci and other Biden advisers repeated indications that the travel ban imposed on South Africa and other African countries might soon be lifted. They also sought to reassure a public on edge about what Omicron might mean for Christmas holidays, amid rising Covid case numbers. The surgeon general, Dr Vivek Murthy, told CBS’s Face the Nation: “The concern and the challenge we have right now in the country is that we have millions of people who are still unvaccinated, which poses a risk to their lives but also poses an increased risk of transmission. “But if you do as many families do, you get vaccinated and boosted, you use testing judiciously before you gather, you gather in well-ventilated spaces and use masks whenever you can in public indoor spaces, your risk can be quite low and your holidays can be quite fulfilling. That’s what so many families experienced this past Thanksgiving.” On NBC’s Meet the Press, Fauci’s boss, National Institutes of Health director Dr Francis Collins, said more variants were possible after Omicron. He also said the best thing Americans could do would be to stop being “a little sloppy” on precautions such as vaccinations, boosters and mask-wearing, particularly during holiday travel. On ABC’s This Week, Dr Rochelle Walensky, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said the Food and Drug Administration was “already in conversations about streamlining the authorisation of an Omicron-specific vaccine, partially because much of the vaccine is actually exactly the same, and really it would just be that mRNA code that would have to change. “So those conversations are ongoing, and certainly, [the] FDA will move swiftly and [the] CDC will move swiftly right thereafter.”Singapore’s financial regulator has reportedly suspended Bitget, a crypto exchange that is mired in a row involving South Korea’s biggest boyband, BTS. Bitget has removed the Monetary Authority of Singapore’s logo from its website, the Guardian confirmed. The platform still claims to have licences from Australia, Canada and the United States, according to its website. According to a Financial Times report on Sunday, Bitget was suspended after it got into a high-profile dispute for promoting the digital currency Army Coin, which is named after the band’s followers, who are known as the BTS army. In October, the platform was threatened with legal action by the BTS management company, Hybe Corporation, for promoting Army Coin to traders using an unauthorised image of the band and distributing what it said was false information that the coin was made for BTS and intended to maximise its profits. BTS made history earlier this year after being named global recording artist of the year for 2020 by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry, becoming the first act that performs in a language other than English to top the annual ranking. In a statement at the time, Hybe said the coin had “no affiliation” with BTS and urged anyone who had suffered financial damage linked to Army Coin to file a report at their nearest police station. “We are currently reviewing legal violations, including the infringing of an artist’s portrait right, without consulting with the company, and we will take all legal action against infringements and violations.” Founded in Singapore in 2018, Bitget sponsors the Italian football team Juventus, and claims to have more than 1.5 million users worldwide. Its website claims the business was valued at more than $1bn (about £760m) in the latest financing round. The platform reported that as of 30 November, it had 11,626 traders handling a 24-hour trading volume of $4bn. It introduced a Turkish website on 5 November. The episode illustrates the complexity and transnational nature of cryptocurrencies, and comes as the Asian city state seeks to establish itself as the world’s leading digital currency centre. The Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) said last month it was introducing “strong regulation” for companies that dealt with cryptocurrencies. “With crypto-based activities, it is basically an investment in a prospective future, the shape of which is not clear at this point,” said Ravi Menon, the managing director of MAS, in an interview with Bloomberg. He added: “But not to get into this game, I think risks Singapore being left behind. Getting early into that game means we can have a head start, and better understand its potential benefits as well as its risks.” Bitget has been contacted for comment.Millions of people are being urged to get a flu jab by Friday to maximise protection over Christmas, as new figures reveal that more than half of those who are pregnant or have an underlying health condition have yet to be vaccinated. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) is encouraging eligible people to have the vaccine by 10 December to allow it take full effect before the festive season. In particular the agency is pushing for pregnant women and those with underlying health conditions to come forward, but it is also calling on people from a black Caribbean or black African background, with data suggesting they have the lowest uptake of the vaccine. While 79% of those aged 65 and over have already come forward for their flu jab, exceeding the World Health Organization target of 75%, less than half of those who are pregnant or have underlying conditions have taken up the offer. Uptake among those under 65 in clinical risk groups is just 41.4% in England, while in pregnant women, only slightly more than one in three – 34.4% – have been vaccinated so far. Flu is a highly infectious disease and can lead to serious complications for those living with a long-term health condition, including respiratory and heart conditions, diabetes, kidney disease, liver disease or a chronic neurological disease such as multiple sclerosis or cerebral palsy. Compared with healthy adults, people with underlying health conditions are on average 11 times more likely to die if they catch flu, the UKHSA said. Pregnant women are also at increased risk of serious complications and should have the flu vaccine to help protect themselves and their babies, the agency added. “Getting your winter vaccines, whether that is your flu jab if eligible or your [Covid] booster jab, is one of the most important things people can do for yourself and your family this winter,” said Sajid Javid, the health secretary. “Don’t delay – book your flu vaccine as soon as possible.” While levels of flu infection are still low, this can typically “ramp up” over December, with a peak in January, the UKHSA said. Eligible adults can book their free NHS flu vaccination at their GP practice or local pharmacy. In England, more than 35 million people are eligible for a free flu vaccine this winter. In addition to people aged 65 and over, those with underlying health conditions, and pregnant women, children are offered the vaccine to help protect them and reduce the spread of flu to more vulnerable people. This includes children aged two and three on 31 August; and schoolchildren up to year 11. Dr Conall Watson, a consultant epidemiologist at the UKHSA, said: “The threat of flu has not gone away. It can cause serious illness and be fatal. Flu vaccination saves lives. If you are eligible, you don’t have to wait to be called up – book your flu vaccine as soon as possible to help protect yourself and family this Christmas.”Antony Sher (Obituary, 3 December) was a stalwart in the struggle against apartheid. He joined us on the picket line outside South Africa House on many occasions. He did not draw attention to himself. He was just there. A modest, self-effacing and committed anti-racist. David Kenvyn Chair, London Anti-Apartheid Committee, 1982-88 • I was quite excited at your headline in the print edition (Experts on kissing under the mistletoe, 3 December) and avidly read the article below hoping to pick up a few tips for the festive season. Imagine my disappointment on finding that the emphasis was on how not to do it. Judith Wainwright Pontfaen, Pembrokeshire • It’s a pity that the two dozen staff and six customers trapped by snow in Aalborg’s Ikea only ate, watched TV and slept in the beds (Report, 2 December). The ratio would have been perfect for a world record-beating attempt to assemble the fiendishly difficult Pax wardrobe. Brian Smith Berlin, Germany • Now in my 60s, I like to think that the Guardian sudoku helps to keep my brain agile. However, as it is a symbol puzzle, not a real number puzzle, I wondered if its relevance could be improved by swapping in some everyday items? I suggest that 1 be substituted by keys, 2 by spectacles, 3 by cooker and so on. Eric Sharp Newcastle upon Tyne • You report (2 December) that the Information Commissioner’s Office has fined the Cabinet Office £500,000 over a serious data breach. Writing as a taxpayer, I’d like to know who pays. Jim Golcher Greens Norton, Northamptonshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Maxine Peake’s rejected idea to write a musical about a “northern tripe dynasty” (Betty Boothroyd musical to chart rise from dancer to Commons Speaker, 2 December) is a reminder of Bill Tidy and Alan Plater’s stage version of The Fosdyke Saga, which was exactly that. Performed in London and the north in the early 1980s, it was an exuberant mixture of satire and coarse humour, including a scene where the actors threw tripe at the audience – and usually had it thrown back at them. It also had a marvellous parody of Wordsworth’s Westminster Bridge. Brilliant! Michael Church Lincoln • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The continuing requirement for an efficient system to administer Covid vaccinations is currently consuming important NHS manpower that could be more usefully employed delivering essential services and dealing with the huge backlog of care (GPs in England get green light to provide less care and join Covid jab drive, 3 December). Instead, the NHS should be using the retired workforce – doctors, nurses, pharmacists and those in professions allied to medicine who have the required skills and the spare time to implement them. My husband and I are both retired doctors and are among a number of retired local health professionals who have volunteered our services. To become approved to do this has been relatively straightforward once contact with the correct local service manager has been made. As the need for vaccinations is likely to continue for several years, it would seem obvious that professional bodies should work with the NHS to encourage retired professionals to volunteer to do vaccinations and so allow NHS staff to get on with delivering healthcare. Dr Beth Rimmer Harrogate, North Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.As people who were detained indefinitely in Australia’s offshore camps on Nauru and Manus Island, Papua New Guinea, and as professionals who were employed there, we are deeply concerned that the UK government will attempt this week to grant itself the same power to send people seeking asylum to offshore detention centres. We have watched with dismay as the UK government has drafted legislation that allows for the indefinite detention offshore of women, men and children, refused a probing amendment to exclude survivors of trafficking and torture from being sent to offshore detention centres, and ignored the failings and financial costs of the Australian experiment, which saw the Australian government spend £8.6bn to detain 3,127 people in appalling conditions, while failing to end dangerous boat journeys. Two of us lost a combined 13 years of our lives trapped in offshore camps, with no indication of when we would be free. Others in the same situation lost their lives. The authorities insisted we would never reach Australia. Now, like more than two-thirds of the people detained offshore, we are recognised refugees, living in the US and Australia. We cannot imagine why any country would replicate such a cruel, costly and ultimately futile system. Finally, consider why a government that has no intention of detaining children offshore would give itself the power to do so. Or why any law that claims to protect people entitled to asylum would instead hide them away in offshore detention camps. Thanush Selvarasa and Elahe Zivardar Former offshore detainees, Dr Nick Martin and Carly Hawkins Former medical officer and former teacher, Nauru detention centre • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.While services designed to protect Arthur Labinjo-Hughes were involved with the family, we do not know yet what could have been done differently to prevent his death; that is the subject for a learning review. I am not condoning poor practice; we must recognise and address this. However, we should appreciate the context: the system in England is “a 30-year-old tower of Jenga held together with Sellotape”, according to the chair of the independent review of children’s social care. I have facilitated workshops for practitioners working with child neglect throughout the pandemic. These practitioners are running on empty and yet have found inventive ways to ensure children continue to be protected. However, this is at significant cost. I have witnessed workers crying with frustration, struggling with limited resources, created by year-on-year cuts to budgets. Others are risking Covid, violence and aggression, and feel compelled to visit at weekends and out of hours to keep children safe. I have heard from supervisors working long hours in front of a screen trying to support workers and manage their caseloads virtually. All staff are struggling with their current workloads as a tsunami of new cases roll in as the pandemic takes its toll on families who can cope no longer. The contribution that health and social care professionals, shop assistants and others have made during the pandemic is acknowledged frequently. Not so the contribution of those working to safeguard our children. What does that say about our society? Unless we recognise the need for well-resourced services and value the contribution of these practitioners, children remain vulnerable. Jan Horwath Emeritus professor in child welfare, University of Sheffield • While agreeing with most of what Harry Ferguson concludes about the case of Arthur Labinjo-Hughes (Opinion, 3 December), I am disappointed by the narrowness of the analysis, and the focus on agency and individual practice. As a retired social worker with 30 years’ experience, I have watched with impotent fury and despair the recent hollowing out of social services by governments committed to funding cuts and privatisation. During my career, the priorities of the job shifted from care, support and prevention towards intervention and mopping up the mess. Social work before the 1980s was sloppy and unfocused, and needed a shake-up, and value-for-money auditing had to be part of this. What it did not need was to be turned into a skeleton emergency response service, forced to create thresholds even for responding to suggestions of neglect and abuse. Ken Rutter Sheffield • Prof Harry Ferguson’s article says: “Health visitors, early help and therapeutic services that normally support young children and parents retreated from homes and either went online or stopped altogether.” The use of the word “retreat” implies that it was voluntary. The health visiting service was categorised as a “partial stop” service in the NHS’s Emergency Preparedness, Resilience and Response programme – up to 63% of health visitors were redeployed, some to administrative tasks. This was not of our choosing, and those remaining carried huge burdens in a service already under-resourced. As always, the service to families was the priority. Pamela Goldberg Chair, Institute of Health Visiting • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Two former detainees in Australia’s notorious offshore immigration detention centres have issued a “dire warning” to UK parliamentarians ahead of a vote to replicate these centres this week. They are urging MPs not to back the nationality and borders bill which will be debated in parliament on Tuesday and Wednesday. If passed into law in its current form it will diminish refugee protection. Large-scale reception centres are planned and the legislation includes a provision for housing asylum seekers offshore while their claims are considered. The two former detainees who have signed the letter are Thanush Selvarasa, a Tamil refugee held in the Manus Island detention centre for seven years before being transferred to Australia and now a campaigner for asylum seekers’ rights, and Elahe Zivardar, an Iranian artist and refugee held in the Nauru detention centre for six years before being transferred to the US in 2019. They are joined by two other signatories who worked in the detention camps and were appalled by what they witnessed there. Dr Nick Martin is a GP and former surgeon lieutenant commander in the British navy, who spent nine months as senior medical officer at the Nauru detention centre in 2016 before speaking out against the conditions there. Carly Hawkins is an education specialist who previously worked as a teacher for children incarcerated at the Nauru detention centre. The letter, coordinated by the charity Detention Action, states: “As people who were detained indefinitely in Australia’s offshore camps on Nauru and Manus Island, Papua New Guinea, and as professionals who were employed there, we are deeply concerned to learn that the UK government seeks to grant itself the same power to transfer people seeking asylum to offshore detention centres. It adds: “We write to you with a dire warning against adopting offshore detention. We cannot imagine why any country would want to replicate such a cruel, costly and ultimately futile system.” They say it will create an “indelible stain on the reputation of the United Kingdom”. Various organisations including Amnesty International (UK and Australia), Lancet Migration, the Royal College of Psychiatrists, Refugee Council, Human Rights Watch and Doctors of the World are backing the letter. The United Nations high commissioner for refugees has condemned the plans and warned that if the bill becomes law it will undermine the 1951 refugee convention and the current system of international protection not just in the UK but globally. Selvarasa said: “I am one of many people who came to Australia seeking asylum and safety. Instead, I spent seven years suffering under the Australian government’s cruel policy of offshore detention, on Manus Island in Papua New Guinea. “Year after year, I watched my friends die. They lost their lives and their futures waiting for freedom. The mental effects of facing such uncertainty, a life in indefinite detention, was what forced some to take their own lives. We screamed but our screams were not heard.” Zivardar said: “I left Iran to seek safety, instead I became a prisoner. These island prisons were designed to be a place of torture, humiliation, cruelty and racism. They were intended to drive innocent people, including hundreds of children and women, to either go back to the countries from which they came, or die on the island.” Martin said: “I cannot stress enough the ruinous costs of offshore detention, not only in money spent but international reputation and most importantly to the physical and mental health of people who were seeking a decent life.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “People should claim asylum in the first safe country they arrive in, and as part of our response we are removing incentives to come to the UK and working with international partners to put an end to these dangerous journeys. “We will always comply with our international obligations and the European convention on human rights.”In late 1995, one of the US’s shrewdest political observers, Michael Barone, wrote of Senator Bob Dole that he “towers over everyone else in the political landscape, even the president”. Less than 12 months later, Dole, who has died aged 98, had given up his prized leadership of the Republican-controlled Senate to run one of the most inept presidential campaigns in modern US history. It ended with his hard-won reputation as a master politician in tatters and his opponent, Bill Clinton, becoming the first Democratic president to be voted a second term for 52 years. By the time Dole felt obliged to surrender his Senate seat in a desperate effort to revive his flagging campaign, he had represented Kansas on Capitol Hill for 36 years, the longest Republican incumbency of his generation. He served first, for eight years, in the House of Representatives. His election in 1960 had come after a long apprenticeship making himself known to all levels of the deeply conservative society of the rural midwest. He reached Washington only after service in the Kansas state legislature and eight years as a county prosecuting attorney in his small home town of Russell. Elected to office as a staunch conservative, he retained that view for the rest of his political life. As a young man, he had been hit by a shell during wartime service in Italy. The shoulder injury, from which he nearly died, became the overriding influence on the rest of his life. The determination he had mobilised to fight his disability was harnessed to his political career and early on he revealed two characteristics that were to mark his campaigning style – readiness to fight a deeply partisan battle and the acerbic wit he often employed to further his cause. During his four terms in the House of Representatives Dole carved out a solid enough reputation to secure him victory when he ran for the Senate in the watershed year of 1968, amid the turmoil of the Vietnam war and the social cataclysm set off by the assassinations of Martin Luther King and Bobby Kennedy. It was a good year for the Senate Republicans, who gained seven seats from the Democrats, but they still did not control the chamber. Dole soon found himself mounting a vigorous defence of Richard Nixon as the new president settled in to face a hostile Congress. It was plain that the two men had much in common, both politically and personally. In short order Dole was fighting the Democrats’ effort to stop US military action in Cambodia and coming under fire for procedural manoeuvres that the chairman of the Senate armed services committee said “bordered on the ridiculous”. It won him enough points in the White House, however, for the president to appoint him chairman of the Republican National Committee in 1971, his first rise to national prominence. He carried out the role assiduously, building up the party in preparation for the 1972 re-election battle, until obliged to fall on his sword in 1973 when Nixon needed something for George HW Bush, newly replaced as UN ambassador, in the post-election reshuffle. That proved an unexpected blessing for Dole as the Watergate scandal unravelled and Bush found himself forced to defend the indefensible. It may have been this relative obscurity that narrowly saved the senator’s bacon after Nixon’s unprecedented resignation. He had to fight for his seat in a deeply hostile mid-term election which saw the Democrats in Congress achieve a large enough majority to override any presidential veto, the first time that had happened for nearly 40 years. Two years later, the 1976 general election found the unelected President Gerald Ford under siege not only because of the circumstances of his arrival at the White House and his decision to pardon Nixon but because his own Republican right thought him too soft. He won the party nomination by a majority of only 4% over Ronald Reagan and, in an effort to appease his opponents and unify the party, chose Dole as his running mate. It was a disastrous move. Dole’s combative style in the campaign soon had the country in a furore, particularly after he had characterised the century’s two world conflicts as “Democrat wars”. Jimmy Carter squeaked into office with just 50.1% of the popular vote – a margin of 1.6m in a total of just over 80m – and Dole was widely blamed for the outcome. However, as the country swung to the right in the Reagan years, Dole’s reputation recovered. He was chairman of the Senate finance committee during the White House tax-cutting campaign of 1981 and demonstrated his exceptional skill at managing the intricate legislative process. But he was far from happy about the budgetary consequences of the measures and successfully manoeuvred an offsetting bill through the Senate the following year in an attempt to stop the federal deficit ballooning uncontrollably. The clumsily named but effective Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act led the then fiery young congressman Newt Gingrich to dub Dole “the tax collector for the welfare state”. But, generally speaking, Dole’s legislative record was poor: he was a manager rather than an innovator. As leader of the Senate Republicans for more than a decade his unrivalled talent, of inestimable value in a constitutional structure designed to reduce intransigence to deadlock, was to wheel and deal until common ground had mysteriously surfaced from the party quagmire. Among the fruits of his efforts were such laws as those extending food stamp relief for very poor people, the 1982 Voting Rights Act, and important new federal support for disabled people. But his lack of specific ideological aims repeatedly undermined his wider ambitions. His first bid for the presidency ended abruptly in 1980 with a derisory vote of 607 in the New Hampshire primary. His second attempt in 1988 appeared at first to be going far more smoothly until George HW Bush’s spin doctors successfully induced Dole to lose his temper during a televised debate in New Hampshire and snarl at his opponent “stop lying about my record”. Bush romped through the subsequent primaries. In 1996 Dole secured the Republican nomination but seemed wholly unable to mount a credible campaign against an ostensibly vulnerable Clinton. The president had a poor legislative record and there was a host of allegations of sexual and financial misconduct. But Dole’s electioneering was marked by poorly delivered speeches whose content baffled many of his audiences. He seemed to have no clear electoral strategy and constantly reshuffled his staff in the effort to develop one. In the final stages, with the opinion polls swinging steadily towards the Democrats, even his own party gave up the fight to sit resignedly awaiting the inevitable defeat. That dismal 1996 campaign persuaded only 49% of eligible voters to turn out (the second lowest figure in US history) and Dole’s failure to address issues important to female voters proved to be critical. While he and Clinton each secured 44% of the male vote, Dole could attract only one third of women’s ballots. Born in Russell, Kansas, Robert was the son of a small dairy retailer, Doran Dole, and his wife Bina (nee Talbott). There were few indications in his early life that he would emerge from the pack. His formative years were spent in that disastrous period of the 1930s when poor farming methods had turned the Great Plains into a dust bowl and the Depression had limited the few alternative ways of making a living. Government relief was the only lifeline for many families, a deeply traumatic experience for homesteaders whose principal creed was self-reliance. The six members of the Dole family kept going by moving into their basement and renting out the rest of their house to an oil prospector, but they were obliged to pinch and scrape for years. Doran gave up the dairy business for the more secure post of managing a grain storage unit and his mother sold sewing machines door-to-door. Robert, who had shown himself a formidable athlete during his school career but not much of an academic, nonetheless gained the financial support of a local banker to enrol at the University of Kansas. He wanted to become a doctor but the US was pitched into the second world war and the 18-year-old student found himself in the US army, fighting in Europe. On 14 April 1945, three weeks before the end of the European campaign, he was leading an assault on a German machine gun position in the Po valley in Italy when a shell smashed his spine and tore his right shoulder apart, leaving him temporarily paralysed. On his return to Russell, local people raised a fund to send him to Chicago for treatment by one of the leading neurosurgeons of the day, Hampar Kelikian. During the three-year course, for which the doctor refused payment, Kelikian became one of Dole’s closest friends and eventually persuaded the young man that he would have to cope with the permanent disablement of his right arm. The occupational therapist brought in to train him for this disability, Phyllis Holden, became Dole’s first wife in 1948, and they had a daughter, Robin. Under the spur of the doctor and the therapist, Dole settled down to cope with the pain he would endure for the rest of his life. He resumed his university career but diverted to a law degree. Since he was still unable to write with his left hand, his wife sat with him to take lecture notes and write out examination answers to Dole’s dictation. To outsiders the young man seemed to overcome most of his physical problems, but this was really because of a great deal of backstage manoeuvring. As he embarked on his political career his wife padded his suits to disguise his injured arm and shoulder and arranged for his food to arrive ready cut at public functions. Dole took to carrying a pencil permanently in his right hand to avert the agony of anyone trying to shake it. In 1950, at the age of 27, he became one of the youngest state legislators in the history of Kansas. In an overwhelmingly Republican state he naturally ran as a steadfast conservative. He also began to show the obsession with every aspect of politics for which he later became renowned. He was far from the favourite in the 1960 Republican primary for the first congressional district, covering about three-quarters of Kansas, but eventually won the election, embarking on a Washington career that would last nearly four decades. After standing down as a senator, and his defeat in the 1996 presidential election, he did not seek public office again. It was a sad ending at the age of 73 to a career in which he had served his country well in war and in peace. Many of his most significant contributions were made well away from the public eye. In the words of one of his staff, “people never just knew what Bob Dole achieved late at night in the Senate”. He wrote a number of books, including a memoir of his second world war experiences, One Soldier’s Story (2005). The only former Republican nominee to endorse Donald Trump, he was awarded the Congressional gold medal in 2018 for his service as “soldier, legislator and statesman”. In 2019 Congress made him an honorary colonel. His first marriage ended in divorce in 1972. Three years later he married Elizabeth Hanford, who – as Elizabeth Dole – became a leading political figure in her own right, serving in the administrations of Reagan and Bush Sr, and later as a senator. She survives him, along with his daughter. • Robert Joseph Dole, politician, born 22 July 1923; died 5 December 2021 • Harold Jackson died in June 2021Chris Silverwood expects Ben Stokes will make his Test return at the Gabba this week and the head coach believes the very presence of England’s Headingley hero from 2019 has lifted hopes of winning back the Ashes from Australia this winter. Stokes has impressed Silverwood with a typically full-throttle return to training after ending a four-month break from cricket to attend to his mental health and undergo a second operation on his left index finger. Asked if the all-rounder is now ready to start the series despite a paucity of warm-up cricket, Silverwood replied: “He has definitely not told me any different and, from the noises I’m hearing, I should imagine he’ll be telling me he’s ready. “I think it is massive, really. We felt a lift when his name came back into the hat for being on tour. We love having him around, not just from this cricket point of view. He is lively around the dressing room and a leader in his own right. People listen to him, he has a lot of things to share. And from a cricketing point of view, we’ve seen how devastating he is with bat and ball at times.” Justin Langer, the Australia head coach, admitted over the weekend that he still has nightmares about Stokes, both from the unbeaten 135 that pulled off the miracle run chase in Leeds during the drawn series two years ago and the marathon spell with the ball that preceded it. Silverwood made this point too, saying: “Certainly that knock at Headingley did hurt the Australians and will still be hurting for a while to come. They know what he is capable of and they know he can take anybody down.” For all the hype around Stokes, the length of his lay-off means there are no guarantees of instant results. The 30-year-old’s solitary warm-up innings against the Lions last week did produce a 56-ball 42 before retiring, however, his 10 overs with the ball were reportedly hostile and returned two wickets. It creates a logjam in the England middle order and Silverwood has a headache choosing between Jonny Bairstow’s experience or the coming man in Ollie Pope. He and Joe Root, the England Test captain, are also taking time to decide the makeup of their bowling attack amid concerns over the readiness of the frontline seamers. While Australia have already named their XI, Silverwood stressed they are in the same boat on this front, with Pat Cummins, Mitchell Starc and Josh Hazlewood all featuring in the T20 World Cup and since restricted to middle practice. The T20 global tournament led Silverwood’s late arrival on tour along with England’s multi-format players and was also overshadowed by the racism scandal that erupted at Yorkshire through Azeem Rafiq’s parliamentary evidence. Further allegations at Essex make it two clubs from the head coach’s own career. Asked if he had witnessed racism during his time at either county, Silverwood replied: “I’m not sure I did. I look back on it and obviously some of the people that are involved were friends of mine and I’ve worked closely with. “It is something I have reflected on. I would hope that if I had heard it I would have said something. But I know moving forward if I hear anything I will stand up to it. “It’s sad, isn’t it? Clearly people have been hurt in the past. That hurts us as a cricketing fraternity as well. We have to make this a game for everyone. And I’m not just saying that, I truly believe it. “If I look at the team that we’ve got here, there’s a lot of people that truly believe that as well. We’ve touched on the [diverse England] white-ball dressing room before. “How did we learn so much about each other? Well, we took interest. We learned, we asked questions. We genuinely care about each other. That’s the way forward. We’ve got to help that filter through to everywhere really.”Norway’s Magnus Carlsen is on the verge of retaining his world championship after defeating Russia’s Ian Nepomniachtchi for the second time in three days on Sunday in the eighth game of their €2m (£1.71m) showdown in Dubai, opening a practically insurmountable 5-3 advantage in the best-of-14 match with six contests remaining. A fatal blunder by Nepomniachtchi donated a pawn to Carlsen in the middlegame, gifting the 31-year-old world champion an advantage he leveraged until the Russian challenger resigned after 4hr 6min. The long-time Real Madrid left‑back Míchel Salgado made the honorary first move (1 e4) and Carlsen, playing as white, left it on the board. Nepomniachtchi opened into the solid Petrov Defence (1 ... e5 2 Nf3 Nf6) and the position pointed towards a draw when the knights came off the board immediately after (3 d4 Nxe4 4 Bd3 d5 5 Nxe5 Nd7 6 Nxd7 Bxd7 7 Nd2 Nxd2 8 Bxd2 Bd6). After Carlsen castled (9 O-O), Nepomniachtchi bypassed the natural O-O-O for the rare and provocative 9 ... h5!, a novelty that brought both players out of known theory but left black slightly worse. Carlsen spent more than 40min pondering his response before ultimately offering a trade of queens with the unambitious 10. Qe1+. Nepomniachtchi responded with the ambitious 10 ... Kf8, showing his intent to play for a win. He twice declined queen exchanges that would have driven towards a peaceful result over the next sequence of moves, but a pair of rare inaccuracies on consecutive moves (14 ... Rh6 and 15 ... c6) presented Carlsen with the opportunity to press for a win with little risk. Four minutes after Nepomniachtchi underscored his winning intent with 20 c4 followed by a pawn exchange that did nothing to improve black’s position, the challenger made a fatal blunder with 21 ... b5. “I suspected it was a mistake,” Carlsen said. “I thought it was just a blunder. But I had plenty of time so I thought I will double-check to see what he was intending. It turned out it was nothing.” Nepomniachtchi said: “After (21 ... b5), probably I didn’t defend in the best way. It becomes truly unpleasant and frankly speaking it’s hard to defend after such a blunder.” After Carlsen found the winning 22 Qa3+, the challenger found himself in survival mode. A pure queen endgame loomed after the bishops and rooks came off (26 Bxe6 Rxe6 27 Rxe6 fxe6) with the Norwegian ruthlessly denying his opponent any chances for counterplay in the endgame. Both players will look forward to Monday’s rest day before the competition resumes on Tuesday with Nepomniachtchi playing as white in game nine. “It was pretty cagey at the start [of the match],” Carlsen said. “Obviously a win changes the dynamic of the match. I don’t think I would have won this game if I hadn’t won the first one.”A satisfying sense of symmetry surrounded a Women’s FA Cup final which, in some ways, seemed almost as much about the past as a reassuringly vibrant present. One hundred years to the day since the Football Association banned women from playing football on grounds belonging to affiliated men’s clubs on the basis that the game was “quite unsuitable for females”, Chelsea – and Fran Kirby and Sam Kerr in particular – thoroughly undid Arsenal in a final postponed from last season. No prizes for guessing that Covid‑19 proved responsible for that delay; or avoiding the parallels with 1921 when the world was still recovering from the ravages of the Spanish flu pandemic of 1918-20. A century on, Covid’s Omicron variant may be worrying the scientists but a healthy attendance of almost 41,000 on a wet, bitterly cold December afternoon offered life-affirming evidence of women’s football’s re-emergence from the ghostly depression of games staged behind closed doors. The resumption of human connectivity even extended to the pre‑match pitch formalities where Lesley Lloyd, who 50 years ago captained Southampton to a 4-1 victory against Stewarton Thistle in the inaugural Women’s FA Cup final, was introduced to the players from both sides. Lloyd’s Southampton were forced to play matches on a muddy common until the FA finally lifted the ban in 1970 and her involvement on Sunday served as another striking slice of symmetry across 90 minutes which certainly did not mirror Arsenal’s 3-2 win against Chelsea at the start of the Women’s Super League season in September. Emma Hayes’s side have not lost since and –at the end of a final in which her team denied Jonas Eidevall’s team a single first-half shot on target – that run shows few signs of ending. Arsenal remain one point ahead of their west London rivals at the top of the WSL but, on this evidence, it will not stay that way for too much longer. Admittedly only a single goal from the, once again, outstanding Kirby separated the teams at the interval but by then Kerr had missed a hat‑trick of chances and been denied a plausible-looking penalty after her upending by Jen Beattie. Eidevall must have been equally alarmed by the way in which his key midfielder, Kim Little, and principal striker Vivianne Miedema were utterly marginalised. After struggling to get started, his chastened side never quite managed to second‑guess Hayes’s choreography. When Kerr finally rediscovered her shooting boots and, having met Kirby’s through pass, directed Chelsea’s second goal through the legs of Lotte Wubben‑Moy and on beyond Manuela Zinsberger, the game seemed virtually done and dusted. If Kirby represented a very big reason for that – and much of her industry and stunning movement off the ball proved as vital as her invariably exquisite input on it – this was a wonderful collective performance by a team offered invaluable defensive stability by their imperious captain Magdalena Eriksson. Having begun by hassling and harrying Eidevall’s back four into all sorts of unaccustomed errors and winning the majority of second balls, Hayes’s players, in a fluid 3-4-3 configuration, responded to Arsenal’s slight, late first-half improvement by pressing their opponents even harder. It flummoxed their London rivals horribly, prompting a litany of little mistakes on the part of a Beattie/Wubben-Moy central defensive axis already seriously discomfited by not only the rapidity with which Kerr and Kirby changed pace but the excellence of Erin Cuthbert’s midfield manoeuvres. Afterwards Hayes acknowledged her front two – dubbed “Kerrby” by opponents – had been “out of this world” and said it was “the best game” she had seen Kirby play in a Chelsea shirt. Given the England playmaker’s glorious consistency in recent months that ranked as quite some compliment. Yet even when Kirby hobbled off nursing an injury there was no respite for Eidevall. On came Pernille Harder to further terrorise his backline and it was not long before Kerr chipped Zinsberger to complete the scoring. That audacious dipping finish created yet more symmetry on an afternoon when the numeral three seemed charmed for Chelsea. The history books will record that Kirby’s third-minute opener in this 3-0 triumph set Hayes’s side on course for their third FA Cup victory and the completion of a 2020-21 domestic treble. “I think we deserved it,” Kerr said, with a touch of understatement. “I think we’re the best team in England.” Or as Hayes put it: “We painted Wembley blue.” Along the way, Chelsea’s deft brushstrokes reminded Lloyd and co precisely why their long struggles for recognition were so worthwhile. “Today was an amazing day for women’s football,” Kirby said. “It was about not forgetting the trailblazers who helped get us here.”The date ringed in red in Westminster is 18 December – not the date for Christmas parties but the time by which people should start to know how different their festive plans may look. For this government it is quite an inauspicious date, just a day before soaring cases forced Boris Johnson to finally put the brakes on Christmas mixing plans last year and tell most families they would be spending celebrations apart. And it is also the day Downing Street is said by insiders to have hosted a staff party while the country was under strict restrictions on social contact. But there is a difference in the personnel around the table making the call this year: Steve Barclay and Sajid Javid have replaced Michael Gove and Matt Hancock, who were the key voices for caution last December. Gove was a particular champion of vaccination certification and more sceptical of calls for returns to the office, while Hancock spoke forcefully about the pressures the NHS could experience. All of those contributions appear absent from the debate now. Johnson and Javid are firm believers that a pact was made with the public that the vaccine was the way out of the pandemic – so the government has directed its firepower into turbocharging the booster vaccine campaign. Javid will also direct the NHS to offer new antiviral treatment to the most vulnerable to take at home if they have a positive diagnosis, rather than wait to be admitted to hospital with the virus. One adviser for the government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) described that tactic this week as “all the eggs in one basket”, with hopes pinned almost entirely on scientific intervention to halt the spread of the variant rather than human behaviour. But this time there is also a significant difference in the public mood. There is public support for the measures the government has introduced so far – a tight regime at the border and also mask-wearing in shops. But most adults in England are unwilling to return to full lockdown rules, according to the latest polling from YouGov, which found 68% were against closing pubs and 56% were not in favour of the return of limited numbers at gatherings. On those issues, the public has not moved significantly since the new variant’s discovery, suggesting there is a degree of fatigue about more bad Covid news. Ministers pledged measures introduced to halt the spread of the Omicron variant would be reviewed three weeks from when new mask-wearing and testing requirements were introduced. In part, that was to placate Conservative MPs who bristled at the return of face coverings, and Johnson will need to return to parliament before the Christmas recess to ask for a renewed mandate on them or the rules will expire on 20 December. It will mean ministers must make that final call the previous weekend. In practice, No 10 could introduce new rules on social distancing or home working earlier than the official review date. In between, there are plenty of social events planned across the country, including in Westminster. For now, the deputy prime minister, Dominic Raab, has said people can attend their office party or share a mince pie with older relatives. But tellingly, he said his own staff would not be holding a party themselves but would, instead, get together in small teams.Dominic Raab has become the first cabinet minister to concede that a “formal party” in Downing Street last December would have been contrary to Covid-19 guidance, saying it would have been “the wrong thing to do”. It came as MPs and campaigners, including a woman whose mother died of Covid-19 on the day when staff are alleged to have held a drinks party at No 10, called for the Covid inquiry to investigate the effect that politicians breaking rules has had on the erosion of public trust in politics and compliance with pandemic restrictions. Anneliese Dodds, the Labour party’s chair, said it was the first admission that a party inside No 10 would have been, in itself, against the rules. “We have it in black and white from the prime minister’s right-hand man: a formal party at Downing Street would have been both wrong and against Covid rules,” she said. “These comments from his deputy pile the pressure on Boris Johnson to come clean about what happened last Christmas and publish the full facts about the party at No 10. There cannot be one rule for senior Conservatives and another rule for everyone else.” Raab, the deputy prime minister, said Johnson had assured him that no rules had been broken over the alleged gathering last year, despite reports from various sources in several newspapers. “Let’s just be clear what we’re talking about here, something that took place a year ago, unsubstantiated anonymous claims being made,” Raab said on Sunday. “It’s impossible to answer the charge on that basis, only that we are clear the rules were being followed. If there is a breach of the rules, there is a breach of the rules, but I don’t know the full facts because I wasn’t there.” Asked if, as a lawyer, he agreed it would have been a breach of the rules to have held a gathering, Raab said: “Of course, if there was a formal party held … that is something that is clearly contrary to the guidance. “If anyone held a party contrary to the rules, of course that is the wrong thing to do.” “If something unsubstantiated from anonymous sources actually materialised, then of course it would be wrong,” he added. Two Labour MPs have reported the alleged gathering at No 10 to the Metropolitan police. However, Raab, who is also the justice secretary, said the police “don’t normally look back and investigate things that have taken place a year ago” – a comment that drew some incredulity from the opposition. Jackie Green, whose 86-year-old mother, Beryl, died of Covid in hospital on the night of 18 December, when a party is alleged to have been held, said she was shaken by Raab’s comments. “The claims that there is any distinction between a formal or informal party or that the guidance was caveated is total nonsense,” she said. “It was crystal clear. As far as I am concerned, by abiding by those rules, the consequence was my mum died alone and frightened – and if I had been with her, I might have been able to alleviate some of that fear.” The government is due to announce the chair of its Covid-19 inquiry within the next fortnight. Green said she hoped the inquiry would look into rule-breaking by politicians in power. “It was shameful how Dominic Raab was trying to evade the questions,” she said. Daisy Cooper, the deputy leader of the Liberal Democrats, said the party would write to the inquiry chair to urge them to investigate the truth about what happened in Downing Street. “Lessons must be learned, and there is no doubt the endless list of ministers breaking rules has destroyed the public’s trust in Covid rules which keep us all safe,” she said. Raab earlier told Sky News’s Trevor Phillips on Sunday programme that the rules for Christmas parties this year were “very clear”. He said: “People can go in and have Christmas parties. “Of course, employers will want to think common sense about how they do that. We won’t be having a Ministry of Justice-wide Christmas party this year. We will be having appropriate drinks at a smaller scale. “The government wants people to be able to enjoy Christmas this year. People should feel free to go and enjoy those celebrations, and every employer will think about the right way to do it and I’m the same as everybody else.”New managers get the benefit of the doubt. Even language breaks their way. A 1-0 win against Crystal Palace that might have been described as streaky under Ole Gunnar Solskjær becomes a hard-fought three points under Ralf Rangnick. While Solskjær showed “indecision” in delaying his substitutions, here Rangnick confidently “bided his time”. A fortnight ago, this was a performance that would have “papered over the cracks”. Now, it is a “platform to build on”. And so for all the temptation to read the early runes, to derive immutable learnings from these 90 minutes against limited opposition, it’s probably worth pointing out at the outset that none of this really means anything yet. It was possible, if you were that way inclined, to glimpse in this game the rebirth of United as an elite pressing team, the redemption of Fred, the end of the road for Aaron Wan-Bissaka and Donny van de Beek. In reality it was three points and a fresh start, and how painfully United were in need of both. Fred’s winning goal, a curling shot with 13 minutes to go, felt symbolically like the turning of a page, a slate being wiped clean. And yet the need for United to go to the market in search of a central midfielder has not waned. A clean sheet for David de Gea felt like a welcome balm after the knockabout chaos of the 3-2 win over Arsenal on Thursday night. And yet the need for United to tighten up their defensive structures and perhaps reinforce at centre-half remains as pressing as ever. What has changed is the outlook. We can talk about Rangnick’s tactics and his technical approach and his ideas on the game, but you can’t tell me that the same players who looked so bereft and disinterested towards the end of the Solskjær era have been coached into competence in the space of one training session. Instinctively, and in its simplest form, most footballers already know how to press. It’s just that under Solskjær, they rarely felt like they had to. Now the terms of engagement have shifted, it turns out that United’s players could run after all. For a time, anyway. If the first half hour showed United at their effervescent best, hounding and harrying and getting their shots away, then it felt like they spent the next 45 minutes paying for their early exertions. The energy levels sagged, Palace began to get a grip of the midfield, and a team unchanged from Thursday night began to look a little short of ideas. This was surely a game management issue – picking your moments, coordinating your efforts, knowing when to charge and when not to charge – and you imagine Rangnick will be working on this at length. The result was a slightly uneven performance: 11 shots in the first 33 minutes and just five over the rests of the game, a grand total of four completed passes into the Palace penalty area in the second half. After beginning the game in full hero mode, Cristiano Ronaldo faded a touch as the game progressed. United deserved the win on the strength of their first‑half play but had Jordan Ayew not missed from three yards barely a minute before Fred’s goal, they might easily have lost. “Football is about minimising the coincidence factor and having control and gaining control,” Rangnick had said in advance of this game, and here perhaps was a reminder that United are still some way short of that goal. Controlling the game for long periods still seems beyond them. But there were encouraging performances from Diogo Dalot and Alex Telles in the full-back positions, perhaps the biggest immediate point of difference on a tactical level. Telles won the ball back more often than any player on the pitch, and while Luke Shaw will probably return when he is fit, no such comfort is available to Wan-Bissaka, who now appears to have been usurped by the more adventurous Dalot. As for Fred, it was a happy afternoon’s work that could well be the start of something. United’s lack of leadership and direction in that area of the pitch has frequently left him overburdened, forced to create and destroy and run and tackle and press and sit all at once. A more bespoke role – giving him the cover to break up play and join attacks – would probably suit him. But again, this is a project that needs time. And in a way, this is the whole point: we still don’t really know how this is going to work, or if it will work at all. After all, Rangnick’s career tells us that he doesn’t indulge stars, he makes them. What happens when the high priest of pressing meets a world-class striker who won’t press? What happens when the ultimate long-term project builder takes a short-term job at a club and in a league fixated on snap judgments? Either way, it should be worth finding out. The fixture calendar has been kind to United: there are three months until they play Manchester City in March, and the hardest league game in that period is probably West Ham at home. And so one of the most calamitous episodes in the history of the club has ended with them three points off the Champions League places with one of the world’s leading coaching minds at the helm. If this is failure, most clubs would crave a bit of it.Musicals, to twist an old Kern and Hammerstein title, are in the air. In London there are new productions of Cabaret, Moulin Rouge and Hex (a retelling of Sleeping Beauty at the National), and in the next month – if the pandemic does not force a delay, Spring Awakening at the Almeida. The Drifters Girl (starring Beverley Knight) has just opened, as has Get Up, Stand Up! (about Bob Marley); Andrew Lloyd Webber’s over-the-top (and inside-out) Cinderella got a belated de facto opening gala at the end of November. Steven Spielberg’s film remake of West Side Story arrives on 10 December. The recent death of Stephen Sondheim produced an outpouring of song and memory. Perhaps this has something to do with needing an antidote. Anything Goes, a frothy romp set on an ocean liner with music and lyrics by Cole Porter, is due to return next summer after a run that enjoyed ecstatic word-of-mouth reviews stressing its joyousness. There is also, of course, the theatre sector’s urgent need of income after months of closure, and musicals – of which there are 30 now playing in the West End, back up to pre-pandemic numbers – are reliable crowd-pleasers. But the appeal of musical theatre is far larger than that. Yes, musicals can be frothy, but they can also be very dark. Cabaret is, behind the catchy music, about nazism, antisemitism and abortion; Carousel deals with domestic violence and Oliver! with poverty, criminality, domestic violence (again) and grief. The subject matter can be dry – 18th-century American economic theory, which in Lin-Manuel Miranda’s Hamilton becomes anything but – or funny. The best shows mine the tension between music and subject matter; a recent close reading by the biographer David Benedict of Every Day a Little Death, Sondheim’s potent sketch of married life from A Little Night Music, revealed just how full of emotional complexity and nuance a show tune can be. Musicals demand the gamut of performance skills – singing, dancing, acting, comic timing; a successful production must pull all those things off. Opera, which often does too, is generally afforded more cultural respect, but musical theatre is emotionally, musically and culturally accessible in a way that opera, which in Britain at least arrives with formidable barriers of class and education, sometimes isn’t (although it’s true that some West End musicals are beginning to rival and even outstrip opera in ticket prices). Musical theatre is serious about silliness. And having dispensed with realism in order to sing words rather than say them, the form allows for huge emotions, hugely expressed. Because it is a rare musical theatre number that cannot be hummed – or belted – by anyone, it gives a kind of permission; a language of release. Problems like Maria might never be solved, but musicals are an important source of joy.When the elements turn hostile, we are more than ever dependent on the roofs over our heads. So evocative is this scenario, of humans walled up against the cold, that there is talk of a film capturing the experience of the group snowed in for three days at a Yorkshire pub during Storm Arwen. But for those without a safe place to shelter, extreme weather is an ordeal to be endured. Last week, the Liverpool Echo reported on complaints about a local McDonald’s that refused to sell hot food to a woman who wanted it for a homeless man she met outside in pouring rain. Starting in March last year, the Everyone In scheme saw 37,000 rough sleepers offered emergency accommodation, much of it in hotels. But since the initial instruction to councils to take people off the streets, the guidance has been diluted. The already acutely vulnerable group who lack recourse to public funds, due to their immigration status, is set to grow as a result of the government’s borders bill. And there is disagreement about the figures, with the number seeking support last year far greater than would have been indicated by council rough sleeping figures. What is beyond dispute is that those sleeping rough on any given night (most do not consistently sleep outdoors) are the tip of a much larger iceberg. The problem of homelessness extends beyond rough sleepers, most of whom are men, and many of whom have mental health problems (in London, the most recent survey found rough sleepers to be 82% male and 10% aged 25 or under). Around 330,000 households received support from councils in England, Wales and Scotland in 2019-20 on the grounds that they lacked housing. Many of these families are trapped in unsuitable temporary accommodation such as bed and breakfasts. Cuts to universal credit and other benefits, and the disastrous failure to regulate the private rental sector properly, exacerbate the kinds of chronic insecurity that can lead to rough sleeping; for example, if a family breaks down. While it is often assumed that people seen on the streets have nowhere to sleep, in some cases it is during the day that people have nowhere to go – before shelters open in the evenings. Meanwhile, the so-called hidden homeless get by through sofa-surfing or joining already crowded households. In London, Manchester and elsewhere, some good work was done by councils and charities, which took rough sleepers into hotels during the pandemic, enabling some to move on to more secure situations. But with the eviction ban rescinded, and a backlog of arrears, there is a real risk that the ranks of the housing insecure will quickly swell. An underlying problem is the government’s commitment to rising property prices, which serves the interests of homeowners, developers and speculators, but works against people who don’t own their homes and can’t access secure and affordable rented ones. New research from the Resolution Foundation shows that the proportion of 25- to 34-year-olds who are homeowners has fallen from 51% in 1989 to 28% in 2019. One charity, Centrepoint, has predicted that the rate of homelessness among under-25s in England could soon reach a record high. Cuts over the past decade to the local services relied on by rough sleepers, and others in the most vulnerable categories, have made it harder to access support. The approach taken during the pandemic was a marked improvement. The number of recorded deaths of homeless people in England and Wales, for example, fell from 778 in 2019 to 688 in 2020 (though experts warned that this could be an underestimate). But the people at the sharp, sometimes brutal end of Britain’s housing crisis need more than a temporary bed – and some redistribution of the benefits accrued from rising property values must be part of any meaningful “levelling up”. In the meantime, and during the winter, the voluntary sector has a strong record in supporting homeless people and needs public support.Leicester will turn their attentions to Europe buoyed by claiming the scalp of the Premiership champions to continue their 100% winning start to the season and further establish themselves as England’s leading lights at present. It was not particularly pretty but defensive reliance and a cool head from their ringmaster George Ford were enough to edge past Harlequins and claim a ninth consecutive win – a run of form which will have their continental rivals taking note. It was Ford’s first outing since his move to Sale next season was announced and though he has been in commanding form, perhaps that further sharpened the senses. For as Harlequins threatened one of their trademark comebacks after a stunning individual try from Louis Lynagh, it was Ford’s authority that kept the Tigers on top. He finished with 11 points and perhaps proved a point against those suggesting he ought to have shown more loyalty to his current employers. Maybe Eddie Jones too, given Ford outplayed his opposite number Marcus Smith. “My sole focus is for this club, I’ve been here a long time, I love it here and I’ll do everything I can for the rest of the year,” said Ford. “The decision is made but I’m 100% focused and committed to Leicester and loving it here and that will carry on being the same.” Lynagh’s try on 63 minutes had brought Harlequins back to within two points and set up a nervous finish but Smith - who had earlier spent 10 minutes in the sin-bin - missed the conversion and Harlequins were left to rue another narrow defeat, having lost by three points to London Irish last time out. They are missing a bit of spark at the moment but their defensive showing at a sold-out Welford Road suggests they will be in the mix again at the end of the season. On paper this was a mouth-watering clash full of individual head-to-heads with an international narrative. Ford shone brighter than Smith, Joe Marler and Ellis Genge went toe-to-toe throughout and Freddie Steward again impressed on his 21st birthday but perhaps the most eye-catching performance came from England’s evergreen scrum-half Ben Youngs. He was the most dangerous back on show and it was his excellent grubber kick which teed up Harry Potter for Leicester’s try. It was far from a classic, however - defences were on top and the rain did not help - and in many ways it echoed Exeter’s narrow victory over Saracens 24 hours previously. In the early rounds of the season maybe running rugby was the order of the day but the December weather will always be a leveller and ultimately Leicester coped the better. As a result they travel to Bordeaux for their Champions Cup opener on Saturday having opened up a nine-point gap at the top of the Premiership. Ford and Smith notched two penalties apiece inside the first half-hour before the latter was sent to the sin-bin for mindlessly diving through a ruck and knocking the ball from Youngs’s hands. Ford kicked the resulting penalty but the Leicester No 8, Jasper Wiese, was also shown a yellow card for a no-arms tackle soon after and Harlequins finished the half the stronger. Indeed, they really ought to have scored the opening try when Huw Jones went for the line himself rather than using the two-man overlap outside him. It was a missed opportunity that summed up Harlequins’ day and Leicester were 10 points to the good early in the second half when Youngs’s delightful grubber put Potter’s try on a plate. Another Smith penalty brought Harlequins back to within touching distance before Lynagh’s moment of magic further cut the deficit - the winger racing on to his own kick down the right in the tightest of spaces. Harlequins had their chances, notably fluffing a lineout near halfway with the clock in the red, but they had been unable to build towards a grandstand finish with Ford’s spiral bombs wreaking havoc in the rain. “We missed our opportunities and they found a way to get the job done,” said the Harlequins coach, Tabai Matson. “It’s disappointing but you’ve got to be at your best to win here.”Banksy has offered to raise millions of pounds towards buying Reading prison, where Oscar Wilde was once held, so that it can be turned into an arts centre. The street artist has promised to match the jail’s £10m asking price by selling the stencil he used to paint on the Grade II-listed building in March, a move campaigners hope will prevent it from being sold to housing developers. Banksy’s contribution, together with Reading borough council’s, would bring the offer for the former jail to an estimated £12.6m. The Bristol-based artist said Wilde was “the patron saint of smashing two contrasting ideas together to create magic,” adding: “Converting the place that destroyed him into a refuge for art feels so perfect we have to do it.” Banksy’s mural depicted a figure, considered to be the writer, abseiling from the perimeter wall from bedsheets with a typewriter. The stencil went on display at Bristol Museum and Art Gallery earlier this month as part of an exhibition by the artist Grayson Perry for his Channel 4 series Grayson’s Art Club. The actors Dame Judi Dench, Sir Kenneth Branagh, Kate Winslet and Natalie Dormer are among the stars who have lent their support to the campaign to convert the jail into a cultural centre. Wilde was held at the prison between 1895 to 1897 after being convicted of gross indecency when his affair with Lord Alfred Douglas was exposed. While incarcerated, he wrote De Profundis, his letter to his former lover and, after his release, recounted his time there in The Ballad of Reading Gaol. The prison was built on the site of the medieval Reading abbey, a monastery founded by Henry I. Henry is believed to have been buried under the altar, now thought to be under the prison car park or walls. Matt Rodda, Labour MP for Reading East, said the concept of using the prison to house arts had been proved by past exhibitions, adding that he planned to raise an urgent question in parliament this week to put ministers “on the spot” with the offer. “There are these amazing layers of history – there’s the literary history and the LGBT community history, and the link to Oscar Wilde,” he said. “But there’s also some local and national Victorian social history and there’s the link to the royal family all in one building and it’s so well connected to the rest of country. “For so many reasons it’s absolutely right this building is preserved and used in a constructive way rather that just being gutted and turned into flats or some other thing.” Toby Davies, the artistic director for Rabble theatre in Reading, said it would be criminal for the Ministry of Justice to turn down the artist’s offer. Davies told the BBC: “Banksy is offering an incredible amount of money, which will go directly to the MoJ for the public benefit. Banksy’s offer is phenomenal and if the MoJ turn that down then I consider that a criminal act.” Jason Brock, the council’s leader, welcomed the attention Banksy’s interest in Reading prison had placed on the sale. “The council has had only informal approaches from representatives of Banksy to date, but no detailed discussions,” said Brock. “Our bid remains firmly on the table and has widespread support – both from within the community here in Reading and from the wider arts, heritage and cultural community – all of whom recognise the prison’s huge historical and cultural value.”As the supreme court weighs the future of abortion access in America, Republicans on Sunday expressed confidence that the landmark 1973 Roe v Wade decision would soon be overturned, paving the way for a raft of anti-abortion legislation around the country next year. On Wednesday, the supreme court heard arguments over a Mississippi law that bans abortions after 15 weeks of pregnancy. Observers suggested that the conservative supermajority on the court appeared poised to uphold the law and potentially go further by overturning Roe, which protects a woman’s right to choose. A decision is not expected until June next year. Mississippi’s governor, Tate Reeves, told CNN’s State of the Union he had “some reason for optimism” after this week’s arguments. He also confirmed that if the landmark ruling was overturned entirely, Mississippi would enforce a ban on almost all abortions in the state under a so-called “trigger law”. “That is a yes,” Reeves said when asked if he would enforce the “snap-back” legislation. “Because if you believe as I believe very strongly that that innocent, unborn child in the mother’s womb is in fact a child, the most important word when we talk about unborn children is not unborn, but it’s children.” The position is not representative of the majority of Americans. According to recent polling, seven in 10 are opposed to overturning Roe v Wade while 59% believe abortion should be legal in all or most circumstances. Nonetheless, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a global research and policy organisation “committed to advancing sexual and reproductive health and rights”, 21 US states are certain to attempt some form of ban on abortion should Roe be overturned, using laws already on the books. Reeves caveated his answer by cautioning that Mississippi’s response to the forthcoming supreme court ruling would be “dependent upon how the court rules and exactly what those opinions allow us to do”. He also noted that any decision would not lead to a national ban but could permit states to make their own determinations. Mike Braun, a Republican senator for Indiana, echoed a number of Reeves’ arguments. He told NBC’s Meet the Press he wanted “abortions to be eliminated from the landscape” but would not be drawn into specifics regarding potential laws in his state. Indiana has enacted 55 abortion restrictions and bans in the past decade, according to the Guttmacher Institute, but does not have a “trigger law” or equivalent on the books. It is listed by the institute as one of five states without these laws that are still likely to move towards almost total bans should Roe be overturned. “When it comes to things like abortion, I think it’s clear it’s time to turn it back to the states,” Braun told NBC. Since former president Donald Trump installed three conservative justices to the supreme court in just four years, both sides of the fight over abortion rights have been preparing for a legal showdown. According to the Associated Press, campaign finance data reveals that pro-abortion-access groups donated $8m in 2018 and more than $10m in 2020. Those numbers outpace the public contributions of anti-abortion groups, which donated $2.6m in 2018 and $6.3m in 2020, according to data. But the complexity of the network of non-profits and “dark money” funds makes it difficult to produce a full accounting of the money flows.That’s it, it’s over. I’ll leave you with Pete Lansley’s report from a noisy Villa Park. Thanks for your company and emails - goodnight! Post-match interviews Ezri Konsa “I didn’t want to claim the first goal – I felt sorry for Emi! It was a tough game, we know how good Leicester are, but we kept our shape and it was hard for them to break them down. In the second half we were very compact. We’ve got a new set-piece coach, Austin; he’s brilliant and I’ve got to shout him out for my goals.” Jacob Ramsey “I haven’t seen the disallowed goal back. At the time I thought it was a bit harsh to disallow it, but it is what it is. The new manager has given us a boost. Training has been intense, the standard’s gone up, and we’ve won three games out of four so it’s looking good.” That’s three wins out of four for Gerrard, who has lifted Villa from 16th to 10th in the table. Next up: Liverpool away. Peep peep! Villa move above Leicester after a rousing comeback. Ezri Konsa scored both goals, but the story of the game might be Steven Gerrard’s half-time teamtalk. Villa were level but had been outplayed by an impressive Leicester. In the second half, they overwhelmed Leicester with an intense, purposeful performance that was very much in Gerrard’s image. 90+2 min The corner is curled towards Schmeichel, who is beaten in the air emphatically by Mings. Schmeichel stays up, and then goes down under challenge from Mings and Young moments later. There was a slight push in the back from Young, a risky thing to do, but it wasn’t enough for a penalty. 90+2 min Perez’s header deflects behind for a corner, and Kasper Schmeichel is coming up... 90+1 min Four minutes of added time. 90 min Maddison is booked for a cynical trip on Chukwuemeka. 88 min Lots of Leicester pressure now, with a couple of corners in quick succession. The second, taken by Maddison, comes to nothing when Michael Oliver penalises one of the Leicester players for a foul off the ball. 87 min Thomas’ lobbed cross is headed behind by Mings in the six-yard box, with Vardy waiting behind him to equalise. 86 min Another change for Leicester - Dewsbury-Hall off, Kelechi Iheanacho on. 84 min Maddison’s corner is only half cleared and then put back in the area by Thomas. A loose clearance goes straight to Dewsbury-Hill, who slices over from the edge of the area. 83 min Axel Tuanzebe comes on for Villa in place of Jacob Ramsey. That probably means a switch to a back five. 80 min Cash drives wide from the right side of the area. Not a great effort, though in his defence he didn’t have much support. 78 min Changes galore - Leicester bring on Ayoze Perez for Daka, Villa introduce Morgan Sanson and Carney Chukwuemeka for Buendia and Douglas Luiz. 77 min Ashley Young goes head to head with Dewsbury-Hall. If he’s accusing Dewsbury-Hill of diving then he’s got some front. Douglas Luiz did actually stand on Dewsbury-Hill’s foot, and I think last season that would have been a penalty. This season, rightly I’d say, the contact needs to be a bit firmer for a foul to be given. 75 min Leicester fire the corner to Dewsbury-Hall on the edge of the area. He goes over after a challenge from Douglas Luiz, but play continues and Villa break. I think it was a dive. 75 min: Great save by Martinez! Castagne’s cross takes a deflection and kicks up at Barnes, who improvises superbly to loop a header towards goal. Martinez springs spectacularly to his right to tip it over the bar. That’s a marvellous piece of goalkeeping. 72 min “You said, ‘I knew I should have read the laws of the game instead of getting drunk last night,’” says Ian Copestake. “This is a lyric from an Arctic Monkeys song, yes?” Arf, very good. It’s from their concept album, Stockley Park. 71 min: Ramsey misses a great chance! Villa almost seal it on the break. McGinn plays another superb through ball, this time to Ramsey, who spoons it over the bar from 15 yards. 71 min Villa are playing mainly on the break now, which is understandable but risky against a team who are as good in possession as Leicester. 67 min: Good save from Schmeichel! Villa are opening Leicester up at will. Watkins cuts inside from the left and plays a good square pass to McGinn. He waits for Watkins to make an angled run off the ball, then puts him through on goal with a smart pass. Watkins takes the shot on the run and Schmeichel, perfectly positioned, saves with his legs. In all but his finishing, Watkins has been quite outstanding today. 65 min Jamie Vardy replaces the disappointing Ademola Lookman. Not sure what that means tactically, probably Daka moving to the right. 64 min: So close from Maddison! For the first time in the half, Leicester are enjoying some extended possession. Maddison shifts the ball away from McGinn in the D and cracks a lovely left-footed shot that flashes just wide. Martinez wasn’t saving that. 61 min Young’s cross eventually comes to Cash, whose shot is blocked desperately by somebody in the six-yard box. Villa have been sensational since half-time, playing with much greater purpose and intensity. 59 min “I distinctly remember Derby being denied a win, and Malcolm Christie a hat trick, against Man Utd in 2002 due to one hand on the ball counting as ‘under control’,” says Tom Hopkins. “I think there are two lessons to take from this: Sometimes the rules are poor, not VAR. It’s important not to hang on to these small injustices with so much else going on in the world.” I’ve probably misremembered this, as it’s not a season I dwell on, but I thought the whole point with Christie’s goal was that at the time you needed to have two hands on the ball for it to be a foul, and the debate/row was about whether Barthez had one or two hands on it. 58 min Watkins is penalised for a foul on the last man Evans. He plays on and scores, just in case VAR decides to intervene, but there’s no such luck. “You’re not fit to referee,” chant the Villa fans. For what it’s worth I thought was a foul. 55 min Nakamba is booked for a foul on Maddison. McGinn curls the ensuing corner beyond the far post, where Konsa gets above Soyuncu and plants a downward header that beats Schmeichel at the near post. Schmeichel tried to save with his feet but could only shin it into the net. It’s Konsa’s second of the game - the first was given to him in the end - and yet another that Leicester have conceded from a set piece. 53 min: Great block by Thomas! It’s all Villa at the moment. Watkins plays a one-two with Ramsey, surges into the area and hits a low shot that is crucially blocked by Thomas. In hindsight Watkins should have played in Cash to his right. Not that it matters now... 51 min “Hello Rob,” says Stephen Carr. “We can argue the whys, wherefors and “do you mind if we don’ts” about that Villa non goal ad infinitum but what’s pretty clear is that in awarding the goal, Michael Oliver did not make a clear and obvious error.” You say that, but the wording of the law is ambiguous. Does the exception refer to both preceding clauses or just the second one? If it’s the latter, it was a clear and obvious error. But I’m honestly not sure, and the more I gawp at it the more confused I get. 50 min Young shoots well wide from the left of the area. It’s been a lively start to the second half from Villa. 49 min Buendia flips the ball out to Cash, whose cross-shot flies through the six-yard box and out for a goalkick. Buendia almost reached it after a late run into the area, but Evans got between him and the ball. 48 min Cash clips a flat cross towards Ramsey, whose flying volley hits Evans on the back. I think it was going over anyway. 46 min Mings’ clearance hits Lookman and rebounds to Daka, who plays a clever reverse pass back towards Lookman in the area. His first touch is slightly heavy and that allows Nakamba to intercept. 46 min Peep peep! Villa begin the second half. “Ref here,” says Paul Pooley. “By rule, one hand is control”. I knew I should have read the laws of the game instead of getting drunk last night. It looks like this is the key bit, and it’s as clear as mud. A goalkeeper is considered to be in control of the ball with the hand(s) when: the ball is between the hands or between the hand and any surface (e.g. ground, own body) or by touching it with any part of the hands or arms, except if the ball rebounds from the goalkeeper or the goalkeeper has made a save The ball had rebounded from the keeper, so that means he isn’t necessarily in control, doesn’t it? Or does it? Half-time entertainment This is terrific. The issue is whether Schmeichel had the ball under control. He was on the floor, feeling for it after originally palming it away with his other hand. You can argue it either way; I’m not sure it was a clear and obvious error by Michael Oliver. The half-time whistle leads to a chorus of boos from the home fans. Villa were outplayed for much of the half but would be going in 2-1 up but for an intervention from Stockley Park’s finest. It’s been disallowed for a foul by Ramsey. Schmeichel had one hand on the ball, his left, and Ramsey kicked under his hand to send the ball into the net. Anyway, the goal is disallowed. VAR check! Mike Oliver is looking at the monitor for a possible foul by Ramsey on Schmeichel. I don’t think it was. Douglas Luiz, on the left, swept a hopeful cross beyond the far post. Cash headed it back into the six-yard box, where Schmeichel dived to his right in an attempt to palm the ball away. All he could do was drop it at the feet of Ramsey, who hammered it gleefully into the net. Jacob Ramsey gives Villa the lead! 42 min McGinn’s deep cross is headed back across goal by Watkins and booted clear by Evans. 40 min: Chance for Leicester! Evans’ lofted free-kick is headed across goal by Daka towards Maddison. He lets it run across his body, losing Cash in the process, but then hits a left-footed shot too close to Martinez. That was a fairly good chance. 39 min Thomas shoots over from the edge of the area after being teed up by Barnes. A half chance at best. 38 min Barnes wins the ball off Cash on the left side of the area and lifts a cross that is headed away by Konsa. Cash lunged in at Barnes, who stayed on his feet rather than look for a penalty. There has been quite a lot of desperate Villa defending in this half, most of it effective. 37 min Thomas flashes a superb ball across the six-yard box, with no Leicester players in there. Leicester have been really good going forward and probably deserve to be in front. 36 min Cash makes a vital tackle on Barnes, who had run through Konsa’s challenge on the edge of the area. 35 min A bit of a quiet spell. You’re welcome. 31 min This is great to watch. Leicester look so much better with Barnes and Maddison in the team and in form. 30 min After a bit of a scramble in the Villa area, Maddison’s shot is kicked away by Cash in the six-yard box. I think that would have beaten Martinez. 27 min: Good save from Schmeichel Douglas Luiz fires a pass into Ramsey, who takes it classily on the half turn and releases Cash on his outside. He takes a touch and drives a low shot that is kicked behind by Schmeichel. 26 min Jonny Evans has a problem, I think with his groin. This is a worry for Leicester, who have had so many injuries in the last 15 months. 22 min: Good chance for Dewsbury-Hall! Barnes turns Cash inside out and finds Thomas, whose cross is headed wide from eight yards by the stooping Dewsbury-Hall. If he had his time again I think he’d take that on the volley with his left foot rather than going with his head. 22 min This is a really entertaining game. Both teams, Leicester especially, look so confident going forward. 21 min Yep, the ball just brushed the studs of Konsa’s outstretched boot. 20 min The more I see it, I think that’s Konsa’s goal. 19 min Leicester thought Konsa was offside and got a touch on the ball. I think he did get a touch, so it may go down as his goal, but he was being played onside by Lookman. That was such a good header from Buendia. A set piece led to a game of head tennis that was ended decisively when Buendia strained his neck muscles to steer the dropping ball into the bottom corner. Emi Buendia equalises with a precise header from 10 yards, though Leicester want it disallowed for offside. I don’t think it will be. It was made by Daka, who has looked so sharp. He lost the ball 35 yards from goal, then won it back from Nakamba and played a good angled pass to find Barnes in the area. Konsa came across to meet Barnes, who passed the ball jauntily through his legs and into the far corner. Harvey Barnes gives Leicester the lead with a lovely finish! 11 min Ramsey plays in the overlapping Cash, whose overhit cross goes out for a throw-in. It was a promising move, though, and there’s a nice open feel to the game. 9 min Another half chance for Daka, who slices well wide from a tight angle after intercepting Mings’ chested backpass towards Martinez. 9 min Barnes pokes a low cross into the middle that is half cleared to the edge of the area. Maddison collects and rattles a shot that is excellently blocked by the outrushing Nakamba. 7 min The players stop after six minutes to applaud Arthur Labinjo-Hughes, whose horrific murder has been in the news this week. 5 min Villa win the first corner of the game. Buendia’s inswinger is punched away by Schmeichel, and that’s the end of that. 3 min The first half chance for Leicester. Lookman stabs a short pass behind the defence towards Daka, who drills a low shot towards goal from a very tight angle. Martinez, though slightly surprised by the shot, saves with his feet. 3 min Plenty of early possession for Leicester. I don’t know what else to tell you. 1 min Peep peep! Leicester, in their onyx and pink (sic) third kit, kick off from right to left. The Leicester players are first out, followed by the home side. It looks freezing at Villa Park, though Emi Martinez is still wearing his short-sleeve goalkeeping shirt. The 2pm games have finished, and here’s what happened: Man Utd 1-0 Crystal Palace Leeds 2-2 Brentford Spurs 3-0 Norwich Chelsea have won the Women’s FA Cup! More on that here: This is a good read. Of course it is, Paul Doyle wrote it. The Gerrard/Rodgers head-to-head Celtic 1-0 Rangers, Scottish Premier League, 2 September 2018 Rangers 1-0 Celtic, Scottish Premier League, 29 December 2018 And that’s it. Two changes for Villa, both enforced: Ashley Young and Jacob Ramsey replace the injured pair of Matt Targett and Leon Bailey. And two changes for Leicester: Patson Daka comes in for the rotated Jamie Vardy, who is on the bench, and Kiernan Dewsbury-Hall replaces Boubakary Soumare. Aston Villa (4-3-3) Martinez; Cash, Konsa, Mings, Young; McGinn, Nakamba, Douglas Luiz; Buendia, Watkins, Ramsey. Substitutes: Steer, Sanson, Tuanzebe, El Ghazi, Hause, Philogene-Bidace, Chukwuemeka, Davis, Iroegbunam. Leicester (4-2-3-1) Schmeichel; Castagne, Evans, Soyuncu, Thomas; Dewsbury-Hall, Ndidi; Lookman, Maddison, Barnes; Daka. Substitutes: Ward, Vardy, Albrighton, Iheanacho, Perez, Choudhury, Vestergaard, Daley-Campbell, Soumare. Hello and welcome to live coverage of Aston Villa v Leicester in the Premier League. That’s Aston Villa v Leicester. It bears repeating because much of the pre-match chatter has involved three other clubs: Celtic, Rangers and Liverpool. Villa manager Steven Gerrard is a former manager of Rangers and possibly a future manager of Liverpool; Brendan Rodgers has done time at both Celtic and Liverpool, where he would surely have won the title but for an impossibly cruel slip by Gerrard. Gerrard aspires to make Villa the Midlands’ best club, and since their promotion in 2019 they have got much closer to Leicester. There were 27 points between the teams in 2019-20 but only 11 last season. And if Villa win today, they will go above Leicester and move two points behind Wolves. They’ve made a promising start under Gerrard, with two wins and a dignified defeat to Manchester City. Leicester, not helped by more miserable luck with injuries, have been unusually scruffy this season. But there have been encouraging signs in recent weeks, not least a return to form from the ghost of Euro 2020, James Maddison. to his infectious best. Kick off 4.30pm.Labour has stepped up pressure to compel the government to publish documents that could show whether the disgraced former Conservative MP Owen Paterson helped to secure large contracts for a healthcare firm. Anneliese Dodds, the Labour party chair, criticised what she said was a “highly suspicious” delay in publishing the documents. The Commons last month approved a motion that ordered the government to publish a set of documents relating to the award of contracts worth £480m to the healthcare firm Randox. Paterson was paid more than £100,000 a year by Randox before he resigned from parliament after a lobbying scandal. The government has said it would take up to two months to collect and publish any documents. Now Dodds has written to the senior clerk of the Commons, John Benger, seeking his advice on how to speed up the publication of the documents. She accused the government of treating parliament with contempt. “When parliament directs the government to fulfil an obligation, the house expects action – not delay,” she wrote. “The highly suspicious two-month delay in publishing the Randox files will leave the public wondering just what on earth ministers are hiding,” she added. On 17 November, MPs passed a motion, initiated by Labour, that requires the government to make public all correspondence and electronic communications relating to the awarding of the two contracts to Randox. Both contracts were given to the company to conduct Covid-19 tests during the pandemic without other firms being allowed to submit competing bids. The motion also requires the government to publish the minutes and notes of a meeting on 9 April last year that was attended by Paterson, Randox and Lord Bethell, then a health minister. The government has yet to publish a full account of what was discussed at this meeting. On 26 November, Sajid Javid, the health secretary, wrote to Dodds telling her that his department had started work to gather the relevant documents to comply with the Commons motion. He added that the government would respond “no later than the end of January”. The extent of the official records relating to this meeting is unclear. Gillian Keegan, a health minister, told MPs last month that the government was at that time “unable to locate a formal note of the meeting … That doesn’t mean there isn’t one.” Dodds said: “If the minutes … don’t actually exist, the government should come clean now – not spend the next two months pretending to look for them down the back of the sofa.” Randox has previously said Paterson “played no role in the award of Covid contracts” to the firm. The Department of Health and Social Care has failed for more than a year to respond to a freedom of information request from the Guardian for documents relating to the 9 April meeting. The DHSC has previously said it was “inaccurate to accuse the department of withholding information”. Paterson resigned last month after an official investigation found he had broken parliamentary rules when he lobbied for Randox and another firm. The DHSC has been approached for further comment.Sydney-born actor Murray Bartlett, 50, made his screen debut aged 16 in medical soap The Flying Doctors. He worked in Australian TV and film before being cast as a guest star in Sex and the City in 2002. Subsequent TV credits include Dom Basaluzzo in HBO’s gay comedy-drama Looking and Michael “Mouse” Tolliver in the Netflix revival of Armistead Maupin’s Tales of the City. This year, he starred as luxury Hawaii spa resort manager Armond in HBO’s hit satire The White Lotus, shown in the UK on Sky Atlantic. How did you land your role in The White Lotus? I did a self-tape audition in lockdown, then spoke to [writer/director] Mike White on the phone. Before I knew it, I was on the plane to Hawaii and landing in paradise, which was bizarre and thrilling. There’d been times early in the pandemic when I thought: “Should I get another skill? Maybe acting won’t be a thing any more.” So The White Lotus came as an extraordinary surprise. I felt guilty talking to my actor friends about it because it was such a dreamy job. How was the experience of filming it in lockdown? We had the entire resort, living and working there, and couldn’t leave for the whole two-and-a-half-month shoot. It was weird and wonderful to be in a five-star resort for that long. It felt like a TV summer camp. We worked hard, but at the end of the day we’d go down to the beach and swim at sunset. You could put your head underwater and hear the whales. We were pinching ourselves. How did you go about creating the character of Armond? The scripts were mind-blowingly well written and I instantly felt like I’d come across Armond-like characters in my life. Me and Mike agreed that for all his showmanship and largeness, we wanted him to feel like a real person, not a caricature. That way, we could unleash him later, when he’s drugged up and flying. I just want to kiss Mike all over his face. A role like that is a gift. There were moments of terror, but mostly it was pure joy. Some people compared Armond to Basil Fawlty. Did that similarity occur to you? Not until I started hearing it when the show aired. I took it as a huge compliment, because I grew up watching Fawlty Towers and John Cleese is such a genius. Your cast mate Lukas Gage, who plays Dillon the waiter, went viral after a director criticised his apartment during a Zoom audition… That blew up while we shooting and we all watched it [laughs]. It’s great that Lukas had the last laugh. He’s an awesome guy. You and he had one particularly, ahem, exuberant sex scene together. What was it like filming that? There’s always an awkwardness to those scenes, especially if your face is in someone’s butt in front of 60 strangers, but by that stage we were well into the shoot and having so much fun. Lukas and I came up with that ourselves, not only to reflect the dynamic between our characters but also to be suitably shocking for the guy who walks in on us. When we told Mike what we’d come up with, he was like, “Oh my God, can we do that?”, with a shit-eating grin on his face. How did you pull off that suitcase scene? I wouldn’t want to give away the mystery of such a magical TV moment [laughs]. What I can tell you is that it wasn’t me. I mean, it’s my pretty impressive thigh control helping me squat over the suitcase, but the rest happened in post-production. We filmed it in several different ways and the final version didn’t look quite how I’d imagined. I was a little horrified when I first saw it. Watching yourself explicitly taking a shit on TV is fairly confrontational. But I soon got over it, because it’s such an epic moment. Mike’s not afraid to go to those places. There’s not much difference between what Armond’s doing in that scene and the way certain other characters treat people like shit. It’s kind of brilliant in that way. Did you enjoy all the memes that did the rounds? Those memes where the suitcase represented people’s 2021 plans and I was Covid, crapping on them, were very funny. A lot of people dressed up as White Lotus characters for Halloween, too. One guy here in Cape Cod [where Bartlett lives] dressed as the Pineapple Suite. He had a pineapple lampshade on his head, pineapple curtains hanging from his shoulders and a suitcase strapped to his front. He’d unzip it and there was a big shit in there. So creative [laughs]. When gay drama Looking was cancelled after two seasons, fans campaigned for it to continue. That must have been a huge compliment? We all believed in that show so much, so it was very gratifying that people wanted more. Many of the positive responses also came from places in the world where people can’t live freely as queer people. It helped them feel less alone. It’s great to feel your work has a purpose. We would’ve been happy to do Looking for years. I have the “Dom’s Chicken” neon sign [his character’s street-food stall] in my backyard and those guys are still my best friends. It got called “the gay Sex and the City”. And of course, you were in Sex and the City too… [Laughs] I carried the baton from show to show. Sex and the City was my first job in the US. It was a very New York story. I knew someone who heard the producers were looking for a non-American to play this shoe importer. Before I knew it, I was on-set with Sarah Jessica Parker, which was both exciting and terrifying. I was a huge fan of the show, so to suddenly be in it, opposite characters I adored, felt dreamlike. That job laid the groundwork for me staying in the US, so it was pivotal for me. Two years ago came the Tales of the City revival. Were the books or original TV adaptation important to you? Very much. The first time I went to San Francisco in the 90s, I stayed with a friend who had the first season on VHS. I devoured it all, fell completely in love with it and subsequently read the books. I wasn’t closeted and didn’t have major issues coming out, but somehow Tales of the City still made me feel free. It’s so full of promise and possibility, it had a profound impact on me. Having the chance to meet Armistead [Maupin] and step into that world years later was magical. Next up is The Last of Us, HBO’s post-apocalyptic drama based on the video game. What can you tell us about it? It’s co-created by Craig Mazin, who did Chernobyl. The scripts he’s written blew my head off. It’s an epic show, but beautifully human and intimate. We filmed it in Calgary. A lot of my scenes are with Nick Offerman. Playing off him was awesome. What kept you sane in lockdown? Long walks with the dog and cooking. There’s amazing seafood here, so I cooked a lot of fresh tuna and swordfish. I stole a lot from Yotam Ottolenghi’s spices, because he’s a genius with flavour. In fact, as I’m talking to you, my laptop is sitting on a stack of Ottolenghi books. Are you hoping for some recognition for The White Lotus in awards season? It would be the icing on the cake. Or perhaps the rose harissa on the swordfish. The White Lotus is available for streaming on Sky Atlantic and Now TVRed wears a magic hoodie in this pantomime, and sets off into the woods to deliver essential goods to her dame of a granny. She not only meets the wolf along the way but also his wet-behind-the-ears son, Wolfie. Thrown into this mix is her realisation that the seasons are not changing and animals are missing. These are nice twists to the fairytale but the set-up does not go anywhere for far too long, and even then doesn’t progress far enough. Under Robert Shaw Cameron’s direction, this production has plenty of energy and a clear will to please, so it is all the sadder that it feels so underwhelming, with clumsy storytelling and bland jokes. Jean Chan’s set comprises flat cut-outs and illustrative back-screens painted in bright colours. We are in Stratford-on-the-Downs, which is preparing for “Fairie Berry’s Bake Off” …but this does not link to any of the other elements of the show. The climate message is conveyed through a cartoonish backdrop of overflowing rubbish and Red’s repeated concerns about a “Season’s Tree” that is crying in the woods. This is a clever concept which might have been incorporated into the central story more sophisticatedly. There are too many weak, repeated jokes in Carl Miller’s book, with a smattering of half-hearted smut from Granny (Phil Nichol), who looks like an over-decorated cupcake. The songs (lyrics by Miller and Robert Hyman, with music by Hyman) are of variable quality, not particularly catchy, accompanied by uneven singing and unremarkable choreography. It is not without charming moments: there is a fun disco number as Wolfie (Luke Latchman) tells us he can channel the thoughts of the Season’s Tree while also channelling a sound resembling that of the Pet Shop Boys. There are some good puns around London localities: Red’s school-friend, Bow Peep (Ashley Goh), comes from Bow and speaks of her posse as “them Bow’s peeps”, and the Wolf (Raphael Bushay) leaves Stratford to live in the more lupine-friendly “Wolfhamstow.” Bushay’s Wolf is well-performed and sings an amusing song about his carnivorous appetites. Wolfie is ditzy and sweet. There is also an entertaining character in the thigh-slapping woodcutter Woody (Jodie Jacobs), and Elise Zavou, as Red, performs with zest. It might have been more successful as purely a children’s show but its thin on crossover appeal and feels – at two and a half hours on opening night – overlong and somewhat grinding. • At Theatre Royal Stratford East, London, until 31 DecemberA combination of Villa Park’s frenzy at Jacob Ramsey’s disallowed goal on the stroke of half-time and a dressing-room dressing-down from Steven Gerrard enabled Aston Villa to continue their revival under their new manager. Ezri Konsa’s first goals in 13 months enabled Villa to win their third game in four under Gerrard to overtake Leicester City in the middle of the Premier League after Harvey Barnes had given them the lead. As Brendan Rodgers, the Leicester manager, bemoaned his team’s achilles heel of failing to defend set-pieces effectively, his former Liverpool captain admitted he had to “get into [his players] a little bit at half-time”. The legendary former Liverpool captain can relish his return to Anfield next week with some confidence that his new team know how to produce a combative and tactically astute showing, at least after half-time. As in Wednesday’s narrow defeat by Manchester City, Villa improved in the second half when here they dominated the middle of the field and, with Marvelous Nakamba, Douglas Luiz and John McGinn offering protection and drive, they also gained joy from wide areas, with Matty Cash particularly effective attacking from right-back. The home majority of Villa Park was in uproar when the referee Michael Oliver disallowed Ramsey a goal in half-time stoppage time, after VAR recommended he review the TV replays, but the official made the right call. Cash headed Luiz’s left-footed cross to the far post back into the middle of the six-yard area. Kasper Schmeichel saved and still had one hand on the ball as Ramsey shot into the net. After the goal was disallowed and Schmeichel took the free-kick, the incident was replayed on the big screen, infuriating Villa supporters all the more who saw that Schmeichel did not have two hands on the ball but had not checked the rules. Schmeichel and the officials were booed as they came out for the start of the second half with the teams all square and Villa capitalised on this energy and that from their manager’s half-time words, increasing their intensity in a performance that reflected the aggression and dynamism of Gerrard the player. “I’m really happy with the second-half performance,” the Villa manager said. “Right across the pitch we were more aggressive and we could have scored two or three more goals.” Gerrard said Villa were “too open on the transition” in the first half and said: “Moving forwards we can’t be waiting for me to get into their ribs at half-time. But in terms of results, I’m super pleased. We’ve won three games out of four and I think we can get better. “We’ve got a week on the training ground to iron out a few issues and we go to Anfield determined to give a competitive performance every week.” Gerrard said he would not be making his return to Liverpool all about himself. “If other people choose to, that’s their business but for me, it’s about getting the team prepared.” Yet it was Leicester who had gone ahead. Even with Jamie Vardy, rested for Thursday’s decisive Europa League tie away to Napoli, starting on the bench, Leicester looked dangerous on the break throughout the first half. Patson Daka, receiving James Maddison’s pass as Leicester countered, did well to battle his way through a combined challenge from both Cash and Nakamba and feed Barnes in the space Cash had vacated. The winger sidefooted through Konsa’s legs into the far corner. Within three minutes Villa equalised. Luiz’s free-kick was unconvincingly cleared by Jonny Evans, inviting Cash to head back in for Emiliano Buendía to head goalwards, though without much power. Konsa got the slightest of touches to distract Schmeichel for his first goal since November of last year. Maddison went through the gears and, after Kiernan Dewsbury-Hall dived to head wide on his first Premier League start, only a great tackle by Cash prevented Barnes from going through the middle as Leicester threatened to take control. All that changed in the second half as Villa Park and Gerrard triggered the turnaround. Konsa headed in at the back post from McGinn’s corner, the 13th goal Leicester have conceded from set-pieces including penalties this season, and Ollie Watkins, with the England manager Gareth Southgate watching on, twice came close to making the game safe, before Ramsey spooned a great chance over the bar. Gerrard was grateful Emiliano Martínez produced a brilliant save to tip over Barnes’s header to secure Villa’s victory. Rodgers said: “I’m frustrated. First half, we were very good, scored one and could have had more goals but our achilles heel, which is killing us, is our defending of set-pieces. It’s undoing a lot of our good work and sapping morale.”In the Apennine mountains in 1945, Bob Dole was hit by fire from a German machine gun. Through sheer force of will, endless hours of strengthening, an experimental drug and the extraordinary kindness of a doctor who performed seven operations for free, Dole was able to rebuild his life. His right arm had limited motion. His left suffered numbness. It was painful to write. A signed note from Dole is a treasure. Beating the governor of Kansas to win a Senate seat in 1968, he rose to Republican leader. When Gerald Ford selected him as his running mate in 1976, his initial impression on Americans was a bit sharp: “Democrat wars” was the most famous line from his debate with Walter Mondale. But he recovered and spoke of “hard choices”, basically code for reducing the federal deficit. He called himself the “heartland candidate” and that was true. His speech accepting the nomination for president in 1996 was roundly criticised for its line about “a bridge to the past”. In response, Bill Clinton proposed a “bridge to the future”. But Dole had a point. That glance to history was essential: “Whenever we forget its singular presence, it gives us a lesson in grace and awe.” Few were quite sure where Clinton’s bridge was going – or when it might be completed. Dole offered a moral vision. “What is more important, wealth or honor? Only right conduct distinguishes a great nation from one that cannot rise above itself … All things flow from doing what is right.” This was sincerity, not sentiment. Rare indeed the politician who could say with integrity, “I do not need the presidency to make or refresh my soul. For greatness lies not in what office you hold, but on how honest you are in how you face adversity and in your willingness to stand fast in hard places.” His was an older Republicanism, one that said: “If there’s anyone who has mistakenly attached themselves to our party in the belief that we are not open to citizens of every race and religion, then let me remind you, tonight this hall belongs to the party of Lincoln. And the exits which are clearly marked are for you to walk out of as I stand this ground without compromise.” Ever the party loyalist, he called himself a “Trumper” but also “sort of Trumped out” – and he flatly rejected the lie of electoral fraud in 2020. His voice calls out in today’s deep troubles: “Is the principle of unity, so hard-fought and at the cost of so many lives, having been contested again and again in our history, and at such a terrible price, to be casually abandoned to the urge to divide?” In their debate, Clinton said, “I like Bob Dole. You can probably tell that.” Dole asked viewers to check his website, a first for presidential candidates. His wry humor and distance from hoopla struck a chord with some Gen X voters. Running against peace and prosperity is hard. Ross Perot’s second bid did not help. Yet Dole pressed on, loyal to the party and the ticket he led. Then he moved on. Losing “hasn’t been all bad”, he said. He did a commercial for Viagra – but only after he could vouch for it following prostate cancer. Addressing stigma was his life’s work. If speaking up could help, why not risk the jokes? He could happily discuss deficiency payments for farmers for hours – that’s what senators do – and to him that sort of thing mattered more than personal revelations. Referring to himself in the third person was mocked, but one knew where he stood. When he was introspective, one had the sense the past, of good people making a living on the unforgiving prairie, was never far away. There was an earthy honesty too often missing in politics today but popular when it appears: “Facts are better than dreams and good presidents and good candidates don’t run from the truth.” The charge of being an intellectual lightweight was unfair. Dole just didn’t agree with some of the new Republican intellectuals. The man whose father ran a creamery knew budgets had to be balanced, a lesson learned on the prairie, where “a man is very small, and if he thinks otherwise, he is wrong”. The Americans with Disabilities Act was his proudest accomplishment. Strongly committed to civil rights, he worked with former rival George McGovern to develop an international school lunch program and received the World Food Prize. A lion of the Senate, his cross-party friendship with Daniel Inouye, also grievously wounded in the second world war, is a telling reminder of what Washington once was. Dole may remind British readers somewhat of Denis Healey. As the Guardian wrote in its obituary of Healey, “it is rarely enough in politics to say: ‘I’m here if you want me.’ Always wanting to ‘do something rather than be something’, Healey was too busy to be a faction-fighter or plotter.” For Dole, “honorable compromise is no sin. It is what protects us from absolutism and intolerance”. It was said Dole wanted to be president in case decisions needed to be made – a reminder of another Kansan, Dwight Eisenhower. After all, he might have reasoned, the big issues were decided – democracy, decency, honour, economic opportunity, civil rights, a strong defense, support for allies – but the small decisions mattered too. Why not Bob Dole to make them honestly? The substance of those decisions would generally have been wise and, as with Eisenhower, likely bolder than expected. A Dole presidency would have reset the country for the new millennium: less talk, more action, less fluff, more substance. He carried a pen in his disabled right hand. As in 1945, he was always ready for work. John S Gardner is a writer. He was special assistant to George HW Bush and deputy assistant to George W BushEmmanuel Macron came under fire from the French right at the weekend as Valérie Pécresse was chosen as the presidential candidate for Les Républicains, while the far-right TV pundit Éric Zemmour launched a new party and Marine Le Pen travelled to Poland for a show of force with the Polish prime minister and other European populist parties. Pécresse said her “mission” was to stop Macron. She called him a “zigzagging” president who had “run France into the wall with debt and taxes, a society where there is no more respect or authority”. In her first interview, with the Journal du Dimanche, she said Macron had saddled future generations with a wealth of problems including “debt, commercial deficit, taxes, struggling public services [and] a chronic crisis of authority”. She added: “France is damaged and divided, everything has to be repaired.” Pécresse will on Monday travel to the southern French heartlands of the hard-right deputy Éric Ciotti, who she beat in the primary final and who on Sunday piled pressure on her to prioritise his hardline policies on immigration and tax in order to win voters back from the far-right’s Le Pen and Zemmour. The left’s Jean-Luc Mélenchon held a vast presidential campaign rally calling for an urgent show of “strength and unity” from leftwing voters in France, insisting that the nation was not lurching to the right after opinion polls in recent months have suggested greater support than ever for far-right candidates and hardline anti-immigration rhetoric. The centrist Macron is likely to announce his re-election attempt in January or February before April’s presidential election. But this weekend’s choice of Pécresse as candidate for Nicolas Sarkozy’s party, Les Républicains, immediately ramped up the election campaign. Macron’s government spokesperson, Gabriel Attal, told Le Parisien that there was no clear political line inside Les Républicains and that Pécresse would have to do political “acrobatics” to try to keep together all the “antagonistic” party views. He said the right was in “existential crisis” and argued that Macron’s transformation of the labour market, lowering of taxes and creation of police jobs meant “we have done everything that Pécresse could have done when she was minister [under Sarkozy], but which she didn’t do”. Meanwhile, Zemmour,who has convictions for inciting racial hatred and no previous political experience, held his first campaign rally in an exhibition space 12 miles north of Paris in Villepinte. There were street demonstrations against him by trade unionists in Paris as well as scuffles inside the rally itself after several people protesting against Zemmour took off their jackets in the audience to reveal anti-racism T-shirts. Footage emerged of him appearing to be put in a headlock by protesters at his first campaign rally, a few days after he formally declared his candidacy in a video highlighting his anti-migrant and anti-Islam views. Zemmour announced he was forming a new political party named Reconquête, which means “reconquest”, as he vowed to save “the destiny of French civilisation” against what he called the threat of migrants. He attacked the political system and the media, promised to raise wages for low-salary workers fed up with the boss class getting rich, and promised “immigration zero” if he came to power. The 63-year-old polemicist has been attacked by historians for claiming the Nazi collaborator Marshal Philippe Pétain saved French Jews rather than aiding their deportation to death camps. He has been described by the French justice minister as a dangerous racist and Holocaust denier. On stage, he denied he was a racist or misogynist, saying he was a lone defender of “free speech”. Before the rally, several hundred people joined a demonstration against Zemmour in Paris which was led by trade unions with banners saying “Zemmour out” and denouncing him as racist. Simon Duteil, spokesperson for the Solidaires trade union, said it was important to show people would stand up to the “advance of fascism”. A total of 48 people were arrested at anti-Zemmour protests in Villepinte and Paris. It was a sign of the divisiveness of the presidential campaign that while Jacline Mouraud, a key Brittany figure of the gilets jaunes (yellow vests) movement, took the stage to support Zemmour, at the same time another figure from the gilets jaunes was arrested for protesting against Zemmour outside the rally. Pécresse said of Zemmour: “In the history of France, people who divide have never been the savours. Merchants of fear do not bring solutions.” She said her party was the only “credible alternative”. Mélenchon urged leftwing voters to unite behind him. The left is splintered into several different candidates, including the Socialist mayor of Paris, Anne Hidalgo, and the Greens’ Yannick Jadot, with polls showing that division is stopping any candidate reach the presidential final round. “France is not the far-right,” Mélenchon said. “France is its social security system, public health, emancipation, school, research and sharing.” The situation in France was “volatile”, he told Le Parisien, adding that the left would make it through to the presidential final if working-class neighbourhoods turned out to vote.The biting winter winds that whipped around Nottingham’s Motor Point Arena did little to dull the fire of Jamaica who, after two defeats, exacted the perfect revenge on England’s Roses, defeating the series winners 63-53 in the final game of the three Tests. Learning losses, that’s what Jamaica’s head coach Connie Francis alluded the first two game outcomes had been for her side, so when the Sunshine Girls began with the same seven that led the first match for half the game the question was asked: had Jamaica learned? It may have taken Kadie Ann Dehaney two England wins, but the Jamaican keeper finally cracked England’s golden girl Eleanor Cardwell, and its consequences proved decisive. Despite the Roses’ own defensive efforts, led by Layla Guscoth and England captain Serena Guthrie, Jhaniele Fowler was all too ready to reap the rewards conjured up by her teammates. Not even an ankle injury to her centre, Adean Thomas, could abate her side’s ever-building momentum and at the end of quarter one Jamaica were in front 14-11. Tails up, they continued their onslaught in the second quarter. Searching for answers England head coach Jess Thirlby turned to her bench. First, on for Jo Harten came Helen Housby whose introduction had some impact. Dehaney and Sterling however, familiar with the Rose who plays against them week-in and week-out in Australia’s Super Netball league, adjusted quickly and were soon back capitalising on England’s lack of penetration in attack. Then on came Stacey Francis. But with Fowler flexing her full might, putting on a performance worthy of the “world’s best” suffix that often follows mention of her name, little changed, and the Sunshine Girls stormed ahead. Down by eight it was a new-look Roses that started the third quarter, featuring names yet to play in the series. Sensing the responsibility handed to them by Thirlby, the seven on court gritted their teeth and got down to the task. Benefiting from Jamaica’s defensive triumvirate catching the eye of the umpire, England clawed back some lost ground, leaving them a deficit of eight to undo heading into the final quarter. In elite netball a deficit of seven goals, so it goes, is considered too much to recover. Four turnovers, plus four centres taken to goal are necessary to flip the script. For England, up against an on-song Jamaica with Fowler and Sterling firing, a comeback of such magnitude was always unlikely. The Sunshine Girls seemed only to thrive on the desperation of the hosts watching their clean-sweep slip from their grasp and on the hour Jamaican cheers drowned out the arena. Though project whitewash was a target not achieved, the mood in the England camp was one of positivity: “As much as it’s nice to get three out of three we have to be respectful to our opposition,” Thirlby said. “We just have to hold true to the success of the series overall and there’s never any harm in a little bit of a learning in that final performance.” Next up for the Roses will be January’s Quad Series featuring Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa. As Birmingham 2022 beckons it will be a critical test for the defending champions, who will no doubt head in as favourites.Labour’s longest-serving MP currently in parliament, Barry Sheerman, has said he will step down at the next election and that representing Huddersfield has been “the honour of my life”. The 81-year-old MP, who was first elected in 1979, said he had informed his constituency party that he would be retiring. It follows an announcement by the Labour MP Margaret Hodge, who was first elected in 1994, that she would step down from her Barking seat at the next election. “After 40 years as Huddersfield’s member of parliament, I have taken the decision that I will not be standing at the next general election,” Sheerman tweeted on Saturday. “Serving Huddersfield has been the honour of my life. Thank you to my constituents for the kindness, support and warmth you have shown me.” He said he was “looking forward to spending more time with my wife, my three daughters, my son and 12 grandchildren”. Sheerman said he still planned to be active in the Commons, saying he did not anticipate a general election for some time. It is understood the Labour party has asked for MPs to begin to inform the party if they do not intend to stand again. His Huddersfield seat saw an almost eight-point swing to the Conservatives in 2019, in line with many neighbouring constituencies, although he achieved a majority of more than 4,000. Sheerman is the second-longest-serving MP currently in office, behind the father of the House of Commons, Sir Peter Bottomley, a Conservative MP who was first elected in 1975. Sheerman told BBC Radio Leeds that age had been the reason for his decision. “The important thing is what you’ve done in those 40 years,” he said. “I’ve really enjoyed it. I’ve been able to make some real changes in the law; I’ve been able to save lives; I’ve been able to help with some really good people to steer Huddersfield and West Yorkshire.” Sheerman did not serve in Tony Blair’s cabinet, but held several shadow ministerial briefs under Neil Kinnock and John Smith. He chaired the children, schools and families select committee for nine years until 2010.“What an awfully big adventure,” said Kevin McNally’s Prof Jericho as he faced certain death at the hands of either a Sontaran or the Flux, or possibly both simultaneously. And in fairness to executive producers Chris Chibnall and Matt Strevens, in pre-publicity they promised that Doctor Who: Flux was going to be an awfully big adventure. It was. Did chapter six work as a standalone episode where Sontarans invaded Earth and used it as a base to conquer what was left of the universe? Yes. Did it work as a unifying story to tie together all the disparate threads of the past six weeks? Not always. First up, things that were good. The portrayal of the Sontarans trod the line well from enjoyable buffoonery (getting addicted to chocolate, being regularly thwacked on the head) to grimness (not even blinking at the idea of wiping out the entire Lupari species to further their aims). Steve Oram’s Joseph Williamson got back to his time, like Vincent van Gogh before him, knowing that his work was valued. And Jemma Redgrave was imperious as Kate Stewart. She said she hoped she would see this Doctor again. I hope we see them together again, too. Chibnall delivered a multi-Doctor story a la The Three Doctors – even to the point of having two Doctors work together while one was stranded elsewhere – but with all three Doctors being the 13th Doctor. That allowed Jodie Whittaker to drive the plot forward in every location. It also made her vocalised exposition much more bearable when it was being delivered as a chat with herself over the Tardis console. What didn’t work so well? They had earned victory in the end, because the Doctor had convinced the Ood stationed at Division to weaken the Flux, she herself had distracted the Ravagers and sabotaged the Sontarans’ plan, and Di (Nadia Albina) had inspired the idea of hoovering the rest of the Flux up with Passenger. However, the climax of the Big Bad arc was essentially that an even Bigger Bad rocked up, said they were displeased with failure, and bumped off Swarm (Sam Spruell) and Azure with very little fanfare. Before that, I thought Rochenda Sandall’s Azure was the pick of the bunch this week – she delighted in taunting the Doctor. Whether this episode is a storytelling success depends on what comes next. If the following three specials pick up the loose threads as we head towards this Doctor’s regeneration, it may have worked as a springboard for those stories. If they don’t, and the end of the divisive Timeless Child arc is “The Doctor hides a fob watch inside the Tardis and we never mention it again,” that is rather more “OK, so what was the point of all that?” The lengthy melancholy coda to this episode of everybody – except Prof Jericho – getting back to their correct space and time (but all seem to have lost something) also took the wind out of chapter six’s sails. But it was, for me, a decent episode that ended what was the best, most consistent season of the Whittaker era. Sum it up in one sentence? Time kills the Doctor’s enemies while she saves her friends and what is left of the universe; then she puts aside her quest for her hidden memories and mysterious past lives – or does she? Life on board the Tardis “Come on, Scouse. Let Yorkshire show you the way!” was probably the line of the night. I take my hat off to Mandip Gill’s Yaz, who has finally been allowed to be a strong, organised, effective companion in this series. I saw someone make the point that Dan (John Bishop) has hardly even spent hours with the Doctor, but he has spent years off screen with Yaz as the leader, and his tribute to her when the Doctor arrived in the Williamson tunnels felt apt. The scene where Yaz and the Doctor spoke together alone in the Tardis felt like the closest we’ll get to the Thirteen-Yasmin “Thasmin” relationship so many in fandom have invested in. But I can’t be the only person who felt sad for Dan that Di’s reaction to her ordeal was to push him away for being late for their date-not-a-date at Halloween. At least it gave him motivation to get into the Tardis and leave Liverpool behind. One of the most powerful scenes was about the life on board the Tardis we presumably won’t ever see, as imprisoned together on the Sontaran ship, it slowly dawned on the Doctor that Karvanista used to be her companion and that she had broken his heart. They must have gone through many scenarios just like that which she can’t remember. There’s a spin-off waiting for Jo Martin (the Fugitive Doctor) and Craige Els’ adorably grumpy space-dog character as her companion out there somewhere. Mysteries and questions For a series that threatened to answer so many questions and provide so many reveals, as an episode, The Vanquishers just … didn’t. Bel and Vinder weren’t revealed to be anybody important’s parents. We never saw any of the Doctor’s former lives. Nobody was the Rani in disguise. And Annabel Scholey’s Claire – to my great chagrin – may have made a welcome return and been a brilliant psychic, pivotal to the Sontarans’ plans, but was not revealed to be anybody who would permanently join the Tardis crew. I felt especially teased in the scene where Craig Parkinson was torturing the Doctor, and she commented on his double pulse, and he said “You can call me…” and it wasn’t a build-up to him being the Master. He was a joy as the Grand Serpent, though, and deserved his fate. Talking of Bel (Thaddea Graham) and Vinder (Jacob Anderson), did we really just watch six episodes of their quest to find each other to only see two scenes of them together, one of which was “By the way, we are having a baby?” and then that’s it? Surely not? But then last week I couldn’t believe they’d killed off Tecteun. And did the Flux story really finish with most of the universe destroyed and the Doctor not trying to use the “seed bank” Tecteun mentioned on Division’s space station to try to restore and repopulate it? Deeper into the vortex The opening salvo of Commander Stenek’s message to space echoed the words of Anthony Ainley’s Master in 1981’s Logopolis, where he hooked up a microphone to a radio telescope on Earth and gleefully announced: “Peoples of the universe, please attend carefully. The message that follows is vital to the future of you all.” Stenek also referred to the Rutans. Long cited as the perpetual enemies of the Sontarans, we only saw them once, in the 1977 Tom Baker story Horror of Fang Rock. Given the not exactly cryptic warning from the Time entity at the end, it may well end up that Hot Camp Master™ – as Dan Martin used to call him – may have been pulling the strings all along. We will surely see him again before Whittaker leaves? I got so excited about hearing Nicholas Courtney’s voice last week that I failed to notice they’d given him the wrong rank and then misspelled his character’s name in the credits. You’d think, in 2021, fan service like this would get the details right. But then, I think I’ve spelled Karvanista about five different ways in these recaps, so glass houses/stones, etc. Sony has officially acquired Bad Wolf, which will be producing series 14 of Doctor Who for the BBC. If the Sontarans killed all the Lupari, does that mean they killed my species-bonded personal walking-talking space dog? I’m furious. Next time There are three more Whittaker episodes left, starting with a New Year’s Day special that features Adjani Salmon, Aisling Bea, Pauline McLynn and, it turns out, Daleks! If you need more Doctor Who in the meantime, there is a new and enjoyable box-set of three audio adventures starring ninth Doctor Christopher Eccleston reprising his TV role. Fantastic!Ralf Rangnick was delighted with Manchester United’s “front-foot” performance as his opening match as interim manager ended with a 1-0 win against Crystal Palace at Old Trafford on Sunday. The victory, which came via Fred’s 77th-minute strike and featured only a third league clean sheet this season, lifted United to sixth place with 24 points, three behind West Ham in the final Champions League berth, in a fourth unbeaten match across all competitions. “I’m very happy with the way the team performed, the way they played – especially the first half-hour, that was exceptional,” Rangnick said. “The only thing missing was 1-0 or 2-0. We had control of the game. I am very happy with the result and the clean sheet.” Rangnick, who had only one full training session to work, admitted surprise. “I said in my first press conference, there are things we need to improve on, to get clean sheets, to get control of the game. What they [my players] showed was more than I expected, to be honest,” the German said. “I was positively surprised by the physical state and intensity, the first half-hour was amazing, I felt it was extremely high-tempo, high intensity, always on the front foot.” Rangnick retained the same team that beat Arsenal on Thursday. “It was logical not to change too many positions after the win. Everyone was fully fit, recovered. The question was how to get pressure, control, so I decided on 4-2-2-2, Cristiano [Ronaldo], Marcus [Rashford] in attack, Jadon [Sancho] and Bruno [Fernandes] in the two 10 positions. “And we had enough space with Bruno and Jadon for our full‑backs to play forward on the wing and they almost played like wing‑backs. Alex [Telles] and Diogo [Dalot] did extremely well offensively. That’s why I played 4-2-2-2, I’m a big fan. The most challenging, demanding positions in that formation are the two 10s.” Rangnick also praised Ronaldo, for the 36-year-old’s willingness to carry out the German’s high-pressing style. “What Ronaldo did today ‘against the ball’: chapeau.” The 63-year-old also suggested a much-changed team may face Young Boys at Old Trafford on Wednesday as United have already qualified for the Champions League.Good morning. More NDIS participants are speaking up about funding cuts putting them in positions that would reduce their quality of life, and Australia’s diplomatic influence in Asia has waned. A terminally ill NDIS patient is facing re-hospitalisation after his funding for a 24-hour nurse was cut. Ian Haywood is the latest NDIS participant to speak out about what the federal Labor party and disability advocates say are “stealth cuts”. Haywood, who lives with motor neurone disease, had his plan cut to cover just six hours of nursing care each day, far less than the round-the-clock care he has previously been approved for. “They don’t think it is ‘reasonable and necessary’ for Ian to have nursing funding,” said his partner, Bianca*. “We think it is reasonable for him to stay home and it is necessary in order for him to live. It’s cheaper for them if he dies.” Australia has weathered “sustained trade sanctions” from China to become more resilient but has lost ground when it comes to diplomatic influence in the region, according to the latest rankings of power in Asia. Australia remained ranked sixth in the overall rankings of comprehensive power in the region, after the US, China, Japan, India and Russia. Australia’s response to trade actions from China helped it to improve its score on its capacity to deter real or potential threats to state stability. The UK’s political leaders have left it too late to make a substantial difference to a potential wave of Omicron cases, a government scientific adviser said as the country recorded 43,992 new Covid cases and 54 deaths. The comments come as the UK justice secretary, Dominic Raab, concedes that a “formal party” in Downing Street last December would have been contrary to Covid guidance. In the US, Dr Anthony Fauci has dismissed a Republican senator’s claim he is “overhyping” Covid as “preposterous”. Meanwhile in Belgium (where two hippos have tested positive for Covid), protests against government restrictions turned violent. Australia A NSW scholarship program to recruit new maths teachers attracted only six people last year, five of whom dropped out. As the state’s public school teachers prepare for their first strike in almost a decade, new figures have cast doubt on the success of the government’s attempts to address teacher shortages without significantly increasing pay. The plan to control Kosciuszko national park’s feral horses poses a threat to the critically endangered freshwater fish the stocky galaxias. Horse numbers will be reduced overall but some will be allowed to remain in an area that is the only known habitat for fish. Peter Cundall has died aged 94. The much-loved former host of the ABC television program Gardening Australia died peacefully after a short illness. The world A US congressman has caused outrage by posting an “insensitive” tweet of a Christmas picture of himself and what appears to be his family posing with an assortment of guns, just days after four teenagers were killed in a shooting at a high school in Michigan. The UK data watchdog must introduce age verification for commercial pornography sites or face a high court challenge over any failure to act, children’s safety groups have demand in a letter to the Information Commissioner’s Office. Students at an Oxford University college have accused staff of disregarding their welfare after a postgrad who alleged she was sexually assaulted said she was treated with hostility after making a complaint. Rescuers continue to search for survivors after the highest volcano on Java island erupted on Saturday, killing at least 14 people and injuring dozens more. Recommended reads The prolific Yolŋu artist Dhambit Munuŋgurr has been waiting a long time to get Julia Gillard’s attention. Gillard was set to visit the north-east Arnhem Land community of Yirrkala to mark the 50th anniversary of the signing of the bark petitions, but was toppled in a Labor leadership spill a fortnight beforehand. Now, almost a decade on, the former female prime minister has again inspired the 53-year-old artist – this time as the subject of a large-scale work, Order, which depicts Gillard in parliament during her 2012 misogyny speech. Order will be hung as part of Bark Ladies: Eleven Artists from Yirrkala at the National Gallery of Victoria. After an unfortunate experience with a metal bench, Darling the dog ended up with symptoms of acute traumatic stress. Helping Darling to relax was vital to helping – but unlike a human, she isn’t dealing with the ethical and cognitive issues often involved in post-traumatic stress. “Dealing with any traumatic stress implicates a bio-psycho-social approach, and while our focus here is on the body, the psychological and the social aspects of traumatic stress are not just additive but are multiplicative,” write Gill Straker and Jacqui Winship. It’s that time of the month again – we’ve added 20 new songs to our Spotify playlist. Read about 10 of our favourites here, including Gang of Youths’ ambitious as hell and unrelentlessly earnest Tend the Garden, and Barkaa’s tune King Brown, in which the 26-year-old Malyangapa and Barkindji rapper reclaims a slur slung at her by a former lover. “A salsa sample anchors what is a truly singular hip-hop single, with Barkaa’s fierce bark obliterating whatever her sorry ex called her as toxic and then kept on calling her phone,” Nathan Jolly writes. Listen In early November, fruit pickers on Australian farms were granted a minimum wage. But unfair pay is just one example of the shocking conditions plaguing this sector, where it’s alleged that workers are routinely exploited. In this episode of Full Story, Laura Murphy-Oates speaks to reporter Cait Kelly about the dark side of Australian farm work. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Melbourne Victory’s women are now arguably the best A-League team in Melbourne after their 5-1 win over Adelaide United, writes Joey Lynch. “The overall performance would put a smile on the face of most coaches, especially taking into account that Victory had played all of one warm-up game during the pre-season and was missing its two best attackers.” Lewis Hamilton has distanced himself from his Formula One team’s partnership deal with Kingspan, an insulation company linked to the Grenfell Tower fire, saying he had nothing to do with the decision. Media roundup Queenslanders will not receive kidney, lung or heart transplants until they are fully vaccinated against Covid-19, the Courier-Mail reports. A Victorian man is believed to be the first single man to be granted approval to have a biological child on his own under the state’s surrogacy laws, reports the Age. Coming up Sydney bus drivers will go on strike. The man accused of Cleo Smith’s abduction is due in court in Carnarvon. And if you’ve read this far … Berlin’s DJs are persuading Unesco to grant heritage status to Berlin techno, saying they believe the backing of the UN body is vital for securing the future of the countercultural music genre that defined the reunification era. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday from 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.So that’s it for another week on Strictly – we’ve now got our four semi-finalists and next week AJ, Rose, John and Rhys will battle it out for a place in the Grand Final. That feels like the right four based on performances across the series, but feel free to air your grievances in the comment box below if you feel like there’s been a terrible Strictly injustice. Each couple has TWO DANCES next week, so there’s everything to play for – join me at 7.05pm on Saturday. Thanks for joining in and I’ll see you then! Hx Dan and Nadiya say lovely things about the show and the other contestants and each other, including an obligatory FRIENDS FOR LIFE from Dan and some tears from Nadiya. They take to the floor for their final dance, to ‘I Can’t Help Myself’ by The Four Tops. All the judges vote to save AJ and Kai, although they make a valiant effort to pretend it was a difficult decision. Dan says he would have saved AJ and Kai too, which I kind of love him for. Party Latin definitely isn’t AJ’s forte, but I think if this season of Strictly has taught us anything, it’s that Party Latin is NOBODY’S forte. And when we remind ourselves that AJ is a TV presenter from Blackburn rather than a Salsa goddess from Havana, it’s a pretty impressive effort. NAILED that final lift. Good work, AJ. Fab to see what that ending was supposed to look like. I actually quite liked this Tango last night, and I think Dan actually does a pretty decent job. It’s still a bit ploddy and lacks drive, but it’s also a long way from the kind of dancing he was doing in the early weeks. He should be really proud of his Strictly journey, Nadiya’s made a dancer of him. Ooh, next week John and Johannes are doing their Couple’s Choice, to ‘Hometown Glory’ by Adele. Reckon that might be one to watch. I mean, obviously I’ll be watching either way, it’s my job. But still, might keep both eyes on the telly rather than just the one. So who’s joining AJ and Kai in the bottom two? It’s DAN AND NADIYA, so John and Johannes are safe! Well, that’s a done deal, surely (SHIRLEY). Dan’s had an incredible run and has improved immensely, but neither he nor AJ have any dance experience and I think we can all sensibly agree that AJ is in a different league. So unless she and Kai manage to entirely stuff this up, it’s less of a dance-off and more of a…Dan’s Off. Time for a musical interlude, courtesy of the finest X Factor runners up EVER (sorry One Direction and Olly Murs). I’ve only been to one gig this year and it was JLS at the O2 a few weeks ago, so I’m happy to declare myself a FAN. They’re singing their new single ‘Postcard’ while Neil and Dianne do some contemporary wrestling. Yeah, OK. That was kind of horrible. Let’s pretend it never happened. So which couples are through to next week’s MASSIVE SEMI? Rhys and Nancy are safe, and you’ve never seen two people so relieved and excited. Rose and Giovanni are also safe. First couple in the bottom two: AJ AND KAI. Well, that’s not entirely unexpected, but at least she now has a chance to do that routine again without the shambolic final lift. The big questions is...will she be up against Dan and Nadiya or JoJo? EEEEK. Incidentally, I watched Rhys’s Argentine again this morning and decided my issue wasn’t Rhys’s dancing per se, it was the sheer number of lifts in that routine. For me an Argentine is a close contact dance, where any lifts are part of the push-and-pull tension of the whole thing. So the beginning and middle were great, but the acrobatic lifts in between broke that tension and spoiled the flow. It’s just my opinion, and it doesn’t detract from the fact that Rhys delivered outstanding control and some really great footwork. He absolutely deserves to be in the semi-final next week. Last night on Strictly – short, sweet and emotionally draining. Highlights: Rose and Gio’s swan dive American Smooth, moody Rhys, Oti and Graziano emoting, Claudia’s red disco frock (possibly my favourite of the season so far). Lowlights: this lift is not currently working, please use the stairs. Tess in the darts scoreboard from your local pub. Claudia in black trousers and festive sparkles. LOVE that shirt. And we’re off! Tonight’s opening pro dance has a ‘leading ladies’ theme, to a medley of Janet Jackson bangers. There are a lot of bad wigs and trashy ponytail hairography, but Aljaz in a white suit is the early Christmas gift we didn’t know we needed. Evening all, and welcome back for this week’s Results Show! Tension is running high at Liveblog Towers after a rollercoaster of a show last night, but by the end of this evening we’ll have our four semi-finalists and we’ll all be able to breathe out in relief/throw things at our tellies/remember that it’s only a gameshow*. *delete as appropriate. Kick-off is at 7.20pm – tonight’s dress code is a hoodie in either yellow, green, red or blue according to your favourite member of JLS, who are performing later. Obviously the correct answer is blue for Aston – it’s never too late to show our solidarity for one of the biggest Strictly injustices of all time. Until tonight, possibly. See you later! Thank you as ever for joining in – I’ll be back tomorrow evening from 7.20pm for the results show, when JLS will be performing live (YAAAS). In the meantime you can find me on Twitter @heidistephens, so feel free to swing by and say hello. Enjoy the rest of your Saturday! Hx The dancing is done and the voting is open! Time for a (very short) recap – Rhys and Nancy and Rose and Giovanni are at the top of the leaderboard, with AJ and Kai and Dan and Nadiya in line for the dance-off. Will it be them, or will the voting public give the pack a shuffle? It could well end up being a John/AJ Salsa dance off, which would be a real shame. What do we all think is going to happen?? Scores: 7,8,8,7 - a total of 30 for AJ and Kai. Shirley thought it had pure sass and full of energy, even though the ending went wrong. Anton agrees - the ending was a nightmare but otherwise great. Craig thought the landings from the lifts were generally heavy and the ending was a DISASTER, but it was very watchable. The ending killed Motsi, but the rest of it gave her goosebumps and it was a powerful Latin dance. Eek, this scoring is going to be BRUTAL. AJ is NOT here to play - this is a fabulous opening from her. Great footwork and timing in a really complex routine, with bags of energy and some amazing lifts. Ah, I say that, but the final lift was an absolute dog. Not a great night for final Salsa lifts, apparently. Eek. This week they’re dancing the Salsa to ‘Rhythm Is Gonna Get You/Get On Your Feet’ by Gloria Estefan. Love an Estefan mash-up, and have high hopes for this being a legendary party Salsa. Who wouldn’t want to go to AJ and Kai’s party? I’d be there with bells on. Scores: 7,8,9,7 - a total of 31 for Dan and Nadiya. Shirley giving that more than John and Johannes is just RUDE. Motsi was mesmerised by the intent (drink) at the beginning but he lost control a bit in the second half. Given time Dan will shine, says Shirley - he was focussed and it took on an independent feeling. Anton thought Dan’s frame wasn’t great in hold and it wasn’t all that good. Craig agreed that Dan has stepped it up but it was littered with balance issues. That said, it was his favourite of the dances Dan has done. I would agree with that. This has a slo-mo Matrix vibe and Dan is doing a very decent job, albeit it lacks drive and precision and he gets a bit shuffly and off-balance in the transitions. Nice Tango mood and definitely one of his better dances - mostly not in any way terrible. This week they’re dancing the Tango to ‘Santa Maria’ by Gotan Project. Always great to hear proper Tango music, and I have every expectation that Nadiya is going to do a brilliant job of this. Scores: 9,10,10,10 - a total of 39 for Rose and Giovanni. Craig thought it was gorgeous and he loved the storytelling. Motsi thought it was so well connected and she loved the changes of pace and mood - there was something for everyone. Shirley loved how Rose blocked out all the noise and clapping from Rhys’s performance and delivered an amazing performance. It touched Anton’s heart and he loved it. Loving cheesy Giovanni, and as expected this has bags of sugary charm. Rose looks like she’s having the time of her life, and is taking the rest of us along with her. Amazing lift/catch from Giovanni too. Really enjoyed that, I can’t stop smiling. This week they’re dancing the American Smooth to ‘This Will Be (An Everlasting Love)’ by Natalie Cole. Love this song, love this pairing, have every expectation that this is going to joyful and uplifting from start to finish. Scores: 9,10,10,10 - a total of 39 for Rhys and Nancy. OK, will definitely watch that again later. Anton thought Rhys absolutely nailed it, it was intense, involved and mature. Craig thought Rhys did a fantastic job, it had all the drama even though the grapevines got a bit out of sync. Motsi loved the connection Rhys and Nancy had and Argentine Tango is Rhys’s dance. Shirley just wants to hold Rhys right now and say well done. I mean, just say it, Shirley. No need for the holding. Maybe I missed something? I’ll watch it again later. This is quite moody and Nancy is giving it a lot of leg. I like the mood of this from Rhys, but the first round of ganchos are a bit heavy and there’s not nearly enough Argentine accents. Some nice lifts, but that’s not really what Argentine Tango is about for me. Bit disappointed. They’re dancing the Argentine Tango to ‘In The Air Tonight’ by Phil Collins. A few weeks ago I’d have said that Rhys didn’t have the control and tension in his body for a dance like this, but he’s come a really long way in this competition and this might actually be amazing. Weird song choice though – am generally not a huge fan of experimental 80s pop/rock Argentines, but each to their own. Scores: 7,8,8,9 - a total of 32 for John and Johannes. Feels a bit mean to punish John for Johannes mucking up the lift, no? Also much energy of party and energy. DRINK. Shirley loved the tricks and knee slide and John recovered well from Johannes giving him the wrong hand in the lift. Anton loved the disco feel, he hasn’t seen a Salsa danced in this style before. Hang on, where’s he been all these years? Craig loved the hips even though it lacked a tiny bit of dynamic, but John is a terrific dancer. Motsi loved that it was clean and rehearsed and John took some risks, it was a fantastic start to the show. Well this is right up my disco alley. I feel like John is finally letting go and properly enjoying himself, and as a result this has great party Salsa energy and fab footwork and timing. The final lift is a bit like John’s lugging a railway sleeper but otherwise marvellous. LOVED THAT. This week they’re dancing the Salsa to ‘We Are Family’ by Sister Sledge. Very much hoping John gives this full tipsy wedding dancefloor energy, it’s what we all need in these dark times. Out come the judges! Loving Shirley and Motsi both in white, and Motsi’s hair is incredible as ever. Out come the stars! Great outfits this week, everyone looks FAB.U.LUSS. Tess oven-ready in torn Bacofoil, Claudia in a scarlet strapless disco frock. One of these is lovely. Bonus pro dance! Oti and Graziano are having some kind of wintry fever dream to ‘It’s All Coming Back To Me Now’ by Celine Dion. It’s all quite intense but also rather gorgeous. Ooh, amazing leap off a chaise longue, I bet they nailed that down. And we’re off! It’s showday on Strictly, and there’s a fabulous magical energy behind the scenes. There’s only five of them left and it all comes down to THIS. EXCITING. There’s going to be more Salsa/Tango buzzwords than feathers at the Rio Carnival this evening, so mix yourself a fresh caipirinha for any mention of the following: Intensity Power Energy Drive Party BONUS DRINK for early mentions of TWO DANCES. Might be Dan, might be Rhys, might be a big old upset. My crystal snowglobe is largely useless from this point on. Evening all, and welcome to this week’s Strictly Come Dancing liveblog! It’s Week 11, which means the quarter-final is upon us. Only five couples remain, and it’s the shortest show of the season at only 57 minutes. As a long-time liveblogger, I thank you from the bottom of my worn fingers. We’re Salsa/Tango heavy this evening – two Salsas, one Tango, an Argentine Tango and a token American Smooth. That’s what happens when you practise Difficult Dance Avoidance for the whole series – next week’s two-dance Semi is going to be like a Boxing Day buffet of unwanted Latin leftovers. Random kick-off time tonight is at 6.40pm, so bring snacks, beverages, pets, children and your preferred electronic device. I’ll see you then!Hear the one about the major champions punished for playing from the wrong tee? Step forward Jordan Spieth and Henrik Stenson, who both made the bizarre error in the final round of the Hero World Challenge. A shuffling of Sunday tee positions at Albany meant the 9th, a par five, was played in its shortest form of the week. The lengthened, par three 17th was to be played from what had earlier been the back tee position at the 9th. Spieth and Stenson, playing at the front of the 20-man field, strode from the 8th green to what was actually the 17th tee and battered drives down the 9th fairway. Before they could reach their balls, a referee pointed out the error; both players had to return and play three from the tee. Both spoke openly and in a self-effacing manner about the faux pas the round was completed. Stenson takes up the story. “We kept our heads down off the finishing out on hole No8 and walked to the 9th tee box that we did on Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday,” said the Swede. “Put the ball down and hit some beautiful tee shots. Then when we went down to the hole, went down to the balls. The rules official said, ‘Did you hit off the right tee box?’ And we’re like, ‘Well, yeah...’ and then we looked back and we saw that there was another one forward and left. So obviously they switched things around and put 17 on the 9th tee box today and 9 was in a different place and we didn’t pay attention being first out and just motoring along. Yes, it was just go back and reload. It was only two shots each, so it wasn’t a big deal.” Standing alongside his playing partner on the media podium, Spieth at this point was in spurts of laughter. “I think the frustrating part for us now is that every other group, they’re making sure to tell them, but for us they didn’t,” he said. “It obviously didn’t matter for us, which is fortunate I think for those [tournament] guys.” Smiles soon returned. “My question to him was if we could just finish 19th and 20th and leave after 9, but that wasn’t an option,” said Stenson. Spieth again burst out laughing at this point. “Yes, he did,” said the Texan. “He asked if we could just head to the airport.” Spieth explained a comedy of errors. “I teed it up first and it wasn’t my tee,” he added. “So Michael [Greller, his caddie] told me it’s not my tee. Then Henrik hit. Then I teed up too far in front and he told me too scoot back.” Stenson at this point feared what had been portrayed as an easy mistake was reflecting badly. “You just spoiled the whole thing,” he said to Spieth. “Like, look at these guys; they don’t know who’s going to hit. Once they figured out who’s hitting, one guy’s trying to tee up in front and then they both hit from the wrong tee box. I guess we got what we deserved. “Let’s just leave it that a little note on the tee box would have been helpful and I will make sure I tee it up on the right tee box in the future because I don’t think I’ve ever done this before. Have a nice Christmas everyone and we’ll see you in the new year.” Stenson delivered handshakes to assembled media and headed to the clubhouse. In terms of the serious stuff, Collin Morikawa surprisingly blew the chance to earn top spot in the world rankings after a closing round of 75. The stumble of Morikawa, who started day four holding a five shot lead, allowed Viktor Hovland to prevail at Albany. Hovland’s 66 saw him win by one from Scottie Scheffler.Labour is embroiled in a tussle over advisers as it emerged two Asian women in the new shadow cabinet will no longer have their own personal aides. Keir Starmer redrew a slimmed-down frontbench last week to make the roles more reflective of the current cabinet. Labour has said it will also mean fewer political advisers as the party grapples with insecure finances. Two senior shadow ministers – Rosena Allin-Khan, the shadow mental health minister, and Preet Gill, the shadow international development secretary – have been told they must now fundraise independently for their advisers. Although Gill’s equivalent cabinet role was abolished when the government merged the International Development Department with the Foreign Office, Gill is still expected to attend shadow cabinet meetings. Allin-Khan, a practising A&amp;E doctor, will also lose her adviser. She will keep her high-profile role on mental health under the new shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting. Both declined to comment. One MP said it was “embarrassing two of the party’s most high-profile women have to go cap-in-hand trying to get support to do their jobs”. A Labour source said: “The Labour party is reorganising to get fighting fit for an election. Decisions are being made based on election priorities.” The source said the pair were not being specifically targeted for any other reason and that all shadow ministers would have access to resources. Starmer’s reshuffle, which has been well-received across much of the party for appointments such as Yvette Cooper as shadow home secretary and Lisa Nandy at levelling up, also shone new light on his divisions with the deputy leader, Angela Rayner. Over the weekend, Labour suspended Rayner’s director of communications, Jack McKenna, over a since-deleted tweet by a journalist, though the party said there was no presumption of guilt. McKenna is consulting his trade union. McKenna, an experienced adviser who worked under Jeremy Corbyn in the former Labour leader’s office, has been closely involved with Rayner’s high-profile campaign on uncovering Tory cronyism but has told friends he has been hit hard by the abuse and threats she has received during their time together. It is understood McKenna had been told by Rayner to take some time off for his mental health after the stress of the threats involving Rayner since Labour conference. While on leave, McKenna found out from a journalist that he had been suspended. He is understood to vehemently deny any wrongdoing. One Rayner ally suggested relations between her team and the leader’s office had been significantly patched up by the end of the week, and that she had been involved in discussions about the more junior posts in the reshuffle. Another shadow cabinet minister said Rayner needed to decide whether she was “going to be a Tom Watson or a John Prescott” – a reference to Corbyn’s deputy who was a thorn in his side, or Tony Blair’s deputy who had political differences but remained loyal and protective. Speaking to the Times last week, Starmer hinted that the dispute had not been about personal animosity between him and Rayner. “There is no personal issue between me and Angela. We’re friends, we get on, we talk a lot. We bring different things to the table. The two of us make each other stronger. She’s politically astute and invaluable to me as a deputy.”The far-right French presidential candidate Éric Zemmour appeared to be put in a headlock by a protester at his first campaign, a few days after he formally declared his candidacy in a video highlighting his anti-migrant and anti-Islam views. Videos online appeared to show Zemmour being grabbed by a man at the heated rally near Paris on Sunday, during which anti-racism activists were also reportedly attacked. He was later reported to have suffered light injuries. The former TV pundit announced on Tuesday that he would run in next April’s election, joining the field of challengers seeking to unseat centrist President Emmanuel Macron. He held his first event at an exhibition centre in a suburb of Paris where thousands cheered every mention of reducing immigration and booed every reference to Macron loudly. “The stakes are huge: if I win it will be the start of winning back the most beautiful country in the world,” Zemmour told the crowd. Fighting broke out and chairs were thrown at activists when they stood up with “No to Racism” written on their T-shirts, with at least two of them seen bleeding as they were ejected from the auditorium. A crew from the popular but critical Quotidien nightly TV news show were also booed and removed by security, with hostility to the media a feature of the speeches at the event. The rally was seen as a chance for Zemmour to regain momentum after opinion polls showed support for him falling over the last month as he attempted to maintain suspense about his intentions. Polls show that voters currently believe Marine Le Pen, the veteran leader of the far-right National Rally party, would make a more competent president than Zemmour. The latest surveys suggest he would be eliminated in the first round if the election were held now, with Macron tipped to win ahead of Le Pen, but analysts warn that the outcome remains highly uncertain. Zemmour vowed to reduce immigration to almost zero if he were elected, dramatically toughen up the naturalisation process, and expel failed asylum-seekers and illegal immigrants. France’s right-wing Republicans party picked the boss of the Paris region Valerie Pecresse as its nominee on Saturday after a primary dominated by talk of immigration and crime. Police were on alert for far-left activists and anarchists who disrupted Zemmour’s trip last weekend to the southern of port city of Marseille, which ended with the candidate showing the middle finger to a woman who was protesting. As well as a series of recent missteps, Zemmour has seen several influential figures on the far-right distance themselves from him, including his main financial backer.• A story reported research into the health of people who recovered after being seriously sick with Covid-19. However, the headline – Long Covid: Death within a year twice as likely after severe illness – wrongly equated the post-illness period studied with long Covid, a condition where identified Covid symptoms persist (1 December, p7). • The composer is Franz Liszt, not Lizst (The divine algorithm, 26 November, p17). • Other recently amended articles include: How bad is the British Columbia and Pacific north-west flooding and what caused it? ‘I didn’t think this would air on the BBC’: the stars of shocking legal drama You Don’t Know Me The British film board’s racism rule change smacks of paternalism“Don’t push me, I’m going to cry,” says Esteban Ocon of missing out on the podium at the very last. “Five metres to the end, that was what cost us the podium ... hard to swallow, the competitor inside me is frustrated and very sad ... today was an outstanding team effort once again.” Fair play. Anyway, that’s all from me. Thanks for reading, emailing, tweeting ... that was mad wasn’t it? And it all comes down to next week in Abu Dhabi. See you soon for more. “Hi Luke, having read Alex Kroon’s email to you, I can tell you that the headline in EL PAIS is that Verstappen performed a “strange manoeuvre” causing the touch with Hamilton,” emails Simon West. “And that he “turned the struggle for the championship into a dirty fight”, so other parts of Europe are obviously taking a view on what happened today.” Looking at an on-board replay from Verstappen’s car when Hamilton hit him, it looks to me as if he is genuinely trying to let Hamilton through. But, ultimately, that incident is not why people are complaining about Verstappen today – it was more a couple of reckless moves in corners (which, it is worth pointing out, he was punished for during the race) ... Race report! More Hamilton quotes, from a press conference: “I took a lot of risk at the end, with the damage that I had, to get the extra point [for the fastest lap] ... we keep pushing, we never give up ... today I think I’ve seen a passion in my team which I don’t think I’ve seen in 10 years, and that’s amazing.” Hamilton gives his version of the contact with Verstappen: “I didn’t get the information, so I didn’t really understand what was going on, it was very very confusing, all of a sudden he started backing up and started moving a little bit [across the track], I was like: “Is he trying to play some crazy tactic? I don’t know.” The message started coming through just as he ... like, he hit the brakes so hard that I nearly went up the back of him and took us both out. “For him ... it doesn’t matter for him if we don’t both finish. For me, we both need to finish ... but it’ll be interesting to see what happens. “I’m personally chilled ... I’m personally chilled ... I feel like I’m in the boxing ring, and I’m ready to go.” Lewis Hamilton has a chat: “For me, I had to try and keep my cool out there which was really difficult to do, and, like, I’ve raced a lot of drivers through my life, in the 28 years [of racing] I’ve come across a lot of different characters, and there’s a few like at the top which are kind of, yeah, over the limit ... yeah ... rules don’t apply, or don’t think the rules apply. “Today, I just tried to do my talking on the track, keep the car between the white lines, and do it the right way, I was trying to catch ... we got the pole, then I lost out, then I got back past, he passed over the kerb. “There were just so many crazy curveballs ... then he obviously brake-tested, I think, to try and get the DRS back into turn 1 to overtake me again. There was the commotion, I lost my wing ... I took a lot of risks to get fastest lap. “He’s [Verstappen] over the limit, for sure. I mean I’ve avoided collision on so many occasions with the guy and I don’t always mind being the one that does that, you live to fight another day, which I obviously did.” Lewis Hamilton is going to speak to Sky shortly. “Hi Luke, As a Dutchman I have a feeling that you are biased,” emails Alex Kroon. “Had a quick scan of the European papers (Le Monde, Bild, etc.) No one is even mentioning things like this except they all see it as a epic title fight. Maybe focus more on that." A bit of friction between Damon Hill and Christian Horner in that post-race reaction just then ... meanwhile Paul Di Resta thinks the constructors’ championship is sealed for Mercedes, with Bottas snatching third place on the line. Mercedes have 587.5pts, Red Bull have 559.5pts in that competition. Christian Horner says the team are not down, despite seeing Verstappen’s championship lead eroded so dramatically over the past few weeks. Mahim Mishra emails: “This race is a perfect demonstration of why it is so fraught to compare the great drivers of this era, Hamilton included, with the greats of the past, and apply labels like Greatest Of All Time. It is entirely plausible that Verstappen will win several drivers’ titles and himself be part of that G.O.A.T. conversation in a decade and a half. Yet had he been racing in the 50s, 60s, 70s or 80s, he’d be dead by now.” “Interesting isn’t it that Verstappen just admitted that he indeed did apply the brakes in that slowing down situation in addition to downshifting 5 gears?” emails Andrew Chappell. “Therefore brake testing? He had no need apply the brakes after all the slowing down.” Christian Horner of Red Bull has a chat: “That was a race that was very difficult to manage ... I think race control struggled with it ... we feel hard done by with the five-second penalty ... and then the incident when Lewis has driven into the back of Max - we informed race control we were giving the place up. I don’t know if he’s [Lewis] messing around for the DRS line there, we had informed race control we were going to give the place up ... “We said OK, we’ll give the place up and we informed race control.” “It’s weird, it looks like Lewis has lifted off, it’s like he didn’t want to pass him there because of the DRS ... we picked up quite a bit of damage with that. It’s very frustrating and very annoying. “It was a shame with the quali, yesterday, not to get the pole but Max was able to address that and get the lead.” Christian Horner is about to speak to Sky Sports. Meanwhile, Verstappen again, on the contact with Hamilton: “I was just down-shifting and braking for him to go by ... I looked in the mirror and waited for him to pass ... maybe there was some confusion ... I was already off the racing line, I don’t know ... maybe he was looking for the DRS, they told me on the radio to let him by, so that’s what I did. “Like always, I’ll try to do the best I can [next weekend]. “Brundle usually talks a hell of a lot of sense - from a position of huge experience,” emaills Tony Bartholomew. “So if he’s saying Verstappen has crossed a line today, I think that says something.” I agree 100 per cent. Wolff, continued: “I need to reserve judgment, I will see the race again tomorrow ... the driving needs to be assessed and looked at ... it’s hard, very hard, maybe over the line hard ... we just want to have a clean championship, may the best man win, and if Max wins at the end I have peace with that, but it needs to be fair.” Toto Wolff, the Mercedes team principle, speaks to Sky Sports: “I don’t think this is yet done ... the result, he [Hamilton] deserved it ... he could have been out a few times with a broken front wing ... I don’t want to do ‘dirty laundry’ here. That was spectacular, but not a good race.” “Hamilton didn’t know [Verstappen was giving the place back], there was the wrong sequence of messages ... DRS was not on Lewis’s mind ... I think it could have been confusion, absolutely, but the stewards will look precisely at the telemetry, and then come to a conclusion.” Nadim Chaudry emails: “For Lewis to have kept his head in what to my mind was almost homicidal tactics by Verstappen is just incredible. I do hope the stewards look at Verstappen’s behaviour ... Reckless and just not sporting. “In years to come I think that may be judged Hamilton’s finest race. A great great champion with none of the malice of Schumacher, Prost, Senna. The British public need to appreciate this man more. He’s a gent on and off the track. Love him to bits.” Hamilton did incredibly well to keep his composure. Absolutely no question about that. “It looks to me like it’s a less malicious move by Max than we first thought,” says Damon Hill, on pundit duty for Sky. “They were two big hits, I don’t know how they both continued,” says Di Resta of the contact between Hamilton and Verstappen. “It’s applied after the race,” says Richard Wood of the five-second penalty. “It’s not a drive-through penalty.” “I’m a lifelong F1 cynic but have been drawn in by this gripping, vindictive finale,” emails Paul Griffin. “If neither finish the last race – a fair bet judging by today’s streetcraft - who wins the championship?” The answer is that Verstappen wins by virtue of having won more races this season. So that’s obviously not a potential issue at all! Interesting stuff from Nick Honeywell on email: “From the high camera angle (not quite overhead), it very much looked to me like Verstappen almost came to a stop and the got back on the gas straight away, causing Lewis to hit him. Presumably the stewards will have access to the telemetry which will prove this one way or the other. “Either way, absolute madness from Verstappen, who is a danger to everyone else on the track now. “Also, re: “why didn’t Lewis just go around”, I suspect that because Verstappen had slowed so unnaturally, he was worried there might be an obstacle - crashed backmarker or debris - that would’ve been the reason Verstappen slowed, so wouldn’t have wanted to overtake at speed and smash into something.” Red Bull, apparently, say they have the data to prove that Verstappen did not ‘brake test’ Hamilton. That incident, by the way, is being investigated so it’s possible Verstappen will be punished in some way. “What I don’t understand is, why didn’t Lewis go by?” asks the Sky F1 pundit Paul di Resta. “I don’t think there was anything malicious from Max at that point.” “So what happened about Verstappen’s 5 sec penalty that he didn’t appear to take?” asks Steve on email. I was wondering the same thing. Was it something to do with the fact that third place was so far back it wouldn’t have made any difference? I honestly don’t know. Verstappen walks off the podium and plays no part in the celebrations. Going into the Abu Dhabi grand prix, in seven days, both Hamilton and Verstappen are on 369.5 points each. Remarkable stuff, no matter what the rights and wrongs of what happened today, and what happened across the race. Bizarrely, my video feed dropped out at the precise moment that Verstappen was asked about the little shunt with Hamilton, and came back just as he was finishing his answer. Sky Sports then apologised for that, so it wasn’t a problem at my end. Strange. “Verstappen did a Rassie Erasmus on it today ... acting way over the top, unsportsmanlike and downright dangerous,” emails John Fitzsimons. The drivers are on the podium now: Hamilton, Verstappen, Bottas, in that order. A remarkable race that was far from perfect. A farce? I’m not sure. I think Hamilton has every right to be unhappy with some of Verstappen’s driving ... as for the little shunt, it did look like Verstappen veered into Hamilton’s path at the last minute. Whether that constitutes ‘brake testing’ him is another question. Max Verstappen is voted driver of the day by fans and says something about being glad that the fans understand racing, and ‘it’s not Formula One’ if it’s more about penalties than racing ... Controversial! Lewis Hamilton, the race winner, speaks: “I’ve been racing a long time and that was incredibly tough ... I tried to be as sensible and as tough as I could be out there ... [I used] all my racing experience just keeping the car on track and staying clean ... we’ve had all sorts of things thrown at us in the second half of the season ... On the contact with Verstappen: “I didn’t understand why he hit the brakes quite heavily ... then I ran into the back of him ... then he moved on ... I got a message afterwards [that he was giving a place back], it was a bit confusing. “They’ve [Red Bull] got some raw pace, they have been so quick, it was very hard to overtake them today. “This is for all the guys and girls back in the factory ... the people have been lovely [in Saudi Arabia] and the track is phenomenal to drive. Very difficult physically and mentally but you wouldn’t want it any other way.” Bottas speaks: “It was tricky with all the red flags ... it was quite difficult to overtake. It’s a nice track, a big challenge physically and mentally.” Max Verstappen speaks: “It was quite eventful ... a lot of things happened which I don’t fully agree with ... I tried on track to give it all ... just lacking a bit of rubber I think towards the end, but still second. “It will be decided in Abu Dhabi, hopefully we’ll have a good weekend there.” I’m getting a lot of emails, a LOT of emails, with accusations of bias from me on both sides, and only one abusive one so far ... I’ll take that. An absolutely crazy grand prix, with a lot of questions to be answered: Is that circuit too dangerous for Formula One? Was the punishment for Verstappen handled correctly? For just two ... Hamilton climbs out of his car and I have never seen him celebrate as riotously as he is right now. There is a massive amount to unpick from that race but what Martin Brundle says on commentary for Sky Sports is surely right: Verstappen crossed the line today in terms of safety and fair racing. “I don’t know why he [Hamilton] went up the back of you there Lewis, it made no sense at all,” says a Red Bull team member on the radio to Verstappen. At the end of an absolutely mad, and some may say farcical, grand prix, Mercedes take first and third on the podium with Lewis Hamilton winning the race ... Max Verstappen of Red Bull finishes second and it will be all square going into the final race of the season in Abu Dhabi. “Verstappen’s got to look at his driving standards, that was too much today,” says Brundle. “That’s more like it! Great job today guys!” says Hamilton on the radio. Lap 50/50: Hamilton closes out the win ... Bottas takes Ocon at the last and gets on the podium! Wolff is pictured smiling and clapping. Astonishing, astonishing stuff! Lap 50/50: Bottas gets past Ocon! But Ocon grabs the place back immediately! Lap 49/50: Up to 8.2sec for Hamilton at the front. Bottas keeps trying to put pressure on Ocon and grab the podium place ... “So if it stays like this they will be equal on points but Max ahead on wins - guaranteed then that he will crash into Lewis’s car and do a Schumie,” emails Steve Ditchburn. Lap 48/50: Fastest lap for Hamilton! This has been an awesome drive from him yet again ... Bottas meanwhile is trying to get past Ocon and snatch third place ... Hamilton has over seven seconds at the front of the race! Incredible! Is Hamilton going to remonstrate with Verstappen at the end over what he called his ‘fucking crazy’ driving? Lap 47/50: Over five seconds at the front for Hamilton and Mercedes ... he’s also got damage to his front wing after that earlier contact with Verstappen. Lap 46/50: Hamilton is streaking away at the front now. Ocon is nearly 25 seconds down in third place ... Verstappen is four seconds down on his title rival. If it finishes like this, Hamilton and Verstappen will go to Abu Dhabi, the final race of the season, all square. Absolute scenes. Lap 45/50: Brundle says Red Bull need a fresh set of tyres for Verstappen and they need to go to the fastest lap. “He left him loads of room ...” says Brundle ... “Then at the last moment there was some movement [from Verstappen].” Lap 44/50: Hamilton leads the grand prix by nearly two seconds and Verstappen has the five-second penalty, when is he going to take that? Lap 43/50: This is too much. Hamilton now overtakes Verstappen! Again! And Verstappen still has the five-second penalty to soak up. Lap 42/50: Verstappen lets Hamilton past ... and then immediately overtakes again! Verstappen has now apparently been hit with a five-second time penalty for leaving the track (that must be a few laps ago, when Hamilton overtook him on the start/finish straight ...) Lap 41/50: There is a fierce row going on in the pits between the race director and the teams as to who said what and when ... and if it was clear to Mercedes that Verstappen was giving the place back. This really is madness. Verstappen was clearly slowing though, why didn’t Hamilton just go around him, even if he was slightly over to the middle of the track from the left ? Lap 40/50: “I think it was a misunderstanding, frankly,” says Brundle of that latest incident between Hamilton and Verstappen. Race control have instructed Verstappen to give the place back to Hamilton. “Red Bull will say we tried to give him the place back, and he ran into us ...” says Brundle ... “Mercedes will say he brake-tested us.” Lap 39/50: A message from a friend comes in via WhatsApp: “In fairness, Red Bull have correctly calculated that this track turns the race into a lottery and they can take their chances that either a red flag or multiple safety cars will allow them to get to to the end without another pit stop.” This is mad. Verstappen is told on the radio to give the place back ... he slows down, but in the middle of the track. Hamilton, seemingly unaware, can’t slow down in time and touches the back of Verstappen’s car, and damages his front wing! This is crazy! “He just brake-tested me!” Hamilton says of Verstappen. Wolff is pictured looking furious in the pits. Along with the rest of the team. What is going on!!? Lap 37/50: “Fucking crazy, man,” Hamilton says on the radio. Lap 36/50: Hamilton is pushing, pushing, pushing ... Hamilton overtakes down the start/finish straight! But Verstappen, again, isn’t having any of it! They touch in the corner and Verstappen emerges further in the lead!!! Lap 35/50: Hamilton sets the fastest lap by 8/100ths of a second. He is a fraction under a second behind Verstappen. This is a great battle. Ocon, Ricciardo and Bottas are third, fourth and fifth respectively. There is more debris on the track. Lap 34/50: “Lewis clearly shoved Max off the track and then Max is blamed for it?” emails Rick McGeady. I don’t agree with that. Hamilton got a better start, by a mile, he ‘owned the corner’ as Brundle said. And Verstappen, in desperation, went off track to try and keep the lead. Lap 33/50: “Isn’t the rule that the criminal is punished rather than the victim resurrected?” emails Rob Rouge. “Max was told to give back his position, i.e. fall back behind Lewis. Esteban did nothing wrong, so could stay where he was. When Valtteri pushed Max off track for a DNF the other day, Max wasn’t put back into the race, but Valtteri was punished. It would be good if this Lewis fan site could explain the rules, even when they’re not in its hero’s favour. This is a good battle between two great talents.” Thanks for the kind words! I am very much neutral and impartial, I can assure you... Lap 32/50: The ‘VSC’ endures at the laps tick down. However this plays out from here, I must admit, I am kind of looking forward to the post-race interviews go. There are going to be a lot of strong opinions from all sides on this one! Lap 31/50: “What plays into Red Bull’s hands here is that all these virtual safety cars aren’t taking much out of Verstappen’s tyres,” points out Brundle on commentary for Sky. Lap 29/50: Another virtual safety car, to clear up yet more debris on the track. I’m getting a lot of emails featuring the word ‘farce’ ... and there is plenty of sympathy for Hamilton in how this is working out so far ... Verstappen and Red Bull gambled after that first crash, and it paid off, but the way Verstappen’s punishment was handled after he clearly unfairly overtook Hamilton does indeed seem ridiculous. “The circuit is in the worst condition of the weekend,” says one of the drivers on the radio referring to the debris on track. This is dangerous for the drivers. Lap 28/50: Debris on the track, and a brief virtual safety car. The gap between the race leader, Verstappen, and second-placed Hamilton seems to be moving up and down. Hamilton is chasing hard ... one moment it’s 1.5secs, then it seems to move down to under a second. Lap 27/50: Top 10: 1 Max Verstappen Red Bull 2 Lewis Hamilton Mercedes +1.435 3 Esteban Ocon Alpine +14.279 4 Daniel Ricciardo Mclaren +18.238 5 Valtteri Bottas Mercedes +18.354 6 Pierre Gasly Alphatauri +20.849 7 Antonio Giovinazzi Alfa Romeo Racing +28.715 8 Carlos Sainz Ferrari +31.885 9 Charles Leclerc Ferrari +32.968 10 Lance Stroll Aston Martin +36.591 Lap 26/50: The gap between Verstappen and Hamilton is down to under half a second! Lap 26/50: “I agree with Felix Wood. This is a farce,” emails David in Stockholm. “It reminds of Michael Schumacher running people off the track to win and no one did anything. That’s when I stopped watching the sport. This is season has got me back into it, but this is no good ... I’m off out for a beer. Greetings from Stockholm.” Lap 25/50: Hamilton is 1.2secs behind Verstappen. Can he catch his prey and overtake? How is Verstappen’s car going to hold up after that qualifying crash? What is the tyre strategy going to be for the two protagonists in the title race from here? Lap 23/50: In the pits, Toto Wolff looks ashen-faced. Hamilton and Mercedes lost a lot of time, for some reason, on that last lap before the virtual safety car. The virtual safety car ends with Tsunoda in the pits. And we are racing again ... Lap 23/50: Yellow flag! Tsunoda (AlphaTauri) spins off, his front wing comes off, and he gets a bit snarled up while trying to drive over it ... and now it’s a virtual safety car! Lap 22/50: Hamilton trails Verstappen by 1.5sec, doing his best to put his title rival under pressure. I hear you, Felix, but I guess the race director, rather than asking for Red Bull to decide, was gauging whether or not they would protest his decision, which is an important distinction. It did seem odd though, no question about it. “I’m genuinely baffled by this,” writes Felix Wood on email. “Since when do teams get to decide what is an acceptable punishment for them? Ocon was first because Verstappen broke the rules, but Red Bull get to decide the starting order? And the stewards don’t get involved at all? This is a farce, no?” Lap 20/50: Hamilton is under a second behind Verstappen. Verstappen sets the fastest lap. “Lack of power, guys,” Verstappen says on the radio. It’s all happening. Steve Ditchburn emails regarding that second standing start: “So Hamilton was leading and Verstappen did something that caused him to drop two places? Then the race director says that Hamilton has to drop to second!!Surely that cannot be right?” Lap 17/50: Amazing stuff, really. A real ding-dong battle on and off the track ... Hamilton overtakes Ocon and is now in second place, hunting down his title rival Verstappen. They replay the start on TV - it’s almost as if Hamilton had no idea Verstappen had the pace - or the intention - to try and take him on the inside into that first corner. It was a bold move by Verstappen to say the least and it paid off. And that was the THIRD standing start that we have had so far today ... Well ... that was exciting ... again! Verstappen brakes late, diving down the inside of Hamilton. Ocon is forced wide on the outside as a result of Hamilton having no space ... and Verstappen leads! Colin Boulton emails: “Why should Hamilton not be on pile for the restart, he did nothing wrong.” Esteban Ocon leads the cars on to the grid, after the third formation lap of the day. As mentioned on commentary on Sky Sports, the incident with Verstappen and Hamilton was not referred to the race stewards. It was the race director who negotiated with Red Bull regards to the punishment for Verstappen. Anyway, it’s pretty clear that as George Russell said, the drivers need to absolutely millimetre-perfect to avoid crashing on this narrow, fast circuit ... It’s another standing start, says Michael Masi. We’re going to have the third standing start of the day ... I wonder if it will be as exciting, and as controversial, as the last one. “My Gawd, this could turn into a fiasco of a GP,” emails Steve Carbert. “I’m still expecting Max Verstappen’s gearbox to implode though.” “Unless Hamilton wins by enough to have a points lead going into the last race, he will have no chance in Abu Dhabi,” emails Phil Haran. “Because it’s clear Verstappen WILL take Hamilton out to win the championship. There can be little doubt about it after this last restart.” This is all quite odd, but it’s interesting. “Uncharted territory, I would say,” observes Brundle. It seems likely now that the race will restart with Ocon on pole, Hamilton second and Verstappen third. We’ve already had two red flags. Half an hour ago, Verstappen looked to be in a perfect position, having elected not to pit after Schumacher’s crash. Now, after the race restart in which Hamilton got a much better start than his rival Verstappen, it seems the advantage it back with the British world champion, after Verstappen attracted censure from the race director for going off track at the first corner. Correction, so the deal is: Ocon will be on pole, Hamilton second, Verstappen third. Red Bull say they will accept P2, on the condition that Ocon is on pole, which seems like a ludicrous idea to me. Obviously it would not be fair to drop Hamilton down to third given he led into the first corner, and was in control of the race, before a move by Verstappen that the race director has now concluded was not fair. Toto Wolff is pictured marching down the pitlane. Red Bull are told that Verstappen can start in second position, a place behind Hamilton, after what occurred at the first corner. Red Bull ask for a minute or two to think about it. “We thought we were pushed off there,” they say. The problem for the stewards, in one way, is that Esteban Ocon of Alpine made his way between Hamilton and Verstappen on that corner, so can they reasonably demote Verstappen two places, behind Ocon? “Was it fair in your opinion?” Brundle is asked by David Croft of Verstappen’s move at that first corner. “No. Lewis owned the corner.” Lap 15/50: This is going to be a very interesting decision for the stewards ... Hamilton went down the inside, and was clearly ahead having got a far, far better start than his rival ... Verstappen just veered on the outside, off the track, ‘outside the white line’ as Hamilton says on the radio to his team now, and retook the lead. “And you are also obliged to rejoin the track in a safe manner,” says Brundle. Verstappen will have to give the place back ... won’t he? Wow! Wow! Hamilton got a better start by Verstappen, by miles, and led into the first corner ... but Verstappen forced his way back across the track, and just bullied his way back into the lead ... back down the track, Nikita Mazepin smashes into the wall in his Haas, and it’s another red dlag. Lap 15/50: Verstappen is now complaining that Hamilton, who should be no more than 10 car lengths behind on the formation lap, is way more than that behind. “That’s not allowed,” says the Dutchman. “Why is the safety car driving so slow? We can’t heat up the tyres,” Verstappen complains on the radio, a familiar refrain. Lap 14/50: The cars are rolling back out. Those time gaps from before are beside the point, of course. We are now having the second formation lap of the day ... and it should be a standing start, as opposed to a rolling start, when the race gets back on. We thought there would be drama ... and there is drama! Verstappen rolls back into the fray, on nice, shiny new hard tyres. He must be feeling as thrilled as Hamilton is dismayed. Hamilton speaks on the radio to his team: “So what’s the scenario now? What are we going to do?” “Hi Lewis, everyone’s going to go to the end on these hard tyres,” comes the response ... “the main thing to do is pressure him [Verstappen]”. Lap 14/50: The race is still red-flagged. This is the top three as it stands: 1 Max Verstappen Red Bull (1 stop) 2 Lewis Hamilton Mercedes (2 stops) 3 Valtteri Bottas Mercedes (2 stops) Lap 14/50: The race will resume in 10 minutes. On the radio a while ago, Hamilton sounded suspicious, as if Red Bull had some inkling that there would be a red flag. There is no evidence for that, of course, and as Brundle said on commentary even before the red flag came out, it made sense for Red Bull not to copy Mercedes and pit immediately when the safety car came out. They needed to gamble to try and wrest control back from Mercedes, who had enjoyed a perfect start to the race having started one-two on the grid. But even Red Bull’s Christian Horner may not have hoped it would have worked out quite as well as it has ... Lap 14/50: “That was a roll of the dice and it came up double six for Red Bull,” says Brundle on commentary. “But there’s a long way to go yet.” Lap 14/50: Hamilton, on the radio, sounds furious. “Find out what the reason for the red flag is?” he asks. Verstappen is back in the pits with his helmet off while the team work on his car. Hamilton knows that Verstappen has gained a huge advantage by virtue of that red flag, taken by the race officials, while they try and tidy up Schumacher’s crash. “Have they said what the reason is? ... that’s unbelievable man. That was a big gamble that they just took ...” Hamilton adds. Big moment. The red flag, suspending the race, means the cars will return to the pitlane ... crucially that means that Verstappen can change his tyres, having not previously pitted. On a track where it’s so tough to overtake this could prove pivotal in the title race ... Brundle on commentary points out that Hamilton benefited from this scenario at Imola. Lap 13/50: The safety car remains while they continue to clear up after Schumacher’s accident. A few moments ago Verstappen was asking if the safety car could fo faster, a few moments ago. He’s a man in a hurry. The accident is going to complicate matters for pit strategy. Brundle: “Mercedes were in control ... if they’d just followed Mercedes in, they would be on an identical strategy.” Lap 12/50: We see replays of Schumacher’s crash, which was a heavy one. Verstappen sits behind the safety car, having not pitted, with Hamilton and Bottas behind him having changed their tyres. Lap 11/50: The crash has made the pit strategy interesting ... Hamilton and Bottas both pit immediately for Mercedes. Verstappen stays out and now leads! “There’s a very good chance there will be another safety car or incident,” says Brundle on commentary. Lap 10/50: Mick Schumacher (Haas) crashes heavily! It’s a safety car ... “Are you OK, Mick?” his team asks on the radio. “Yeah I’m OK ... sorry about that,” he replies sheepishly. The car is a mess but thankfully he is OK. Lap 9/50: For those of us hoping for a wheel-to-wheel duel between Hamilton and Verstappen today, it’s not looking too good right now. The top three are pulling away from the rest of the field, Hamilton is streaking away. Live standings on lap 8/50: 1 Lewis Hamilton Mercedes 2 Valtteri Bottas Mercedes +1.486 3 Max Verstappen Red Bull Racing +3.015 4 Charles Leclerc Ferrari +7.694 5 Sergio Perez Red Bull Racing +9.760 6 Lando Norris Mclaren +15.735 7 Esteban Ocon Alpine +17.341 8 Pierre Gasly Alphatauri +18.787 9 Daniel Ricciardo Mclaren +19.312 10 Fernando Alonso Alpine +22.502 11 Antonio Giovinazzi Alfa Romeo Racing +23.040 12 Carlos Sainz Ferrari +23.647 13 Yuki Tsunoda Alphatauri +25.114 14 Kimi Räikkönen Alfa Romeo Racing +26.210 15 Sebastian Vettel Aston Martin +27.855 16 Lance Stroll Aston Martin +31.026 17 George Russell Williams +32.949 18 Mick Schumacher Haas F1 Team +34.531 19 Nicholas Latifi Williams +36.149 20 Nikita Mazepin Haas F1 Team +39.001 Lap 6/50: Verstappen in third place is now 1.5seconds down on Bottas. Both the Mercedes, that of Hamilton and Bottas, are clearly flying. Bottas gets on the radio and seems to ask if Hamilton can push it a little more at the front and widen the gap because he doesn’t want to be in his slipstream. Lap 4/50: My first impressions of the circuit is that it’s nigh-on impossible to overtake. There it little room for manoeuvre. Bottas takes the fastest lap. Lap 3/50: Hamilton leads Bottas by 1.5secs. At the start of the race, Sergio Pérez of Red Bull locked up his wheels when he nearly went into the back of Ferrari’s Charles Leclerc. Lap 2/50: The circuit is noticeably narrow and super-fast. As George Russell said, the drivers need to be millimetre-perfect in everything they do. I’m waiting for some on-screen timings, but Hamilton leads from Bottas, with Verstappen third. Lap 1/50: Everyone gets away cleanly. Hamilton, Bottas and then Verstappen stay in first, second and third. An ideal start for Mercedes as they look to crank up the heat on Red Bull ... Hamilton gets away well and leads into the first corner! Hamilton has been flawless in recent races. He’s been playing catch-up for much of the season so perhaps the pressure is on Verstappen not to throw it away ... Anyway, the formation lap has begun, and we are just a couple of minutes away from showtime on this narrow, fast circuit in Saudi Arabia, which is looking stunning at night, positioned on the edge of the Red Sea. Will yesterday’s mishap affect Verstappen? He would dearly love to have been on pole, and in more control ... and how much will he attack at the start, will he go all out to try to get past Bottas in second? There’s plenty of pressure on the start, which will take place in under 10 minutes. Verstappen currently leads Hamilton by eight points in the drivers’ standings. If he leads by 26 points or more by the end of the race, he is champion. In other words, he needs to out-score Hamilton by 18 points or more today to seal the championship with a race still to go. But as things stand that looks unlikely: for instance, he’d need to win the race, take the fastest lap point, and for Hamilton to finish sixth or lower. We shall see. Toto Wolff of Mercedes speaks: “One and two is really good for us, I hope we can stay there. If it stays like this - knock on wood - then it’s all wide open for Abu Dhabi. “I work up this morning and it’s so exciting, this is why we are racing, the butterflies in the stomach ... we are so privileged to be involved in a title fight like this.” George Russell of Williams, who starts 14th on the grid, speaks: “Hopefully a lot of action ... you’ll be punished if you got a millimetre too much, or too little ... I hope it won’t be too difficult to overtake ... you’ve got to be inch-perfect everywhere you go.” Sir Frank Williams died just a few days ago, of course, and Giles Richards remembers him here: We’re 15 minutes away from lights out. You’ve got time to read Giles Richards’s report from qualifying: Carlos Sainz of Ferrari, who starts 15th on the grid, has a quick chat: “I should be in the points today with a good race ... it’s a balance to find.” Brundle asks Christian Horner of Red Bull if they should have changed Verstappen’s gearbox after that accident: “It’s passed all the tests we’d normally do ... there was no pressure to take additional risks ... we’ve got to go for it, Max has been driving beautifully this weekend ... it was a great shame yesterday not to convert that lap but there is a lot of racing to be done.” Martin Brundle is doing his famous gridwalk now. He has spoken to Mika Hakkinen, who thinks Mercedes’s recent speed gives Lewis Hamilton the edge in the drivers’ title race, despite the fact they are playing catch-up. Adrian Newey of Red Bull, their chief technical officer, tells Brundle that no significant damage was caused to Verstappen’s car by that shunt in qualifying. Half an hour until lights out. Pre-race reading on a controversial sponsorship deal for Mercedes, with Kingspan, an insulation company linked to the Grenfell Tower disaster: Mathematically speaking, Max Verstappen of Red Bull could win the drivers’ title in Saudi Arabia today, in the penultimate grand prix of the Formula One 2021 season. But with his championship rival Lewis Hamilton on pole position for Mercedes after a dramatic qualifying session, the Dutchman (who starts third on the grid) will not be taking anything for granted. Hamilton’s fighting spirit has come to the fore in recent weeks and if this season is anything to go by – including that latest instalment in qualifying, when Verstappen looked to be heading for pole before hitting a trackside wall on his final flying lap – we should be in for another generous dose of excitement. There is no shortage of needle between the protagonists either, Hamilton and Verstappen in the drivers’ cockpits along with Toto Wolff of Mercedes and Christian Horner of Red Bull, with the drivers’ and constructors’ championships still up for grabs. The season finale next week in Abu Dhabi beckons, but could someone strike a decisive blow in Saudi Arabia today? It’s not out of the question. We’ll find out from 5.30pm when the lights go out. Pre-race reading and more coming up.Bob Dole, the long-time Kansas senator who was the Republican nominee for president in 1996, has died. He was 98. In a statement on Sunday, the Elizabeth Dole Foundation – founded by Dole’s wife, a former North Carolina senator and cabinet official – said: “It is with heavy hearts we announced that Senator Robert Joseph Dole died earlier this morning in his sleep. At his death at age 98 he had served the United States of America faithfully for 79 years.” In late February, Dole announced that he had advanced lung cancer and would begin treatment. Visiting him, Joe Biden called Dole his “close friend”. The two men were in the Senate together for 23 years. On Sunday, Biden said: “We picked up right where we left off, as if it were only yesterday that we were sharing a laugh in the Senate dining room, or debating the great issues of the day, often against each other on the Senate floor. “I saw in his eyes the same light, bravery and determination I’ve seen so many times before in the Senate. Though we often disagreed, he never hesitated to work with me or other Democrats when it mattered most.” Citing Dole’s work on the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Social Security Commission and in creating a public holiday in honour of Martin Luther King – “a bill that many in his own caucus opposed” – Biden called Dole “an American statesman like few in our history, a war hero and among the greatest of the greatest generation”. “To me,” he said, “he was also a friend whom I could look to for trusted guidance, or a humorous line at just the right moment to settle frayed nerves.” The House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, ordered flags at the Capitol flown at half-staff. Born in Russell, Kansas, in 1923, Dole left college to serve in the US infantry in the second world war, suffering serious wounds in Italy and winning a medal for bravery. His wounds cost him use of his right arm but he entered state politics and soon became a Republican power-broker, representing Kansas in the US House from 1961 to 1969 and in the Senate until 1996. He had spells as chairman of the Republican National Committee and as Senate minority and majority leader. In 1976 he was the Republican nominee for vice-president to Gerald Ford, in an election the sitting president lost to Jimmy Carter. Famously, in a debate with Walter Mondale Dole said America’s wars in the 20th century had been “Democrat wars”. Mondale said Dole had just “richly earned his reputation as a hatchet man”. Dole denied saying what he had just said, then backed down. He eventually acknowledged going too far. “I was supposed to go for the jugular,” he said, “and I did my own.” He pursued the Republican nomination in 1980 and 1988 and finally won it in 1996, at the age of 73 and two decades after being on the ticket. That put him up against Bill Clinton, a formidable campaigner seeking a second term. Against the backdrop of a booming economy, the Democrat won with ease, by 379–159 in the electoral college and by nine points in the popular vote, the third-party candidate Ross Perot costing Dole support on the right. On Sunday, Clinton said of Dole: “After all he gave in the war, he didn’t have to give more. But he did. His example should inspire people today and for generations to come.” Dole received both the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the Congressional Gold Medal, the highest US civilian honours. In December 2018, amid ceremonies in honour of the former president (and Dole’s rival) George HW Bush, Dole appeared before Bush’s casket in the Capitol Rotunda. As an aide lifted him from his wheelchair, Dole steadied himself and saluted. In the Trump years and after, Dole came widely to be seen as a figure from another time in Republican politics. On Sunday, the political consultant Tara Setmeyer, a member of the anti-Trump Lincoln Project, tweeted: “I cast my first ever vote for president for Bob Dole in 1996. A war hero with a sharp sense of humor … another piece of a once respectable GOP gone.” But Dole remained a loyal Republican soldier. This summer, he told USA Today that though Donald Trump “lost the election, and I regret that he did, but they did”, and though he himself was “sort of Trumped out”, he still considered himself “a Trumper”. On Sunday, Trump called Dole “an American war hero and true patriot for our nation”. In the same USA Today interview, Dole called Biden “a great, kind, upstanding, decent person”, though he said he leaned too far left. He also said: “I do believe [America has] lost something. I can’t get my hand on it, but we’re just not quite where we should be, as the greatest democracy in the world. And I don’t know how you correct it, but I keep hoping that there will be a change in my lifetime.” On Sunday the Senate Republican leader, Mitch McConnell, a fiercely partisan Washington warrior who many on the left hold responsible for America losing its way, said: “Whatever their politics, anyone who saw Bob Dole in action have to admire his character and his profound patriotism. Those of us who were lucky to know Bob well ourselves admired him even more.” The Associated Press contributed to this reportA directorial debut about a recently widowed woman coming to terms with her late husband’s shocking secret has emerged as the lead winner of the British independent film awards. After Love by the film-maker Aleem Khan won six awards at Sunday night’s ceremony hosted by the comedian Asim Chaudhry. They included best British independent film, best director, the Douglas Hickox award for best debut director and best screenplay. Joanna Scanlan also took home best actress and Talid Ariss best supporting actor for their performances in the film. Scanlan, who is best known for her comedic work in shows such as Getting On and The Thick of It, plays Mary, a white, English woman who converted to Islam many years ago to marry Ahmed (Nasser Memarzia), with whom she lives near the Dover cliffs. But when Ahmed dies suddenly, Mary discovers the husband she thought she knew had been leading a secret life in Calais, making her question her relationship, culture and identity. Khan, who earned plaudits for short films such as 2014’s Three Brothers, has talked widely about how growing up Muslim and gay caused him to lead “two very separate personal lives for a long time” – a sentiment that runs through the film. Meanwhile, the award for best actor went to Adeel Akhtar for his role in Clio Barnard’s story of forbidden love, Ali &amp; Ava. Connie Farr and Harry Escott picked up the award for best music for their work on the same film. The best supporting actress award went to Vinette Robinson for her work in Philip Barantini’s multi-Bifa nominated, single-take restaurant kitchen drama Boiling Point. The movie, which premiered to acclaim at the Karlovy Vary film festival in the Czech Republic, also received awards for best casting, best cinematography and best sound. The Bifas highlight and celebrate the best independent British film and film-makers and the best future prospects, with nominees and winners selected by the industry. This year, the award for breakthrough performance went to Nell Barlow, the star of Marley Morrison’s British holiday park-set coming-of-age debut Sweetheart, which also won breakthrough producer for Michelle Antoniades. Cathy Brady won best debut screenwriter for Wildfire, which follows two sisters from Northern Ireland reconnecting with each other and their past. Poly Styrene: I Am a Cliché, Paul Sng and Celeste Bell’s intimate film about the titular punk figure and X-ray Spex frontwoman, won best documentary, while best British short film went to FEMME, about a sinister night out for a femme gay man. Jonas Poher Rasmussen’s Flee, the animated real-life story of a childhood refugee’s hidden past, won best international independent film. The Souvenir Part II, Joanna Hogg’s follow up to her critically acclaimed 2019 feature was awarded best costume design, best editing and best production design. The award for best effects went to road trip horror Dashcam and best makeup and hair design went to period biopic The Electrical Life of Louis Wain. The Richard Harris award for outstanding contribution by an actor to British film was presented to Riz Ahmed, who missed out on the best actor gong for his role in Encounter. The special jury prize awarded by the Bifa main jury went to Raising Films, the groundbreaking organisation which supports and campaigns for parents and carers working in the UK screen sector. Full list of awards Best British independent film After Love Best director Aleem Khan, After Love Best screenplay Aleem Khan, After Love Best actress Joanna Scanlan, After Love Best actor Adeel Akhtar, Ali &amp; Ava Best supporting actress Vinette Robinson, Boiling Point Best supporting actor Talid Ariss, After Love Douglas Hickox award (for debut director) Aleem Khan, After Love Breakthrough producer Michella Antoniades, Sweetheart Breakthrough performance Nell Barlow, Sweetheart Best debut screenwriter Cathy Brady, Wildfire Best documentary Poly Styrene: I am a cliché Raindance discovery award Poly Styrene: I am a cliché Best British short film Femme Best international independent film Flee Best casting Boiling Point Best cinematography Boiling Point Best costume design The Souvenir Part II Best editing The Souvenir Part II Best music Ali &amp; Ava Best makeup &amp; hair design The Electrical Life of Louis Wain Best effects Dashcam Best production design The Souvenir Part II Best sound Boiling Point The Richard Harris award for outstanding contribution by an actor to British film Riz Ahmed The special jury prize Raising FilmsLittle Simz, Ghetts and Dave have won the top prizes at the 2021 Mobo awards, which recognise the best in Black music from the UK and beyond. Grime veteran Ghetts won his first Mobo – more than 15 years into his career – for best male act. His album Conflict of Interest has been acclaimed as one of the year’s best rap albums. He lost out in the album category, however, to Dave, who was given the award for his second album, We’re All Alone in This Together. Little Simz was awarded best female act – also her first Mobo win. The drill MC Central Cee won two awards, for best newcomer and the inaugural best drill act award, after he had two of the biggest hits yet in the genre: Obsessed With You and Commitment Issues both charted in the Top 10. Drill was also recognised in the song of the year category – which was won by the energetic remix of Tion Wayne and Russ Millions’ track Body, the first drill track to reach the UK No 1 – and for video of the year, for Lagga by M1llionz (directed by Teeeezy C). Nigerian pop star Wizkid also won two awards, for best African act and best international act. The ceremony returned as a live show, at Coventry Building Society Arena, the first time since 2017. There were no awards in 2018 and 2019 and only a virtual ceremony in 2020. Hosted by Munya Chawawa and Leigh-Anne Pinnock, it featured live performances by Ghetts, Pa Salieu, Stefflon Don and Ms Banks, Bree Runway, Potter Payper, Tems, NSG and Enny. Mobo winners 2021 Album of the year: Dave – We’re All Alone in This Together Best female act: Little Simz Best male act: Ghetts Best newcomer: Central Cee Song of the year: Tion Wayne &amp; Russ Millions – Body (remix feat ArrDee, Bugzy Malone, Buni, Darkoo, E1, Fivio Foreign &amp; ZT) Video of the year: M1llionz – Lagga (directed by Teeeezy C) Best grime act: Skepta Best R&amp;B/soul act: Cleo Sol Best hip-hop act: D Block Europe Best drill act: Central Cee Best international act: Wizkid Best performance in a TV show/film: Michael Ward – Franklyn in Small Axe Best media personality: Chunkz &amp; Yung Filly Best gospel act: Guvna B Best African music act: Wizkid Best reggae act: Shenseea Best jazz act: Sons of Kemet Best producer: Jae5Another Sunday evening, another courtroom drama in which the audience gets to be the jury. Hot on the heels of Showtrial is You Don’t Know Me (BBC One), based on the 2017 novel by the barrister Imran Mahmood. Here, a young man, Hero, is in the dock, accused of murder. Much circumstantial evidence suggests he is guilty of the crime, and the prosecution seems to have an easy case, summarised neatly in an efficient, damning closing statement. The victim’s blood is on Hero’s fingernails, the murder weapon was in his house, his car was seen in the area right before the shooting. Case closed. Except that this is a four-parter, so, of course, it’s not closed yet. Instead of hearing a barrister deliver the closing statement for the defence, we learn that Hero has sacked his barrister, so that he can represent himself and tell his own story to the jury. He is as convinced as we are that he’s going down for the crime, so he might as well go for one last roll of the dice. “The truth is that I’m innocent. I am. I did not kill that boy. I didn’t,” he says, before explaining, at length, why it was not him that did it. Hero works at a fancy car dealership in London before being accused of murder, and is a decent, law-abiding son and big brother. He is on trial for shooting and killing Jamil, a local drug dealer with whom he had publicly argued, though their relationship slowly reveals itself to be more ambivalent. Jamil had been “chatting shit about my girl”, he tells the jury, adding that his girl, Kyra, will be the key to everything. And so we go back in time to follow his love story with Kyra from inception to messy end, in great detail, beginning with their bus-based courtship and blueberry muffins. If this story is meant to be what the jury is hearing, then they learn that Kyra really loves reading. Aside from an impressive home library, Kyra is a mystery, a blank page. When she suddenly disappears from his life, Hero attempts to report that she’s missing, realising then that he doesn’t know a thing about her, even though they are living together: not where she went to school, not her parents’ first names, nor even why a strange man had appeared at their door and she had lied about not knowing him. A trip to Camden reveals some uncomfortable details about her life, which results in a classic TV rage montage, with smashed pictures, furious jogging and a stress-induced vomiting fit. The performances flesh out the bare bones of the drama, and give it some much-needed intrigue. Samuel Adewunmi has hopped over to the BBC from his stint in ITV’s Angela Black, and here he cooks up a convincing mix of righteousness and flaws. Bukky Bakray, such a standout in last year’s film Rocks, is his sister, Bless, and Sophie Wilde is the ethereal Kyra. After 45 minutes, the drama finally starts to develop a sense of urgency, as Hero tells the jury that he’s done some bad things. “You’re going to hear a lot about them by the time we’re through,” he says, which does not strike me as a great defence strategy, nor does it explain why we’ve spent the bulk of the episode learning that Hero’s mum really liked his girlfriend. But it does, finally, get the drama going. It takes a long time to get there, and if it is the audience’s job to be the 13th member of the jury, I wonder if it will seem too much like hard work. As in the book, Hero’s lengthy statement forms the narrative, via voiceover, which makes it feel a little like an audiobook, with added moving pictures. That’s not really what television is, and in this first episode, You Don’t Know Me doesn’t quite bridge the gap between the stylistic devices that work in a novel and what feels authentic on screen. But it does lay a trail of promise as it starts to wake up. Now that we’ve got the niceties out of the way, Hero can begin to unpick the case against him. Hopefully the members of the jury, including those at home, will have the patience to see it through.The UK data watchdog must introduce age verification for commercial pornography sites or face a high court challenge over any failure to act, children’s safety groups have warned. The demand in a letter to the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) states that the government’s failure to stop children seeing porn is causing lifelong trauma and putting children at risk of abuse and exploitation. It urges the ICO to use the powers under the recently introduced age appropriate design code (AADC) to introduce rigorous age-checking procedures for publicly accessible porn sites. However, the ICO has said the code is not intended to impose age assurance measures on porn sites. The author of the letter, John Carr, secretary of the Children’s Charities’ Coalition on Internet Safety, which represents 11 major children’s charities, including the NSPCC, Barnardo’s and the Children’s Society, has written to the information commissioner, Elizabeth Denham, urging her to reconsider. “You remain the only person in the country with the power to act to protect another generation of children from the distorting impact of open access to pornography, with all the dreadful and now well-documented effects we know that has on society, particularly in respect of violence towards women and girls. I ask you to reconsider your decision not to act against pornography websites.” It comes after a survey of Barnardo’s frontline workers found high levels of concern among staff about the impact of porn on children, particularly those who are already vulnerable. Barnardo’s child exploitation experts told the Guardian they are seeing growing numbers of children acting in highly sexualised ways or being vulnerable to abuse because they have been watching porn. “It is everywhere; on the school bus, in the corridors, in their social media feeds. Children should not be seeing this material, it is a form of trauma and abuse to let them see it,” one case worker told the Guardian. A number of recent studies have shown the increasingly detrimental ways that porn affects young people, including that children as young as seven are unintentionally stumbling across it online. A PSHE (personal, social, health and economic) study found that when children viewed porn, 70% frequently saw men portrayed as dominant (compared with 17% frequently seeing women as dominant) and 35% frequently saw “consensual” violence towards women (compared with 9% frequently seeing this towards men). In an interview with the Guardian, Carr said the coalition was prepared to seek a judicial review if the ICO declines to act. “We are asking the information commissioner to act now, using the powers she has under the AADC, to ensure porn companies don’t let children on their sites. If she doesn’t, we will look at a judicial review of her decision not to act,” he said. Carr added that “this is really about age verification” – a form of age assurance where users are asked to provide formal proof of their identity through passports, credit cards or other forms of identification known as hard identifiers. The AADC applies to websites and apps likely to be accessed by children, such as TikTok, Facebook and Instagram, and aims to prevent misuse of their data, such as use of “nudge” techniques aimed at encouraging children to give up more of their privacy or spend more time online. In some cases, it recommends use of age assurance measures – such as age verification – if a service is deemed to pose risks to children. Companies that breach the code face fines of up to 4% of annual global turnover. The ICO challenge comes as the government prepares to put landmark internet safety legislation through parliament. The online safety bill charges social media and tech companies with a duty of care to protect children from harmful content, but campaigners have warned that in its draft form it does not go far enough to protect minors. The bill does not make overt references to age assurance – the umbrella term for measures that check an app or website user’s age – but a private member’s bill introduced by crossbench peer Beeban Kidron, the architect of the AADC, could provide a pathway. The age assurance (minimum standards) bill sets out a framework for introducing basic standards of age-checking online and could effectively be included in the online safety bill if, for instance, Ofcom – the regulator charged with implementing the bill – is given powers within the legislation to introduce new standards. Kidron said age assurance has been promised since 2017, when it was a part of the Digital Economy Act expressly for porn, but was never implemented. “Parents, parliament and the press want a solution to the pornography issue, and in that sense tomorrow is not soon enough. But pornography is only one of many issues children face online. I brought the bill forward to put a stop to the commercial exploitation of kids – it is absolutely urgent. My bill will do what John [Carr] wants and more.” Plans to introduce an age verification system in the UK for online porn were abandoned in 2019, when then culture secretary Nicky Morgan told parliament that the government would instead focus on including child protection in the online safety bill. Vanessa Morse, CEO of the Centre to End All Sexual Exploitation, said: “It is unconscionable that the government is delaying age verification until the online safety bill comes into force when it could be brought in now. Make no mistake, porn sites are not neutral or naive. They are actively engaging all users, including children, through data surveillance, SEO and algorithms, to get them to stay on their sites and return more often because this makes them money. This is exploitative and an unlawful misuse of children’s data and it must be stopped. We want the ICO to investigate this.” Kidron added that age assurance is not just needed to monitor use of commercial porn sites but also to prevent social media sites from profiteering from children under the age of 13 – the age barrier for most platforms. “Let’s face it, if they know a kid is 12 then they have to answer the question, why are they recommending [content about] extreme diets, self-harm or suicide?” The ICO’s executive director for tech and innovation, Stephen Bonner, said the AADC is intended for sites that are used by children or likely to be used by children – and therefore does not apply to adult content sites. “The goal of the code is to make [relevant] sites child-friendly. There are some sites that we do not expect children to use. In those cases, the code does not apply. It would be ridiculous to make adult sites child-friendly.” Bonner said data protection alone “can’t solve this problem”. He added: “It is already illegal to sell age-restricted products to children in the offline world and it’s going to take working together with government, other regulators and civil society to effectively take action on these complex online issues.” The threat of action against the ICO comes after a judge last week gave campaigners permission to bring a judicial review against the government over its failure to enact the Digital Economy Act. The case, which will be heard in the new year, centres on the argument that children are being harmed and their human rights affected by the failure to introduce age verification. It is brought by two campaigners, 20-year-old Ava Vakil, a student and activist involved in raising the issue of sexual violence among teenagers, and Ioannis Dekas, a father of four who is giving evidence about the impact of porn on his own children, despite his efforts to stop them watching it. Vakil said: “It is incredibly important that we prevent access to pornography for young children, particularly given that so much of pornographic content online includes sexual violence and the objectification of women. Most children encounter porn online before they talk about sexual consent in PSHE or at home, creating a culture in which sex becomes deviant and pornographic, and not based in shared trust and intimacy. “It is simply unbelievable that children are prevented from seeing a rated-18 film in the cinema, and yet can access sexually violent and explicit content with a few taps of their fingers.” • In the UK, the NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In the US, call or text the Childhelp abuse hotline on 800-422-4453. In Australia, children, young adults, parents and teachers can contact the Kids Helpline on 1800 55 1800, or Bravehearts on 1800 272 831, and adult survivors can contact Blue Knot Foundation on 1300 657 380. Other sources of help can be found at Child Helplines InternationalChildren in some parts of England are three times more likely to be vaccinated than others, figures from the House of Commons library show, prompting Bridget Phillipson, Labour’s newly appointed shadow education secretary, to criticise the government for its lacklustre efforts to vaccinate young teenagers. The figures – collated by the House of Commons library and distributed by Labour – reveal that in some parts of London just one in five children aged between 12 and 15 had received a vaccination at the start of December. Phillipson, who was promoted to the shadow cabinet last week, said the government was making a strategic error in not improving vaccination take-up among children and exposing them to the Omicron variant. She wants children to be able to access walk-in clinics, as well as a campaign to promote the benefits of vaccinations to parents and discredit the “anti-vax disinformation” she said was being pushed at children and their families. “As Omicron cases in the UK are starting to rise it’s even more important that we speed up vaccine rollout, but the government’s lacklustre approach is putting children’s education at risk of further disruption,” Phillipson said. The figures show that by 2 December just under 20% of children aged 12 to 15 had received their first Covid vaccine in the London borough of Hackney and the City of London. But in Newbury and elsewhere in the West Berkshire local authority, more than three times as many (62%) of the same age group had been jabbed. Overall, London has the lowest regional vaccination rate with just one in three children having received their first jab. The south-east of England is the only region where at least half of 12-to 15-year-olds have been vaccinated. But in the north-west and the West Midlands just 40% of children have done so, leaving many vulnerable to infection. Labour said the government’s promise that all 12-to-15-year-olds would be offered a vaccination by the October half-term break has proved to be empty. The Department for Education’s latest attendance figures showed that Covid remains rife within schools in England, as more than 185,000 pupils and students were out of the classroom with confirmed or suspected Covid symptoms at the end of last month. “The Conservatives have been complacent and children are paying the price. The government must get a grip and stop neglecting children’s education,” Phillipson said. “Labour has been urging ministers to use every measure from pop-up and walk-in clinics to bringing back volunteers and retired clinicians to ramp-up vaccine rollout. This must come alongside finally introducing the ventilation in schools that Sage recommended well over a year ago.” The Department of Health and Social Care said that the vaccination programme in England has been “a phenomenal success,” with children able to be vaccinated at school or using the national booking system. To “turbocharge” the vaccine programme covering schoolchildren, Labour is calling for better use of community pharmacies, walk-in clinics and pop-up clinics to make it easier for families to get children jabbed and for parents to get booster doses. Labour said that “mayors, local authorities, and health leaders have worked hard to increase uptake but are urging government to provide more support”. On the possibility of vaccinations for younger children, Labour also wants “clarity for parents” over approval of the vaccine for those aged under 12, after the Pfizer vaccine was approved for younger children by US regulators.Lewis Hamilton hit out at his Formula One title rival Max Verstappen after the world champion won the Saudi Arabian Grand Prix, describing him as unwilling to obey the rules and his driving as over the limit. Hamilton took victory after an intense battle with Verstappen that saw the pair repeatedly clash on track as they vied for the lead. It was an ill-tempered affair where both drivers traded accusations against one another across their team radio. Verstappen forced Hamilton off track to hold the lead but was ordered to give the place back to the Mercedes driver. In attempting to do so Hamilton was unaware of why Verstappen had slowed and hit the rear of his car, calling him “fucking crazy”. Yet it was Verstappen’s repeatedly aggressive approach to defending, and driving Hamilton off the track that had really angered the world champion. “I’ve raced a lot of drivers in 28 years,” he said. “I’ve come across a lot of different characters and there’s a few at the top which are kind of over the limit. The rules kind of don’t apply, they don’t think of the rules. “He’s over the limit, for sure. I’ve avoided collision on so many occasions with the guy and I don’t always mind being the one that does that, because you live to fight another day. Which I did.” Hamilton’s win means the two drivers are now level on points going into the season finale at Abu Dhabi next weekend. However the pair will do so with no love lost after a chaotic race interrupted by stoppages, safety cars and repeated incidents that forced the stewards and race control to intervene. Hamilton noted, when asked, that he did believe Verstappen was driving dangerously enough to end his race and take him out of the title fight. “I definitely feel that there were scenarios where that was the case,” he said. “This isn’t the first time I have had to avoid collisions and that is how I felt in the moment.” The Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, insisted Verstappen’s behaviour was beyond the pale. “The driving needs to be assessed and looked at. It’s hard, very hard, maybe over-the-line hard,” he said. Verstappen, who took a penalty for his driving during the race and another following a stewards’ investigation, was aggrieved and dismissive of the criticism from his rivals. “Emotions were running high at the time and it is what it is,” he said. “I don’t agree with the decisions but I don’t want to waste too much time on it because we don’t need to make headlines out of it. They [Mercedes] don’t deserve that.”Substitute Talles Magno scored in the 88th minute and visiting New York City FC rallied to reach their first-ever MLS Cup final with a 2-1 victory over the Philadelphia Union on Sunday afternoon. Magno – who scored only twice in the regular season – helped NYC FC defeat Philadelphia in the Eastern Conference final on a day they were without MLS Golden Boot winner Valentin Castellanos due to suspension. Castellanos will be able to return for the final in Portland, who defeated Salt Lake in Saturday’s Western Conference title game. Maxi Moralez also scored for City, who had beaten top-seeded New England on penalties in the semifinals. Union leading scorer Kacper Przybylko helped pressure NYC FC into an own goal to give Philadelphia a lead that lasted less than two minutes. Covid-19 protocols ruled 11 players out for the hosts, who were forced to make six changes from the starting lineup of their semi-final triumph on penalties over No 3 seed Nashville City SC. Only seconds after the restart following Philadelphia’s 63rd-minute goal, New York’s Maxime Chanot drove a speculative effort from distance that wrong-footed Matt Freese into an awkward save. Magno got a piece of the rebound before it eventually fell to Moralez at the back post, who hammered a powerful finish past Freese. Freese redeemed himself with an excellent save of Alexander Callens’ deflected header, and the Union could have gone ahead again in the 87th when Nathan Harriel flashed a header over the bar. Instead, minutes later Gudmundur Thorarinsson seized upon a mistake from defender Olivier Mbaizo to get free inside the penalty area. From there, he drove a firm cross to the sprinting Magno, who hammered a first-time finish past Freese. Philadelphia took the lead when Flach drove an inswinging cross toward Przybylko near the center of the penalty area. Callens reached out his leg to try to keep Przybylko from reaching the ball. He succeeded, but at the expense of turning it into his own goal beyond the dive of goalkeeper Sean Johnson. The Union were rocked days before the biggest game in their 11-year history when 11 players were ruled out of the game because of Covid-19 health and safety protocols. Philadelphia were also seeking to reach their first MLS Cup final. The Union were unable to practice on Thursday because of the league’s protocols. They resumed training on Friday. Coach Jim Curtin said during the regular season that all Union players had been vaccinated. The individual players may not have tested positive for the coronavirus, but may have come into contact with someone with a suspected case. The list included Alejandro Bedoya and defender Jack Elliott. The loss of goalie Andre Blake was particularly crushing. The two-time MLS Goalkeeper of the Year had 12 shutouts this season (11 wins, one draw), making 76 saves and posting a 0.96 goals-against average in the regular season. He stopped two penalty kicks against Nashville to lift the Union into the conference final.